^i^'V'<Aic^--;v.:^>^->v^'v'?'^ 


^^t.til«e»%i«,,^-f' 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


% 


5//f^- 


Division       J!_)s-//l"    > 

*w/«V« ,.t3^  O  C? 

Nttmber         \   (9  i  ' 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE: 


OR, 


ANECDOTES,  SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLUSTRATIONS,  EXPOSITORY, 

SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGRAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND  HOMILETIC, 

GATHERED    FROM    A    WIDE    RANGE    OF    HOME    AND 

FOREIGN  LITERATURE,  ON  THE  VERSES 

OF  THE  BIBLE. 


KEY.   JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


I.  CORINTHIANS. 

VOL.  L 


NEW  YORK 
ANSON  D.  F.  RANDOLPH  &  COMPANY 

91    AND   93   FIFTH   AVENUE 


INTRODUCTION  TO   THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE 
CORINTHIANS. 

I.  Corinth. — 1.  Its  early  history: — Corinth  was  famous  in  every  age  of  Greek 
history.  In  the  stories  which  have  come  down  from  tlie  so-called  heroic  times 
it  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  ffidipus  and  with  Jason.  Homer  speaks  of 
"wealthy  Corinth."  Thucydides  tells  us  that  the  Corinthians  were  early  dis- 
tinguished for  naval  architecture  and  enterprise,  for  commerce  and  for  wealth. 
Sirabo  speaks  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Bacchiadre  who  ruled  in  Corinth  and  made 
profit  by  its  merchandise  for  200  years  ;  and  of  Cypselus,  who  overthrew  them  ia 
B.C.  655,  whose  wealth  was  attested  by  a  large  statue  of  beaten  gold  presented  by 
him  to  the  temple  at  Olympia.  Under  his  son  Periander,  Corinth  was  the  most 
prosperous  of  the  commercial  cities  of  Greece.  For  this  Strabo  accounts  by  the 
preference  of  the  traders  between  Asia  and  Italy  to  carry  their  goods  across  the 
Isthmus  rather  than  risk  the  great  perils  of  sailing  round  the  Pelopounese;  and 
by  the  position  of  the  Isthmus  as  the  only  route  for  merchandise  between  the 
peninsula  and  the  mainland  of  Greece.  The  Corinthians  thus  commanded  two 
streams  of  traiiic,  on  both  which  they  were  able  to  impose  toll :  and  their  city  was 
the  best  residence  for  the  merchants  who  conducted  the  traffic.  Strabo  mentions 
also  the  Isthmian  Festivals  as  a  source  of  proht  by  bringing  strangers  to  the  city. 
As  a  proof,  and  means  of  increase,  of  the  wealth  of  Corinth,  he  speaks  of  the 
temple  of  Aphrodite,  which  was  served  by  a  thousand  sacred  courtesans.  This  is 
sad  proof  that  in  Corinth  abundance  of  material  good  had  produced  its  frequent 
result  of  self-indulgence  and  gross  sin.  Strabo  says  that  Corinth  was  also  the 
chief  home  of  painting  and  sculpture.  We  notice,  however,  that  the  wealth  of 
Corinth,  so  conducive  to  the  development  of  art,  did  little  for  intellectual  develop- 
ment. Among  the  many  great  writers  of  ancient  Greece  no  Corinthian  is  found. 
(Prof.  Beet.)  2.  In  the  time  of  Paul: — Corinth  was  the  capital  of  the  Eoman 
province  of  Achaia,  and  the  residence  of  the  Koman  pro-consul.  In  the  time  of 
the  apostle  it  was,  in  fact,  the  metropolis  of  Greece,  as  Athens  was  its  university. 
The  old  city  was  destroyed  (b.c.  146)  by  the  consul  Mummius  so  completely  that 
only  a  few  temples  and  columns  survived.  It  was  in  this  conflagration  that  a 
mass  of  gold,  silver,  and  bronze  was  melted,  and  ran  together,  accidentally  forming 
the  famous  metallic  compound — "  Corinthian  brass,"  which  the  ancients  valued 
above  pure  gold.  About  a  century  after  Julius  Ca3sar,  noting  the  importance  of 
the  site  both  as  a  commercial  port  and  a  militai'y  position,  built  a  new  town  on  the 
ruins  of  the  old,  and  peopled  it  with  Italians,  most  of  whom  were  freed-men.  The 
city  rapidly  increased.  The  descendants  of  the  Greek  merchants  and  traders  who, 
at  the  destruction  of  the  ancient  city,  had  fled  to  Delos  and  the  neighbouring 
coasts,  came  back  to  their  ancestral  home ;  and  many  Jews  flocked  eagerly  to 
a  city  where  there  was  much  business  to  be  done,  and  from  which  Jerusalem  was 
easily  reached.  Still,  the  Italians  were  the  strongest,  the  ruling  class.  From 
this  fact  arose  one  chief  characteristic  of  the  place.  It  was  Roman  not  Greek, 
democratic  not  aristocratic,  in  its  habits,  and  held  in  itself  the  vices  as  well  as  the 


vi   INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 

virtues  of  turbulent  democracy.  This  fact  tells  on  St.  Paul's  letters.  It  was  only 
in  a  democratic  city  such  as  Corinth  that  those  meetings  could  have  taken  place  in 
which  every  member  of  the  Church  exercised  his  gifts  io  a  brawling  unmannerly 
way,  and  without  heeding  rules  of  order  and  courtesy  ;  it  was  only  in  such  a  com- 
munity tliat  the  parties  could  have  been  formed  which  divided  the  Church — a 
community  in  which  a  crude  sense  of  equality  and  indeiDendence  led  men  first  to 
jostle  together  confusedly,  and  then  to  combine  in  adverse  factions.  Another  fact 
throws  light  on  the  Epistles.  Corinth  was  also  a  commercial  port.  Its  site  was 
perhaps  the  finest  in  the  ancient  world.  It  stood  on  the  Isthmus  which  connected 
North  with  Soatli  Greece,  on  the  narrow  tongue  of  land  which  divides  the  .33gjean 
and  Ionian  seas.  The  most  prominent  feature  of  the  Isthmus  was  the  "Acro- 
corinthus  " — a  stern,  ji.gj.ed,  abrupt  cone  of  rock  which  suddenly  sweeps  up  to 
some  two  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  tlirows  its  long  shadow  half 
way  down  the  Isthmus.  Corinth  stood  on  the  northern  base  of  this  lofty  formidable 
rock,  on  a  small  table-land  of  no  great  elevation,  and  spread  downward  and  side- 
ward, throwing  out  great  roads  which  extended  to  the  sea  on  either  side  of  the 
Isthmus.  These  roads  terminated  each  in  a  port — Cenclirese  on  the  Mges&n  Sea, 
and  Lechfeum  on  the  Ionian  Sea;  the  latter  for  the  Italian,  and  the  former  for  the 
Oriental  commerce.  The  Isthmus  between  these  two  ports  was  only  about  three 
miles  broad,  and  the  light  small  shij^s  of  antiquity  were  often  drawn  across  this 
narrow  sandy  space,  and  so  transported  from  sea  to  sea.  In  the  apostle's  time, 
the  Emperor  Nero  made  an  unsuccessful  attemi^t  to  cut  a  canal  across,  and  thus 
facilitate  the  passage.  In  this  happy  situation  Corinth  soon  rose  to  be  one  of  the 
richest  and  greatest  emporiums  of  the  Eomau  Empire  ;  all  the  traffic  between  North 
and  South  Greoce  passing  along  the  Isthmus  it  commanded,  and  most  of  the  sea- 
borne traffic  between  Europe  and  Asia  passing  across  it.  From  this  fact  arose 
anotlier  peculiarity  of  Corinth.  Its  aristocracy,  its  leading  men,  were  not  men  of 
birth,  but  men  of  wealth  ;  not  manufacturers  even,  but  merchants.  They  had  not 
the  settled  dignity  which  ancient  and  honourable  lineage  ought  to  give,  nor  the 
trained  intelligence  and  quick  invention  which  fit  the  manufacturer  for  success. 
Mere  commerce  is  apt  to  sink  into  routine.  It  produces  nothing,  but  simply  shifts 
productions  from  one  place  to  another.  Those  who  pursue  this  vocation  often 
come  to  look  at  all  things  merely  with  an  eye  to  their  market  price,  to  worship 
Mammon  instead  of  God,  to  value  profit  above  honour,  and  to  account  as  of  little 
worth  the  mental  power,  or  moral  virtue,  or  spiritual  hope,  which  weighs  nothing 
when  put  into  their  scales.  And  such  men  were  many  of  the  Corinthian  merchants. 
Besides  this  worship  of  wealth,  there  were  also  the  usual  demoralising  influences 
of  a  seaport.  Men  of  all  lands,  of  all  faiths,  of  all  morals  and  of  none,  met  and 
jostled  on  the  quays  and  in  the  streets  of  Corinth.  Withdrawn  for  the  time  even 
from  the  restraints  which  the  influences  of  home  would  set  to  them,  they  gave 
loose  to  their  passions.  Corinth  became  a  synonym  for  vice.  Licentiousness 
was  dignified  into  worship ;  the  temples,  no  less  than  the  streets,  swarmed  with 
courtesans,  more  than  a  thousand  of  whom  served  as  priestesses  in  a  single  temple 
devoted  to  the  goddess  Aphrodite.  The  stately  but  unhappy  city  became  a  hotbed 
of  evil,  in  which  every  noxious  weed,  indigenous  or  transplanted,  grew  and  throve  ; 
luxury  and  sensuality  were  stimulated  by  the  gambling  spirit  of  commerce,  till 
Corinth  became  a  proverb  of  corruption.  (-S'.  Cox,  D.D.)  Population  at  this 
time  probably  about  400,000.  Society  of  high  culture,  but  in  morals  lax,  even 
gross.  Four  classes  of  inhabitants— Jews,  Italian  freedmen,  Greeks,  and  a 
motley  population  from  the  cities  of  the  Levant.  1.  Throughout  the  Eoman 
province  of  Achaia  "communities  of  scattered  Israelites"  had  settled:  these 
were  mercantile  guilds  or  firms.  How  did  the  Corinthian  Jew  receive  the  glad 
tidings  of  the  Messiah  from  the  lips  of  St.  Paul  ?  His  heart  hardened  against 
the  miracles  of  our  Lord,  he  was  still  less  impressed  by  the  apostolic  miracles : 
these  carried  no  conviction  to  him  whatsoever ;  he  demanded  signs  from  heaven 
(1  Cor.  i.  22) ;  he  reiterated  with  a  new  application  the  Jewish  cry  of  scorn  at  the 
foot  of  the  Cross,  "  If  He  be  the  (ascended)  Christ,  let  Him  now  come  down  " — 
"He,  the  crucified  Malefactor,  a  Messiah  meet  for  our  theocracy!  "  At  such 
Hebrew  sceptics  the  apostle  in  Corinth  was  compelled  (Acts  xviii.  6)  to  "  shake  out 
the  folds  of  his  cloak."  Converts  among  the  Jews  were  few.  Thus  the  first 
Epistle  speaks  to  a  church  in  which  the  Gentile  element  is  much  greater  than  the 
Jewish  ;  not  so  other  Pauline  Epistles.  2.  "EnoiKoi  or  settlers  of  the  Julian  colony 
were  Italian  descendants  of  the  Jirst  founders  from  Casar's  army,  and  had  been 
now  established  in  Corinth  103  years.     They  were  termed  Corintliienses.     Most  of 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,  vii 

them  were  freedmen.  3.  The  Greek  inhabitants  of  AchaTa  were  marked  by  intel- 
lectual restlessness  and  a  feverish  hankering  after  novelties.  To  this  was  added  a 
ruinous  egoism,  which  three  centuries  before  had  prevented  Aratus  from  confeder- 
ating disintegrated  Hellas.  Their  egoism  was  as  fuel  ready  laid  for  the  torch  of 
sectarianism.  The  more  cultured  of  them  also  had  a  strong  bent  for  subtle 
dialectic,  which  hindered  them  from  seeing  "the  forest  for  trees."  A  nicely 
adjusted  scheme  of  philosphy  charmed  and  dazzled :  they  had  no  eyes  for  aught 
beyond.  How  then  did  the  Hellenic  student  of  Aristotle  or  of  Philo  receive  the 
preaching  of  St.  Paul  ?  His  gaze  fixed  upon  a  fleeting  wisdom  that  had  no  bearing 
upon  man's  eternal  welfare,  he  could  not  see  the  true  wisdom  for  the  false.  When 
the  moral  logic  of  the  Cross  (chap.  i.  IS)  was  set  before  him,  Where  is  the  scheme, 
he  loftily  asked,  in  which  this  theory  of  the  Cross  can  be  inserted,  as  a  part  in  the 
whole?  It  stands  alone,  a  sun  without  a  system,  a  thread  without  its  woof:  it  is 
foolishness.  4.  The  mixed  population  of  Corinth  were  merchants  and  sailors  from 
Eome,  from  Macedonia,  from  Asia  Minor,  from  Syria  and  Egypt,  traders  from  the 
towns  of  Achaia,  with  the  usunl  admixture  of  handicraftsmen  and  slaves  always 
found  in  such  a  society  ;  to  such  the  simplicity  of  the  apostle's  teaching  would  be 
welcome.     [Canon  Evans.) 

II.  Paul  at  Corinth. — In  the  course  of  his  second  missionary  journey  St.  Paul 
passed  from  Athens  to  Corinth,  and  to  the  wealthy  and  luxurious  inhabitants  the 
visit  must  have  seemed  of  the  slightest  importance  :  a  solitary  Eastern  traveller, 
he  would  be  at  once  lost  in  the  constant  ebb  and  flow  of  strangers  crossing  each 
other  at  the  Isthmus.  But  by  the  apostle  himself  his  visit  was  regarded  as  of 
supreme  moment.  At  the  time  of  his  arrival  there  was  a  larger  uumber  of  Jews  in 
the  city  than  usual,  many  of  those  who  had  been  lately  banished  from  Konie  by  the 
decree  of  Claudius  (Acts  xvi.  9,  10)  having  taken  refuge  at  Corinth.  Among  these 
were  Aquila  and  Priscilla.  In  their  house,  always  hospitably  open  to  strangers 
(Eom.  xvi.  5 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  19),  Paul  found  a  home,  attaching  himself  to  them 
because  they  were  of  the  same  craft  with  him.  His  first  thought  in  this  new  city  ■ 
was  to  earn  his  bread  and  secure  his  independence  by  honest  toil  (2  Cor.  xi.  9).  - 
Once  fairly  settled,  we  may  suppose  that  he  began  to  look  about  him.  On  the 
narrow  neck  of  land  which  stretched  between  the  two  seas  he  would  mark  the  level 
plain  and  broken  gullies  clothed  with  the  stunted  pine,  frona  whose  branches  of 
emerald  green  were  woven  the  garlands  for  the  conquerors  in  the  Isthmian  Games, 
which  he  contrasts  with  the  unfading  "  incorruptible  crown  "  of  the  Christian 
combatant.  In  the  eastern  declivities  of  the  Acrocorinthus  he  would  observe  the 
"  stadium,"  along  which  the  runners  raced  with  a  speed  and  energy  which  St.  Paul 
bids  his  converts  imitate  in  the  Christian  race.  On  the  outskirts  of  the  city  his 
eye  would  rest  on  the  spacious  amphitheatre,  in  which  victims  were  thrown  to  the 
wild  beasts,  or  gladiators  fought  to  the  death  ;  and  from  which  he  probably  drew 
his  figures  when  he  told  his  Corinthian  converts  how  he  had  "  fought  with  beasts 
at  Ephesus,"  and  how,  when  pressed  above  measure  with  hari'ships  and  indignities, 
it  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  "set  forth  as  the  last  in  the  tile  of  combatants 
appointed  to  death" — a  spectacle  to  the  world,  to  angels,  and  to  men.  About  the 
city  he  would  mark  the  temples  and  columns  with  their  Corinthian  capitals,  which 
alone  had  survived  the  conflagration  that  destroyed  the  former  city,  and  works  of 
art  wrought  in  that  Corinthian  brass  into  which  gold  and  silver  and  bronze  had 
melted  and  run ;  and  hence,  no  doubt,  he  drew  that  magnificent  illustration  in 
chap,  iii.,  in  which  he  warns  us  that  we  build  upon  the  one  sure  foundation,  not 
"  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,"  but  "  gold,  silver,  and  costly  marbles,"  that  so  when  "  the 
day  that  is  to  be  revealed  in  fire  prove  every  man's  work  "  our  work  may  "  abide," 
just  as  the  precious  metals  and  costly  marbles  of  Corinth  remained  when  all  meaner- 
edifices  of  wood  and  thatch  had  been  swept  away.  Within  the  city,  no  doubt,  he 
would  also  take  note  of  the  luxury  and  mammonism  shown  in  the  streets  and 
markets,  of  the  schools  and  gymnasia  in  which  the  Corinthians  contracted  their 
admiration  for  mere  gifts  of  intellect  and  speech,  and  of  those  wicked  temples  in 
which  licentious  indulgences  were  hallowed  by  forms  of  worship.  From  Acts  xviii. 
we  learn  that  on  the  Sabbath  he  was  woirt,  when  first  he  arrived  in  Corinth,  to  go 
up  to  the  synagogue,  and  reason  and  persuade  both  with  Jews  and  proselytes, 
apparently  speaking  at  first  only  as  a  Jew  to  Jews,  about  the  "mercy  proujised 
to  their  forefathers,"  and  the  "  oath  sworn  to  Abraham."  But  soon  Timotheus 
and  Silas  follow  him  from  Macedonia,  and  bring  so  good  a  report  of  the  con- 
verts he  has  left  there,  that  Paul  is  "pressed,"  i.e.,  "straitened"  in  spirit.     He 


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 

cannot  any  longer  speak  simply  as  a  Jew.  He  testifies  to  his  astonished  hearers 
that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  the  Christ  of  God.  They  break  out  into  invective  and 
blasphemy ;  and  Paul  stands  up  in  the  synagogue  and  shakes  its  dust  from  his 
robes,  declaring  that,  since  they  will  not  hear  him,  he  will  henceforth  "go  to  the 
Gentiles."  He  had  not  far  to  go.  Contiguous  to  the  synagogue  was  the  house  of 
Justus,  a  proselyte,  in  which  the  spostle  continued  to  preach  to  as  many  as  would 
come  to  hear.  Here  his  labours  were  greatly  blessed.  The  household  of  Stephanas 
were  his  first-fruits  in  Aehaia.  Gains,  with  whom  Paul  found  a  home  on  his  next 
visit  to  the  city,  was  another  of  his  converts.  Aquila  and  Priscilla  too,  with  whom 
he  now  lived  and  worked,  seem  to  have  received  his  gospel.  But  of  all  his  early 
converts,  none  appears  to  have  been  more  warmly  welcomed  than  Crispus,  the 
chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  whom,  on  his  profession  of  faith,  Paul  baptized  with 
his  own  hands,  as  indeed,  contrary  to  his  usual  practice,  he  had  also  baptized 
Gains  and  the  family  of  Stephanas.  The  congregation  rapidly  grew  (Acts  xviii.  8), 
and  among  this  mixed  and  growing  audience  Paul  "  sat,"  after  the  manner  of  the 
Ilabbis,  and  taught  with  unabated  fervour  "  the  Cross  of  Christ."  Speaking  not 
with  enticing  rhetfirical  words,  but  as  one  who  heartily  believed  in  the  simple 
gospel  facts,  he  won  an  easy  victory  over  the  outworn  creeds  of  Paganism  and 
Hebraism.  Some  of  his  converts  were,  we  know,  men  of  culture  and  wealth  ;  but 
there  were  "  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  not  many  wise,"  but  mainly  slaves 
and  artisans.  It  would  seem  that  while  Paul  was  busy  in  his  work,  Gallic,  the  new 
pro-consul,  arrived  at  Corinth.  The  Jews,  anxious,  if  possible,  to  profit  by  a  change 
in  the  administration,  and  encouraged,  i:)erhaps,  by  the  compliant  and  gracious 
character  of  the  pro-consul,  accused  Paul  before  him  as  a  disturber  of  the  religious 
faith  and  peace  of  the  city.  They  seem  to  have  hoped  that  Paul  would  be  given  up 
to  them  ;  and  had  Gallic  been  a  governor  of  the  stamp  of  Pilate,  or  Festus,  or 
Felix,  their  hope  would  probably  have  been  fulfilled.  Happily  he  was  a  man  of  a 
nobler  cast ;  and  no  sooner  had  he  undeistood  that  the  question  before  Ijim  was 
simply  a  question  of  "  vvords  and  names"  and  the  technicalities  of  the  Hebrew 
faith,  than,  withijut  permitting  Paul  to  reply  to  the  accusation,  he  drove  Sosthenes 
and  his  abettors  from  the  judyment-seat.  This  was  a  decision  which  carried  great 
consequences  with  it.  The  whole  city  was  on  the  alert  to  see  what  the  new  pro- 
consul would  do,  and  to  gather  some  hints  of  the  direction  in  which  his  symi^athies 
would  run.  The  Greeks  interpret  the  decision  as  adverse  to  the  Jews  ;  they  deliver 
Paul  from  the  hands  of  his  enemies  ;  they  ru.sh  upon  Sosthenes  and  beat  him, 
probably  with  the  lictors'  roils,  before  the  pro-consular  chair.  And  "  Gallic  cared 
for  none  of  these  things."  Why  should  he  ?  He  is  there  to  administer  the  justice 
of  the  State,  not  to  control  or  patronise  religion.  How  critical  the  occasion  was 
we  may  infer  from  the  fact  that  on  all  previous  occasions  Paul  had  left  the  cities  in 
which  the  Jews  persecuted  him  ;  and  that  to  keep  him  at  Corinth  God  sent  him 
a  vision  (Acts  xviii.  9,  10).  It  was  only  because  God  cheered  and  strengthened  him 
that  Paul  remained  at  Corinth,  risking  all  tlie  enmity  of  the  Jews  in  order  that  he 
might  gather  much  people  of  that  wicked  city  into  the  pure  fold  of  Christ. 
{S.  Cox,  D.D.) 

III.  CoRiNTHiAX  Church  Life. — 1.  Tlie  bright  side  : — It  is  Sabbath  evening,  but 
of  course  the  heathen  city  knows  of  no  Sabbath.  The  day's  work  at  the  busy  sea- 
port is  over,  and  the  streets  are  thronged  with  gny  revellers  intent  on  a  night  of 
pleasure,  for  it  is  the  wickedest  city  of  that  wicked  ancient  world.  Hundreds  of 
merchants  and  sailors  from  foteign  parts  are  lounging  about.  The  gay  young 
Eoman,  who  has  come  across  to  this  Paris  for  a  bout  of  dissipation,  drives  his  light 
chariot  through  the  streets  If  it  is  near  the  time  of  the  annual  games,  there  are 
groui)s  of  boxers,  runners,  charioteers,  and  wrestlers,  surrounded  by  their  admirers 
and  discussing  their  chuncts  of  winning  tlie  coveted  crowns.  In  the  warm  genial 
climate  old  and  young  are  out  of  doors  enjoying  the  evening  hour,  whilst  the  sun, 
going  down  over  the  Adriatic,  is  casting  its  golden  light  upon  the  palaces  and 
temples  of  the  wealthy  city.  Meantime  tlie  little  company  of  Christians  has  been 
gathering  from  all  directions  to  their  place  of  worship  ;  fur  it  is  the  hour  of  their 
stated  assembly.  '1  he  place  of  meeting  itself  does  not  rise  very  clearly  before  our 
view.  But  at  all  events  it  is  no  gorgeous  temple  like  those  by  which  it  is  surrounded  ; 
it  has  not  even  the  pretensions  of  the  neighbouring  synagogue.  It  may  be  a  large 
room  in  a  private  house  or  the  wareroom  of  some  Christian  merchant  cleared  for 
the  occasion.  Glance  round  the  benches  and  look  at  the  faces.  You  at  once 
discern  one  marked  distinction  among  them  :  some  have  the  peculiar  facial  contour 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,  ix 

of  the  Jew,  while  the  rest  are  Gentiles  of  various  nationalities  ;  and  the  latter  are 
the  majority.  But  look  closer  still  and  you  notice  another  distinction  :  some  wear 
the  ring  which  denotes  that  they  are  free,  while  others  are  slaves  ;  and  the  latter 
preponderate.  Here  and  there  among  tlie  Gentile  members  there  is  one  with  the 
regular  featui-es  of  the  born  Greek,  perhaps  shaded  with  the  pale  thonghtfulness  of 
the  philosopher  or  distinguished  with  the  self-confidence  of  wealth  ;  but  not  many 
great,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble  are  there ;  the  majority  belong  to  what  in 
this  pretentious  city  would  be  reckoned  the  foolish,  the  weak,  the  base,  and  despised 
things  of  this  world  ;  they  are  slaves,  whose  ancestors  did  not  breathe  the  pellucid 
air  of  Greece,  but  roamed  in  savage  hordes  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube  or  the  Don. 
But  observe  one  thing  besides  on  all  the  faces  present — the  terrible  traces  of  tbeir 
past  life.  In  a  modern  Christian  congregation  one  sees  in  the  faces  on  every  hand 
that  peculiar  cast  of  feature  which  Christian  nurture,  inherited  through  many 
centuries,  has  produced;  and  it  is  only  here  and  there  that  a  face  may  be  seen  in 
whose  lines  the  tale  is  written  of  debauchery  or  crime.  Bat  in  this  Corinthian 
congregation  these  awful  hieroiilyphics  are  everywhere.  "Know  ye  not,"  Paul 
writes  to  them,  "  that  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  Be 
not  deceived ;  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor 
abusers  of  themselves  with  mankind,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  extortioners 
shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  such  were  some  of  you."  Look  at  that 
tall,  sallow-faced  Greek  ;  he  has  wallowed  in  the  mire  of  Circe's  swine-pens.  Look 
at  that  low-browed  Scythian  slave  ;  he  has  been  a  pickpocket  and  a  jail-bird.  Look 
at  that  thin-nosed,  shari^-eyed  Jew ;  he  has  been  a  Shylock,  cutting  his  pound  of 
flesh  from  the  gilded  youth  of  Corinth.  Yet  there  has  been  a  great  change. 
Another  story  besides  the  tale  of  sin  is  wi-itten  on  these  countenances.  "But  ye 
are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  Listen,  they  are  sin^-'ing;  it  is  the  fortieth  Psalm  : 
"  He  took  me  from  the  fearful  pit  and  from  the  miry  clay."  What  pathos  they 
throw  into  the  words,  what  joy  oveispreads  tli^ir  faces  !  They  know  themselves  to 
be  monuments  of  free  grace  and  dying  love.  But  sujipose  them  now  all  gathered. 
There  was  this  difference  between  their  services  and  ours,  that  instead  of  one  man 
conducting  them,  all  were  at  liberty  to  contribute  their  part.  There  may  have 
been  a  leader  or  chairman  ;  but  one  member  might  read  a  portion  of  Scripture, 
another  offer  prayer,  a  third  deliver  an  address,  a  fourth  raise  a  hymn,  and  so  on. 
Nor  does  there  seem  to  have  been  any  fixed  order  in  which  the  different  parts  of 
the  service  occurred ;  any  member  might  rise  and  lead  away  the  comx^any  into 
praise  or  prayer  or  meditation,  as  he  felt  i^rompted.  This  i^eculiarity  was  due  to 
another  great  difference  between  them  and  us.  The  members  were  endowed  with 
very  extraordinary  gifts.  Some  of  them  had  the  power  of  working  mirat'les,  such 
as  the  healing  of  the  sick. '  Others  possessed  a  strange  gift  called  the  gift  of  tongues. 
It  is  not  quite  clear  what  it  was ;  but  it  seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  tranced 
utterance,  in  which  the  speaker  poured  out  an  impassioned  rhapsody  by  which  his 
religious  feeling  received  both  expression  and  exaltation.  Some  of  those  who 
possessed  this  gift  were  not  able  to  tell  others  the  meaning  of  what  they  were  say- 
ing, while  others  had  this  additional  power;  and  there  were  those  who,  though  not 
speaking  with  tongues  themselves,  were  able  to  interpret  what  the  inspired  speakers 
were  saying.  Then,  again,  there  were  members  who  possessed  the  gift  of  prophecy 
— a  gift  of  impassioned  eloquence,  whose  effects  were  sometimes  marvellous  :  when 
an  unbeliever  entered  the  assembly  and  listened  to  the  prophets,  he  was  seized 
with  uncontrollable  emotion,  the  sins  of  his  jiast  life  rose  up  before  him,  and,  fall- 
ing on  his  face,  he  confessed  that  God  was  among  them  of  a  truth.  Other  memi^eis 
exercised  gifts  more  like  those  we  are  ourselves  acquaiuted  with,  such  as  the  gift 
of  teaching  or  the  gift  of  management.  After  the  services  just  described  were 
over,  the  members  sat  down  together  to  a  love-feast,  which  was  wound  up  with  the 
breaking  of  bread  in  the  Lord's  Supper ;  and  then,  after  a  fraternal  kiss,  they 
departed  to  their  homes.  It  was  a  memorable  scene,  radiant  with  brotherly  love  and 
alive  with  outbreaking  spiritual  power.  As  the  Christians  wended  their  way  home- 
wards through  the  careless  groups  of  the  heathen  city,  they  were  conscious  of 
having  experienced  that  which  eve  had  not  seen  nor  ear  heard.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.) 
2.  Tlie  dark  side  and  its  lessons  : — The  picture  j^resented  in  this  Epistle  is  by  no 
means  an  ideal  of  excellence.  Indeed,  it  dispels  rudely  a  j^leasant  dream  that  the 
early  Christians  were  a  pattern  of  purity  and  love.  Transported  to  their  midst  we 
find  not  love  and  order  and  maturity,  but  spiritual  childishness,  a  universal  spirit 
of  faction,  blind  self-conceit,  resolute  opposition  to  the  great  and  loving  apostle. 


X    INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 

and  gross  sin.  Yet  these  imperfect  Christians  Paul  recognises  as  brethren  in 
Christ,  justified  and  sanctified,  the  Hving  temple  of  God,  and  a  living  letter 
evidently  written  by  Christ  with  the  Spirit  of  God  through  the  agency  of  Paul,  and 
therefore  to  him  a  source  of  thankfulness  to  God.  This  warns  us  not  to  treat  as 
worthless  imperfect  forms  of  Christianity;  and  not  to  shut  out  men,  and  still  less 
churches,  from  the  family  of  God  because  of  imperfections  or  inconsistencies. 
Human  nature  is  a  strange  mixture.  Churches  with  bad  men  in  their  chief  places 
have  often  contained  true  followers  of  Christ.  And  underlying  much  that  is 
unchristlike  there  has  often  been  genuine  though  infantile  Christian  life.  There 
are  both  tares  among  the  wheat  and  among  many  tares  wheat  which  wiU  be 
garnered  in  the  eternal  harvest.  This  picture  of  an  early  Church  dissipates  fears 
for  the  churches  of  to-day.  Possibly  Paul  trembled  when  he  thought  how  soon 
these  children  in  the  faith  would  be  left  orphans  in  a  wicked  and  stormy  world. 
Certainly,  had  we  stood  by  his  side  and  seen  the  feebleness  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
Cross  and  tbe  divisions  in  their  camp,  and  thought  that  to  them  alone  must  soon 
be  committed  the  royal  banner  and  all  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on 
earth,  we  should  have  feared  that  the  Church  itself  would  not  long  survive  the 
departure  of  its  founders.  But  the  feeble  Christianity  of  that  day  overspread  the 
Eoman  Empire,  overthrew  the  gods  of  Greece,  and  became  the  religion  of  the 
civilised  world.  In  view  of  this  triumph  we  cannot  fear,  as  some  seem  to  do,  that 
the  Christianity  of  our  day  will  be  ruined  by  the  imperfections  and  disorders 
prevalent  here  or  there.  For  underneath  weakness,  or  even  disease,  in  the  body  of 
Christ  tliere  breathes  immortal  life.     (Prof.  Beet.) 

IV.  The  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians. — 1.  Its  date  and  occasion: — The 
apostle's  sojourn  at  Ephesus  is  drawing  to  a  close.  Easter  is  approaching  (58  a.d.), 
and  he  expects  to  stay  in  the  Asiatic  capital  until  Pentecost  (chaps,  v.  8 ;  xvi.  8, 
9).  After  Pentecost  he  proposes  travelling  to  Macedonia,  then  coming  on  to 
Corinth  and  spending  the  ensuing  winter  there  (chap.  xvi.  1-9),  after  that  setting 
out  to  Jerui^alem.  Meanwhile  he  has  sent  Timotlay  in  his  place  with  Erastus  (chap, 
iv.  17  ;  Acts  xix.  22).  But  it  was  possible  he  might  be  hindered  or  delayed  (chap, 
xvi.  10) ;  au'i  so  indeed  it  turned  out.  For  in  the  Second  Epistle,  which  Paul 
writes  from  Macedonia  with  Timothy  by  his  side  (chap.  i.  1),  not  a  word  is  said  of 
Timothy's  mission  (contrast  with  this  1  Thess.  iii.  G-8) ;  St.  Paul's  mind  is  full 
of  Titus'  report  of  tbe  state  of  affairs  at  Corinth  (chaps,  ii.  IB;  vii.  5-16).  Clearly 
it  was  Titus  who  actually  went  to  Corinth  (chap.  iv.  17),  to  report  to  him  on  the 
condition  of  the  Church  and  the  effect  of  the  Epistle,  and  to  expedite  the  collection 
for  Jerusalem  (2  Cor.  ix.  2  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  1-6 ;  cf.  Eom.  xv.  25-29;  Acts  xxiv.  17; 
Gal.  ii.  10 ;  vi.  7-10).  We  are  told  in  2  Cor.  viii.  6  that  Titus  took  a  special 
interest  in  this  work  of  charity,  arising  perhaps  from  the  fact  that  he  had  been 
with  Paul  at  Jerusalem  some  years  before  (Gal.  ii.  1).  Previous  to  the  despatch 
of  the  First  Epistle  there  had  been  a  good  deal  of  communication  between  St.  Paul 
and  Corinth.  From  2  Cor.  xii.  14  and  xiii.  1,  2  ("  This  third  time  I  am  coming"), 
we  infer  that  he  had  himself  visited  the  Corinthian  Church  not  very  long  ago,  when 
he  was  grieved  at  the  conduct  of  its  members  (2  Cor.  xii.  20,  21).  It  is  possible 
that  we  have  a  hint  of  the  time  of  this  visit  in  2  Cor.  ix.  2,  where  the  words  "  a 
year  ago,"  perhaps  indicate  the  summer  or  autumn  of  57  as  the  date  of  his  excur- 
sion from  Ephesus.  He  took  no  judicial  action  against  the  offenders  at  the  time, 
contenting  himself  with  hearing  "the  word  of  those  that  were  puffed  up"  (chap, 
iv.  19),  and  warning  them  of  the  punishment  that  would  ensue  if  on  his  return  in 
the  next  spring  he  found  them  unrepentant  (2  Cor.  xiii.  2).  This  forbearance 
some  of  his  opponents  put  down  to  weakness  on  his  part— an  impression  that 
he  fears  may  be  aggravated  by  the  present  delay  in  his  coming,  and  wliich  in  both 
Epistles  he  earnestly  strives  to  remove  (chap.  iv.  18-21 ;  2  Cor.  i.  17— ii.  1), 
promising  his  defiers,  who  asked  for  "  a  proof  of  Christ  speaking  in  him  "  (2  Cor. 
xiii.  2,  3),  that  their  wish  would  shortly  be  gratified.  Not  only  had  St.  Paul  been 
in  Corinth  before,  but  had  also  written  to  the  Church,  probably  in  consequence 
of  his  visit  (chap.  v.  9).  It  is  conjectured  that  we  have,  after  all,  a  paragraph  of 
the  earlier  lost  letter  in  2  Cor.  vi.  14— vii.  1,  that  has  s^omehow  slipped  into  this 
place.  This  passage  very  much  interrupts  the  connection  of  thought  where  we 
rind  it  in  2  Corinthians,  and  it  is  well  suited  to  the  purpose  of  the  missing  letter. 
The  Corinthians  received  this,  but  had  not  as  yet  acted  upon  it.  The  doubt  raised 
as  to  its  meaning  supplied  a  reason  for  delay.  In  explaining  this  by  letter  to  the 
apostle  they  addressed  to  him  at  the  same  time  a  number  of  inquiries,  with  which 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FinST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COPdNTHIANS.   xi 

he  deals  consecutively  in  chaps,  vii. — xii.  Three  esteemed  members  of  the  Corin- 
thian Church,  Stephanas,  Fortnnatns,  Achaicns,  came  to  Ephesus,  seemingly 
as  a  deputation,  brinp;inf!;  with  them  the  above  letter,  and  wisliful  to  assure  the 
anxious  apostle  as  to  the  feeling  of  the  Corinthians  towards  him  (chap,  xvi,  17,  18). 
Unfortunately,  about  the  same  time  he  heard  from  another  source,  "  by  those  of 
the  house  of  Chloe  "  (cliap.  i.  11),  tidings  which  revived  his  worst  fears.  The 
strifes  he  had  witnessed  with  so  much  sorrow  had  broken  out  still  more  violently  ; 
indeed,  they  threatened  to  bring  about  the  speedy  disruption  of  the  Church.  Amid 
the  general  rivalry  and  confusion  four  separate  factions  were  distinguished.  There 
were  the  Judaists — destined  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  later  development  of 
affairs — who  said,  "  I  am  of  Cephas."  The  Apollos  party  boasted  themselves  men 
of  culture  and  philosophic  breadth  ;  they  missed  in  the  apostle's  discourse  the 
"  excellency  of  speech  and  of  wisdom  "  with  which  Apollos  had  gratified  them 
(chap.  ii.  1;  2  Cor.  xi.  6).  Nor  did  Paul  lack  vigorous  asseiters  of  his 
superiority,  men  devoted  to  evangelic  faith  and  freedom,  whose  cliampionship, 
however,  was  maintained  with  a  party  spirit  highly  distasteful  to  him.  There 
was  even  a  Christian  party,  as  jealous  and  disputatious  as  the  rest,  who  set 
themselves  above  their  brethren  in  claiming  to  be  the  true  followers  of  Jesus, 
disparaging  all  other  names  and  all  other  earthly  authority  in  the  pride  of  saying, 
"I  am  of  Chiist"  (ver.  12).  Amongst  the  cases  of  immorality  that  had  occurred 
in  this  Church  (2  Cor.  xii.  21),  there  was  one  of  an  especially  infamous  nature, 
respecting  which  St.  Paul  has  now  received  information  that  leaves  no  room  for 
doubt  as  to  the  facts  (chap.  v.  1).  He  demands  indignantly  a  prompt  and 
summary  judgment  of  the  case,  so  that  before  the  approaching  passover  the 
Church  may  be  purged  of  the  jjrofligate's  defiling  pi-esence  (chap.  v.  3-13).  This 
case  of  discipline  was  a  crucial  matter.  Had  the  Corinthians  refused  obedience 
the  apostle  would  feel  that  he  had  lost  all  authoriiy  over  tlu-m,  and  that  his  work 
at  Corinth  was  ruined.  Ijooking  at  matters  in  this  light  we  can  understand  the 
conflicting  emotions  under  which  the  apostle  wrote  this  letter,  and  the  intense 
anxiety  with  which  he  awaited  its  result  (2  Cor.  ii.  4,  12,  13,  and  vii.  5-9).  ^Yhen 
the  danger  was  over  he  allowed  expression  to  these  feelings  of  distress.  In  the  First 
Epistle  he  bears  himself  with  perfect  self-control,  with  the  calm  and  firm  courage 
of  the  pilot  at  the  height  of  the  storm.  Chaj).  v.  was,  in  effect,  Paul's  ultimatum 
to  Corinth.     {Prof.  Findlaij.)  2.  Its  (jeuuineuess  : — (1)  It  is  found  in  all  Greek 

MSS.  of  Paul's  Epistles,  and  in  the  Latin,  Syriac,  Egyptian,  Gothic,  Armenian, 
and  Ethiopia  versions.  (2)  It  is  quoted  by  the  following  Fathers :  TertuUian, 
Clement  of  Alexamlria,  Ireujeus,  Polycarp,  and  Clement  of  Itome.  We  find,  there- 
fore, that  it  was  well  known  and  accepted  both  by  friends  and  foes  before  a.d.  200 
in  places  so  fir  apart  as  Carthage,  Eg\  pt,  and  Gaul ;  and  that  it  was  referred  to  by 
three  writers  born  before  a.d.  100,  and  was  appealed  to  within  the  lifetime  probably 
of  some  who  had  seen  the  apostle  in  a  public  letter  from  the  Church  at  Piome  to 
that  at  Corinth  as  having  been  written  to  the  latter  Church  by  Paul.  (8)  Its 
contents  are  such  as  no  forger  would  dare  to  write ;  and  such  as  would  certainly 
prevent  its  acceptance  by  the  Church  at  Corinth  except  on  evidence  which  forbad 
all  doubt.  It  abounds  in  severest  condemnation  of  irregulaiities,  vice,  and  heresy, 
which  no  contemporary  forger  would  dare  to  record  in  a  letter  for  which  he  sought 
acceptance  as  written  by  Paul ;  nor  would  any  Church  accept,  without  careful 
scrutiny,  so  public  a  monument  of  its  degradation.  (4)  Our  study  of  the  Epistle 
will  assure  us  that  it  came  from  a  man  of  vast  mental  power,  of  intense  earnestness, 
and  of  the  highest  moral  grandeur.  Now  the  contents  are  such  as  must  be  either 
genuine  or  written  with  an  intent  to  deceive.  Can  we  conceive  a  man  able  to  write 
such  a  letter  perpetrating  a  forgery  in  order  to  hide  his  own  name  in  oblivion  ? 
Nay,  more ;  no  man  could  do  it.  For  the  tone  of  reality  throughout  these 
Epistles  is  too  clear  to  be  simulated.  The  living  picture  here  presented  can  be 
no  other  than  a  genuine  reflection  of  actual  life.  And  that  it  is  such,  will  be 
strongly  confirmed  by  our  comparison  of  the  Acts.  So  abundant  and  unquestionable 
is  this  various  evidence  that  in  all  ages  it  has  been  accepted  as  genuine,  both  by 
those  who  share  and  those  who  trample  under  foot  the  earnest  faith  of  the  great 
apostle.      {Prof.  Bict.)  3.  Its  compositioii : — It  was  written,  with  the  exception 

of  the  last  few  lines,  by  an  amanuensis  ;  not  in  Paul's  name  alone,  but  in  that  of 
Sosthenes  also — whether  the  successor  of  Crispus,  as  president  of  the  Corinthian 
synagogue  (Acts  xviii.  17),  or  another  of  the  same  name  cannot  be  determined.  There 
is  Paul  himself,  now  about  sixty  yeai-s  of  age,  and  bearing  in  the  pallor  and  feeble- 
ness of  his  frame  traces  (Gal.  vi.  17  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  27;  iv.  10)  of  his  constant  and 


xii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS, 

recent  hardships;  his  eyes  at  times  streaming  with  grief  and  indignation  (2  Cor. 
ii.  4)  :  the  scribe  catcliing  the  words  from  his  hps  and  recording  them  on  the  scroll 
of  parchment  or  papyrus  (2  John  12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  13)  which  lay  before  him. 
Possibly  Sosthenes  was  himself  the  scribe ;  and  if  so,  we  may  conceive  him  not 
only  transcribing,  but  bearing  his  part  in  the  Epistle,  at  times  with  signs  of  acquies- 
cence and  approbation,  at  times,  it  may  be,  interposing  to  remind  the  apostle  of 
some  forgotten  fact,  as  of  the  baptism  of  the  household  of  Stephanas  (chap.  i.  16), 
or  of  some  possible  misapprehension  of  what  he  had  dictated.  (Dean  Stanley.) 
4.  Its  importance : — (1)  Paul's  relation  to  the  Church  in  Corinth  was  in  some 
respects  peculiar.  He  was  not  only  its  founder,  but  he  continued  in  the  closest 
relation  to  it.  It  excited  his  solicitude,  called  for  the  wisest  management, 
tried  his  patience  and  forbearance,  rewarded  him  at  times  by  signal  evidence 
of  affection  and  obedience,  and  filled  him  with  hopes  of  its  extended  and  healthful 
influence.  His  love  for  that  Church  was  therefore  of  special  intensity.  It  was 
analogous  to  that  of  a  father  for  a  promising  son  beset  with  temptations,  whose 
character  combined  great  excellences  with  great  defects.  The  Epistles  to  the 
Corinthians,  therefore,  reveal  to  us  more  of  the  personal  character  of  the  apostle 
than  any  of  his  other  letters.  They  show  him  to  us  as  a  man,  as  a  pastor,  as 
a  counsellor,  as  in  conflict  not  only  with  heretics,  but  with  personal  enemies. 
They  reveal  his  wisdom,  his  zeal,  his  forbearance,  his  liberality  of  principle  and 
practice  in  all  matters  of  indifference,  his  strictness  in  all  matters  of  right  and 
wrong,  his  humility,  and  perhaps,  above  all,  his  unwearied  activity  and  wonderful 
endurance.  (2)  These  Epistles  show  more  clearly  than  any  other  portion  of  the 
New  Testament  Christianity  in  conflict  with  heathenism.  We  see  what  method 
Paul  adopted  in  founding  the  Church  in  the  midst  of  a  refined  and  corrupt  people  ; 
how  he  answered  questions  of  conscience  arising  out  of  the  relations  of  Christians 
to  the  heathen  around  them.  The  cases  may  never  occur  again,  but  the  principles 
involved  in  their  decision  are  of  perpetual  obligation,  and  serve  as  lights  to  the 
Church  in  all  ages.  Principles  relating  to  Church  discipline,  to  social  relations  and 
intercourse,  to  public  worship,  the  nature  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  Facraments, 
are  here  unfolded,  not  in  an  abstract  form,  so  much  as  in  their  application.  These 
Epistles,  therefore,  in  reference  to  all  practical  measures  in  the  establishment  of 
the  Church  among  the  heathen,  and  in  its  conduct  in  Christian  lands,  are  among 
the  most  important  portions  of  the  Word  of  God.  (C  Hodge,  D.D.)  6.  Its  styles 
tone,  and  contents : — (1)  Style  and  tone.  In  chap.  i.  a  quiet  and  dignified  asser- 
tion of  his  own  apostolic  authority,  which  had  been  called  in  question  by  the 
Hebraizing  party,  followed  by  a  courteous  salutation,  leads  to  a  brief  exordium, 
which  is  kindly  in  tone,  and  winning  even.  Then  the  sore  subject  of  partisanship 
is  introduced  easily  and  without  obtrusiveness  :  "  I  am  assured  by  Chloe's  friends 
that  there  are  contentions  among  you."  After  this  the  style  and  tone  kindle  into 
a  fiery  vehemence :  "  What  ?  has  the  Christ  been  made  a  share  ?  The  Christ 
reduced  from  a  whole  to  a  part  ?  Was  then  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?  was  Apollos  ? 
was  Cephas?  Say  not  that."  This  fiery  vehemence  rolls  on  through  the  first 
chapter  in  an  emphatic  terseness  that  brings  out  to  the  reader's  view  bright  eleva- 
tions only,  leaving  dark  the  connecting  depressions.  One  aim  of  a  commentary  is 
to  throw  light,  if  possible,  on  the  sunken  depressions.  Again,  when  he  comes  to 
deal  with  human  philosophy,  St.  Paul  speaks  out  boldly,  even  contemptuously  and 
in  scathing  antithesis  more  than  once :  "  the  world's  wise  are  God's  fools,  and  the 
world's  fools  are  God's  wise."  Nor  can  we  wonder  at  this,  for  it  is  from  the  serene 
summits  of  his  own  "  superabundant  revelations "  in  the  philosophy  of  Christ- 
ianity (for  he  insists  that  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  nucleus  and  centre  of  a  pro- 
found philosophy  of  Eedemption,  planned  in  heaven  prior  to  Creation  itself),  it  is 
from  this  lofty  level  of  a  transcendental  knowledge  that  the  apostle  looks  down 
with  pity  and  with  a  holy  scorn  upon  men's  intellectual  methods  and  scientific 
labours  to  solve  life's  riddle.  Hence  with  pious  contempt  he  thunders  down  upon 
the  sophist  aud  the  Eabbi,  upon  the  sapient  Greek  and  the  stolid  Jew,  "  Where  is 
Wiseman  i  \\\\exe  i?,  scribe  ?  Has  not  God  proved  tbe  world's  wisdom /((f/Ze  ?  silly? 
reduced  to  an  absurdity  all  its  irrelevant  philosophies  ?  "  No  compromise  here. 
Or  what  can  be  more  incisive  than  the  sharp  contrasts  blended  with  a  polished 
irony  in  chajx  i.  27,  28  ?  "A  foolish  thing  of  God  is  wiser  than  all  mankind  !  A 
weak  thing  of  God  is  stronger  than  all  mankind ! "  Or  again,  the  world's 
simpletons,  the  world's  nonentities,  the  world's  weakling?  and  baselings  (i.e., 
elements  deemed  such  by  the  worLi)  are  the  f/to.<e)i  things,  the  very  elements  of 
God's  selection  for  the  kingdom,  while  the  scientists  and  the  potentates  and  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS,  xiii 

entities  (as  St.  Paul  calls  the  somebodies)  are  often,  not  always,  just  what  God's 
selective  wisdom  in  its  niaicli  through  the  world  looks  at,  and  passes  by  and  leaves 
behind.  These  cosmic  eminences  are  generally  among  the  rejectanei.  Another 
conspicuous  feature  of  this  Epistle  is  the  Pauline  irony  :  certain  passages  ring  with 
indignant  sarcasm.  (2)  Contents.  Three  trustworthy  members  of  the  Corinthian 
Church  came  to  Ephesus  bearing  a  letter  from  the  Pauline  and  largest  party, 
begging  a  solution  of  divers  questions  on  marriage,  on  the  veiling  of  women  in 
assemblies,  on  sacrificial  feasts,  on  spiritual  gifts.  The  apostle,  who  had  been 
informed  of  the  disorders  and  divisions  in  the  mother  Church,  replies  to  these 
questions  seriatim.  He  also  rebukes  their  contentious  spirit,  their  acquiescence 
in  a  gross  case  of  immorality  unpunished,  their  appealing  to  heathen  tribunals, 
their  iri'egularities  in  the  manner  of  celebrating  the  Eucharist  and  the  Love-feasts, 
the  denial  by  some  of  the  resurrection  itself.  (Canon  Evans.)  6.  Its  relation 
to  the  (jospel  liistory,  as  evidencing  its  truth  in  connection  with  the  other 
Epistles.  Note — (I)  The  allusions  to  the  sayings  of  Christ.  There  are  only  two 
occasions  on  which  our  Lord's  authority  is  directly  quoted — chaps,  vii.  10 ;  ix.  4. 
Evidently  referring  in  the  one  case  to  Matt.  v.  32  ;  Mark  x.  11 ;  Luke  xvi.  18  ;  and 
in  the  other  to  Luke  x.  4,  7  ;  Matt.  x.  9,  10.  To  these  we  may  add  chap.  xiv.  37, 
which,  like  Acts  xx.  35,  is  lost.  Four  other  passages,  from  their  likeness  of  expres- 
sion, may  seem  to  have  been  derived  from  our  Lord's  teaching— chap.  iv.  2,  cf. 
Luke  vi.  28;  chap.  vi.  2,  cf.  Luke  xxii.  30;  chap.  vii.  35,  cf.  Luke  x.  39,  40; 
chap.  xiii.  2,  cf.  Matt.  xvii.  20.  But  note,  first,  that  their  want  of  exact  agreement 
implies  that  at  the  time  the  Gospels  were  not  in  existence.  Secondly,  that  this 
discrepancy  of  form,  combined  with  an  unquestionable  likeness  of  spirit,  agrees 
with  discrepancies  of  a  similar  kind  in  the  gospels  themselves;  and  when  contrasted 
with  the  total  dissimilarity  of  such  isolated  sayings  as  are  ascribed  to  Christ  by 
Irenaius,  show  that  the  atmosphere,  so  to  speak,  of  the  gospel  history  extended 
beyond  the  limits  of  its  existing  records,  and  that  within  that  atmosphere  the 
apostle  was  included.  Thirdly,  the  manner  in  which  the  apostle  refers  to  these 
sayings  proves  the  undisputed  claim  which  they  have  already  established,  not  only 
in  his  own  mind,  but  in  that  of  the  whole  Church.  He  quotes  the  sentence  of 
Christ  as  that  from  which  there  was  to  be  no  appeal  (chap.  vii.  10).  Already  the 
Lord's  words  had  become  the  law  of  the  Christian  society.  (2)  The  references  to 
the  particular  acts  of  the  life  of  Christ.  To  the  earlier  events  the  references  are 
few.  First,  those  to  the  Nativity  (Rom.  i.  3;  Gal.  iv.  4)  illustrate  the  stress  laid 
by  the  evangelibts  on  the  lineage  of  David  (Luke  ii.  23;  Matt.  i.  1);  on  the 
announcement  of  His  birth  (Luke  ii.  4 ;  Matt.  i.  23),  and  on  the  ritual  observances 
which  immediately  followed  (Luke  ii.  21-24).  Secondly,  there  is  no  detailed 
allusion  to  the  ministry  or  miracles  of  Christ.  To  the  general  manner,  however, 
of  our  Lord's  mode  of  life  there  is  one  strong  testimony  which  agrees  perfectly 
with  the  fact  and  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  narratives  (2  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  Phil.  ii.  7). 
Thirdly,  it  is  in  the  closing  scenes  of  our  Lord's  life  that  the  apostle's  allusions 
centre.  His  "gospel"  began  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  (chap.  xv.  3),  and  the 
main  subject  of  his  preaching  in  Corinth  and  Galatia  was  the  Cross  (chap.  i.  17, 
18;  Gal.  iii.  1).  The  distinct  allusions  to  His  sufferings  are  few  but  precise  (Heb. 
V.  7 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  13).  But  the  most  definite  and  exact  agreement  is  that  which  in 
chap.  xi.  23-26  contains  the  earliest  written  account  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and 
which  but  for  the  confusions  of  the  Corinthian  Church  would  have  remained 
unrecorded.  The  resurrection,  like  the  death  of  Christ,  is  the  subject  of  numerous 
allusions.  In  chap.  xv.  4-7  we  have  the  account  of  five  appearances  after  the 
resurrection  besides  the  one  to  himself,  the  general  character  of  which  remarkably 
opens  with  that  of  the  gospel  narratives.  Some  of  the  instances  given  are 
identical  in  both  ;  but  the  appearance  to  James,  agreeing  as  it  does  with  the  rejected 
gospel  to  the  Hebrews,  indicates  an  independent  source  for  the  apostle's  statement. 
The  appearance  to  Peter  is  also  to  be  noticed  especially,  as  an  example  of  an 
incident  to  which  allusion  is  made  in  Luke  xxiv.  34,  which  here  only  receives  its 
explanation.  Paul's  mention  of  the  appc^arance  to  the  five  hundred  exemplifies  that 
he,  writing  nearer  the  time,  makes  a  fuller  statement  than  is  to  be  found  in  the 
later  accounts — the  reverse  of  what  is  URually  supposed  to  take  place  in  fictitious 
narratives.  The  final  result  of  the  comparison  thus  shows  that  thirty  years  after 
the  event,  there  must  Lave  existed  a  belief  in  the  gospel  story  of  the  resurrection 
much  as  we  have  it  now.  As  regards  the  ascension,  in  the  early  Epistles,  as  in  the 
Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mwrk,  and  John,  all  reference  to  it  is  omitted,  as  though  it 
were  a  mere  accompaniment  of  the  resurrection.     But  in  the  later  Epistles,  as  in 


xiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS. 

Luke  and  Acts,  it  is  prominently  brought  forward  (Eph.  i.  20,  ii.  6,  iv.  8 ;  1  Tim. 
iii.  16;  Heb.  x.  20,  iv.  14,  ix.  24).  The  coincidence  may  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that 
the  ascension  (as  in  Acts  i.  9-11)  was  regarded  rather  as  part  of  the  life  of  the 
Church  (of  which  the  later  Epistles  treat)  than  of  Christ  Himself.  It  is  to  be 
noted  that  these  detailed  references  agree  mostly  with  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  which 
points  to  the  conclusion  that  the  author  of  that  Gospel  was  the  companion  of  Paul. 
(3)  The  allusions  to  the  character  of  Christ.  First,  His  greatness  (chap.  1.  30 
viii.  6,  XV.  45  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10,  19,  &c.  &c.).  We  are  so  familiar  with  the  sound  of 
these  words  that  we  rarely  think  of  their  vastness,  complexity,  and  freshness 
as  employed  in  their  first  application  to  an  actual  individual  man.  Yet  the  image 
of  Christ  in  the  Gospels  will  be  by  all  confessed  to  approach  more  nearly  to  Paul's 
description  than  any  other  appearance  in  humanh  istory.  Secondly,  His  wisdom 
(chap.  i.  30,  cf.  Col.  ii.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  17).  This  is  not  the  attribute  which  a  zealous 
convert  would  necessarily  think  of  applying  to  the  founder  of  his  religion.  It 
is  so  applied  by  the  apostle,  and  we  see  from  the  Gospels  that  his  application 
of  it  cannot  be  questioned.  Thirdly,  His  truth  (Eom.  ix.  1 ;  Eph.  iv.  21 ;  2  Cor. 
i.  20).  The  apostle's  words  are  a  faithful  echo  of  John  viii.  32,  xiv.  6,  xviii.  37, 
and  of  Christ's  "  Verily,  verily."  Fourthly,  His  freedom.  The  apostle  urges  on  his 
converts  the  freedom  of  the  doctrine  he  preached  and  its  contrast  to  the  narrowness 
and  concealment  of  the  Jewish  law,  and  tells  them  that  they  must  attain  this 
freedom  through  "the  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  (2  Cor.  iii,  1;  iv.  10).  We  turn  to 
the  Gospels  and  find  in  their  representation  of  Christ  this  very  freedom — the 
sacrifice  of  the  letter  to  the  spirit,  and  the  encouragement  of  openness  and 
sincerity.  Fifthly,  His  toleration  (Eom.  xv.  1,  3 ;  1  Cor.  x,  32,  33 ;  xi,  1),  We 
cannot  overlook  our  Lord's  constant  though  not  universal  acquiescence  in  the  forms 
of  the  Mosaic  law,  and  His  condescension  to  human  weakness  and  narrowness  which 
runs  through  the  whole  texture  of  the  gospel  story.  Sixthly,  His  gentleness  (2  Cor, 
X.  1).  Seventhly,  His  love.  Chap.  xiii.  is  a  portrait  of  Christ  and  of  no  other. 
{Dean  Stanley.)  7.  Its  relation   to  jjhilosojyhy,  criticism,  and  theology  : — The 

Epistle  to  a  remarkable  degree  combines  modern  questions  and  ancient  methods. 
It  touches  on  several  of  the  points  around  which  the  battle  of  Christianity  in  our 
day  is  fought — the  person  of  Christ,  the  supernatural  element  in  the  Church  and 
in  the  Christian  character,  miracles,  casuistry,  and  the  resurrection.  But  the 
apostle's  statements  on  these  and  kindred  topics  are  not  conceived  in  the  modern 
spirit.  They  are  not  tentative  and  deductive,  but  idealistic.  He  has  funda- 
mental ideas,  which  he,  like  Christ,  does  not  attempt  to  prove.  It  is  only  when 
he  raises  a  superstructure  of  truths  on  this  foundation  that  discussion  begins. 
If  the  reader  rejects  the  assumptions  as  mystical  unreason,  the  apostle's  entire 
doctrinal  system  must  be  unintelligible  to  him,  except  as  the  allegorical  part  of 
pi-actical  exhortation.  We  have  no  safe  ground,  it  is  true,  for  the  inference  that 
Paul  formulated  a  purely  philosophical  system  which  might  be  applied  to  the 
solution  of  all  religious  problems  as  they  arose.  But  a  thoughtful  reader  of  his 
"Epistles  will  have  no  difficulty  to  discover  the  bent  of  his  mind,  even  when  it  acts 
most  freely.  He  is  ever  seeking  the  one  in  the  many  ;  and  when  he  has  found  it, 
the  unifying  principles  assumes  in  his  eyes  an  objectiveness  of  character  and 
becomes  a  real  cosmical  faotor.  His  search  for  unity  was  partly  the  half-conscious 
yearning  of  a  profound  intellect  that  remained  to  the  end  more  or  less  a  stranger  to 
the  conflict  of  the  later  Greek  schools,  partly  it  embodied  tbe  spirit  of  the  age,  which 
felt  the  reaction  against  scepticism  and  faced  the  ever  recurring  question  of  dualism 
from  the  side  of  religion.  Such  a  philosophy,  however  latent,  could  not  fail  to  give 
binh  to  a  very  pronounced  theology.  In  that  theology  a  conspicuous  place  would 
be  assigned  to  such  ideas  as  lend  themselves  to  the  gathering  of  many  particulars 
under  general  principles.     The  apostle's  system  of  religious  thought  lay  at  the 


INlTiODlCTION  TO  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COUIXTIIIAXS,    Xv 

farthest  distance  from  empiricism  and  individualism.  The  principle  that  no 
thought  can  be  admitted  except  on  the  express  warrant  of  cont^ciousuess  is  modern. 
The  source  of  Paul's  ideas  is  revelation — an  outward  revelation  of  certain  essential 
facts,  and  an  inward  revelation  of  the  principles  involved  in  them  to  the  spiritual 
man.  Those  facts  and  jninciples  centre  in  Christ.  The  Christ  of  Paul  is  at  once 
the  historical  Jesus  and  the  risen  Lord  in  heaven.  His  fundamental  philosophical 
assumptions  would  be  accredited  to  his  mind  by  their  spiritual  influence,  their 
practical  use,  their  consistency  with  his  moral  convictions,  and  their  readiness 
to  fit  into  the  revelations  which  he  believed  himself  to  have  received  of  God 
concerning  the  person  of  Christ  and  the  meaning  and  power  of  His  life,  death, 
and  resurrection.  Plato's  ideas  "dwell  in  heaven."  If  they  were  on  earth  they 
would  be  individual  and  therefore  imperfect.  Similarly  in  Paul's  teaching  the 
Christ  lives  a  heavenly  life.  He  is  spiritual,  supernatural,  absolute.  What  is 
of  the  earth  is  earthy,  and  what  is  of  the  flesh  is  flesh.  By  regarding  the  second 
Adam,  not  as  a  mere  Adam  or  earthly  man,  but  as  a  quickening  Spirit  and  as  the 
second  Man  from  heaven,  the  apostle  finds  place  for  the  identification  of  Christ 
with  the  ideally  and  absolutely  good.  We  admit  that  to  the  Greek  conception  that 
religion  is  the  criterion  of  truth,  we  must  add  the  Hebrew  conception  of  religion 
involving  a  moral  law,  the  consciousness  of  sin,  and  the  felt  necessity  of  an  atone- 
ment. The  spiritual  man  is  before  all  things  a  saved  man.  The  Christ  of  heaven 
is  the  crucified  Saviour.  The  gospel  calls  on  men  to  repent  and  believe.  But  it 
is  precisely  in  the  union  of  a  salvation  through  an  atonement  and  salvation  unto 
spirituality  that  the  peculiar  greatness  of  St.  Paul's  representation  of  Christianity 
lies.  What  corresponds  most  nearly  in  his  teaching  to  the  modern  conception  of 
consciousness  as  test  of  truth  is  faith ;  for  it  combines  trust  in  God's  mercy  and 
a  realisation  of  Christ  as  a  perfect  ideal.  Faith  is  both  the  cry  of  the  terror- 
stricken  sinner  for  pity  and  the  eye  of  the  spiritual  man  that  can  look  at  the  sun 
without  blinking ;  and  it  is  the  one  and  the  other  because  it  unites  the  soul  to 
Christ,  who  is  at  once  the  Saviour  and  the  example.     (Principal  Edwards.) 

The  works  of  the  late  Reverend  C.  H.  Spurgeon  are  nsed  in  the  preparation  ol  this  vohime  by 
permission  of  Messrs.  Fassmore  and  Aiab&ster. 


THE    BIBLICAL    ILLUSTEATOE. 

I.  CORINTHIANS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vers.  1-9.  Paul,  called  to  be  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  through  the  will  of  God. — 

T)ie  salutation  : — I.  The  charactku  of  Paul.  1.  There  were  two  things  tlie  apostle 
knew  coulidently.  (1)  That  he  was  "  uot  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle."  The  same 
humility  should  mark  us.  Our  humilit}',  however,  must  not  weaken  faith  or  enfeeble 
energy.  For — (2)  Paul  was  an  apostle.  We  are  not  "  meet"  to  be  saved,  but  we 
should  never  doubt  our  salvation  when  the  Word  of  God  assures  us.  2.  The 
strength  and  nobleness  of  Paul's  character  was  based  on  the  confidence  that  he 
was  "  called  of  God  "  to  be  and  to  do  the  work  of  an  apostle.  A  little  thing  will  not 
make  us  lose  heart  in  our  work  if  we  believe  we  are  "called  of  Gol."  II.  The 
CHARACTKR  OF  THE  CoKiNTHiANs.  1.  They  also  Were  "called  of  (iod "  "to  be 
saints" — i.e.,  separated  to  God.  They  were  not  self-called,  to  be  and  to  do  what 
they  liked.  They  were  called  of  God  to  be  like  God,  and  to  do  His  will;  to  be 
separated  from  their  former  selves.  2.  They  had  been  called  out  of  a  society — (1) 
Where  the  Greeks  sought  for  "  wisdom  "  and  the  Jews  for  "  sign«. "  (2)  That  was 
morally  corrupt.  3.  The  character  given  them  by  God  should  inspire  them  with 
jealous  care  against— (1)  The  adjnission  into  the  Church  of  the  elements  of 
Corinthian  society.  (2)  Eeligious  bigotry  and  intolerance — the  spirit  of  the  Jew. 
They  were  but  a  part  of  the  Church.  III.  The  benediction.  Grace  is  essentially 
an  element  of  "peace."  Its  great  dispensation  was  heralded  in  by  "peace  on 
earth."  "  Sinai  "  and  "peace "  were  not  known  ;  but  " Calvary  "  and  "  peace  "  are 
one.  They  who  build  on  anything  but  "grace"  will  not  know  "peace."  The 
Church,  too,  will  be  characterised  by  "  peace  "  in  the  measure  of  the  "  grace  "  in  the 
heart  of  its  members.  The  peace-breaker  is  never  a  man  "full  of  grace."  {The 
Study.)  The  salutation  : — I.  The  designation  of  the  writers.  1.  An  apostle 
means  "  one  sent,"  a  missionary  to  teach  the  truth  committed  to  him  ;  and  the 
authority  of  this  apostolic  mission  St.  Paul  substantiates  in  ver.  1,  for  it  was 
questioned.  In  the  firm  conviction  of  his  call  by  tlie  will  of  God  lay  all  his  power. 
No  man  felt  more  strongly  his  own  insignificance,  but  more  deeply  did  he  feel  that 
he  was  God's  messenger.  Imagine  that  conception  dawning  on  him  in  the  midst 
of  his  despondency,  and  his  joyful  boldness  against  the  slander  of  his  enemies,  and 
the  doubtfulness  of  his  friends  is  natural.  This  sbo  ild  be  our  strength.  Called  to 
be  a  politician,  a  tradesman,  a  physician.  Why  should  not  each  and  all  of  us  feel 
that?  But  we  get  rid  of  it  by  saying  that  God  called  the  apostles,  but  does  not 
speak  to  us.  But  observe  "the  modesty  of  the  apostolic  claim.  He  did  not  wish 
that  his  people  should  receive  his  truth  because  he,  the  apostle,  had  said  it,  but 
because  it  was  truth.  2.  St.  Paul's  joining  with  himself  "  brother  "  Sosthenes  is 
another  proof  of  his  desire  to  avoid  lording  it  over  God's  heritage.  If  Sosthenes 
be  he  of  Acts  xviii.,  what  a  conqueror  St.  Paul,  or  rather  Christianity,  had  become. 
Like  the  Hpostle,  Sosthenes  now  built  up  the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed.  II. 
The  persons  addressed.  1.  "  The  Church,"  which,  according  to  the  derivation  of 
the  word,  means  the  House  of  God.  It  is  that  body  of  men  in  whom  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwells,  and  who  exist  on  earth  for  the  purpose  of  exhibiting  the  Divine  life,  to 
penetrate  and  purify  the  world.  It  has  an  existence  continuous  throughout  the 
VOL.    I.  1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ages,  not  on  the  principles  of  hereditary  succession  or  of  human  election,  but  on  the 
principle  of  spiritual  similarity  of  character,  just  as  the  seed  of  Abraham  are  the 
inheritors  of  his  faith.     2.  There  is,  however,  a  Church  visible  and  invisible  ;  the 
latter  consists  of  those  spiritual  persons  who  fulfil  the  notion  of  the  ideal  Church ; 
the  former  embraces  within  it  all  who  profess  Christianity,  whether  they  be  proper 
or  improper  members  of  its  body.     Of  the  invisible  Church  St.  Paul  speaks  as 
"  called  to  be  saints,"  "temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost."     Of  the  visible  as  "  carnal, 
and  walking  as  men,"  and  when  he  reproves  their  errors  Christ  too  speaks  of  the 
same  in  the  parables  of  the  draw-net  and  the  tares.     To  illustrate  the  abstract 
conception  of  a  river  is  that  of  a  stream  of  pure  water,  but  the  actual  river  is  the 
Ehine  or  the  Thames,  ninddy  and  discoloured.     So  of  the  Church.     Abstractedly 
and  invisibly  it  is  a  kingdom  of  God  in  which  no  evil  is ;  in  the  concrete,  and 
actually,  it  is  the  Cburch  of  Corinth,  Rome,  or  England,  tainted  with  impurity ; 
and  yet  just  as  the  muddied  Ehone  is  leally  the  Rhone,  and  not  ruud  and  Rhone, 
so  there  are  net  two  churches,  the  Church  of  Corinth  and  the  false  church  within 
it.  but  one  visible  Church  in  which  the  invisible  lies  concealed  (c/.  the  parable  of 
the  Vine).     3.  But  beyond  the  limits  of  the  visible  is  there  no  true  Church  ?     Are 
Plato,  Socrates,  Marcus  Antoninus,  and  such  as  they,  to  be  reckoned  by  us  as  lost  ? 
Surely  not.     The  Church  exists  for  the  purpose  of  educating  souls  for  heaven  ;  but 
goodness  is  goodness,  find  it  where  we  may.     A  vineyard  exists  for  the  purpose  of 
nurturing  vines,  but  he  would  be  a  strange  vine-dre^ser  who  denied  the  reality  of 
grapes  because  they  had  ripened  under  a  less  genial  soil,  and  beyond  the  precincts 
of  the  vineyard.     4.  The  visible  Church  of  which  the  Church  of  Corinth  formed  a 
part  existed  to  exhibit  what  humanity  should  be  to  represent  the  Life  Divine  in — 
(1)  Self-devotion.     They  were  "  sanctified  in  Jesus  Christ."     When  eccle-iastical 
dignity  makes  godliness  a  means  of  gain,  or  when  priestcraft  exercises  lordthip  over 
God'sheritage,  then  it  is  falsifying  its  mission.     (2)  Sanctity.     The  Corinthian 
converts  came  out  of  a  factious  and  extremely  corrupt  society,  and  carried  into  the 
Church  the  savour  of  their  old  life,  for  the  wine-skin  will  long  retain  the  flavour  of 
the  wine.     We  find  immorality  existing,  old  philos-jphy  colouring  Christianity,  the 
insolence  of  wealth  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  spiritual  gifts  exhibited  for  ostenta- 
tion.    Such  was  the  Church  of  Corinth,  the  Early  Church  so  boasted  of  by  some  ! 
Nevertheless  all  are  "  called  to  be  saints,"  and  their  mission  is  to  put  down  all  evil. 
(3)  Universality  :  "  With  all  who,  in  every  place,"  &c.     The  Corinthian  Church  was 
only  a  part  of  the  Church  universal  as  a  river  is  of  the  sea.     Paul  would  not  permit 
it  to  think  of  itself  as  more  spiritual  or  as  possessing  higher  dignity  than  the  Church 
at  Jerusalem  or  Thessalonica.     There  is  no  centre  of  unity  but  Christ.     We  boast 
of  our  advantages  over  Dissenters  and  Romanists.     Whereas  the  same  God  and  the 
same  Christ  is  "theirs  and  ours."     (4)  Unity.     Christ  was  the  Saviour  of  all,  and 
His    Spirit  bound  all  together  into  a  living  and  invisible  unity.     Each  in  their 
several  ways  contributed  to  fill  up  the  same  building  on  the  same  Foundation  ;  each 
in  their  various  ways  were  distinct  members  of  Christ's  body,  performing  different 
offices,  yet  knit  into  one  under  the  same  Head  ;  and  the  very  variety  produced  a 
more  perfect  and  abiding  unity.     III.  The  benediction:  "Grace  and  peace,"  &c. 
The  heathen  commenced  their  letters  with  the  sahitation,  "  Health!  "     There  is 
a  life  of  the  flesh,  and  there  is  a  life   of  the  spirit— a  truer,  more  real,  and  higher 
life,  and  above  and  beyond  all  things  the  apostle  wished  them  this.     He  wished 
them  neither  "  health  "  nor  "  happiness,"  but  "  grace  aird  peace,"  &c.     And  now 
comes  the  question,  What  is  the  use  of  this  benediction?     How  could  grace  and 
peace  be  given  as  a  blessing  to  those  who  rejected  grace,  and  not  believing  felt  no 
peace?     Its   validity   depeuded  on  its  reception    by   the  hearts  to  whom   it   was 
addressed.     If  they  received  it  they  became  in  fact  what  they  had  been  by  right  all 
along.     (F.  W.  Robertson,  M. A.)         The  ajjostoUc  salutations  :— The  praise  here 
bestowed,  though  not  greater  than  that  with  which  other  Epistles  are  opened,  is 
remarkable  as  being  addressed  to  a  Chu:  -h  which  is  thought  deserving  of  severe 
censures.     But  it  is  to  be  observed — 1.  That  the  praise  there  bestowed  on  faith  and 
holiness  is  here  almost  confined  to  gifts  such  as  knowledge  and  wisdom,  which 
were  obviously  not  incompatible  with  the  moral  degradation  into  which  some  of  the 
members  of  the  Church  had  fallen.     And  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  apostle's 
method  to  seize,  in  the  first  instance,  on  some  point  of  sympathy  and  congratula- 
tion, not  merely  from  a  prudential  policy,  but  from  natural  courtesy  and  generosity. 
2.  That  this  apostolic  practice  is  an  exemplification  of  the  general  rule,  according 
to  which  Scripture  presents  strongly  the  ideal  of  the  whole  without  describing  the 
defects  and  sins  of  the  parts.     The  visible  society  of  Christians  was  to  the  apostles, 


CHAP.  I]  I.CORINTHIANS. 


in  spite  of  its  many  imperfections,  the  representation  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  And 
then,  although  the  Christian  cont^jregation  in  each  city  or  country  was  distinct  from 
the  heathen  community  in  wliich  it  was  situated,  it  was,  as  it  were,  tlie  Christian 
representative  of  that  community.  A  Christian  of  Corinth  or  Ephesus  might 
travel  backwards  and  forwards  from  one  to  the  other ;  but  however  great  were  the 
disorders  of  the  one  or  the  excellences  of  the  other,  there  was  no  call  upon  him  to 
exchange  communions  unless  he  actually  ceased  to  reside  in  Corinth  or  Ephesus. 
The  supposed  duty  of  gaining  proselytes  from  Christian  communities  different  from 
our  own,  and  the  consequent  division  of  Churches  by  any  other  than  their  local  and 
national  designations,  are  ideas  alien  from  the  apostolic  age.  "  Spartam  nactus  es  ; 
banc  exorna,"  was  a  maxim  of  apostolical,  no  less  than  of  Grecian  wisdom.  No 
Chm-ch  of  later  ages  has  presented  a  more  striking  example  of  corruption  or  laxity 
than  was  exhibited  at  Corinth,  yet  the  apostle  does  not  call  on  his  converts  to  desert} 
their  city  or  their  community;  and  he  himself  steadily  fixes  his  view  on  the  better 
and  the  redeeming  side.  {Dean  Stanley.)  The  Church  in  Corinth: — I.  The 
WEiTER — "  Paul,  an  Apostle,"  &c.  1.  An  apostle  is  one  sent,  as  Christ  was  sent  by 
the  Father  (1  John  xvii.  18).  It  was  therefore  an  oflice  no  one  could  tnke  to 
himself,  nor  was  it  promotion  from  previous  service.  This  explains  one  of  Paul's 
most  prominent  characteristics :  the  combination  of  humility  and  authority.  He 
is  "  not  worthy  to  be  called  an  apostle,"  yet  he  never  he^itates  to  assert  his  claim 
to  be  listened  to  as  the  ambassador  of  Christ.  And  this  is  for  us  all  the  source  of 
humility  and  couhdence.  It  is  altogether  a  new  strength  witb  which  a  man  is 
inspired  when  he  knows  that  God  calls  him  to  do  this  or  that.  2.  What  share  in 
the  letter  Sosthenes  bad  we  cannot  say.  He  may  have  written  it,  and  be  may  have 
suggested  a  point  here  and  there.  Paul  did  not  stay  to  inquire  whether  Sosthenes 
was  qualified  to  be  the  author  of  a  canonical  book  ;  but  knowing  the  authoritative 
position  be  had  held  among  the  Jews  of  Corinth,  he  naturally  conjoins  his  name 
with  his  own.  II.  The  peksons  to  whom  this  letter  is  addressed  (ver.  2).  1. 
With  them  are  joined  "  all  that  in  every  place,"  &c.  And  therefore  we  may  gather 
that  Paul  would  have  defined  the  Church  as  those  who  "call  upon  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ."  This  implies  trust  in  Him,  and  acknowledgment  of  Him  as  sui^rerae 
Lord.  It  is  this  which  brings  men  together  as  a  Christian  Church.  2.  But  at  once 
we  are  confronted  with  the  dilficulty  that  many  persons  who  call  upon  the  name  of 
the  Lord  do  so  with  no  conviction  of  their  need,  and  with  no  real  dependence  upon 
Christ  or  allegiance  to  Him.  Hence  the  distinction  between  the  Church  visible, 
which  consists  of  ail  who  nominally  belong  to  the  Christian  community,  and  the 
Church  invisible.  Where  the  visible  Church  is  its  members  can  be  counted,  its 
property  estimated,  its  history  written.  But  of  the  invisible  Church  no  man  can 
fully  write  the  histoiy,  or  name  the  members,  or  appraise  its  properties,  gifts,  and 
services.  3.  From  tlie  earliest  times  it  has  been  said  that  the  true  Church  must  be 
one,  holy,  catholic,  and  apostolic.  That  is  true  if  the  Church  invisible  be  meant. 
But  it  is  not  true  of  the  Church  visible.  Paul  hei-e  gives  ns  four  notes  which  must 
always  be  found  in  the  true  Church.  (1)  It  is  composed  of  consecrated  people. 
The  word  "sanctify"  means  that  which  is  set  apart  to  holy  uses.  The  New 
Testament  word  for  Church,  ecclesia,  a  society  "  call  d  out,"  shows  that  it  exists 
not  for  common  purposes,  but  to  witness  for  God  and  Christ  and  to  maintain  before 
men  the  ideal  life  realised  in  Christ.  (2)  Its  members  are  called  to  be  "  saints." 
This  Church  was  in  danger  of  forgetting  this.  One  of  its  members  had  been  guilty 
of  immorality;  and  of  him  Paul  says,  "Put  away  from  among  yourselves  that 
wicked  person."  Even  with  sinners  of  a  less  flagrant  sort,  no  communion  was  to 
be  held.  No  doubt  thei'e  is  risk  and  difficulty  in  administering  this  law.  The 
graver  hidden  sin  may  be  overlooked,  the  more  obvious  transgression  be  punished. 
But  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  maintain  its  sanctity  is  undeniable,  and  those  whose 
function  it  is  to  watch  over  the  purity  of  the  Church  would  be  saved  from  all 
doubtful  action  were  the  individual  members  alive  to  the  necessity  of  holy  living. 
(3)  It  is  to  be  found  not  in  one  country  or  age,  in  this  or  that  Cburch,  whether  it 
assume  the  title  of  "  Catholic  "  or  national,  but  is  composed  of  "  all  that  in  eveiy 
place,"  &c.  No  visible  Church  can  claim  to  be  carholic  on  the  ground  of  its  being 
co-extensive  with  Christendom.  Catholicity  is  not  a  matter  of  more  or  less  ;  it 
caimot  be  determined  by  a  majority.  No  Church  which  does  not  claim  to  contain 
the  whole  of  Christ's  people  without  exception  can  claim  to  be  catholic.  (4)  The 
Lord  of  all  the  Churches  is  one  Lord  ;  in  this  allegiance  they  centre,  and  by  it  are 
held  together  in  a  true  unity.  Plainly  this  note  can  belong  or'y  to  the  Church 
invisible.     It  is  doubtful  whether  a  visible  unity  is  desirable.     Considering  what 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

human  nature  is  and  how  liaMe  men  are  to  be  imposed  upon  by  what  is  large, 
it  is  probably  quite  as  conducive  to  the  spiritual  well-being  of  the  Church  that  she 
is  broken  up  into  parts.  Outwaid  divisions  would  sink  into  insignificance,  and  be 
no  more  bewailed  than  the  division  of  an  army  into  regiments,  were  there  the  real 
unity  which  sprmgs  from  true  allegiance  to  the  common  Lord  and  zeal  for  the 
common  cause  rather  than  for  the  interests  of  our  own  particular  Church.  And 
Christian  people  are  beginning  to  see  how  much  more  important  are  those  points 
on  which  the  whole  Church  is  agreed  than  those  which  split  the  Church  into  sects. 
4.  Paul,  with  his  usual  courtesy  and  tact,  begins  with  a  hearty  acknowledgment  of 
the  distinctive  excellences  of  the  Corinthian  Church  (vers.  4-6).  (1)  Paul  was  one 
of  those  large-natured  men  who  rejoice  more  in  the  prosperity  of  others  than  in 
any  private  good  fortune.  Paul's  joy  was  to  see  the  testimony  he  had  borne  to 
Christ's  goodness  and  power  confirmed  by  the  new  energies  and  capacities  in  those 
who  believed  his  testicnony.  The  gifts  of  the  Corinthian  C  hristians  made  it  manifest 
that  the  Divine  presence  and  power  proclaimed  by  Paul  were  real.  And  it  is  the 
new  life  of  believers  now  which  most  strongly  confirms  the  testimony  regarding  the 
risen  Christ.  (2)  It  is  somewhat  ominous  that  the  incorruptible  honesty  of  Paul 
can  only  acknowledge  their  pt'ssession  of  "  gifts,"  not  of  those  tine  Christian  graces 
which  distinguished  others.  But  the  grace  of  God  must  always  adjust  itself  to  the 
nature  of  the  recipient.  The  Greek  nature  was  lacking  in  seriousness  and  moral 
robustness ;  but  for  many  centuries  it  had  been  trained  to  excel  in  intellectual  and 
oratorical  disjdays.  These  natural  gifts  were  quickened  and  directed  by  grace. 
Each  race  has  its  own  contribution  to  make  to  complete  the  lull-grown  Christian 
manhood,  (a)  Paul  thanked  God  for  their  gift  of  utterance.  Perhaps  had  he 
lived  now  he  might  have  had  a  word  to  say  in  praise  of  silence.  There  is  more 
than  a  risk  nowadays  tliat  talk  takes  the  place  of  thought  and  action.  But  this 
utterance  was  a  great  gift.  In  no  other  language  could  Christian  ideas  have  found 
such  adequate  and  beautiful  expression.  And  in  this  Paul  saw  promise  of  a  rapid 
and  effective  propagation  of  the  gospel.  Legitimately  may  we  hope  for  the  Church 
when  she  so  apprehends  her  own  wealth  in  Christ  as  to  be  stirred  to  invite  all  the 
world  to  share  with  her.  (h)  But  utterance  is  well  backed  by  knowledge.  Often 
has  the  determination  to  satirsfy  the  intellect  with  Christian  truth  been  reprehended 
as  idle  and  even  wicked.  The  faith  which  accepted  testimony  was  a  gift  of  God, 
but  so  also  was  the  kuowleitge  which  sought  to  recommend  the  contents  of  this 
testimony  to  the  human  mind.  (3)  But  however  rich  in  endowments  the  Corin- 
thians must  be  made  to  feel  that  no  endowment  can  dispense  with  the  necessity  of 
conflict  with  sin.  Eichly  endowed  meu  are  often  most  exposed  to  temptation,  and 
feel  more  keenly  than  others  the  real  hazard  of  human  life.  Paul  therefore  assigns 
as  the  reason  of  his  assurance  that  they  will  be  blameless  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that 
"  God  is  faithful,''  &c.  God  chUs  us  with  a  purpose  in  view,  and  is  faithful  to 
that  purpose.  He  calls  us  to  the  fellowship  of  Christ  that  we  may  learn  of 
Him  and  become  suitable  aj/ents  to  carry  out  the  whole  will  of  Christ.  (iV. 
iJnds,  D.D.)  The  call  of  God  is — 1.  The  ground  of  ministerial  authority.  2. 
The  motive  to  minister. al  usefulness.  (J.  Liith,  D.D.)  The  authority  of 
the  Christian  minister: — He  is — 1.  The  messenger  of  Christ.  2.  Divinely  called. 
3.  Set  apart  by  the  will  of  God  as  in  icated  by  His  Providence.  (Ibid.) 
And  Sosthenes  our  brother. — Sosthenes  a  brother: — I.  Who  was  Sosthenes?  1. 
After  Paul  beyan  work  at  Corinth,  Crispus,  the  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  was 
conveited  ;  and  that  Paul  considered  his  a  notable  case  is  proved  by  the  fact  that 
he  personally  baptized  him.  But  as  Paul  was  cumpelled  to  leave  the  synagogue,  it 
is  probable  tliat  Crispus  would  also  have  to  leave ;  and  the  fact  that  Sosthenes  is 
afterwards  mentioned  as  chief  ruler  implies  that  Crispus  was  deposed.  Paul  con- 
tinued his  lectures  next  door  to  the  synagogue,  and  its  success  would  naturally 
enrage  Sosthenes,  who  was  doubtless  the  head  of  the  conspiracy  which  led  Paul 
before  Gallio.  We  know  the  result.  The  Jew.s  had  risen  in  insurrection  ;  it  was 
now  the  turn  of  the  Greeks,  who  made  Sosthenes  the  special  object  of  their  attack. 
2.  That  the  Sosthenes  of  the  text  is  tlie  same  as  he  of  Acts  xviii.  seems  likely. 
(1)  It  is  probable  that  if  converted  he  would  leave  Corinth.  His  conversion  would 
create  deeper  resentment  than  that  of  Crispus,  for  he  had  been  not  only  chief  ruler 
of  the  synagogue,  but  tlie  persecutor  of  the  new  religion.  (2)  If  Crispus  had 
to  leave  Corinth  he  would  naturally  tnke  a  deep  interest  in  the  Church  there,  as  we 
do  in  the  home  of  our  fiist  birth  and  of  our  second.  (3)  Paul  would  surely  regard 
Sosthenes  with  special  interest.  He  had  himself  been  a  bitter  persecutor.  And 
if  he  had  to  flee  from  Corinth  it  is  natural  that  he  should  have  clung  to  Paul  and 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   COniNTIlIAXS. 


Paul  to  him.  (4)  Paul  would  pray  and  strive  for  his  conversion.  After  his 
acquittal  Paul  "  tarried  yet  a  good  while"  at  Corinth,  iind  would  deeply  regret  the 
onslaujiht  on  Sosthenes,  some  of  wliose  assaulters,  if  not  Corinthians,  were  doubtless 
attached  to  Paul,  which  would  lead  to  an  expression  of  regret  on  the  part  of  the 
apostle.  And  who  can  tell  what  such  an  apology  would  lead  to  ?  Perhaps  Paul 
would,  during  the  interview,  refer  to  his  own  conversion,  and  lead  his  listener  to 
see  in  it  a  refieciion  of  his  own  ease.  And  then,  Paul  would  see  in  Sosthenes  one 
who  was  so  like  what  he  had  been.  (5)  Unless  this  Sosthenes  is  lie  of  Acts  xviii. 
it  is  difficult  to  undeistand  why  Paul  should  have  here  introduced  his  name,  which 
is  not  found  elsewhere  ;  but  if  the  two  are  the  same  nothing  is  more  natural.  II. 
The  lessons.  1.  How  wonderful  in  its  operations  is  the  grace  of  God  !  Here  is  a 
man  the  very  last  one  would  expect  to  become  a  Christian.  2.  Do  not  be  hopeless 
over  any  case.  Sosthenes  was  in  office,  and  officials  are  always  difficult  to  move, 
and  the  indignities  he  suffered  would  exasperate  him  against  Christianity.  3. 
Cherish  a  forgiving  spirit.  How  fully  Paul  forgave  his  enemy  and  admitted  him 
into  his  friendship.  4.  Cultivate  kindly  feelings  towards  the  Christian  friends  with 
whom  we  have  been  or  are  associated.  The  tirst  Chiistians  Sosthenes  knew  were 
at  Corinth.  At  first  he  hated  them,  but  afterwards  he  loved  them  as  he  had  never 
loved  friends  before  ;  but  the  brotherliness  was  on  both  sides.      (A.  Scott.)  To 

the  Church  of  God. — The  term,  tKK\T)<Tia  (church),  formed  of  the  two  words  "  out  of" 
and  "  to  call,"  denotes  in  ordinary  Greek  language  an  assembly  of  citizens  called 
out  of  their  dwellings  by  an  official  summons  (cf.  Acts.  xix.  41).  Applied  to  the 
religious  domain  in  the  New  Testament,  the  word  preserves  essentially  the  same 
meaning.  Here,  too,  there  is  a  summoner — God,  who  calls  sinners  to  salvation  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  ((lal.  i.  6).  There  are  the  summoned — sinners,  called 
to  faith  thenceforth  to  form  the  new  society  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head.  The 
complement  "  of  God  "  indicates  at  once  Him  who  has  summoned  the  assembly, 
and  Him  to  whom  it  belongs.  The  term,  "the  Church  of  God,"  thus  corresponds 
to  the  Old  Testament  phrase,  "  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  " ;  but  there  is  this 
difference,  that  the  latter  was  recruited  by  way  of  filiation,  while  in  the  new 
covenant  the  Church  is  formed  and  recruited  by  the  personal  adherence  of  faith. 
(Prof.  Godet.)  ThreffoUl  sanctiiication  (Jude  1,  text,  and  1  Pet.  i.  2) : — Mark 
the  union  of  the  three  Divine  Persons  in  all  their  gracious  acts.  How  unwise  all 
those  who  make  preferences  in  the  Persons  of  the  Trinity.  In  their  love,  and  in 
the  actions  which  How  from  it,  they  are  one.  Specially  is  this  in  the  case  of 
sanctification.  This  being  the  case,  what  value  God  must  set  upon  holiness!  God 
could  as  soon  cease  to  be  as  ce;ise  to  be  holy,  and  sooner  renounce  the  sovereignty 
of  the  world  than  tolerate  anything  unholy.  Sanctification  means — I.  Settino 
APAKT — the  taking  of  something  which  might  legitimately  have  been  put  to  ordinary 
uses  for  God's  service  alone.  1.  E.g.,  in  Exod.  siii.  2  God  claimed  the  firstborn 
of  men  and  cattle.  The  tribe  of  Levi  was  set  apart  to  be  the  representatives  of  the 
firstborn.  In  Gen.  ii.  3,  God  set  apa-t  for  His  own  service  what  had  been  an 
ordinaiy  portion  of  time  before.  So  Lev.  xxvii.  14  was  meant  as  a  direction  to 
devout  Jews,  who  intended  that  the  produce  of  the  field  or  the  occupation  of  the 
house  should  be  wholly  given  to  God.  So  in  Exod.  xxix.  44  we  read  that  God 
said,  "I  will  sanctify  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  and  the  altar."  To  the 
same  effect  are  the  sanctification  of  the  altar,  instruments,  and  vessels  (Numb.  vii. 
1),  the  setting  apart  of  Eleazer  to  keep  the  ark  (1  Sam.  vii.  1),  and  the  establish- 
ment of  cities  of  refuge  (Josh.  xx.  7).  This  Old  Testament  use  of  the  word  explains 
John  X.  26.  Immaculately  conceived  and  preserved  from  all  stain  of  evil,  Christ 
needed  no  sanctifying  work  within  Him.  All  that  is  here  intended  is  that  He  was 
set  apart  (John  xvii.  19).  You  understand  now  the  text  in  Jude.  God  the  Father 
has  specially  set  apart  His  paople.  2.  What  suggestive  and  solemn  thoughts  are 
here.  (1)  If  we  are  sanctified  by  God  we  ought  never  to  be  used  for  any  purpose 
but  for  Him.  Ye  are  not  your  own  ;  ye  are  bought  with  a  price.  "But  must  we 
not  work  and  earn  our  ow-n  bi-ead?"  I'es !  but  still  as  "serving  the  Lord." 
If  any  man  say,  "  I  have  an  occupation  in  which  I  ca'inot  serve  the  Lord,"  leave 
it,  you  have  no  right  in  it ;  but  there  is  no  lawful  calling  in  which  you  will  not 
be  able  to  say,  "I  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  The  Christian  is  no  more  a 
common  man  than  wa'^  the  altar  a  common  place.  It  is  as  great  a  sacriL  ge  for 
Christians  to  live  to  the  world  as  it  would  have  been  for  the  Jews  to  use  the 
holy  fire  for  their  own  kitchen.  (2)  It  was  a  crime  which  brought  destruction 
upon  Babylon  when  Bel^hazzar  had  bi'ought  forth  "the  cups  of  the  Lord,  the 
goodly  spoil  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem."     Just  as  the  sacred  vessel  touched  the 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  i. 

sacrilegious  lip,  a  hand  was  seen  mysteriously  writing  out  his  doom.  Oh,  take 
heed,  ye  that  profess  to  be  sanctified  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  that  you  reckon 
it  not  to  be  an  unholy  thing.  See  to  it  that  ye  make  not  your  bodies  which  ye 
profess  to  be  set  apart  to  God's  service,  slaves  of  sin.  If  you  and  I  are  tempted  to 
sin,  we  must  reply,  "  No,  let  another  man  do  that,  but  I  cannot;  I  am  God's  man." 
When  Antiochus  Epiphanes  offered  a  sow  on  the  altar,  his  awful  death  might  have 
been  easily  foretold.  Oh  !  how  manv  there  are  who  make  a  high  profession,  who 
have  offered  unclean  flesh  upon  the  altars  of  God ;  have  made  religion  a  stalking- 
horse  to  their  own  emolument.     II.  That  the  thing  set  apart  for  holy  uses  is  to  be 

EEOAKDED,    TREATED,    AND     DECLARED    HOLY.         1.     E.g.,    in    Isa.    viii.     13,    it    is    Said, 

"  Sanctify  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  Himself."  Now  the  Lord  does  not  need  to  be  set 
apart  for  holy  uses,  nor  to  be  purified,  for  He  is  holiness  itself.  When  Nadab  and 
Abihu  (Lev.  x.)  put  strange  fire  on  the  altar,  and  the  fire  of  the  Lord  consumed 
them,  the  reason  was — "  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  Me  " ;  by 
which  He  meant  that  He  would  be  treated  as  a  most  Holy  Being  with  whom  such 
liberties  were  not  to  be  taken  (see  also  Numb.  x.  12,  and  "hallowed  be  Thy 
name  "  in  the  Lord's  Prayer).  2.  Have  we  not  some  light  here  concerning  our 
second  text — "Sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus"?  In  Christ  Jcrus  the  saints  are  regarded 
by  God  as  being  holy,  and  treated  as  such,  i.e.,  are  justified.  A  holy  God  cannot 
have  dealings  with  unholy  men ;  but  He  views  us,  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  our 
federal  Head,  the  Second  Adam.  We  may  boldly  enter  into  the  Holiest,  where  no 
unholy  thing  may  come,  because  God  views  us  as  holy  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  now 
come  to — III.  Actually  to  pueify  oe  ]vl4ke  holy.  1.  In  Exod.  xix.  10-12  saucti- 
fication  consisted  in  certain  outward  deeds  by  which  they  were  put  into  a  cleanly 
state  and  their  souls  were  brought  into  reverential  awe.  In  Josh,  iii.,  when  Israel 
■were  about  to  pass  the  Jordan,  they  were  to  prepare  themselves  to  be  beholders  of 
a  scene  so  august.  Men  in  the  old  times  were  sprinkled  with  blood,  and  thus 
sanctified  from  defilement  and  considered  to  be  pure  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  is 
the  sense  in  which  we  view  our  third  text,  "  Sanctification  through  the  Spirit,"  the 
sense  in  which  it  is  generally  understood.  2.  Sanctification  begins  in  regeneration, 
and  is  carried  on  in  two  ways — by  mortification,  whereby  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are 
subdued,  and  vivification,  by  which  the  life  which  God  has  put  within  us  is  made 
to  spring  up  into  everlasting  life.  This  is  carried  on  every  day  in  what  we  call 
perseverance,  and  it  comes  to  perfection  in  "  glory."  Now  this  work,  though  we 
commonly  speak  of  it  as  being  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  is  quite  as  much  the  work  of 
Christ.  There  are  two  agents:  one  is  the  worker  who  works  this  sanctification 
efi'ectually — that  is  the  Spirit ;  and  the  other,  the  agent,  the  efficacious  means  by 
which  the  Spirit  works  this  sanctification  is — Jesus  Christ  and  His  naost  precious 
blood.  There  is  a  garment  which  needs  to  be  washed.  Here  is  a  person  to 
wash  ifj,  and  there  is  a  bath  in  which  it  is  to  be  washed— the  Persan  is  the 
Holy  Spirit,  but  the  bath  is  the  precious  blood  of  Chiist.  3.  The  Spirit  of  God 
as  the  Author  of  sanctification  emjjloys  a  visible  agent.  "  Sanctify  them  through 
Thy  truth.  Thy  Word  is  truth."  How  important  then  that  the  truth  should  be 
preached.  4.  In  another  sense  we  are  sanctified  through  Christ  Jesus,  because 
it  is  His  blood  and  the  water  which  flowed  from  His  side  in  which  the  Spirit 
washes  our  heart  from  the  defilement  and  propensity  of  sin  (Eph.  v.  25).  There  is 
no  being  sanctified  by  the  law ;  the  Spirit  does  nut  use  legal  precepts  to  sanctify  us. 
No;  just  as  when  Marah's  waters  were  bitter,  Moses  had  a  tree  cast  in,  and  th&y 
were  sweet,  so  the  Spirit  of  God,  finding  our  natures  bitter,  takes  the  tree  of 
Calvary,  casts  it  into  the  stream,  and  everything  is  madei^ure.  He  finds  us  lepers, 
and  to  make  us  clean  He  dips  the  hyssop  of  faith  in  the  precious  blood,  and 
sprinkles  it  upon  us  and  we  are  clean.  The  blood  of  Christ  not  merely  makes 
satisfaction  for  sin,  but  works  the  death  of  sin.  The  blood  appears  before  God  and 
He  is  well  pleased  ;  it  falls  on  us — lusts  wither,  and  old  corruptions  feel  the  death- 
stroke.  5.  Just  as  the  Spirit  only  works  through  the  truth,  so  the  blood  of  Christ 
only  works  through  faith.  Our  faith  lays  hold  on  the  atonement,  sees  Jesus 
suffering  on  the  tree,  and  says,  "  I  vow  revenge  against  the  sins  which  nailed  Him 
there"  ;  and  tbus  His  precious  blood  works  in  us  a  detestation  of  all  sin.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Three  notes  of  the  Church  : — I.  It  is  God's — but  to  distinguish  it 

from  the  heathen  iKtXiiaiai — a  name  never  used  in  profane  Greek  to  denote  a 
religious  assembly — but  to  distinguish  it  from  the  icoct/ioc,  which  is  the  antagonist 
of  the  kingdom  and  out  of  which  the  Church  is  called.  Though  the  name  ecclesia 
was  boiTowed  from  the  clubs  or  associations  of  the  time,  the  apostle  discovers  in 
it  a  Christian  idea — that  of  separation  from  the  world.     To  say  that  the  Church  is 


CHAP.  1.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


an  erclesia  is  to  say  it  is  God's.  II.  As  a  result  of  its  being  an  ecclesia,  the 
Church  is  sanctified  (rf.  John  xvii.  lG-10).  The  piimar.v  meaning  is  consecration. 
Tlie  Christian  enters  into  tlie  place  hitherto  occujiied  by  the  Jewish  Church.  But 
consecration  in  its  Christian  form  resolves  itself  into  holiness.  Christ  takes 
possession  of  every  morality  and  raises  it  into  spirituality.  All  goodness  becomes 
a  religion,  binding  the  soul  to  God.  "In"  means  that  believers  are  not  only 
sanctihed  "  through  the  offering  of  Christ  "  (Heb.  x.  10),  but  also  continue  holy  iu 
virtue  of  union  with  Christ  (cf.  Rom.  xv.  16).  III.  It  consists  of  men  "  cAT.r.ED  to 
BE  SAINTS."  They  are  saints  by  reason  of  a  Divine  call  from  without  as  well  as  of 
a  Divine  operation  from  within  {cf.  Rom.  i.  6 ;  Lev.  xxiii.  2).  The  notion  of 
saintship  is  in  Scripture  inseparable  from  that  of  being  reckoned,  of  being  allotted 
a  place  by  God.  {Principal  Edwards.)  Grace  he  unto  you,  and  peace. — Grace 
and  peace  .-—Grace  is  favour,  and  peace  its  fruits.  The  former  includes  all  that  is 
comprehended  in  the  love  of  God  as  exercised  towards  sinners  ;  and  the  latter  all 
the  benefits  which  flow  from  that  love.  All  good,  therefore,  whether  providential 
or  spiritual,  whether  temporal  or  eternal,  is  comprehended  in  these  terms — justifi- 
cation, adoption,  and  sanctification,  with  all  the  benefits  which  either  accompany 
or  flow  from  tbem.  These  infinite  blessings  suiipose  an  infinite  soiree  ;  and 
as  they  are  sought  no  less  from  Christ  than  from  God  tlie  Father,  Clnist  must  be 
a  Divine  person.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  God  is  called  our  Father,  and  Christ 
our  Lord.  God  as  God  has  not  only  created  us,  but  renewed  and  adopted  us. 
God  in  Christ  has  redeemed  us.  He  is  our  owner  and  sovereign,  to  whom  our 
allegiance  is  immediately  due ;  who  reigns  in  and  rules  over  us,  defending  us  from 
all  His  and  our  enemies.  This  is  the  peculiar  form  which  piety  assumes  under  the 
gospel.  All  Christians  regard  God  as  their  Father  and  Christ  as  their  Lord.  His 
person  they  love.  His  voice  they  obey,  and  in  His  protection  they  trust.  (C.  Hodge, 
D.D.)  The  peace  of  the  Christian: — Trust  God  and  thy  soul  shall  no  longer  be 

like  "the  sea  that  cannot  rest,"  full  of  turbulent  wishes,  full  of  passionate  desires 
that  come  to  nothing,  full  of  endless  moanings,  like  the  homeless  ocean  that  is  ever 
working,  and  never  flings  up  any  product  of  its  work  but  foam  and  broken  weeds  ; 
but  thine  heart  shall  become  still,  like  some  land-locked  lake,  where  no  winds  or 
tempests  rulille,  and  on  its  calm  surface  there  shall  be  mirrored  the  clear  shining 
of  the  unclouded  blue,  and  the  perpetual  light  of  the  sun  that  never  goes  down. 
No  peace  without  Christ : — The  vessel  in  which  we  are  passing  over  the  sea  of 
life  is  always  driven  by  contrary  winds  till  the  Lord  embarks.  (J.  Piilsford.) 
Divine  hlessinfis  : — Observe — I.  The  blessing  we  anxodnce.     1.  Grace  and  peace. 

2.  Needed  by  all.     3.  Oft'ered  to  all.     II.  Their  source.    1.  God.    2.  Our  Father. 

3.  Through  Christ.     4.  Hence  the  supply  is  inexhaustible.     {J.  LytJi,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-13.  I  thank  my  God  ...  for  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  you  by  Jesus 
Christ. — Apostolic  titank^niving  for — I.  The  (iiiACE  they  had  received.  1.  Freely 
given.  2.  Richly  supplied.  3.  Amply  confirmed.  II.  The  hope  they  antici- 
pated. They  waited  confidently  for — 1.  Tlie  coming  of  Christ.  2.  Their  final 
justification.     3.  Everlasting  fellowship  with  Him.     {J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Apostolic 

congratulation  and  warning : — I.  The  apostolic  congratulation.  "  I  thank  my  God," 
&c.  1.  In  the  heart  of  St.  Paul,  the  unselfishness  of  Christianity  had  turned  this 
world  into  a  perpetual  feast.  If  we  want  to  know  what  his  life  was,  turn  to  2  Cor. 
xi.  ;  yet  it  was  filled  with  the  blesselne=;s  which  arises  from  the  abilities  to  enjoy 
the  blessings  of  others  as  though  they  were  our  own.  Personally  we  get  very  little 
in  this  world  ;  and  if  we  are  to  mourn  that  we  never  had  a  whole  kid  to  ourselves 
"  to  make  merry  with,"  life  will  become  desolate  indeed.  Only  by  saying,  "  It  is 
meet  we  should  rejoice  and  be  glad"  with  our  brethren,  can  life  be  a  blessing. 
Thus  the  apostle,  in  all  his  weatiness  and  persecutions,  was  nevertheless  always 
rejoicing  with  his  Churches.  2.  Here  he  rejoices  over  three  gifts  to  the  Corinthians 
— (1)  Thut  of  utterance.  To  Paul  a  blessing  was  nothing  unless  it  could  be  imparted 
to  others.  Knowing  a  truth  is  one  thing,  being  able  to  express  it  is  another,  and 
to  dare  to  express  it  another.  "  Utterance  "  implies  both  power  and  courage.  A 
truth  hidden  is  unproductive.  And  therefore  the  power  of  utterance  becomes,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  a  faculty  divine.  (2)  But  there  may  be  utterance  without  know- 
ledge. St.  Paul  desired  utterance  in  order  to  speak  out  something  in  him.  With 
many  persons  utterance  is  only  verbiage.  Let  us  seek,  not  merely  to  have  utter- 
ance, but  to  have  something  worthy  of  uttering.  Be  sure  you  speak  that  you  do 
know,  and  nothing  else.  (3)  The  attitude  of  expectation  (ver.  7),  as  though  that 
were  the  best  gift  of  all.     (a)  We  are  to  look  for  a  Church  of  the  future — not  of  the 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

past,  nor  of  the  present.  The  coming  of  Christ  includes  the  perfect  state  of  human 
society,  and  here — Christ  coming  to  us,  not  our  going  to  Him.  And  we  are  to  be 
looking  forward  to  this  ;  not  busying  ourselves  in  dreams  about,  and  mournings 
after,  the  past,  nor  complacently  praising  the  present,  but  thankful  to  God  for 
•what  we  have,  feeling  that  the  past  was  necessary,  and,  still  dissatisfied  with  our- 
selves, hoping  something  better  yet,  both  for  God's  Church  and  world,  {b)  It 
implies  a  humble  expecting  state ;  not  dogmatising,  not  dreading,  but  simply 
waiting.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  us  ;  but  the  kingdom  of  God  developed 
will  be  as  the  lightning,  sudden  and  universal.  3.  Note  the  ground  of  hope  for  the 
continuance  and  successful  issue  of  those  blessings.  Not  on  any  stabihty  of  human 
goodness,  but  the  character  of  God  (ver.  9).  Had  not  Saul  once  had  the  Spirit? 
Had  not  .Judas  once  had  gifts  ?  Who,  then,  could  say  that  the  Corinthians  might 
not  make  shipwreck  of  their  faith?  The  apostle  answers  this,  not  by  counting  on 
their  faithfulness  to  God,  but  on  God's  faithfulness  to  them.  Of  course,  this 
doctrine  may  be  misused.  We  may  rest  upon  it  too  much,  and  so  become  unwatch- 
ful  and  supine;  but,  nevertheless,  it  is  a  most  precious  truth,  and  without  it  I 
cannot  understand  how  any  man  dares  go  forth  to  his  work  in  the  morning,  or  at 
evening  lay  his  bead  on  his  pillow  to  sleep.  II.  The  apostle's  warning  and 
KEPBOOF.  1.  Parties  had  arisen  in  Corinth.  (1)  Tbat  which  called  itself  by  the 
name  of  Paul.  Now  the  teaching  of  this  apostle  differed  from  that  of  the  others 
in  the  prominence  which  it  gave  to  certain  truths — justification  by  faith,  the  salva- 
bility  of  the  Gentiles,  and  Christian  liberty.  Some  of  the  Corinthians  exaggerated 
all  this,  and  said,  "  This  is  the  truth  and  nothing  else":  accordingly  they  made 
the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  an  excuse  for  licentiousness,  and  the  doctrine 
of  Christian  liberty  a  cloak  of  maliciousness.  (2)  That  whicli  named  itself  after 
Apollos,  the  diiierence  between  whom  and  Paul  seems  to  be  not  so  much  a  difference 
of  views  as  in  the  mode  of  stating  those  views  ;  the  eloquence  of  St.  Paul  was 
rough  and  burning,  that  of  Apollos  was  more  refined  and  polished.  (3)  That 
called  by  the  name  of  Cephas,  between  whom  and  Paul  there  was  this  difference — 
that  whereas  the  Spirit  of  God  had  detached  Paul  from  Judaism  by  a  sudden  shock, 
in  the  heart  of  Peter  Christianity  had  been  slowly  developed;  he  had  known  Jesus 
first  as  the  Son  of  Man,  and  afterwards  as  the  Son  of  God.  It  was  long  before  he 
realised  God's  purpose  of  love  to  the  Gentiles.  Therefore  all  the  Jewish  converts 
preferred  to  follow  him.  (4)  That  calling  itself  by  the  name  of  Christ,  who  doubt- 
less prided  themselves  on  their  spirituality  and  inward  light,  and  looked  down  with 
contempt  on  those  who  professed  to  follow  the  opinion  of  any  human  teacher. 
Perhaps  they  ignored  apostolic  teaching  altogether,  and  proclaimed  the  doctrine  of 
direct  communion  with  God  without  the  aid  of  ministry  or  ordinances.  2.  The 
guilt  of  these  partisans  did  not  lie  in  holding  views  differing  from  each  other  ;  the 
guilt  of  schism  is  when  each  party,  instead  of  expressing  fully  its  own  truth,  denies 
that  others  are  in  the  truth  at  all.  Nothing  eats  out  the  heart  and  life  of  religion 
more  than  party  spirit.  Christianity  is  love ;  party  spirit  is  the  death  of  love. 
Christianity  is  union  amidst  variety  of  views;  party  spirit  is  disunion.  In  these 
daj-s  of  party  spirit,  be  it  urged  solemnly  on  our  hearts  that  we  "  love  one 
another."  Accuracy  of  view  is  worth  little  in  comparison  with  warmth  of  heart. 
It  is  easy  to  love  such  as  agree  with  us.  Let  us  learn  to  love  those  who 
differ  from  us.     {F.    W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Exeviplarij  iiratitude  and  j^recious 

confidence — two  blessed  states  of  mind: — I.  Exemplary  gratitude.  "  I  thank 
my  God  always  on  your  behalf."  The  gratitude  here  was — 1.  Unselfish. 
"On  your  behalf."  It  is  right  and  well  to  praise  God  for  what  He  has 
done  for  us,  but  it  is  a  nobler  thing  to  praise  Him  for  what  He  has  done 
for  others.  No  man  rightly  api^reciates  a  blessing  who  does  not  desire 
others  to  participate  in  it.  The  sublimity  of  a  landscape  is  more  than  doubly 
enjoyed  when  one  or  more  stand  by  your  side  to  share  your  admiration.  2.  For 
spiritual  good.  "  For  the  grace  of  God."  (1)  That  grace  which  "  enriched  in  all 
utterance  and  in  all  knowledge  " — two  splendid  gifts  where  they  are  inspired  by  the 
"  grace  of  God  "  and  properly  refuted.  "  Utterance  "  apart  from  "  knowledge  "  is 
vrorth'ess  and  pernicious,  volubilities  of  vice,  garrulousness  of  social  evils.  "Know- 
ledge"(is  of  no  value  to  others,  unless  it  has  effective  "utterance."  Knowledge  with 
a  powerful  oratory  will  move  the  world ;  it  has  shivered  dynasties,  converted 
millions,  and  created  churches.  (2)  That  grace  which  confirmed  in  their  experience 
the  testimony  of  Christ.  What  higher  gift  than  this— a  personal  realisation  of 
Christianity  ?  (3)  That  grace  which  inspired  them  with  a  practical  hope  of  the 
appearance  of  Christ.     3.  An  habitual  state  of  mind.     "  I  thank  God  always."     It 


cnAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


was  not  an  occasional  sentiment.  It  was  a  settled  attitude  of  heart.  II.  Precious 
CONFIDENCE.  1.  In  Christ  perfecting  character.  "  Who  shall  also  confirm  you  unto 
the  end."  So  perfecting  it  that  it  shall  be  "  blameless."  All  moral  imperfections 
removed.  2.  In  His  appearing  again.  'J  he  day  when  He  will  appear  is  the  day  of 
days  for  humanity.  3.  In  His  granting  them  companionship.  "  Unto  the 
fellowship  of  His  Sou  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord."  "  Where  I  am  there  ye  shall  be 
also."     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  grace  and  gifts  of  God: — Paul  uses  here  two 

expressions,  elsewhere  placed  in  the  same  close  connection  (see  Eom.  xii.  G  ;  1  Pet. 
iv.  10),  "  grace  "  (\flpic)  and  "  gift  " — not  SdJpov  or  its  cognate  words  (which  might 
include  every  natural  blessing  common  to  heathen  and  Christian),  but  x"|0"^M«.  the 
spiritual  blessing  connected  with  and  flowing  from  God's  "  grace."  Note  tuat — I. 
Both  aee  chakaoteristic  op  the  gospel  dispensation.  1.  True,  "  grace "  is 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  God  is  proclaimed  to  be  "gracious,"  but  this 
rarely.  It  is  in  the  New  Testament  that  we  have  complete  revelation  of  this,  and 
first  have  the  frequent  phrase  "  the  grace  of  God."  2.  And  this  because  "  grace 
.  .  ,  came  by  Jesus  Christ"  (John  i.  17;  Titus  ii.  11).  So  in  the  text.  God's 
fullest,  freest  favour  to  a  sinful  world,  made  possible  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ, 
made  manifest  by  His  life  and  ministry,  and  made  over  to  His  discijiles  as  an 
abiding  possession  in  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  3.  The  "  gifts  "  of  God  are 
thus — (1)  The  heritage  of  the  Christian  Church,  which  is  the  special  sphere  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  operations  (2  Cor.  vi.  IG;  Eph.  ii.  22).  (2)  Distributed  to  believers 
by  Him  as  being  God  (chap.  xii.  4,  11).  (3)  The  outcome  of  the  Divine  grace  of 
our  Christian  calhng  (Rom.  xii.  6),  and  argue  the  possession  of  that  grace  (1  Pet. 
iv.  10).  II.  Both  are  to  be  used  by  us.  1.  "  Grace  "  looks  cbielly  to  the  side  of 
personal  sanctitication.  St.  Paul  beseeches  his  converts  not  to  "  receive  the  grace 
of  God  in  vain  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  1),  shows  how  he  himself  had  been  changed  from  a 
chief  of  sinners  "  by  the  grace  of  God  "  (chap.  xv.  10),  and  thanks  God  thai  they  had 
been  partakers  of  tlie  same  blessing  (text  and  chap.  vi.  11).  2.  "Gifts"  look 
chiefly  to  the  side  of  Church  edification.  They  are  to  be  used  for  others  (1  Pet.  iv. 
10).  Some  have  more,  and  some  less ;  some  have  one,  and  some  others.  In  our 
text  St.  Paul  mentions  two,  "utterance"  (or  perhaps  the  expounding  of  "doctrine" 
— Xoyoc)  and  "  knowledge"  of  spiritual  things.  In  chap.  xii.  he  shows  how  this 
Church  was  "  enriched  "  by  an  abundance  (see  vers.  8-10,  28).  3.  As  every  true- 
hearted  Christian  has  received  both  grace  and  some  spiritual  gift  or  gifts,  we  should 
be  careful  to  use  both  aright.  (1)  To  profit  by  all  "  means  of  grace."  (2)  To  essay 
some  work  in  the  Church.  4.  The  grace  and  gifts  of  God  may  be  neglected  or 
misused.  Illustrate  by  the  parable  of  the  ten  pounds  for  "grace,"  and  ot  the  ten 
talents  for  "  gifts."  III.  Both  point  forward  to  the  end  set  before  us.  1. 
Sanctification  is  in  order  to  that  "holiness  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord  " 
(Heb.  xii.  14) ;  to  that  being  "  like  Him,"  that  we  may  "  ste  Him  as  He  is  "  (1  John 
iii.  2).  2.  Christian  work  is  not  an  end,  but  the  means  to  an  end,  even  prepared- 
ness for  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  3.  This  second  advent — and  not  death — is 
the  one  great  end  set  forth  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  goal  of  the  Christian's 
hopes  and  efforts.  So  our  text.  Conclusion  :  Let  this  subject  lead  to — 1.  Thank- 
fulness for  the  grace  of  God  manifest  in  the  progress  of  His  work  amongst  us.  2. 
Humility  in  the  recognition  of  our  spiritual  gifts  as  of  His  grace  alone.  3.  Earnest- 
ness in  the  fulfilling  our  obligation  of  "  ministering  the  same  one  to  another." 
4.  Singleness  of  purpose  in  looking  towards  the  end  of  God's  work  in  us  and 
by  us — the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (T.  H.  Barnett.)  The  ble^isinfts 
which  the  gospel — I.  Imparts — 1.  An  enlightened  mind.  2.  A  waiting  spirit.  II. 
Secures — 1.  The  continued  pres^  rvation  of  believers.  2.  Their  ultiujate  accept- 
ance. Application:  1.  Be  thankful  if  you  are  partakers  of  this  grace.  2.  Be  care- 
ful to  walk  worthy  of  it.  3.  Eemember  in  whom  is  all  your  stren^^th.  (C.  Suneoii, 
M.A.)  Christian  exrellence : — Paul  here  brings  this  before  us  as — I.  A  fact  of 

human  experience.  II.  A  product  of  Divine  influence.  III.  A  subject  of 
THANKFULNESS  TO  GoD.  (J.  Wlllcox. )  Otir  Loid  Jesus  Christ  is — I.  The  channel 
of  Divine  grace.  If  v  e  are  "called  to  be  saints,"  "partakers  of  the  heavenl.y 
calling,"  it  is  all  in  and  through  "  the  grace  given  by  Jesns  Christ"  (ver.  4).  II. 
The  source  of  all  spiritual  gifts.  "EnricI  ed  by  Him  in  all  utterance  and  in 
all  knowledge"  (ver.  5);  "So  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  gift"  (ver.  7);  "Who 
shall  also  confirm  you  unto  the  end"  (ver.  8) ;  "  That  ye  be  unreprovable "  (R.V.). 
Thus :  Gifts  of — 1.  Preaching.  2.  Hearing.  3.  Miracles  (chap.  xii.  4).  4.  Per- 
severance. 5.  Holiness — Are  all  traced  to  Him  as  the  Author.  III.  The  subject 
OF  APOSTOLIC  PREACHING.     "  The  testimony  of  Christ "  means  the  witness  given 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


concerning  Christ.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all  true  preaching.  Christ 
in  all  His  work  and  offices,  f specially  "  Christ  as  crucified."  IV.  The  object  of 
Cheistian  expectation  (vers.  7,  8).  We  look  for  Him  in  faith,  and  hope,  and 
love.  His  coming  will  be  a  revealing  of  His  glory,  and  of  our  judgment.  May  we 
be  "  unreprovable  "  in  His  sight.  (Clt'Hcal  World.)  That  in  everything  ye  are 
enriched  hy  Him. — Spiritual  riches  by  Christ: — I.  Man  poor  bx  natube  (Rev.  iii. 
17).  Lost  his  birthright — his  inheritance.  1.  Poor  in  time.  If  not  enriched, 
poor  in  eternity.  2.  "  Poor  "  in  utterance,  because  poor  in  knowledge.  His  lan- 
guage impious,  foolish,  idle,  &c.  3.  "  Poor,"  though  possessing  ea'thly  wealth. 
"  Carry  nothing  out."  4.  "  Poor,"  because  without  Him,  "  without  whom  nothing 
is  strong."  II.  Man  eneiched  by  geace  (Kev.  iii.  18).  Bkthright  restored.  In- 
heritance secured.  "If  children,  then  heirs."  1.  "Eich"  in  utterance — "all 
utterance  " — because  rich  in  "  all  knowledge."  Holy,  loving,  grateful  words. 
Prayer  and  praise.  2.  "  Rich,"  though  possessing  little  of  this  world's  wealth. 
"  Having  nothing,  yet,"  &c.  3.  "Ricti,"  because  "  in  Christ,"  "  in  whom  dwelleth 
all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  "Unsearchable  riches."  Enriched  by 
Him.  All  of  Christ,  "  who  for  our  sakes  became  poor  that  we  .  .  .  might  be  made 
rich."  {J.  Cornford.)  The  enriching  potoer  of  God  : — "In  everything  " — in  your 
(1)  physical,  (2)  intellectual,  (3)  emotional,  (4)  spiritual  natures.  All  nature  shows 
this  affluence  of  G^d.  We  are  enriched  in  all  our  relations— at  home,  in  society, 
&c.  "  In  Him."  This  can  be  said  of  no  one  else  than  God.  Presidents  and  kings 
may  help  us  to  justice.  Millionaires,  railroad  magnates,  and  bankers  have  the 
power  to  enrich  us  temporally.  Only  of  God  can  it  be  said  that  in  everything  ye 
are  enr.ched  by  Him.  In  what  ways  are  we  enriched?  1.  The  best  way  to  secure 
true  honours  is  to  make  our  lives  conform  to  Christian  principles.  2.  The  ideas  of 
inspiration  will  more  largely  and  more  permanently  enrich  the  intellect  than 
draughts  drawn  from  other  reservoirs  of  wisdom.  All  others  are  receiving  reser- 
voirs :  the  Bible  is  a  fountain  source.  3.  The  man  whose  business  is  conducted 
on  a  Christian  basis  will  most  certainly  be  rich  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word.  No 
one  is  rich  who  is  not  rich  in  contentment  and  in  good  works.  4.  We  are  enabled 
in  God  to  believe  in  and  assert  our  immortality.  5.  In  Him  we  have  a  wealth 
of  spirituality  which  is  ever-iucreasing.  It  is  unaffected  by  the  grave.  Lack 
we  any  good  thing,  we  ask  and  receive.  All  things  are  ours.  If  such  to  us 
is  the  enriching  power  of  God  on  earth,  how  much  more  enriching  will  that 
power  be  in  the  world  to  come!       {N.  Hchenk,  D.D.)  Enriched   by    Christ: 

— 1.  Christ  has  enriched  the  world's  intellectual  life.  Range  of  human  thought 
immense,  but  finite.  Grandeur  of  world's  art  and  literature  evidences  the  high, 
capacious  powers  of  man.  Christ  has  touched  and  refined  the  world's  art  and 
literature.  Ancient  literature,  except  Jewish  sacred  writings,  Pagan,  a  mass  of 
mingled  glory  and  shame.  Christ's  purifying  influence.  To-day  the  world's  art 
and  literature  are  Christian.  2.  Christ  has  enriched  the  world's  moral  life.  Fatal 
weakness  of  human  moralists.  Lacked  authority.  Christ  spake  with  authority. 
His  teachings  not  opinions,  but  living  rule  of  life  and  conduct.  Christ's  teachings 
have  changed  the  world's  moral  life.  Most  important.  (1)  The  Fatherhood  of 
God.  New  meaning  given  to  Old  Testament  simile,  "  Like  as  a  father,"  &c.  (2) 
The  brotherhood  of  man.  Strong  and  wise  to  help  the  weak  and  ignorant.  "  Bear 
one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ."  (3)  Neces-sity  of  moral 
change  to  fit  men  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (4)  Life  and  immortality  brought 
to  light.  Christ  alone  speaks  here  with  authority.  "  In  My  Father's  house  are 
many  mansions."  3.  Christ  has  enriched  the  world's  social  life.  Truths  which 
enrich  the  world's  thought  and  moral  life  bound  to  tell  upon  its  social  life.  Living 
power  in  true  and  noble  thoughts  to  leaven  character.  Truth  subjective  in  its  influence 
upon  the  mind  ;  objective  in  character  and  influence  upon  others.  Christian  thought 
can  mould  a  nation's  life.  (1)  Human  life  made  sacred.  (2)  By  the  elevation  of 
woman.    {Methodist  Times. )  Life  enriched  throuyh  Christ : — If  you  will  to  be  His 

disciple,  He  will  enrich  your  life,  He  will  purge  it  of  its  pollution,  He  will  couquer 
your  lusts,  He  will  enlighten  your  mind,  He  will  deepen  in  you  all  that  is  generous 
and  rich  and  brotherly  and  true  and  just.  He  will  make  your  life  worth  having — 
yea,  increasingly  worth  having — as  you  gain  in  experience  of  His  power  and  His 
iove,  even  to  the  end.  He  will  touch  your  sufferings  and  your  labours  with  the 
glory  of  His  sympathy ;  He  will  deepen  your  hopes  for  yourselves  and  others  with 
the  security  of  an  eternal  prospect.  At  the  last  He  will  purify  and  perfect  and 
welcome  you.  Only  do  not  make  the  fatal  mistake  of  imagining  that  your  life  is 
Christian  anyhow,  or  that  it  can  be  Christian  by  any  other  process  than  by  your 


OHAP.  I.]  I.   COIUNTIIIAJSS.  11 

deliberate  and  coiu-ageous  acceptance  of  the  law  of  Christ,  because  you  desire  to 
be  His  disciple.  (Clias.  Gore,  HJ.A.)  The  poircr  of  utterance  : — There  is  another 
power  which  each  man  should  cultivate  according  to  his  ability,  but  which  is  very 
much  neglected  in  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  that  is  the  power  of  utterance.  A 
man  was  not  made  to  shut  up  his  mind  in  itself,  but  to  give  it  voice  and  to 
exchange  it  for  other  minds.  Speech  is  one  of  our  grand  distinctions  from  the 
brute.  Our  power  over  others  lies  not  so  much  in  the  amount  of  thought  within 
us  as  in  the  power  of  bringing  it  out.  A  man  of  more  than  ordinary  intellectual 
vigour  may,  for  want  of  expression,  be  a  cipher,  without  significance,  in  society; 
and  not  only  does  a  man  influence  others,  but  he  greatly  aids  his  own  intellect  by 
giving  distinct  and  forcible  utterance  to  his  thoughts.  We  understand  ourselves 
better,  our  conceptions  grow  clearer,  by  the  very  effort  to  make  them  clear  to 
another.  Our  social  rank,  too,  dt^jends  a  good  deal  on  our  power  of  utterance. 
To  have  intercourse  with  respectable  people  we  must  speak  their  langunge. 
(IF.  E.  Channing,  D.D.)  Utterance  and  knowhdcje  : — The  two  special  gifts  of 

the  Corinthians  consisted  partly  in  the  elevation  and  consecration  of  their  national 
characteristics.  Sj^eech  occupies  no  less  prominent  a  place  in  the  New  Testament 
than  it  did  among  the  Greeks.  It  has  for  its  object  to  bear  witness  for  Christ,  and 
is  a  "  gift  "  of  God  for  which  the  apostle  gives  thanks.  Chrirflianity  broke  on  the 
world  as  a  new  revelation,  which,  by  being  told  and  echoed  on  all  sides,  is  powerful 
to  regenerate  men.  This  is  the  origin  and  life  of  preaching ;  for,  as  Pascal  says, 
"The  saints  have  never  been  silent."  (Principal  Edicards.)  Even  as  the  testi- 
mony of  Christ  was  confirmed  in  you. — Bearin/i  witness  to  the  irutJi  .-—Note — I. 
The  testimony  of  Jests.  When  He  was  brought  before  Pilate  the  interrogatory 
was.  What  was  His  mission  ?  The  response  was  that  He  had  a  kingdom,  not  of 
this  world,  and  consequently  He  must  be  a  King.  His  wns  the  kingdom  of  truth ; 
and  the  weapons  of  His  warfare  were  not  carnal,  but  spiritual.  He  came  into  the 
world  that  He  might  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  The  Pnarisees  charged  Him  with  ""^ 
witnessing  for  Himself.  The  response  was  not  a  denial  of  the  facts,  but  a 
reaffirmntion  that  He  should  be  the  liglit  of  the  world  and  bear  witness  to  the 
truth.  When  John,  in  his  exile,  began  to  see  the  revelations  of  God,  he  declared 
^_^>that  Jesus  was  the  faithful  Witness  :  that  He  was  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the 
earth.  Whether,  therefoi-e,  we  view  Him  in  prophecy  or  in  history,  or  in  the 
revelation  which  He  made  of  Himself  to  His  servants,  we  see  that  His  mission  was 
to  be  that  of  Witness.     II.  Jesds  having  gh'en  His  evidence  eok  iru'ih,  it  now 

REMAINS    FOIt    EVEIIY    BELIEVER   TO    CONHKM    THAT   WITNESS    TO    THE  WORLD  IN  HIS  LIFE 

BY   WORDS   AND    DEEDS. :/ The  world  does  not  believe  in  the  Son  of  God.     Thej^ 
Pharisees  told  Him  that  His  witness  was  not  true.     He,  on  the  other  hand,  when/^ 
He  had  laid  claim  to  being  the  witness  for  the  truth,  speaking  as  never  man  spake, 
working  with  the  mighty  power  of  God,  turns  round  upon  His  followers,  and  says 
unto  them,  "Ye  shall  be  My  witnesses."     The  idea  here  evidently'  is  that  Jesus, 
having  once  deposed,  they  must  stand  forth  to  confirm  Him  before  the  woild.     He    ^^ 
is,  so  to  speak,  the  main  witness  in  court.      The  effort  is  to  break  Him  down  when^^^ 
He  claims  to  be  the  King  of  the  truth.     His  word  has  been  spoken,  and  now  His 
people  are  rendering  their  evidence  ;  it  is  passing  silently  to  the  jury,  and  the 
verdict  is  rapidly  being  made  up,  either  for  or  against  the  Son  of  God.     Men  must 
receive  Him.     This  they  will  do  when  they  see  His  disciples  corroborating  in  their 
lives  the  witness  He  made  for  the  truth.    This  corroborating  witness  of  the  Church 
is  borne  in  these  ways  :  we  do  for  God,  or  we  bear  for  Him,  or  we  suffer  for  Him.;".     '". 
The  world  pays  a  special  tribute  to  Christian  ethics  when  it  says.  Your  creed  is  a 
good  one,  but  your  life  is  not  up  to  it.     We  may  print  religious  literature  and 
scatter  it  over  the  land,  but  the  world  will  not  read  books — it  is  too  busy,  too  rest- 
less, too  eager;  but  it  will  read  you,  and  it  will  receive  or  reject  the  claims  of  the 
religion  of  Christ  in  proportion  as  it  finds  in  everyday  life  the  record  which  believers  ^ 
are  there  making,  the  witness  they  are  giving.     [II.  K.  Smoot,  D.D.)  "'^ 

Vers.  7,  8.  So  that  ye  come  behind  In  no  gift. — Gift : — This  word  plays  a  large 
part  in  this  Epistle.  As  the  form  of  the  Greek  indicates,  it  denotes  in  general 
every  concrete  product  in  which  grace  is  embodied.  The  various  powers,  which 
so  often  in  St.  Paul's  writings  bear  the  name  of  ^apiVr/iaro,  are  certainly  the  effects 
of  the  sui^ernatural  life  due  to  faith  in  Christ ;  but  they  fit  in,  notwithstanding, 
to  pre-existing  natural  aptitudes  in  individuals  and  peoples.  The  Holy  Spirit  does 
not  substitute  Himself  for  the  human  soul ;  He  sanctities  it  and  consecrates  its 
innate  talents  to  the  service  of  the  work  of  salvation.     By  this  new  direction  He 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

purifies  them  and  exalts  them,  and  enables  them  to  reach  their  perfect  develop- 
ment. This  was  what  had  taken  place  at  Corinth,  and  it  was  thus  especially  that 
the  apostolic  testimony  had  been  divinely  confirmed  in  the  Church.  We  see  how 
Paul  still  carefully  avoids  (>is  in  ver.  5)  speaking  of  the  moral  fruits  of  the  gospel, 
for  this  was  the  very  respect  in  which  there  was  a  grave  deficiency  at  Corinth. 
{Prof.  Godet.)  Gifts  and  graces  : — Gifts  show  what  a  man  has  ;  graces,  what  he 
is.  Gifts  and  inoyer : — In  mining  opeiations,  the  full  and  empty  carriages  or 
vessels  being  connected  together,  those  which  have  been  emptied  are  from  time  to 
time  raised  up  the  ascent  by  the  descending  of  those  that  have  been  filled.  In  this 
way  let  the  descent  of  God's  mercies  and  the  gifts  bestowed  out  of  His  fulness  raise 
your  empty  vessels  to  receive  again  and  again  from  His  inexhaustible  treasury  all  that 
you  need.  (R.  Bickersteth.)  Waiting  for  tlie  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — • 
Waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  object  of  expectation  to  all  teue 
BELIEVERS.  "  The  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  should  rather  have  been 
rendered,  the  discovery  or  manifestation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  primary 
idea  is  that  of  stripping  off  a  garment,  rolling  away  a  curtain,  or  removing  a  screen  ; 
and  under  whichever  of  these  aspects  we  contemplate  the  image  depicted  by  the 
apostle,  it  will  come  hoirie  with  equal  power  to  our  own  consciousness  of  frailty, 
our  own  liability  to  death.  Practically,  that  moment  will  be  to  us  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Christ  as  Judge,  which  sliall  strip  off  this  garment  of  mortality,  roll  away 
the  dark  curtain  of  the  grave,  and  remove  the  screen  which  divides  us  from  the 
invisible  world.  The  believer  does  not,  like  one  conscious  of  unacknowledged  and 
unrepented  sin,  start  back  from  judgment  with  apprehension  and  alarm.  It  is  not 
a  Judge  who  will  be  manifested  to  his  spiritual  view,  arrayed  in  lightnings  and 
attended  by  ministers  of  wrath — it  is  not  such  a  Judge,  but  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : 
yea,  he  can  even  say,  with  all  the  confiding  appropriation  of  the  Apostle  Paul, 
"  Christ  Jesus,  my  Lord,  the  excellency  of  whose  knowledge  is  life  eternal,  and  in 
whom  I  desire  to  be  found,  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law, 
but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by 
faith."  II.  The  mode  of  so  preparing  for  the  coming  or  manifestation  of 
Christ  Jesus,  that  it  sh^ll  be,  not  the  apprehension  of  impending  evil,  but 
THE  expectancy  OF  ci'RTAiN  AND  ENDURING  GOOD.  The  apostlo  spcaks  of  God 
"  confirming  these  Corinthians  unto  the  end."  Confirming  them,  you  will  ask,  in 
what  ?  The  reference  is  to  the  fourth  verse,  in  which  St.  Paul  speaks,  first,  of  the 
producing  cause,  in  which  alone  preparation  had  commenced  or  could  commence, 
even  the  "grace  which  had  been  given  through  Jesns  Christ"  ;  and  afterwards  of 
the  effect  which  had  been  produced  thereby — "  that  they  were  enriched  in  all  utter- 
ance and  in  all  knowledge  "  ;  in  which  utterance,  being  the  declaration  of  a  good 
confession — and  in  which  knowledge,  being  that  which  is  to  life  eternal — he  desires 
that  through  the  same  grace,  and  by  the  same  power,  tbey  may  be  confirmed.  III. 
The  consequence  of  being  thds  preparkd  by  grace  and  confirmed  of  God  unto 
THE  END :  viz.,  that  we  shall  be  found  blameless  in  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  This 
word  "  blameless  "  is  strictly  a  foreusic  term,  applicable  to  the  trial  of  the  soul  in 
the  high  court  of  heaven,  and  by  God,  the  Judge  of  all.  Whatever  may  be  the 
discoveries  of  the  last  day,  or  to  whomsoever  made,  of  one  thing  we  are  certain, 
beyond  all  fear  of  a  contingency,  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus."  (T.  Dale,  31.  A.)  Waiting  : — 1.  We  are  all  doing  this  in  one  way  or 
another.  Some  watchful  and  faithful  at  our  post,  in  the  midst  of  a  wicked  world,  like 
the  sentry  who  died  on  guard  in  sinful  Pompeii ;  some  in  slothful  forgetfulness,  like 
the  foolish  virgins;  others  in  abject  fear,  like  condemned  criminals  who  wait  the 
coming  of  the  executioner ;  many,  I  trust,  with  patience,  and  hope,  and  peace. 
2.  Waiting  is  very  hard  work,  far  harder  than  doing.  Waiting  too  for  uncertain- 
ties, and  better  times  which  may  never  come  ;  "  hoping  against  hope,"  with  that 
"  hope  deferred  whicb  maketh  the  heart  sick,"  is  one  of  the  hardest  of  the  tasks 
which  we  have  to  do.  Waiting  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  also  hard  work, 
because  of  the  sin  which  is  in  us  and  around  us,  but  it  is  not  hopeless  or  doubtful. 
"  In  due  time  we  shall  reup  if  we  faint  not."  3.  How  may  we  best  wait  for  this? 
4.  Though  we  are  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  He  is  in  a  sense 
always  with  us.  5.  We  must  wait  for  our  Lord's  coming  with  our  armour  girded 
on  and  in  the  front  of  the  battle.  (H.  J.  W.  Buxton,  31. A.)  Tlie  coming  of 
Christ : — When  we  expect  any  one  we  turn  our  eyes  that  way,  as  the  wife  looks 
towanis  the  sea  wben  she  expects  her  husband's  return.  Surely,  then,  if  we  look 
for  Christ  to  come  we  sliall  keep  our  e>  es  heavenward,  and  our  minds  occupied 
with  the  country  from  which  He  cimieth.     Christ's  second  coming: — We  are  not 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  13 

afraid  to  go  alone  on  a  journey  to  a  strange  place  when  we  are  sure  that  a  friend 
will  meet  us  at  the  end  of  the  journey.  The  husband  in  a  distant  city  telegraphs 
to  his  wife  to  come  to  him,  and  he  will  be  at  the  station  to  receive  her.  Faith  and 
preparation  as  to  the  second  coming  of  Christ : — The  coming  of  Christ  literally  refers 
to  His  appearing  at  the  last  day,  but  in  its  substantial  meaning,  and  as  to  all  its  prac 
tical  effects,  it  may  be  considered  as  equivalent  to  our  death,  because  there  not  only  is 
our  future  condition  determined,  but  we  enter  into  that  scene  in  which  His  award  shall 
fix  us  when  He  pronounces  our  final  sentence.  Let  us,  then,  consider  what  is  im- 
plied in  the  Christian's  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  A  firm 
CONVICTION  THAT  CiiRisT  WILL  COME.  In  auy  Other  state  of  mind  the  term  "  waiting  " 
would  be  inapplicable.  And,  indeed,  the  second  coming  of  Christ  forms  a  part  of 
the  deliberate  and  cherished  creed  of  every  true  disciple.  It  is  not  a  mere  specu- 
lation indulged  in  because  it  is  agreeable  ;  a  conjecture  suggested  by  appearances, 
and  adhered  to  as  being  probable  and  useful  ;  the  result  of  a  process  of 
reasoning,  liable  to  errors  and  doubts;  it  is  a  point  of  settled  belief,  which  the 
Christian  maintains  because  it  is  founded  on  the  testimony  of  Him  who  is  equally 
omniscient  and  true.  It  is  the  subject  of  a  Divine  prediction,  of  a  Divine  promise, 
of  a  Divine  assurance ;  and  therefore  we  cannot  withhold  our  full  assent  to 
it  without  impeaching  the  abfolute  perfection  of  that  absolutely  perfect  Being  by 
whom  it  has  been  attested.  And  remember  that  it  is  not  set  down  merely  as  one 
of  a  multitude  of  events  which  will  happen,  but  as  a  constituent  portion  of  that 
scheme  which  the  Son  of  God  undertook  to  execute  as  the  Redeemer  of  sinful  men. 
Christ  was  "  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many,  and  unto  them  who  look  for 
Him  Christ  will  appear  the  second  time,  without  s-in.  unto  salvation."     11.  That 

THIS  EVENT  IS  THE  SDI5JECT  OF  HABITUAL  THOUGHT  AND  CONTEMPLATION.       HoW,  indeed, 

can  it  be  otherwise,  seeing  it  is  so  true  and  so  important  in  His  regard?  Were  it  a 
merely  probable  circumstance,  a  fuct  of  little  interest,  or  nothing  more  than  a  dry 
abstract  truth,  the  mind  of  the  Christian  could  not  entertain  it  with  much  cordiality, 
or  look  forward  to  the  period  of  its  being  realised  with  any  intensity  of  feeling.  But 
how  differently  must  he  be  affected  towards  it,  when  he  considers  its  indubitable 
certainly — the  touching  concerns  which  it  involves— the  various  attractions  which 
it  presents  in  its  every  aspect — and  the  bearing  which  it  has  on  all  that  he  now  is, 
and  all  tliat  he  is  to  be  for  ever !  III.  A  dilksent  and  faithful  prepauation  Fon 
IT.  Unless  we  had  this  preparation,  we  could  not  with  any  propriety  be  said 
to  wait  for  Christ's  coming,  because,  if  unprepared  for  His  coming,  it  would  be  an 
event  to  be  feared  and  deprecated,  Christ  will  come  for  two  purposes  :  to  reward 
His  people  and  to  punish  His  enemies.  But  if  we  are  among  the  number  of  His 
enemies,  then,  when  He  comes,  we  must  sufi'er  the  condemnation  which  He  has 
threatened  against  all  those  who  have  refused  or  neglected  to  become  what  He 
required  them  to  be.  Those  who  wait  for  His  coming,  and  are  prepared  for  that 
event,  are — 1.  Believers.  Relying  on  Christ  in  the  exercise  of  a  true  faith,  we 
may  wait  fi)r  His  coming,  because  His  merit,  appropriated  by  that  faith,  has 
cancelled  our  guilt,  the  prevalence  of  which  would  have  made  His  coming  terrible, 
and  has  obtained  for  us  a  title  to  the  celestial  kingdom,  which  we  never  could  have 
entered  through  any  doings  or  deservings  of  our  own.  2.  Saints — holy  persons. 
When  Christ  comes  it  is  to  conduct  His  people  to  their  reward.  But  how  can  He 
take  us  into  His  Father's  house,  if  our  principles  and  dispositions  and  habits 
are  all  in  irreconcilable  hostility  to  the  exercises  and  enjoyments  of  that  blessed 
abode?  Nothing  that  defileth  can  enter  into  the  New  Jerusalem.  IV.  A  decided 
AND  ARDENT  DESIRE  FOR  IT.  The  feeling  is  dictated  by  all  our  present  experience, 
and  by  all  our  future  prospects.  There  are  evils  from  which  that  event  alone  can 
emancipate  us,  and  there  are  enjoyments  to  which  that  event  alone  can  introduce 
us.  And  if  it  be  a  right  thing  to  wish  for  deliverance  from  the  one,  and  for  the 
attainment  of  the  other,  then  it  is  right  to  wish  for  the  second  advent  of  Christ, 
because  that  is  identified  with  both  advantages.  1.  Here  you  are  subject  to 
disease — to  its  pain,  and  its  languishing,  and  its  mortal  issue.  But  when  your 
Saviour  comes  He  will  p  it  upon  you  the  crown  of  life,  and  you  shall  neither 
sicken,  nor  suffer,  nor  die  any  ^lore.  "2.  Here  your  rei^utation  may  be  wounded 
from  ignorance,  envy,  prejudice,  or  malevolence.  But  when  your  Saviour 
comes  He  will  place  you  among  those  whom  God  hath  justified,  and 
whom  no  man  can  condemn — in  whose  society  calumny  cannot  reach  yi  u,  and 
reproach  cannot  hurt  you.  .3.  Here  you  may  have  to  struggle  with  the  numerous 
ills  and  hardships  of  poverty.  But  when  your  Saviour  comes  you  shall  have  no 
wants   which   He  will  not  supply  with  inexhaustible  abundance.     4.  Here  your 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

cherished  friends  may  betray  you  when  you  are  most  confiding,  and  those  who 
were  dear  to  you  as  \  our  own  soul  may  be  torn  from  your  embrace  by  the  relent- 
less hand  of  death.  But  wben  your  Saviour  comes  He  will  wind  up  this  scene  of 
trial,  and  will  take  you  where  ingratitude  and  ti'eachery  and  dissolution  shall  be 
unknown.  5.  Here  you  have  the  plague  of  sin  to  trouble  and  torment  you.  But 
when  your  Saviour  comes  He  will  place  you  where  you  shall  be  beyond  the  reach 
of  temptation,  and  beyond  the  fear  and  the  capacity  of  transgressing.  6.  Here 
your  eye  and  your  heart  are  often  pained  by  the  sight  of  abounding  iniquity.  But 
when  your  Saviour  comes  He  will  conduct  you  into  a  region  as  pure  as  it  is  happy. 
7.  Here  your  best  services  and  highest  attainments  are  mixed  with  much  imper- 
fection and  weakness.  But  when  your  Saviour  comes  He  will  make  you  "  perfect, 
even  as  your  F Uher  in  heaven  is  perfect."  8.  Here  all  your  enjoyments,  however 
exquisite,  multiplied,  and  prolonged,  are  but  mingled  at  the  best,  and  soon  over. 
But  when  your  Saviour  comes  He  will  impart  to  you  a  happiness  immortal  as  the 
souls  that  are  to  enjoy  it — as  the  uncreated  source  from  which  it  i?  to  flow. 
9.  Here  it  is  a  trial  to  your  patience  that  the  Cross  of  Christ  should  be  such  a  rock 
of  offence,  and  that  He  who  bore  its  agony  and  its  shame  should  be  despised  and 
rejected  of  men.  But  when  your  Saviour  comes  His  enemies  will  be  destroyed, 
the  numlierless  trophies  of  His  humiliation  and  His  blood  will  be  assembled  to 
honour  Him,  and  all  the  hosts  of  heaven  will  unite  with  all  the  redeemed  from  the 
earth,  to  ascribe  to  Him  the  blessing,  and  dominion,  which  He  had  so  richly  won. 
V.  The  exercise  of  patience  and  resignation.  Submission  to  the  Divine  arraoge- 
ments  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  Christian  character,  and  particularly  in  this  regard. 
You  should  wait  for  Christ's  second  coming  with  patience,  because — 1.  The  period 
of  that  coming  is  fixed  by  God's  appointment.  It  is  a  part  of  the  plan  which  He 
has  formed  for  your  salvation.  It  ori^mates  in  the  same  mercy  which  prompted 
Him  to  give  up  His  Son  to  suffering  and  to  death  for  you.  And  does  not  every 
view  of  the  Divine  perfections  constrain  you  to  acquiesce  in  all  that  has  been  fixed 
as  to  the  second  coming,  as  well  as  in  all  that  took  place  with  regard  to  the  first 
coming  of  Christ  ?  2.  It  is  conducive  to  your  own  improvement  and  advantage. 
The  present  is  a  scene  of  preparation  for  the  future.  Every  temptation  that  you 
successfully  resist ;  every  obligation  that  you  faithfully  fulfil ;  every  trial  to  which  you 
patiently  submit;  every  step  that  >ou  advance  in  the  career  of  godliness  and  virtue; 
every  victory  that  you  achieve  over  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  by  that  faith 
and  patience  which  characterise  the  saints  of  God  upon  earth,  will  put  a  loftier 
note  in  your  song  of  praise,  and  add  another  gem  to  your  crown  of  righteousness 
and  glory  in  heaven.  Seeing,  then,  that  your  continual  stay  here  is  conducive  to 
your  everlasting  benefit,  let  not  your  suuls  be  cast  down,  and  let  not  their  d^-sires 
for  deliverance  overstep  the  Umits  of  devout  resignation  to  the  will  of  Him  who  has 
arranged  your  lot  in  this  world  with  a  view  to  your  destiny  beyond  it,  and  whose 
redeeming  mercy  will  lead  Him  to  make  all  things  work  together  for  your  good. 

3.  It  is  for  the  advantage  of  your  brethren  and  fellow  men.  This  was  one  of  Paul's 
motives,  when  amidst  his  longings  to  depait  and  to  be  with  Christ,  he  was  still 
contented  to  remain  where  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  had  orda'ned  him  to 
labour.  "  Nevertheless,"  said  he,  "  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you." 
(A.  Thomson,  D.I).)  The  uncertainty  oj  CliriuVs  coming  : — This  blending  of  light 
and  obscurity — I.  Leaves  us  in  a  st.^te  more  suitable  and  more  profitable  than 
EITHER  absolute  IGNORANCE  OR  PERFECT  KNOWLEDGE.  1.  It  awakens  feelings 
whi'h  thv3  former  would  fail  to  excite,  and  which — 2.  The  latter  would  quench  as 
they  arose.     IF.  It  is  specially  adapted  to  keep  alive  expectation,  by  bringing 

E.MPHATICALLY    BEFORE    US    THE    PERPETUAL    POSSIBILITY    OF   AN    IMMEDIATE    BIANIFESTA- 

TioN.     It  keeps  US  in  a  state  of — 1.  Lively  hope ;  2.  Watchfulness;  3.  Humility; 

4.  Fidelity;  5.  Earnest  inquiry  after  truth;  6.  Reverence  and  dread.  (IV.  A. 
Butler,  M.A.)  The  revelaliun  of  Jesus  Christ : — This  "  revelation  "  would  do  two 
things — I.  "Confirm  them  unto  the  end"  (ver.  8).  "All  is  well  that  ends 
well."  The  "  end  "  of  the  Christian  will  confirm  the  wisdom  of  his  choosing  such 
an  "  end."  Hence  "  the  end  of  a  thing  is  better  than  the  beginning."  The  world 
calls  him  a  "fool";  the  day  of  Christ  will  "confirm  "  his  wisdom.  The  world 
calls  him  ignoble  ;  the  day  of  Christ  will  "confirm"  his  pretensions  to  greatness 
and  glory.  The  world  calls  him  poor  ;  the  "  day  of  Christ  "  will  "confirm  "  his 
claims  to  an  "  inheritance  incorruptible,"  &c.  We  are  now  "confirming  the 
testimony  of  Christ,"  and  proving  Him  true  (ver.  6).  In  "that  dny"  Christ  will 
confirm  our  testimony,  and  prove  us  true.  It  will  be  the  manifestation  of  the  sons 
of  God.     II.  Make  them  blameless.     Then  all  imperfections  will  end.     Sin's  damp 


CHAP,  I.]  I.   COniSTHIANS.  15 

mists  will  no  longer  rise  to  obscure  the  moral  heavens.  Lessons:  1.  Encourage- 
ment to  the  faithful  worker.  2.  Confidence.  Do  circumstances  look  discouraging 
in  your  labours  of  love  ?  Do  long-looked-for  wants  tarry  ?  Do  the  desired  clouds 
refuse  to  break  in  blessings  on  the  parched  heart '?  Have  faith.  The  blessing  will 
come,  though  it  tarry,  "  for  God  is  faithful,"  &c,  (ver.  9).  He  will  keep  His 
promises,  &c.  3.  Stimulus.  "  The  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  will  be  a  revela- 
tion of  unrecognised  or  undeveloped  " gifts."  Therefore  "come  behind  in  no  gift,"  &c. 
When  that  day  dawns,  the  grand  confirmation  service  will  be  ht-ld — "confirming"  the 
good  and  the  bad  alike.  (Tlie  Studij.)  Who  shall  also  conflnn  you  unto  the  end. — • 
The  Clirigtian''s  sti'eiigth  : — The  writings  of  St.  Paul  contain  frequent  assurances  to 
the  converts  of  the  cimtinuance  and  increase  of  God's  blessing  and  the  grace  of 
Christ,  and  of  strength  to  support  them  under  their  trials,  to  carry  them  through 
their  (iitticulties,  and  to  make  them  "  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved 
them"  (Kom.  viii.  37  ;  Phil.  i.  6  ;  Rom.  viii.  31,  32,  38,  3y  ;  1  Cor.  i.  4,  <lc.).  In 
what  seuse,  and  with  what  necessary  restrictions,  are  such  promises  as  these 
always  to  be  understood  ?  It  is  manifest,  both  from  the  reason  of  things  and  from 
Holy  Writ,  that  some  spiritual  blessings  are  so  entirely  the  work  of  God,  that,  when 
considered  in  themselves,  it  is  impossible  that  man  can  contribute  to  them,  or  bear 
any  part  in  their  completion.  Thus,  forgiveness  of  sms ;  adoption  into  God's 
family ;  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  and  the  gift  of  eternal  life ;  though  they 
suppose  due  preparations  in  man,  repentance,  faith,  hope,  charity,  fixed  purposes 
of  obedience,  and  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  are  in  themselves  the  absolute 
gifts  of  God,  simple  in  their  nature,  and,  as  far  as  we  can  perceive,  admitting  of 
no  addition  nor  decrease.  But  there  are  other  blessings  or  endowments,  implying 
increase  and  variety,  in  the  advancement  of  which  man  must  bear  his  part,  and 
work  with  God.  Such  are  those  graces  which  qualify  the  human  soul  for  pardon, 
and  peace,  and  everlasting  glory ;  which  are  the  rudiments  or  first  principles  of 
the  heavenly  character.  I"or  these  set  out,  for  the  most  part,  from  small  and  often 
imperceptible  beginnings,  and  are  strengthened  and  ripened  into  habits  by  exercise 
and  godly  discipline.  When,  therefore,  St.  Paul  assures  the  converts  that  God  will 
"  confirm  them  unto  the  end,  that  tbey  may  be  blameless  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  he  does  not  comfort  them  with  an  assurance  of  support,  di'^'orced 
from  all  conditions  and  contingencies  ;  nor  does  he  lead  us  to  believe  that  there  are 
any  particular  persons  whom  God  will  at  all  events  endow  with  an  unfailing  perse- 
verance. Since,  tberefore,  faith  is  spoken  of  in  Scripture  sometimes  as  Gods  gift, 
sometimes  as  man's  duty,  it  is  manifest  that  the  gift  and  the  duty  mutually  imply 
each  other.  On  the  one  hand,  our  faith  can  neither  begin  nor  continue,  nor  be 
perfected,  without  God's  grace  and  blessing.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  no  ground 
for  supposing  that  He  will  "  confirm  our  faith  until  the  end,"  unless  we  endeavour 
to  "  hold  fast  our  own  faith,"  to  improve  it  by  acts  of  piety  and  obedience,  and  to 
abound  in  it  more  and  more.  Man  is,  of  himself,  strongly  inclined  to  evil :  he  has 
a  sinful  nature  stirring  within  him :  his  passions  are  continually  provoking  him  to 
transgress  the  restraints  of  conscience  and  reason,  and  the  laws  revealed  to  him  by 
his  God.  God,  therefore,  who  well  knows  his  indisposition  to  bear  up  against  the 
power  of  corruption,  mercifully  promises  to  take  nim  in  bund,  to  discipline  bis 
imagination  and  affections  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26  ;  Deut,  xxx.  6).  But  though  God  thus 
promises  to  circumcise  the  hearts  of  His  people,  and  to  subdue  them  to  His  own 
purposes,  in  other  passages  of  Holy  Writ  He  calls  upon  them  to  circumcise  their  own 
hearts,  and  to  master  and  mortify  themselves  (Deut.  x.  16 ;  Jer.  iv.  4  ;  Eph.  iv.  22  ; 
Col.  iii.  5,  6).  But  in  order  to  complete  the  Christian  character,  man  stands  in 
need  of  continual  improvement  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  the  daily  renewal 
of  his  mind,  and  confirmed  habits  of  piety  and  obedience.  But  since,  when  unas- 
sisted, he  has  no  power  in  himself  to  help  himself,  and  is,  at  the  best,  a  mere 
beginner  in  the  trade  of  virtue,  God  has  graciously  promised  to  renew  and  to 
supply  him  with  spiritual  sufficiency  (Ezek.  xi.  19,  20,  xxxvi.  26,  27).  Yet  these 
promises  of  grace  and  spiritual  succour  are  accompanied  with  earnest  exhortations 
to  the  performance  of  our  duty,  and  pressing  calls  upon  us  to  do  that  for  ourselves 
which  God  has,  in  some  sort,  engaged  to  do  for  us  (Ezek.  xviii.  31  ;  Eph.  iv.  23,  24). 
Hence  it  follows  that  God's  promises  of  help  to  perfect  our  inner  man,  require 
diligence  and  exertion  on  our  part ;  that  our  prayers  for  renewal  will  bring  no 
blessing  with  them,  if  we  do  not  endeavour  to  renew  the  spirit  of  our  own  minds  ; 
and  that  it  is  worse  than  idle  to  presume  that  God  will  not  leave  nor  forsake  us,  if 
we  shrink  from  our  duty,  and  leave  and  forsake  ourselves  (Eph.  v.  1 ;  Col.  iii.  14, 15). 
I  shall  lay  down  a  few  practical  lessons  which  the  consideration  of  this  subject 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

naturally  suggests.  1.  You  should  make  it  your  business  to  study  the  whole  of 
God's  Word,  and,  as  far  as  you  are  able,  to  compare  and  combine  its  contents  ;  and 
you  must  not  accustom  yourselves  to  dwell  on  the  particular  parts  of  it  to  the  exclu- 
sion of  other  portions  which  require  an  equal  degtee  of  consideration  and  deference. 

2.  You  will  learn  from  those  statements  of  the  scriptural  doctrine  which  have  been  laid 
before  you,  the  folly  and  presumption  of  relying  on  God's  goodness,  and  the  grace 
and  promises  of  Cbrist,  without  the  exercise,  on  your  own  part,  of  religious  labour 
and  spiritual  industry.  3.  Whatever  measure  of  religious  industry  you  may  exert, 
whatever  progress  you  may  make  in  the  improvement  of  your  souls  and  the  refor- 
mation of  your  hearts  and  habits,  still  remember  tbat  you  owe  everything  to  God  ; 
that  you  are  yourselves  inclined  to  evil,  and  that  it  is  your  bounden  duty  to  refer 
back  all  holy  dpsires,  good  counsels,  and  just  works  to  tbe  Author  and  Giver  of  all 
goodness.  {Bp.  Betltel.)  Confirming  grace  :  —  I.  What  does  it  include  ? — Contir- 
mati'>n.  1.  In  faith,  holiness,  love.  2.  Unto  tbe  end.  II.  How  is  it  ErFECTED  ?  1. 
By  Christ.  2.  Through  the  means  of  grace.  III.  Why  is  it  so  necessaey  ?  1.  That 
ye  may  be  blameless.  2.  In  the  day  of  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  B.D.)  Firm  to  the 
end : — Steadfastness  is  one  of  the  most  important  characteristics  of  a  Christian. 
What  are  love,  self-denial,  patience,  and  faitli  without  it  ?  It  is  not  the  best 
regiment  which  makes  the  most  headlong  cbarge,  but  which  can  stand  firm.  The 
Spartans  were  forbidden  by  their  laws  to  flee.  In  the  Pass  of  Thermopylae  stands 
a  monument  to  Leonidas  and  his  followers,  bearing  this  inscription — "  Go,  stranger, 
and  tell  at  Lacedsemon  that  we  died  here  in  obedience  to  our  laws."  What  we 
want,  as  soldiers  of  Christ,  is  not  so  much  zeal,  or  enthusiasm,  or  outward 
profession,  as  firmness  to  the  end,  steadfastness  to  die,  if  need  be,  for  the  laws  of 
our  God.  We  find  plenty  of  zealous  professors,  but  after  a  time  the  fire  dies  out 
into  dead  ashes  ;  they  have  no  staying  power.  Note — I.  Some  of  the  dangers  of 
THE  Church  now.  1.  Tbe  restless  spirit  of  the  age.  This  is  the  result  of  various 
causes.  (1)  The  spread  of  education.  Men  are  taught  to  cultivate  their  heads 
at  the  price  of  their  hearts.  (2)  The  growth  of  cheap  literature.  The  fact  is,  some 
of  us  in  these  days  arc  getting  too  clever.  We  have  got  a  few  drops  of  learning,  and 
we  fancy  that  we  can  pour  the  whole  ocean  of  knowledge  into  our  poor  little  bottle. 
True  education  makes  us  humble,  because  it  shows  us  our  ignorance.  What  are  the 
doubters  and  the  unbelievers  going  to  give  you  in  exchange  for  what  they  rob  you 
of  ?  They  can  take  away  the  Saviour,  and  only  leave  you  your  sins.  They  may 
scoff  you  out  of  believing  in  the  resurrection.  But  can  they  laugh  you  out  of 
believing  in  death?  2.  A  constant  desire  for  something  new,  and,  if  possible, 
sensational.  And,  above  all,  these  people  want  a  religion  made  easy.  They  have 
no  objection  to  being  saved  provided  that  the  process  is  quick  and  cheap.  They 
turn  away  from  the  thought  of  self-denial,  &c. ;  they  must  be  made  good  all  at 
once.  Beware  of  this  mushroom  religion;  the  best  fruit  is  not  that  which  ripens 
most  quickly,  and  the  best  Christian  ceitainly  does  not  come  to  maturity  all  in  a 
moment.  The  Persian  fable  tells  us  how  a  gourd  wound  itself  round  a  lofty  palm- 
tree,  and  in  a  few  weeks  climbed  to  its  very  top.  The  gourd  asked  the  palm-tree 
its  age,  and  the  tree  answered,  "An  hundred  years."  Then  the  gourd  answered 
boastingly  that  it  had  grown  as  tall  as  the  palm  in  fewer  days  than  the  tree  could 
count  years.  "True,"  answered  the  palm-tree,  "every  summer  has  a  gourd 
climbed  round  me,  as  proud  as  thou  art,  and  as  short-lived  as  thou  wilt  be." 

3.  This  is  a  specially  busy  age.  Every  walk  of  life  is  crowded,  and  competition  is 
most  keen.  Now  there  is  great  danger  in  all  this  to  a  man's  spiritual  life,  if  he  has 
not  God  with  him  in  his  work.   He  will  become  selfish  and  unscrupulous.     II.  The 

MEANS  BY  which  ChRIST  WILL  CONFIRM  YOU  UNTO  THE  END.       (//.  J.   W.  BltXtOn,  M.A.) 

Blameless  ia  the  day  of  .  .  .  Christ.^Unim2)eaclied  : — "  So  as  to  be  unimpeached 
in  the  day  of  our  Lord  "  ;  for  when  the  saints  stand  before  the  ti'ibunal  of  Christ, 
they  will  not  indeed  be  found  to  have  been  free  from  sin  in  their  earthly  life,  but 
having  persevered  in  the  faith  and  in  good  works  will  find  themselves  under  the  wing 
and  shelter  of  God's  righteousness,  safe  from  all  impeachment.  "  Unimpeached  " 
of  whom  ?  Probably  of  the  "  accuser  of  the  brethren,"  the  adversary  Satan.  But 
being  found  holy  in  Christ  and  blameless  to  God,  "  who  shall  then  lay  an  impeach- 
ment against  God's  elect?  It  is  God  that  justifieth"  (Col.  i.  22,  23).  {Canon 
Evans.)  Eternal    hlainelessnesa : — I.  Judicial.     The    word    used  here    is    the 

judicial  one.  A  Chri-;tian  is  one  against  whom  there  is  not  only  no  condemnation, 
but  no  accusation.  He  is  a  sinner,  yet  no  man,  nor  angel,  nor  devil,  may  accuse 
him,  or  mention  his  guilt  to  God.  II.  Priestly.  I  might  call  it  sacrificial.  The 
word  used  in  such  places  as  Eph.  i.  4  is  the  same  as  that  in  1  Pet.  i.  19,  "  the  Lamb 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTIHANS.  17 

without  blemish,  anil  without  spot."  This  unblemishednpss  has  special  reference 
to  our  fitness  for  worship  and  service.  III.  Personal  (Phil.  ii.  15;  1  Tliess.  ill.  13). 
We  ai'e  forgiven  and  delivered  from  wrath  that  we  may  be  personally  holy  ;  holy  in 
heart  and  life  ;  saved  from  sin,  conformed  to  Christ.  Holiness  is  to  be  everywhere 
in  and  about  the  man.  If,  then,  y.iu  call  yourself  a  Christian,  consider  how  much 
is  expected  from  you.  Consider — 1.  Your  names.  Thej' are  "  saint,"  "  Christian," 
"  redeemed  from  among  men,"  "  follower  of  tbe  Lamb."  Do  not  these  call  you  to 
blamelessness  ?  2.  Your  designations.  You  are  the  lights  of  the  world,  the  salt  of 
the  earth  ;  pilgrims,  strangers,  virgins,  cross-bearers,  kings  and  priests  ;  a  temple, 
a  habitation  of  God.  3.  Your  calling.  Y'ou  are  called  to  glory,  honour,  and  immor- 
tality. 4.  Your  hojDCS.  5.  Your  companionships.  They  are  all  heavenly  and  pure. 
Old  friendships  are  severed,  and  new  ones  formed.  If  you  are  Christians,  then,  be 
consistent,  lie  Christians  out  and  out ;  Christiana  every  hour,  in  every  part,  and 
in  every  matter.     Beware  of  half-hearted  discipleship.     (H.  Bunar,  1>.1>.) 

Ver.  9.  God  is  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were  called  unto  the  fellowship  of  His  Son. 

— Tlie  faillifnliu'xs  of  (rud  : — On  this  eternal,  self-existent  fidelity  we  can  repose 
with  safety.     I.  It  is  weil  that  we  have  something  sure,  for  talk  as  we  wij.l  of 

TUE  FIDEI  ITY  OF  MAN  AND    WOIIAN,  THERE    IS    MUCH    TO    SAY  ALSO    OF  THEIR  INFIDELITY. 

1.  Who  can  sny — in  friendship,  in  love — what  a  week,  a  month,  ii  year  may  not 
bring  forth  ?  In  the  very  strength  of  human  affection  lies  its  frailty.  And  it  is 
in  hours  when  this  is  realised,  when  we  seem  to  toss  upon  a  shifting  sea  in  sailaig 
over  human  love,  that  we  turn  to  the  everlasting  firmness  of  God's  fidelity.  2.  But 
even  moie  than  in  others  do  we  recognise  this  faithlessne>s  in  ourselves.  How  often 
are  we  only  faithful  liecause  we  are  ashamed  to  be  otlierwii=e,  and  how  often  have 
we  betrayed  that  which  was  given  us  to  keep?  We  look  into  our  own  hearts  and 
know  how  slight  and  fluttering,  how  changeable  we  have  often  been,  how  we  even 
enjoyed  our  cljanf^e.  What  wonder,  then,  if  we  turn  from  the  weakness  of  our  own 
fidelity  to  seek  a  centre  for  it  and  a  power  of  it  in  the  unalterable  streiigth  of  the 
faithfulness  of  God,  and  cry,  "  Faithful  Master  of  fidelity,  enter  into  my  li'e  and 
nial<e  it  all  fidelity."  II.  What  answer  does  God  give  us  to  that  ?  Not  that  we 
should  at  first  expect.  We  have  fled  from  man  to  God,  God  sends  us  back  to 
MAN.  If  a  man  find  not  fidelity  in  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  find 
fidelity  in  GkI  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  We  have  been  looking  on  the  unfaithful- 
ness we  have  found  in  man.  Nothing  can  be  worse  for  us.  He  bids  us  search  for 
faithfulness,  and  we  shall  find  it.  1.  In  the  hearts  of  those  that  love  us.  And  the 
moment  our  whole  position  is  thus  changed,  and  we  look  on  a  new  side  of  facts,  we 
remember  all  the  nncmnplaining  patience  of  long  love  that  mother  and  father,  wife 
and  sister,  have  bestowed  on  us.  We  recollect  that  there  are  friends  who  have 
never  failed  us,  to  doubt  whom  would  be  a  crime.  2.  With  this  new  light  we  look 
within  our  own  hearts,  and  we  are  conscious  that  we  have  been  true  to  many. 
Surprised,  we  ask  ourselves,  What  is  this  faithfulness  in  the  midst  of  unfaithfulness, 
this  stabdity  in  human  nature  that  accompanies  instability  ?  Oh  !  it  is  what  we 
searched  for,  it  is  what  we  fled  away  from  man  to  find.  It  is  the  fidelity  of  God 
Himself  that  moves  and  lives  within  His  children.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  among 
you.  III.  Having  learnt  that  lesson,  we  learn  froji  it — 1.  To  love  and  honour 
men  much  more.  W^e  are  not  so  ready  to  impute  unfaithfulness,  and  we  are  kinder 
and  more  gracious,  and  being  so,  we  find  that  men  and  women  are  more  faithful  to 
us,  for  we  have  lost  the  evil  and  unpleasant  qualities  which  made  people  tire  of  our 
love.  By  believing  in  faithfulness  we  make  it  grow.  Tlien  our  power  of  creating 
faithfulness  has  a  reflex  action  on  our  own  faithfulness.  That  which  we  cause  to 
grow  in  others,  grows  by  that  very  effort  in  ourselves.  2.  An  ideal  of  God's  fidelity. 
The  beauty  of  human  fidelity  forces  us  to  aspire  to  a  moi'e  beautiful  fidelity,  the 
real  leads  us  onwards  to  the  ideal.  IV.  Still  an  ideal  remains  always  somewhat 
in  the  vague.  But  to  our  wonderful  comfort  the  fidelity  of  God  is  realised  in 
humanity,  in  Christ,  the  image  of  God  in  man.  "  He  who  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen 
the  Father."  He  who  hath  seen  the  human  faithfulness  of  Chiist  hath  seen  the 
Divine  faithfulness  of  God.  1.  His  faithfulness  was  faithfulness  to  duty.  At 
twelve  years  of  age  it  was  clearly  conceived.  "  W^ist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about 
My  Father's  business?"  For  eighteen  years  He  brooded  on  His  duty,  and  at 
thirty  it  was  accepted,  and  never  let  go.  The  imperative  of  His  later  saying,  "  I 
must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day,"  was  said  with  the  same 
fervour  as  it  had  been  said  by  the  joyful  enthusiBsm  of  the  boy;  and  when  the 
supreme  hour  of  life  came  He  could  say,  "It  is  finished."  What?  His  Fathers 
VOL.    I.  2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

business!  2.  That  is  the  outward  aspect  of  Christ's  faithfulness  to  duty  ;  its  inner 
aspect  was  Eternal  Truth.  He  had  a  few  clear,  dominant  conceptions  on  which 
His  whole  life  was  built.  To  these  ideas — such  as  the  universal  Fatherhood  of  God, 
the  union  of  the  Divine  and  human,  the  existence  of  a  spiritual  kingdom,  and  the 
necessity  of  man  being  a  believer  in  these  things,  and  being  a)ade  at  one  with  God 
through  Him— Christ's  whole  inner  life  was  faithful.  He  could  say,  with  absolute 
truthfulness,  feeling  that  His  whole  inner  life  had  been  faithful  to  them  throughout : 
"  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for  this  cause  canae  I  into  the  world,  that  I  should 
bear  witness  unto  the  Truth."  This  was  Christ's  fidelity,  the  image  of  God's.  V. 
But  what  duty  can  God  be  said  to  have  to  which  He  is  faithful  ?  There  can 
be  no  duty  impused  on  Him  from  without,  else  there  were  another  greater  than 
Himself.  But  there  can  be  an  imperative  within  His  own  nature  which  is  to  Him 
that  which  duty  was  to  Christ  and  to  us.  1.  With  rejjard  to  us,  that  duty  is  the 
duty  of  a  Father  to  His  children.  By  that  imperative  of  Fatherhood  He  can  never 
cease  to  care  for  us,  watch  over  us,  educate  us,  and  finally  perfect  us.  2.  That  is 
the  outward  form.  But  the  central  idea  of  which  it  is  the  form,  and  to  which  in 
His  own  inner  life  He  is  for  ever  faithful,  is  this :  "  I  am  the  eternal  spiritual  All. 
I  give  Myself  forth  in  all  1hat  thinks,  and  loves,  and  acts,  and  is."  That  being 
such,  it  is  inconceivable  that  He  should  ever  be  unfaithful  to  His  thought,  for  that 
thought  is  His  own  realisation  of  Himself,  and  were  He  unfaithful  to  it,  God  were 
unfaithful  to  God,  which  is  absurd.  To  this  idea,  then,  and  to  all  the  duties  it 
brings  with  it,  God  is  absolutely  faithful;  He  cannot  be  otherwise.  "  I  am,"  He 
says,  "  because  I  am."  Conclusion  :  That  is  our  security.  We  have  arrived  at  the 
conception  of  it  through  Christ,  through  our  own  humanity  taken  up  into  and  filled 
with  divinity.  And  once  we  have  grasped  it,  it  trHusfigureslife  and  gives  us  a  rock 
to  stand  on  amid  the  shifting  sands  of  our  own  feeling,  amid  the  wavering  of  human 
faithfulness.  The  fouudation  of  God  standeth  sure.  [Stojiford  A.  Broolie,  M.A.) 
The  faithfulness  of  God  : — I.  Eesults  fkom,  or  stands  connected  with,  all  His 
OTHER  pekfections.  1.  His  i^ower  (Psa.  cxlvi.  6).  This  enables  Him,  without  the 
possibility  of  failure,  to  accomplish  all  His  promises  and  threatenings.  Honest 
men  may  be  prevented  keeping  their  word  by  unexpected  difficulties;  but  the 
designs  of  the  Almighty  cannot  be  frustrated  (Matt.  xix.  26  ;  Gen.  xviii.  14;  Kom. 
iv.  20,  21 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12).  2.  His  holiness;  without  it,  indeed.  He  could  not  he  holy 
(Psa.  xcii.  15  ;  Titus  i.  2  ;  Heb.  vi.  18  ;  Numb,  xxiii.  19).  Well  might  the  Psalmist 
say,  "  God  hath  spoken  in  His  holiness  :  I  will  rejoice  "  (Psa.  Ix.  C),  for  the  holiness 
of  God  is  a  pledge  of  His  faithfulness.  3.  His  unchangeabkness.  Angels  have 
changed,  and  become  devils  ;  man  is  changed,  and  become  a  rebel ;  but  God 
changes  not  (Mai.  iii.  6).  Men  frequently  change  their  minds,  sometimes  from  good 
to  evil,  at  other  times  from  evil  to  good  ;  their  second  thoughts  are  best :  but  God's 
thoughts  can  neither  be  improved  nor  depraved  (James  i.  17).  The  promises  and 
vows  of  men  (like  Jephthah's  and  Herod's)  are  sometimes  unlawful  or  incautiously 
made,  so  that  "  there  may  be  more  honour  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance  of 
them."  Not  so  the  engagements  of  Heaven  (Job  xxiii.  13,  14).  4.  His  wisdom. 
Among  men,  the  non-performance  of  promises  is  frequently  occasioned  by  circum- 
stances which  human  prudence  could  not  foresee ;  and  therefore  good  men  should 
not  make  promises  hastily,  and  never  without  reference  to  St.  James's  caution 
(James  iv.  15).  But  no  provisions  are  necessary  when  God  makes  a  promise.  No 
difficulties,  no  disappointments,  can  occur  to  Him  ;  His  instruments  are  always  at 
hand,  and  shall  all  subserve  His  holy  designs.  5.  His  mercy,  love,  and  goodness 
(Psa.  cxxxviii.  2).  His  love  inclines  Him  to  make  the  promise,  and  His  veracity 
induces  Him  to  fulfil  it.  II.  Our  confidence  in  it  is  confirmed  hj  the  following 
facts.  1.  The  promises  are  made  in  and  to  Christ,  as  the  Head  of  His  Church  ;  and 
faithfulness  to  Him,  as  well  as  to  us,  insures  their  fulfilment  (2  Cor.  i.  20 ;  Titus  i. 
2;  Eph  i.  6).  2.  God  has  confirmed  His  promise  by  an  oath  (Gen.  xxii.  16  ;  Heb.  vi. 
13, 17, 18).  3.  The  experience  of  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages.  (1)  The  first  promise 
(Gen.  iii.  15)  has  been  fulfilled  (1  John  iii.  8  ;  Gal.  iv.  5).  Pkemember  that  there 
is  nothing  like  distance  of  time  in  the  mind  of  God  between  the  promise  and  the 
fulfilment  (2  Pet.  iii.  8),  and  hence  some  events  are  spoken  of  in  the  prophets  as 
preseut,  or  even  as  past,  which  are  yet  to  come.  (2)  Was  the  universal  flood 
threatened,  and  Noah  with  his  family  to  be  secured  ?  The  event  corresponded  with 
the  threatening,  though  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  intervened.  (3)  Was 
Abraham,  when  one  hundred,  and  childless,  to  have  a  vast  posterity?  Every  Jew 
we  see  is  a  witness  that  the  promise  has  been  fulfilled.  (4)  So  with  the  deliverance 
of   Israel,  &c.      Conclusion :    1.    Learn   the   unreasonableness  and   sinfulness   of 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  19 

unbelief  (1  John  v.  10).  2.  Let  God  be  honoui-ed  in  His  faitlifulness  by  a  suitable 
confidence  in  it.  3.  Let  us,  in  our  humble  measure,  try  to  imitate  God  in  this  His 
glorious  attribute  (Rph.  v.  1).  (G.  Biirder.)  Faithful  is  He  tliat  calh'th  you  : — 
Consider — I.  How  God  deals  with  yod,  in  so  callino  you  as  to  unite  you  to  His 
Son.  Faithfully  throuf^hout.  He  is  faithful — 1.  In  discovering  to  you  your  case. 
2.  In  commending  to  you  His  Son.  3.  In  presenting  Christ  to  you,  in  free  gift,  as 
yours.  4.  In  not  repenting  of  His  call.  II.  The  end  op  this  calling.  You  are 
united  to  His  Son,  and  to  such  an  etTect  as  to  have  all  things  in  common.  1. 
Common  interests.  The  interests  which  Christ  has  as — (1)  God's  ally,  are  identical 
•with  thjse  of  the  Father.  (2)  His  S<m,  are  identical  with  ours.  2.  A  common 
character.  3.  A  common  history.  With  respect  to — (1)  A  birth.  (2)  A  baptism.  (3) 
A  work.  (4)  A  cross.  (5)  A  crown.  (IL  Cnndlish,  D.D.)  The  special  call  and  the 
unfailinp  result : — I.  Yoiiu  calling.  1.  Its  Divine  origin.  The  text  says,  "  God  called 
you  " — does  not  your  experience  prove  the  same  ?  We  thought  that  we  had  had  no 
other  call  than  that  which  came  through  our  Bibles,  good  books,  Ac.  But  did  we  not 
rend  the  same  books  years  before?  but  they  never  touched  a  chord  in  our  hearts; 
therefore  we  conclude  that  that  time  it  must  have  been  the  linger  of  God.  We  had 
been  called  scores  of  times  before,  but  we  always  turned  a  deaf  ear.  But  when  this 
particular  call  came,  we  threw  down  our  sword  and  said,  "  Great  God,  I  yield  !  "  2. 
Its  graciousness.  What  was  there  in  you  to  huggest  a  motive  why  God  should 
call  you?  Some  of  you  were  drunkai'ds,  profmie,  injurinus.  John  Bradford, 
when  he  saw  a  cartful  of  men  going  off  to  Tyburn  to  be  hanged,  said,  ''  There 
goes  John  Bradford  but  for  the  grace  of  God."  A  good  Scotchman  called  to 
see  Rowland  Hill,  and  without  saying  a  word,  sat  still  for  some  five  minutes, 
looking  into  his  face.  At  last  Rowland  asked  him  what  engaged  his  attention. 
Said  1  e,  "  I  was  looking  at  the  lines  of  your  face."  "  Well,  what  do  you  make  out  of 
'em  ?  "  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  that  if  the  grace  of  God  hadn't  been  in  you,  you  would 
have  been  the  biggest  rascal  living."  3.  The  privileges  it  brings.  (1)  Pardon.  (2) 
Righteousness.  (3)  Sonship.  (4)  Heaven.  II.  To  what  end  did  God  call  tou  ? 
That  you  might  have  fellowship  with  Christ.  Now  the  word  "  koinonia  "  is  not  to  be 
interpreted  here  as  a  society,  but  as  the  result  of  society;  i.e.,  fellowship  lies  in 
mutual  and  identical  interests.  A  man  and  his  wife  have  fellowship  with  each 
other,  in  that  which  is  common  to  both  and  enjoyed  in  comuiunidn  accordingly. 
Now  when  we  were  called  to  Christ  we  became  one  with  Him,  so  that  everything 
Christ  had  became  ours.  This  Wiis  the  act  of  faith.  Now  we  have  fellowshijj  to 
Christ.  1.  In  His  loves.  He  loves  saints,  sinners,  the  world,  and  pants  to  see  it 
transformed  into  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  What  He  loves  we  love,  and  what  He 
hates  we  abhor.  2.  In  His  desires.  He  desires  to  see  multitudes  saved,  the  glory 
of  God,  that  the  saints  may  be  with  Him  where  He  is — we  desire  the  same.  3. 
In  His  sufferings.  We  do  not  die  a  blooily  death  ;  yet  many  have  done  so,  and  there 
are  millions  ready  to  do  so.  But  when  He  is  reproached  we  have  learned  to  bear 
His  reproach  too.  Some  few  drops  of  His  cup  we  drink,  and  it  has  been  given  to 
some  more  than  toothers  to  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ 
for  His  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church."  4.  In  His  joys.  Is  He  happy  ?  We  ai-e 
happy  to  think  Christ  is  happy.  5.  In  His  riches.  If  He  has  riches  in  pardoning, 
supporting,  instructing,  illuminating,  sanctifying,  preserving,  or  perfecting  Christians, 
they  are  all  ours.  Is  His  blood  precious.  His  righteousness  complete,  His  merits 
sweet  ?  They  are  mine.  Has  He  power  in  intercession,  has  He  wisdom,  righteous- 
ness— has  He  anything?  It  is  mine.  6.  In  His  glory.  Tliere  is  not  a  crown  He 
wears  but  we  have  part  of  it ;  nay,  there  is  not  a  gem  that  sparkles  in  His  crowns 
but  it  sparkles  for  us  as  well  as  for  Him.  For  us  the  golden  streets,  the  chariot,  the 
crowding  angels;  the  shout  of  "  Hallelujah!  for  Thou  wast  slain,"  Ac,  the  second 
advent  with  all  its  splendours,  universal  reign  of  Christ,  the  day  of  judgment.  III. 
All  this  leads  ds  to  perceive  ouk  security.  Saints  must  be  saved — 1.  Because 
God  has  called  them.  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance," 
Because — 2.  God  has  called  them  into  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  that  fellowship, 
if  God  be  faithful,  must  be  complete.  You  have  shared  His  sufferings.  His  faith- 
fulness secures  the  rest.  [C.  H.  Spurr/eon.)  The  felloicslnp  of  God's  Son  :  —  l.  The 
apostle  writes  as  a  peacemaker.  Party  strife  had  weakened  spiritual  life,  and  a 
weakened  spiritual  life  had  been  fruitful  in  other  evils.  St.  Paul  would  remedy  all  evil 
and  restore  harmony.  He  finds  his  potent  spell  in  the  Name  which  is  above  every 
name,  and  recalls  Corinthian  Christians  to  the  consideration  of  the  common  Saviour, 
and  their  one  hope  which  is  by  Him  and  in  Him.  Christ  Jesus  is  all  to  each  and  to 
every  one  of  th^m.    Thus  it  is  that  throughout  tht  se  opening  verses  this  name  occurs 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  i, 

again  and  again.  2.  Divine  fellowship  is  often  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures.  In  the  New 
Testament  it  is  naturally  most  familiar,  for  there  God  has  come  nearest  to  man, 
and  therefore  man  may  come  nigh  unto  Him.  This  is  the  gospel  message  that, 
"  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ  "  there  is,  for  all,  "  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holiest."  "  No  one  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  Between  God  and  men 
there  is  but  the  one  Mediator.  Fellowship  with  God  must  needs  be  first  of  all  the 
fellowship  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  3.  But  what  is  this  high  privilege  ?  Ordinarily 
tbe  term  suggests  the  interchange  of  sympathy  and  thought,  or  association  in  acts 
of  Christian  worsbip  and  participation  in  common  joys  and  sorrows.  The  word 
itself  has  a  meaning  which,  in  its  application  to  ordinary  affairs,  is  very  definite  and 
clear.  The  sons  of  Zebedee  are  twice  spoken  of  as  "j^artners"  of  Simon.  "With- 
out any  violence,  therefore,  we  may  read:  "The  partnership  of  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  "  {cf.  Heb.  iii.  14).  In  this  busy  life,  partnerships  are  common  ;  but 
never  in  human  commerce  did  men  look  upon  one  like  this.  Suppose  a  firm  utterly 
and  hojelessly  ruined.  A  wealthy  man  asks  to  be  admitted  as  partner.  As  honest 
men,  the  bankrupts  must  needs  protest  that  the  offerer  knows  not  what  he  is  doing. 
Tlien  comes  the  reply  that  all  is  known,  that  wealth  is  available  more  than  sufficient 
to  meet  all  the  n^-ed,  and  that  practical  wisdom  ako  whereby  the  ruin  may  be  recon- 
structed on  a  safe  and  enduring  basis.  Yet  this,  and  more  than  all  this,  is  in  the 
gospel.  A  ruined  race  may  scan  the  present,  or  peer  as  they  will  into  the  dark 
future.  Sin  hath  wrought  shame  and  deaih.  Yet  now,  in  the  midst  of  the  utter 
wreck,  there  stands  One  who  offers  much,  as  He  offers  life — who  giveth  all,  as  He 
gives  Himself.  This  is  true  for  each  and  for  all,  without  respect  of  persons,  and 
without  limitation  of  gift.  4.  What  has  this  communion  brought  to  the  Saviour 
Himself?  The  answer  is  soon  given.  He  took  upon  Himself  our  nature,  "the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh."  He  i-hared  to  the  utmost  its  weakness,  weariness,  pain,  and 
death.  One  burden  He  shared  not;  for  Himself  hath  borne  it  all.  "By  Him- 
self "  He  "  purgeii  our  sins."  Beyond  this  He  had  nothing.  Joy  became  His,  "the 
joy  that  was  set  before  Him,"  ih^t  of  presenting  "  faultless  before  the  presence  of 
His  glory"  the  redeemed  sons  of  men.  Glory  has  been  givf>n  to  Him,  but  it  is  the 
glory  of  "  power  over  all  flesh,  that  He  should  give  eternal  life."  And  these  things 
He  hath  "  received  of  the  Father,"  and  not  from  mankind.  5.  But  let  us  turn  to 
the  other  side,  the  relation  of  mnn  to  this  fellowship.  In  the  commercial  world, 
partnerships  are  not  all  alike.  Modern  society,  under  the  pressure  of  altered  cir- 
cumstances, has  invented  the  contrivance  of  "  limited  liability."  But  in  olden 
times  wlien  any  man  entered  a  firm  he  took  in  with  him  all  that  he  possessed. 
Thenceforth  none  of  the  things  which  he  had  could,  in  presence  of  the  common 
need,  be  called  his  own.  From  such  a  partnership  the  young  ruler  recoiled  :  "  Sell 
that  thou  hast,"  &c.  Into  such  a  partnership  the  early  Christians  gladly  entered, 
for  they  "  had  all  things  common."  Into  such  a  partnership  are  we  called — one  cf 
unlimited  liability.  Entire  consecration  is  the  first  requiiement.  "Ye  are  not 
your  own."  "Whether  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ve  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of 
God."  Christ  will  have  all,  or  nothing.  On  this  essential  condition,  the  partner- 
ship is  open  to  every  man.  He  came  "  to  call  sinners  to  repentance,"  and,  when 
sinners  come,  they  are  accepted  just  as  they  are.  No  man  may  bring  less  than  his 
all  to  the  fellowship  of  Chiist ;  but  no  man  can  bring  more.  So  the  trembling 
servant  comes  with  his  burden  of  conscious  liability.  His  all  is  a  debt  of  ten 
thousand  talents;  but  the  Saviour  admits  him  to  the  partnership.  The  poor 
wasteful  and  wasted  wanderer  comes,  with  rags  and  shame  as  his  only  contribution, 
but  he  meets  with  no  denial.  Penitent,  needy  soul !  Lay  thy  gift  thyself,  whatever 
thou  hast  been,  whate^  er  thou  art — lay  it  all  upon  the  altar.  It  is  His  will,  it  is 
His  command;  therefore,  for  once,  obey.  The  gift  is  accepted,  for  He  hath 
promised.  For  "  God  is  faithful,  by  whom  "  thou  hast  been  called  unto  this  fellow- 
ship. 6.  Once  admitted,  "all  things  are  yours."  In  earth  y  partnerships,  though 
there  may  be  unlimited  liability,  there  is  only  a  limited  supply.  It  cannot  be  that 
every  partner  sliall  have  power  to  draw  as  he  may  upon  the  common  resources.  The 
banking  account  is  strictly  guarded ;  and  the  available  funds  are  doled  out  to  each 
and  to  all,  not  according  to  need,  but  accordmg  to  legal  claim.  For  sinful  men,  all 
this  is  blessedly  otherwise.  The  treasury  of  grace  is  the  fuluess  of  God.  There  is 
"  enough  for  all,  enough  for  each,  enough  for  evermore!  "  "But  all  He  hath  for 
mine  I  claim."  7.  If,  now,  we  would  learn  something  of  the  wealth  which  weslrare 
with  and  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  may  read  His  own  words  (John  xvii.  22,  23).  The 
glory  of  Christ  is  the  possession  of  His  people.  That  glory  consists  in  what  He  is, 
and  what  He  has ;  the  riches  of  life  and  the  gifts  of  love.     (G.  IF.  Olver,  B.A.) 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   COIUNTIIIAXS.  21 

Felloic.fhip  irith  Christ  : — I.  Our  distinctive  position  as  Christians  is  that  we  have 
■FELLOWSHIP  WITH  God's  Son.  Rleu  are  ofteu  nimked  out  fioiu  others  by  the  particular 
fraternity,  corporation,  or  firm  to  wliicli  they  belong.  We  as  Christians  are  members 
of  the  tirin  of  the  Son  of  God;  for  the  word  here  means  co-partnership.  1.  The 
pi'ounds  of  this  fellowship  are — (1)  The  Divine  acceptance  of  Christ's  work.  (2) 
The  consequent  Divine  grant  to  Christ  of  all  the  power  and  gifts  of  salvation  for 
the  benetit  of  all  who  sliould  become  co-partners  with  Himself.  2.  Its  terms  or 
conditions — -entire  self-surrender.  Faith  receives  Christ  "as  He  is  presented  in  the 
gospel,"  i.e.,  in  all  His  relations.  To  Christ  as  a  Saviour  trust  is  reliance,  as  a 
Teicher  trust  is  teachableness,  as  a  Ruler  it  is  obedience,  as  a  Leader  following,  as 
a  King  homage,  as  a  Man  sympathy,  as  God  worship.  Let  there  be  no  mistake  here. 
Many  put  their  trust  in  Christ  as  a  Saviour,  but  not  as  a  King  ;  as  man,  not  as  God. 
They  will  take  all  He  has  to  give,  but  give  nothing  in  return,  or  if  anything  their 
money,  but  not  themselves.  But  Christ  seeks  not  yours,  but  you.  He  requires  not 
large  capital,  knowledge,  skill,  art,  &c.,  although  He  will  receive  them  when  offered  ; 
what  He  does  require  is  your  whole  affection  and  unlimited  trust.  3.  Its  prospects. 
Our  position  is  that  of  partners — in  spiritual  life,  brotherhood  and  service  ;  but  not 
on  equal  terms.  We  take  nothing  into  the  concern  but  weakness  and  poverty. 
Without  Him  we  can  do  nothing,  but  with  Him  we  shall  jointly  realise  God's  ideal 
of  humanity.  Military  or  connnercial  companies  have  often  proposed  to  them- 
selves the  conquest  of  the  world ;  this  society  has  the  same  object,  and  will  achieve 
it,  only  in  a  nobler  sense.  II.  God  has  called  us  into  the  fjollowship  of  His 
Son.  In  the  invitations  of  the  gospel  God  is  calling  men  to  become  co-partners 
with  Christ ;  but  more  invitation  does  not  come  up  to  the  full  meaning  of  tlie  tenu, 
and  our  hearts  must  say  what  that  full  meaning  is.  The  heart  makes  God  the 
author  of  its  whole  salvation.  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  lam."  That  grace 
makes  all  the  ditlerence  between  a  stranger  to  and  a  partner  with  Christ.  III. 
Everything  most  depend  on  the  faithfulnkss  of  God.  This  fellowship  from 
first  to  last  is  His  creation;  on  Him  it  depends  to  render  it  a  failure  or  a  success. 

1.  Therefore  our  confidence  rests  immediately  on  God.  In  worldly  affairs  men 
usually  contemplate  success  through  natural  laws  and  material  properties.  Farmers 
trust  to  the  virtues  of  the  seed,  &o.,  merchants  to  the  winds  and  waves,  warriors 
to  the  spirit  of  their  troops ;  but  even  in  such  cases  a  devout  spirit  will  recognise 
the  presence  of  God  in  all  secondary  causes,  and  make  Him  at  least  the  basis  of  its 
hope.  But  in  this  great  co-partnership  we  have  no  interventions  to  distract  our 
faith.  We  go  riglit  to  God  at  once.  2.  We  rest  upon  the  most  Godlike  thing 
in  God— His  faithfulness,  which  supports  the  universe.  Our  fellowship  with 
Christ  is  thus  placed  beyond  the  possibility  of  failure  in  God.  No  storm  can 
shatter  our  bark,  no  blight  destroy  C)ur  harvests,  for  God  is  faithful.  And  what  a 
stimulus  to  endeavour  we  have  in  this !  Because  God  is  so  faithful  to  me  I  will  be 
faithful  to  Him.  Consequently  the  fellowship  of  Christ  becomes  to  us  the  one 
permanent  interest  in  this  uncertain  world.  There  is  no  possibility  of  bankruptcy; 
we  cannot  be  outbi'iden  or  undersold ;  for  ours  is  the  capital  of  God's  unsearchable 
riches.  His  name  is  pledged  to  every  acceptance  in  which  our  safety  is  involved,  and 
so  long  as  His  throne  shall  stand  our  safety  and  glory  is  assured.  ( Prof.  J.  M.  Charlton.) 
The  Divine  call,  and  its  desii/n  : — I.  The  call  comprehends  all  the  purposes,  decrees, 
providences,  and  means  of  salvation.  II.  The  design  of  this  call  of  God  is,  that  all 
who  obey  it  may  for  ever  have"  fellowship"  or  communion  with  His  Son  our  Saviour. 
Communion  signifies  joint  participation  in  anything,  good  or  bad.  Here  all  is  good. 
God  calls  the  believer — 1.  To  communion  with  His  Son,  in  His  miraculous  formation 
in  the  womb.  The  Spirit  creates  believers  anew  "  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works." 

2.  In  His  purity  from  sin.  The  Spirit  keeps  our  new  nature  from  sin.  3.  In 
growth  in  grace.  The  Spirit  brings  "  unto  the  measure  of  the  statui-e  of  the  fulness 
of  Christ."  4.  In  fitness  for  every  duty.  The  Spirit  anointed  Him,  and  He 
anoints  the  believer.  5.  In  working  miracles.  The  Spirit  enables  the  believer  to 
conquer  Satan,  sin,  the  world,  death,  and  hell.  6.  In  comfort.  The  Spirit  com- 
forted Him,  and  He  comforts  real  lielievers.  7.  In  death.  8.  In  the  state  of  the 
dead.  The  Spirit  preserved  His  holy  body  that  it  saw  no  corruption.  The  Spirit 
will  keep  the  bodies  of  believers  "  still  united  to  Christ,  till  the  resurrection."  9.  In 
the  resurrc'-tion.  The  Spirit  raised  Him  up  ;  and  the  same  Spirit  will  raise  up  the 
believer.  10.  In  gl"ry.  The  Spirit  glorified  our  Lord;  and  He  will  also  glorify 
the  true  believer.  {Jas.  Kidd,  D.D.)  Sonship  and  fellowship  : — Let  us  consider 
this  fellowship  or  partnership  with  Christ  in  the  following  aspects  : — 1.  Partner- 
ship WITH  Hm  IN  what  He  was.     He  was  crucified,  He  died,  was  buried,  rose 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

again.  In  all  these  we  have  part.  II.  Partnership  with  Him  in  what  He  is. 
He  has  not  only  risen,  but  He  has  ascended.  We  share  His  present  dignity  ;  for 
we  are  said  to  be  seated  with  Him  in  heavenly  places,  and  are  treated  by  God  as 
such.  "We  shnve  His  offices;  we  are  prDphets,  priests,  and  kings;  heirs  of  God  and 
joint-heirs  of  Christ  Jesus.  III.  IJartnership  with  Him  in  what  He  shall  be. 
Much  of  His  glory  is  yet  in  reserve  ;  for  now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under 
Him.     (H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-lG.  Now  I  beseech  you  .  .  .  that  ye  speak  the  same  thing,  and  that 
there  be  no  divisions  among  you. — Tlie  apostolical  exhortation  to  unity  : — I.  What 
IT  INCLUDES — unity.  1.  In  confession.  2.  In  spirit.  3.  In  object.  II.  How  it  is 
enforced — by  the  name  of  Ciirist,  implying — 1.  His  will.  2.  His  authority.  3. 
His  claims  on  our  love  and  obedience.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Unity  of  sentiment : — 
I.  The  reasons  why  Christians  should  think  alike  upon  religious  subjects. 
1.  God  has  given  them  an  infallible  rule  of  faith.  His  Word  contains  a  complete 
system  of  Divine  truth.  That  being  the  case,  there  is  a  plain  propriety  in  His 
requiring  them  to  believe  that  it  is  a  complete  system,  and  also  to  believe  all  the 
particular  truths  which  compose  the  system.  2.  That  rule  of  faith  is  sufficiently 
plain  and  intelligible  to  every  capacity.  All  wlio  are  capable  of  knowing  that  they 
are  the  creatures  of  God  are  equally  capable  of  knowing  what  He  has  required  them 
to  believe  concerning  Himself,  their  own  character,  their  present  situation,  and 
tlieir  future  state.  II.  The  objections  which  have  been  urged  against  this 
UNPALATABLE  DOCTRINE.  1.  The  great  and  visible  diversity  in  the  intellectual 
powers  and  externul  circumstances  of  Christians.  But  unity  of  sentiment  does  not 
require  equality  of  knowledge.  As  one  star  differs  from  another  star,  so  angels  will 
differ  from  saints,  and  saints  from  each  other  in  glory.  But  their  difference  in 
knowledge  will  not  create  any  diversity  of  opinions  respecting  the  same  subjects. 
Saints  will  agree  with  angeis  so  far  as  their  knowledge  extends;  but  so  far  as  it 
fails,  they  will  wait  for  further  light.  2.  The  wide  difference  in  the  education  of 
Christians.  But  since  they  have  the  Word  of  God  in  their  hands,  it  is  in  their 
power  to  bring  their  own  opinions  and  those  of  their  instructors  to  an  infallible 
standard,  and  to  decide  for  themselves  what  they  ought  to  believe  or  to  disbelieve. 
3.  The  right  of  private  judgment.  It  is  readily  granted  that  every  Christian  has 
a  right  to  collect  evidence,  and  after  that,  to  judge  according  to  the  evidence.  But 
be  has  no  right  to  examine  and  judge  under  the  influence  of  prejudice,  and  form 
his  opinion  contrary  to  reason  and  Scripture.  4.  That  in  Eom.  xiv.  the  apostle 
allows  Christians  to  differ  in  their  religious  sentiments,  and  only  exhorts  them  to 
view  their  difference  with  a  candid  and  charitable  eye.  But  this  only  applies  to  the 
Mosaic  rites,  which  were  things  indifferent,  and  which  might  be  observed  or 
neglected  under  a  sense  of  duty.  But  he  reminds  them  that  they  must  all  stand 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  where  their  opinions  as  well  as  actions  would  be 
either  appi'oved  or  condemned.  III.  The  truths  which  naturally  flow  from 
the  SUBJECT.  If  God  does  require  Chrislians  to  believe  alike  upon  religious 
subjects,  then — 1.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  what  religious  sentiments  they 
embtace.  2.  They  have  contracted  a  great  deal  of  guilt  from  age  to  age  by 
embracing  and  pr.>pngating  error.  3.  Christians  who  are  united  in  the  belief  of  the 
truth  have  a  riyht  to  blame  those  who  think  differently  from  them  upon  religious 
subjects.  4.  There  appears  to  be  no  j^ropriety  in  attempting  to  unite  them  in 
affection,  without  uniting  them  in  sentiment.  5.  It  seriously  concerns  all  who 
acknowledge  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the  pospel  to  use  every  proper  method  to 
become  entirely  united  in  sentiment.  (1)  For  this  purpose,  therefore,  let  them 
freely  and  candidly  examine  the  various  points  in  which  they  mutually  differ. 
(2)  There  are  various  considerations  which  urge  Christians  to  cultivate  a  senti- 
mental union  ainong  themselves,  (a)  It  will  directly  tend  to  unite  them  in  affection. 
We  find  that  those  who  agree  in  art  or  science  commonly  feel  a  mutual  attach- 
ment arising  from  their  concurrence  in  opinion.  And  a  unity  of  faith  never  fails 
to  produce  a  mutual  esteem  and  affection  among  Christians.  {/*)  The  sure  word  of 
prophecy  predicts  the  future  peace  and  harmony  of  the  Church  as  resulting  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  (c)  By  uniting  in  sentiment,  Christians  will  remove 
one  of  the  strongest  prejudices  of  unbelievers  against  the  Bible,  (d)  They  will 
strengtlien  and  auimnte  one  another  in  promoting  the  cause  of  Christ.  {N.  Einmons, 
D.D.)  Division"  in  the  Church  : — Hardly  five  years  had  lapsed  since  Paul  had  first 
preachpd  the  gospel  at  Corinth,  when  he  is  constrained  to  write  to  his  converts,  now 
in  the  language  of  fatherly  entreaty,  now  in  the  language  of  the  sharpest  rebuke, 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  23 


and  that  though  he  can  still  give  thanks  to  God  with  unfeigned  gratitude  for  the 
growth  of  their  faith  in  Chriht.  What  taen  is  the  fault  which  causes  him  such  keea 
anxiety?  It  is  not  heresy,  it  is  not  apostasy,  it  is  not  open  separation  from  the 
Church  of  Christ :  it  is  a  mattec  which  we  might  be  inclined  to  regard  as  far  less 
momentous  than  any  of  these  :  it  is  the  growth  and  spread  of  party  spirit  within 
their  body.  They  are  degrading  the  names  of  the  apostles  into  watchwords  of 
divisions.  Christ  is  divided  !  indignantly  exclaims  St.  Paul.  You  are  rending  His 
body  asunder,  you  are  severing  the  members  which  cannot  exist  in  isolation.  The 
harmonious  combination  of  manifold  parts,  all  subservient  to  one  end  and  united 
by  one  Head ;  this  is  the  essential  idea  of  the  physical  body.  The  same  law  holds 
in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.  Disregard  the  Divine  order,  and  the  result  can  only 
be  death.  This  division  into  parties  is  no  venial  offence,  no  pardonable  enthusiasm 
for  the  teachers  whose  names  you  thus  dishouour :  it  is  the  ruin  of  the  unity  for 
which  Christ  prayed,  "  That  they  all  may  be  one."'  It  is  a  work  of  the  flesh  :  the 
outcome  of  the  evil  propensities  of  your  unrenewed  nature.  I.  What  ake  the 
CAUSES  OF  PARTY  DIVISIONS?  1.  The  ultimate  cause  lies,  I  believe,  in  a  radical  mis- 
apprehension of  thennture  of  truth.  God's  truth  is  intinite.  Man's  mind  is  finite. 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  impossible  that  we  with  our  limited  capacities  should 
comprehend  the  whole  of  truth.  All  that  we  can  do  is  to  grasp  some  fragments, 
here  a  little  and  there  a  little :  truth  indeed  suiiicient  for  our  personal  necessities, 
if  we  seek  aright  in  faith  and  patience,  but  immeasurably  falling  short  of  the  reality. 
Our  views  of  truth  are  therefore  partial,  disjointed  ;  and  it  is  inevitable  that  men 
with  minds  dilT.nently  trained  should  apprehend  different  parts  and  different  aspects 
of  the  truth.  This  variety  is  not  of  itself  an  evil.  Far  from  it.  Such  different 
views  are  complementary,  not  antagonistic.  As  God's  truth  was  revealed  to  maa 
"  in  many  parts  and  in  many  fashions,"  so  only  in  "  many  parts  and  in  many 
fashions  "  can  it  be  grasped  and  interpreted  by  man.  Only  as  the  ag'^s  roll  on,  and 
each  generation  contributes  its  share  towards  the  final  result,  are  we  slowly  learning 
the  grandeur  of  the  gospel.  Diff'ereuces  are  not  to  be  ignored  or  dissembled,  but 
frankly  acknowledged  :  "  combination  in  diversity,"  it  has  been  said,  is  the  charac- 
teristic featui'e  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  it  must  be  the  characteristic  feature  of 
every  organisation  which  truly  lepresents  that  Church.  "  Combination  in  diversity  " 
is  a  characteristic  feature  of  Holy  Scripture.  It  needs  the  records  of  four  Evan- 
gelists to  give  a  true  portraiture  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  His  earthly  ministry.  We 
are  not  to  regard  one  as  more  faithful  than  anotlier,  not  to  take  any  one  as  in  itself 
complete,  but  to  find  in  the  harmony  of  all  the  true  delineation  of  that  perfection 
which  we  can  only  realise  by  contemplating  it  in  its  several  parts.  St.  Paul  and 
St.  James,  St,  Peter  and  St.  John,  each  offer  to  us  different  aspects  of  the 
truth;  one  is  the  apostle  of  faith,  another  of  works;  one  of  hope,  another  of 
love  ;  but  if  they  have  each  some  special  grace  or  duty  upon  which  they  insist,  it  is 
not  to  the  neglect  or  exclusion  of  other  graces  and  duties  :  nor  are  we  to  pit  them 
one  against  the  other.  2.  Thus  we  see  that  various  schools  of  thought  are  neces- 
sary for  the  full  representation  of  truth.  They  supply,  moreover,  "  that  antagonism 
of  influences  which  is  the  only  real  security  for  continued  progress."  But  schools 
of  thought  are  painfully  liable  to  degenerate  into  parties.  W^e  naturally  and  rightly 
concentrate  our  attention  upon  that  fragment  of  truth  which  we  have  realised  for 
ourselves  to  be  true  and  precious :  gradually  we  grow  to  think  that  this  is  the  whole 
of  truth.  We  divide  the  swelling  river  of  truth  into  a  thousand  paltry  runlets,  and 
each  cries.  Come  drink  at  my  stream,  for  it,  and  it  alone,  is  pure  and  uucontami- 
nated.  W'ell  for  us,  then,  if  the  water  of  life  is  not  evaporated  and  lost  amid  the 
Sftnds  of  the  barren  desert  of  strife.  3.  For  the  next  step  is  easy.  We  atlirm  that 
because  others  see  not  with  our  eyes,  they  are  enveloped  in  the  mists  of  dangerous 
error  ;  resistance  to  their  tenets  becomes  a  duty,  and  in  the  fierceness  of  controversy 
charity  is  forgotten,  and  the  party  contentions  of  the  Cliristian  Church  become  a 
spectacle  that  provokes  the  scornful  laugh  of  devils  and  moves  our  angelic  watchers 
to  tears.  The  absence  of  humility,  the  strength  of  self-will,  the  spirit  that  desires 
victory  rather  than  truth,  all  contribute  to  the  direful  result,  and  the  imperfection 
of  our  knowledge  is  perverted  by  our  sinful  folly  into  the  source  of  incalculable 
mischief  to  ourselves  and  those  around  us.  4.  Especially  in  days  of  revival  of 
religious  life  is  there  danger  of  party  contentions.  Conviction  is  intense,  enthusiasm 
unbounded,  old  truths  are  resuscitated,  new  truths  apprehended,  and  each  indi- 
vidual cherishes  his  own  discovery,  and  proclaims  it  as  the  one  vital  element  of 
truth  to  the  exclusion  of  others  in  reality  no  less  important.  5.  The  use  of  party 
phraseology,  too,  tends  to   accentuate  the  difference  between  various  schools  of 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

thought.  "  By  this  means  over  and  above  h11  the  real  clifferenees  of  opinion  which 
exist,  a  fresh  cause  of  separation  is  introduced  among  those  who  would  perhaps  be 
found;  if  th^ir  respective  statements  were  candidly  explained,  to  have  in  these 
tenets  no  real  ground  for  disunion."  6.  Extremes  beget  extremes :  if  one  set  of 
men  form  themselves  into  an  exclusive  party,  with  narrow  views  and  aims,  the 
almost  Certain  consequence  is  tbat  those  who  are  of  the  opposite  way  of  thinking 
will  form  a  party  to  resist  them.  But  it  is  a  faithless  expedient.  "  Through  strife, 
and  not  by  sirife,  the  Church  of  God  has  passed  upon  her  way."  II.  What  abe 
THE  EVILS  ARISING  FiioM  PARTY  DIVISIONS  ?  1.  Parly  spirit  causes  the  decay  of 
spiritual  life  :  for  love  is  the  breath  of  life,  and  where  love  is  not,  life  must  wither  and 
die.  But  how  can  the  gentle  breezes  of  love  co-exist  with  the  fierce  burning  blasts  of 
the  ttirocco  of  controversy?  As  each  patty  circle  moreover  ceases  to  hold  com- 
munion with  its  neighbours,  and  feedsmoreexclusively  upon  its  own  limited  truths, 
there  is  peril  that  even  these  will  grow  to  be  lifeless,  and  become  petrified  into  hard 
unmeaning  formulas.  Not  loss  of  knowledge  and  narrowness  of  sympathy  alone, 
but  even  death,  may  be  the  consequence  of  isolation.  2.  Party  spirit  is  a  grievous 
hindrance  to  the  growth  of  God's  kingdom.  This  it  is  which  bieeds  distrust  between 
the  clergy  and  the  laity,  and  opens  that  gap  which  we  are  sometimes  told  is  daily 
widening.  When  shall  we  learn  that  the  kingdom  of  God  does  not  consist  in  a 
phraseology,  but  in  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Ploly  Ghost  "?  3.  Party 
spirit  is  a  waste  of  strength.  4.  Party  divisions  are  a  stumbling-block  to  weak 
believers.  What  are  we  to  think  when  we  see  men  whose  personal  characters  are 
equally  estimable  denouncing  one  another  with  unmitigated  bitterness  ?  5.  Party 
divisions  are  a  laughing-stock  to  unbelievers.  "  See  how  these  Christians  love  one 
another,"  is  the  scornful  taunt.  And  thus  we  lose  that  testimony  of  an  united 
Chui'ch  which  was  the  ideal  contemplated  by  our  Lord.  III.  What  are  the 
EEMEDiES  FOE  PARTY  DIVISIONS  ?  1.  The  fundamental  bimd  of  religious  unity  is  this  : 
"  Ye  are  Christ's."  Not  primarily  in  outward  organisation,  however  valuable,  not 
in  creeds,  however  necessary,  but  in  living  union  with  our  Head.  2.  Another 
remedy  is  to  be  found  in  the  frank  recognition  that  in  the  Church  of  Christ  variety 
is  not  only  not  wrong,  but  natural  and  necessary ;  because  the  views  of  any  one 
individual  or  group  of  individuals  can  be  at  best  but  jDartial  embodiments  of  the 
whole  truth.  W'hen  we  maintain  that  our  partial  view  is  the  complete  and  only 
true  one,  it  is  as  if  the  dwellers  in  the  valleys  round  some  mighty  mountain,  a 
Mont  Blanc  or  a  Matterhorn,  should  meet  and  compare  their  ideas  of  its  size  and 
form  :  and  because  these  ideas  do  not  tally,  and  the  outlines  of  its  slopes  and  peaks 
and  precipices  are  differently  described  by  each,  should  forthwith  deny  the  identity 
of  the  object  of  their  argument ;  or  imjjeach  the  veracity  of  their  neighbours,  and 
part  with  angry  and  embittered  feelings.  3.  A  candid  and  patient  examination  of 
the  views  of  those  who  differ  from  us  will  do  much  to  moderate  party  spirit.  Men 
of  undeniable  honesty,  conscientiousness,  zeal,  holiness,  dilfer  from  us.  Why  is 
this  ?  They  cannot  be  entirely  in  the  wi'ong.  No  holy  life  is  based  entirely  upon 
false  premises.  No  system  rests  altogether  upon  a  lie.  4.  Once  more,  a  remedy 
for  divisions  is  to  be  found  in  practical  co-operation  wherever  possible.  5.  If  con- 
troversy should  unfortunately  be  unavoidable,  as  it  may  be  on  some  occasions,  and 
for  some  individuals,  we  must  take  heed  that  it  is  conducted  with  calm  sobriety, 
temperate  reason,  and  with  the  desire  of  truth,  not  success.  But  it  is  a  perilous 
resource  :  far  healthier  for  us  if  we  can  abstain  from  entangling  ourselves  in  it. 
"Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem:  they  shall  prosper  that  love  thee."  (A.  F. 
Kirkpatrick,  M.A.)  Division  in  the  Church  cantrary  to  the  spirit  of  Christ : — Because 
— I.  Contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  Christ  here  by  His  servant — 1.  Exhorts  to 
unity  in  (1)  Confession;  (2)  Spirit;  (3)  Judgment.  2.  Condemns  all  disunion. 
II.  Incompatible  with  our  obligations  to  Christ.  Divisions — 1.  Arise  from  sinful 
attachment  to  persons,  interests,  or  opinions.  2.  Divide  the  body  of  Christ.  3. 
Transfer  the  honour  due  to  Him  to  another.      {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Like-minded  : — 

An  eminent  prcdcher  says  :  "  I  was  walking  some  weeks  ago  in  a  beautiful  grove, 
the  trees  were  distant  apart,  and  the  trunks  were  stiaight  and  rugged.  But 
as  they  ascended  higher  the  branches  came  closer  together,  and  still  higher  the 
twigs  and  branches  interlaced.  I  said  to  myself,  our  Churches  resemble  these  trees  ; 
the  trunks  near  the  earth  stand  stiffly  and  rudely  apart;  the  more  nearly  toward 
heaven  they  ascend,  the  closer  and  closer  they  come  together,  until  they  form  one 
beautiful  canopy,  under  which  men  enjoy  both  shelter  and  happiness.  Then  I 
thought  of  that  beautiful  prayer  of  the  Saviour,  '  That  they  all  may  be  one.'  Those 
who  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  who   go   about  always  doing  good,  will  be  like- 


cnAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  23 

minded."  Divisions,  how  to  heed  : — Whon  so  much  had  been  done  at  Marburg  to 
effect  an  agreement  between  Luther  and  the  Helvetians,  Zwingle  and  his  friends, 
he  magnanimously  resolved  that  they  should  not  make  larger  grants  for  peace,  nor 
carry  away  the  honour  of  being  more  desirous  of  union  than  he.  He  suggested  that 
both  "  the  hiterested  parties  "  should  "  cherish  more  and  more  a  truly  Christian 
charity  for  one  another,"  and  earnestly  implore  the  Lord  by  His  Spirit  to  confirm 
them    in    "  the    sound    doctrine."       (IF.  Baxendale.)  The  evil  ami   daiujer   oj 

schism : — The  Church  of  Corinth  was  now  lying  bleeding  of  her  wounds,  given  her 
not  by  enemies,  but  by  her  own  children.  The  apostle  applies  himself  to  the  curing 
of  this  rent  and  broken  Church  in  this  most  pathetic  exhortation  to  unity.  Note — 
L  The  compellatiox,  "Brethren."  1.  A  kindly  compellation,  whereby  he 
endeavours  to  insinuate  himself  into  their  affections;  f^r  it  is  hard  for  faithful 
ministers  to  get  people's  affections  kept  where  once  divisions  enter.  2.  An  argu- 
ment for  unity  :  he  minds  them  that  they  are  brethren  ;  and  it  is  a  shameful  thing 
for  brethren  to  fall  out  by  the  ears  (Gen.  xiii.  8,  xlv.  24).  II.  Thk  obsecration, 
"  I  beseech  you,  by  the  uame,"  &c.  Paul  turns  a  petitioner  for  the  Church's  peace, 
and  begs  of  them,  as  he  did  of  the  jailor  (Acts  xvi.  28),  that  they  would  do  them- 
selves no  harm,  but  lay  by  the  sword  of  contention ;  and  that  it  might  have  the 
more  weight,  he  iuterposeth  the  name  of  Christ.     It  is  as  much  as  if  he  had  said — 

1.  As  ye  have  any  regard  to  the  authority  of  the  Loni  Jesus  Christ,  the  Piince  of 
Peace,  who  hath  so  often  enjoined  unity  and  brotherly  love  to  His  followers, 
beware  of  divisions.  2.  As  ye  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  ye  tender  His  honour  and 
glory,  let  there  be  no  divisions  among  you  ;  for  the  name  of  Christ  sadly  suffers  by 
your  contentions.  III.  The  mattek  of  his  exhoutation.  1.  He  exhorts  them  to 
unity  of  principles,  "  that  ye  all  speak  the  same  thing  "  ;  for  now  some  were  crying 
one  thing,  some  another,  like  that  confused  multitude  (Acts  xxi.  84),  till  some 
of  them  came  at  length  to  deny  the  resurrection  (chap.  xv.).  2.  He  dehorts  them 
from  schisms,  which  projierly  signifies  a  cutting  in  a  solid  body,  as  in  the  cleaving 
of  wood.  Thus  the  one  Church  of  Corinth  was  rent  into  divers  factions,  some 
following  one,  some  following  another;  therefore  says  the  apostle,  "Is  Christ 
divided  ?  "  Where  will  you  get  a  Christ  to  head  your  different  and  divided  j)arty  ? 
Through  these  divisions,  it  would  seem,  from  chap.  xi.  33,  they  had  sepai-ate 
communions,  they  would  not  tarry  for  one  another.  The  apostle  also  taxeth  their 
divisions  as  carnal  (chap.  iii.  3),  where  the  word  "divisions"  properly  signifies 
separate  standing,  where  one  party  stand  upon  one  side,  and  another  party  on 
another  side — such  dissension,  wherein  one  separate  one  from  another.  3.  He 
exhorts  them  to  amend  what  was  amiss  already  among  them  in  that  matter,  to  be 
perfectly  joined  together,  in  opposition  to  their  contentions  and  divisions.  The 
■word  in  the  original  is  very  emphatic,  and  signifies — (1)  To  restore  disjointed 
members  into  their  proper  i^laces  again  (Gal.  vi.  1).  It  is  a  metaphor  from 
chirurgeons  setting  members  or  joints  again.  2.  To  establish  in  the  state  to  which 
a  person  or  thing  is  restored  ;  and  so  it  denotes  a  firm  union  betwixt  the  members 
of  that  Church  as  a  body,  and  withal  he  adds  here  the  bonds  of  this  union,  the 
same  mind,  that  is,  the  same  heart,  will,  and  affections,  as  the  word  mind  is  taken 
(Rom.  vii.  25),  and  the  same  judgment  or  opinion  auent  matters  ;  if  the  last  cannot 
be  got,  yet  the  first  may.  IV.  From  the  words  we  draw  these  roLLOwiNfi 
DocTRrNEs :  1.  That  schism  is  an  evil  incident  to  the  Churches  while  in  this  world. 

2.  That  professors  ought  to  beware  of  it,  as  they  tender  the  authority  and  honour 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Where,  schism  enters  into  a  Church,  there  will  be 
great  heats,  people  contradicting  one  another  in  matters  of  religion.  4.  That 
however  hard  it  be,  yet  it  is  possible  to  get  a  rent  Church  healed.  5.  That  it  is  the 
duty  of  all  Church  members  to  endeavour  the  unity  of  the  Church,  and  the  cure  of 
schisms;  and  particularly,  it  is  the  duty  of  disjointed  members  to  take  their  own 
places  in  the  body  again.  6.  That  schisms,  as  they  are  grievous  to  all  the  sons  of 
peace,  so  they  are  in  a  special  manner  heavy  and  afflicting  to  faithful  ministers  of 
the  gospel  of  peace.  {T.  /io.^^on,  D.D.)  It  hath  been  declared  ...  by  them 
■wMch  are  of  the  house  of  Chloe  that  there  are  contentions  among  you. — Con- 
tentions in  the  Church  : — I.  How  they  arise.  Out  of  undue  attachments  to  persons 
or  opinions.  II.  How  they  should  be  repressed.  1.  Not  by  seeking  the  triumph 
of  one  party  over  the  other,  or  by  the  absolute  sacrifice  of  private  opinion.  2.  But 
by  exalting  these  points  in  which  all  agree,  and  cultivating  one  mind  and  spirit. 
III.  Why  they  should  be  repressed — for  the  sake  of  Christ.  1.  His  body  is  one 
and  undivided.  2.  He  was  crucified  for  us.  3.  We  are  baptized  into  His  name. 
4.  None  other  has  any  claim  upon  us.       {J.  Lytli,   D.D.)         The  factions: — I. 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


There  were  four  parties  in  the  Church  at  Cokinth.  1.  Those  who  held  by  Paul 
himself.  They  owed  to  him  tlieir  salvation  ;  and  having  experienced  tbe  eificacy 
of  his  gospel/they  thou'-;ht  that  there  was  no  other  efficacious  mode  of  presenting 
Christ  to  men.  So  probably  they  fell  into  the  mistake  of  all  mere  partisans,  and 
became  more  Pauline  than  Paul,  and  were  in  danger  of  becoming  more  Pauline 
than  Christian.  2.  Those  who  were  grouped  round  ApoUos,  who  watered  what 
Paul  had  planted.  He  fitted  the  gospel  into  their  previous  knowledge,  and  showed 
them  its  relations  to  other  faiths,  and  opened  up  its  ethical  wealth  and  bearing  on 
life.  His  teaching  was  not  opposed  to  Paul's,  but  supplementary  of  it ;  and 
chap.  xvi.  12  shows  that  there  was  no  jealousy  between  the  two  men.  3.  Those 
who  gloried  in  the  name  of  Cephas,  the  apostle  of  the  circumcision,  whose  name 
was  used  in  opposition  to  Paul's  as  representing  the  original  group  of  apostles  who 
adhered  to  the  Jewish  law.  Extrt^me  Judaizers  would  had  in  this  party  a  fruitful 
soil.  4.  That  which  named  itself  "  of  Christ."  From  2  Cor.  x.  7-xh.  18,  it  would 
appear  that  this  pxriy  was  led  by  men  who  prided  themselves  on  their  Hebrew 
de-cent  (chap.  xi.  22),  and  on  having  learned  their  Christianity  fnmi  Christ  Himself 
(chap.  x.  7).  They  claimed  to  be  apostles  of  Christ  (chap.  xi.  13)  and  "ministers  of 
rit?hteousness  "  (chap.  xi.  15)  ;  but  as  they  taught  "  another  Jesus,"  "  another 
spirit,"  "  another  gospel  "  (chap.  xi.  4),  Paul  does  not  hesitate  to  denounce  them  as 
false  apostles.  II.  The  apostlk  hears  of  these  parties  with  dismay.  What,  then, 
would  he  tliink  of  the  state  of  the  Church  now?  There  was  as  yet  in  Corinth 
no  outward  disruption  ;  and  indeed  Paul  does  not  seem  to  contemplate  as  possible 
that  the  members  of  the  one  body  of  Christ  should  refuse  to  worship  their  common 
Lord  in  fellowship  with  one  another.  1.  The  evils  attaching  to  such  a  condition  of 
things  may  no  doubt  be  unduly  magnified;  but  the  mischief  done  by  disunion 
should  not  be  ignored.  The  Church  was  intended  to  be  the  grand  uniter  of  the 
race  ;  but  instead  of  this,  the  Church  has  alienated  friends  ;  and  men  who  will  do 
business  and  dine  together,  will  not  v/orship  together.  Had  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
been  visibly  one,  it  would  have  been  without  a  rival  in  the  world.  But  instead  of  this 
the  strength  of  the  Church  has  been  frittered  away  in  civil  strife.  The  world  looks 
on  and  laughs  while  it  sees  the  Church  divided  over  petty  differences  while  it 
ought  to  be  assailing  vice,  ung  Klliness,  and  ignorance.  And  yet  schism  is  thought 
no  sin.  2.  Now  that  the  Church  is  broken  into  pieces,  the  fir.-t  step  towards  unity 
is  to  recognise  that  there  may  be  real  union  without  unity  of  external  organisation. 
The  human  race  is  one ;  but  this  unity  aimits  of  numberless  diversities.  So  the 
Church  may  be  truly  one  in  the  sense  intended  by  our  Lord,  one  in  the  unity  of  the 
Spirit  and  the  bond  of  peace,  though  there  continue  to  be  various  divisions  and 
sects.  As  amidst  all  diversities  of  government  and  customs  it  is  the  duty  of  States 
to  maintain  their  canmon  brotherhood  and  abstain  from  tyranny  and  war.  so  it  is 
the  duty  of  Churches,  however  separate  in  form  of  government,  to  maintain  and 
exhibit  their  unity.  3.  There  may  be  real  uni.m  without  unity  in  creed.  This 
unity  is  desirable  ;  and  Paul  entreats  his  readers  to  be  of  one  mind.  (1)  True,  the 
Church  has  gained  much  by  difference  of  opinion.  Were  all  men  to  be  agreed  there 
might  be  a  danger  of  truth  becoming  lifeless  for  want  of  the  stimulus,  and  doctrine 
has  been  ascertained  and  developed  in  answer  to  error.  (2)  But  as  a  visitation  of 
cholera  may  result  in  cleanliness,  but  no  one  desires  that  cholera  may  come  ;  and 
as  opposition  in  Parliament  is  an  acknowledged  service  to  the  country,  yet  each 
party  desires  that  its  sentiments  become  universal;  so,  too,  notwithstanding  every 
good  result  which  may  flow  from  diversity  of  opmion  regarding  Divine  truth, 
agreement  is  what  all  should  aim  at.  (3)  Bat  what  truths  are  to  be  made  terms  of 
communion  ?  The  answer  is,  the  Church  of  Christ  is  formed  of  those  who  are 
trusting  to  Him  as  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  He  is  in  communion  with  all 
who  thus  trust  Him,  whether  their  knowledge  be  gre^nt  or  small ;  and  we  cannot 
refuse  to  communicate  with  tho-se  with  whom  He  is  in  communion.  No  doctrinal 
error,  therefore,  which  does  not  subvert  personal  faith  in  Christ  should  be  allowed 
to  separate  Churches.  Paul  was  contemplating  Christ,  and  not  a  creed,  as  the 
centre  of  the  Church's  unity,  when  he  exclaimed,  "Is  Christ  divided?  "  In  all 
Christians  and  all  Churches  tbe  one  Christ  is  the  life  of  each.  And  it  is  monstrous 
that  those  who  are  virtually  united  to  one  Person  and  quickened  by  one  Spirit 
should  in  no  way  recognise  th-ir  unity.  It  is  with  something  akin  to  horror  that 
Paul  goes  on  to  ask,  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?  "  He  implies  that  only  on  the 
death  of  Christ  can  the  Church  be  founded.  Take  away  that  and  the  personal 
connection  of  the  believer  with  the  crucilied  Eedeemer,  and  you  take  asvay  the 
Church.     III.  From  this  casual  expression  of  Paul  we  see  his  habitual  attitude 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORIXTIIIANS.  27 

TOWARDS  Christ.  1.  He  was  never  slow  to  aO'irm  the  indebtedness  of  the  young 
Christian  Churches  to  himself  :  he  was  their  father,  but  he  was  not  their  saviour. 
Not  for  one  moment  did  he  suppose  that  he  could  occupy  towards  men  the  position 
Christ  occupied.  Between  his  work  and  Christ's  an  impassable  f,'ulf  was  fixed. 
And  that  which  gave  Christ  this  special  place  and  claim  was  His  crucifixion.  Paul 
does  not  say,  Was  Paul  your  teacher  in  religion,  and  did  he  lead  your  thoughts  to 
God  ?  did  Paul  by  his  life  show  you  the  beauty  of  self-sacrifice  and  holiness  ?  but 
"Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?"  2.  It  was  not,  however,  the  mere  fact  of  His 
dying  which  gave  Christ  this  place,  and  which  claims  the  regard  and  trust  of  all 
men.  Paul  had  really  given  his  life  for  men  ;  but  Paul  knew  that  in  Christ's  death 
there  was  a  significance  his  own  could  never  have.  It  was  not  only  human  but 
Divine  self-sacrifice  that  was  there  manifested.  Through  th's  death  sinners  find 
a  way  back  to  God  and  assurance  of  salvation.  3.  This  unique  work,  then — what 
have  we  made  of  it  ?  Paul  found  his  true  life  and  his  true  self  in  it.  It 
filled  his  mind,  his  heart,  his  life.  This  man,  formed  on  the  noblest  and 
largest  type,  found  room  in  Christ  alone  for  the  fullest  development  and  exercise 
of  his  powers.  Is  it  not  plain  that  if  we  neglect  the  connection  with  Christ 
which  Paul  found  so  fruitful  we  are  doing  ourselves  the  greatest  injustice, 
and  preferring  a  narrow  prison-house  to  liberty  and  life?  {M.  Do(h,  D.D.) 
lite  apostle's  view  of  partij  spirit : — Paul  denounces  it  as  a  sin  in  itself  irrespective 
of  the  right  or  wrong  opinions  connected  with  it ;  and  the  true  safeguard  agjiinst 
it  is  the  recollection  of  the  great  bond  of  fellowship  with  Christ  which  all  have  in 
common.  "  Christianus  mihi  nomen  est,"  said  an  ancient  bishop  in  answer  to 
some  such  distinction  ;  "  Catholicus  cognomen."  1.  The  first  duty  of  the  apostle 
was  to  lose  himself  entirely  in  the  cause  he  preached.  The  most  important  details 
or  forms  were  so  insignificant  in  comparison  that  Paul  ppoke  of  them  as  though  he 
had  no  concern  with  them.  How  often  in  later  ages  have  t}ie  means  and  institutions 
of  the  Church  taken  the  place  of  the  end  !  Antiquity,  novelty,  a  phrase,  a  ceremony, 
a  vestment,  each  has  in  turn  overbalanced  the  one  main  object  for  which,  con- 
fes-edly,  all  lower  objects  are  inculcated.  To  all  these  cases  the  apostle's  answer 
applies,  "  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  gospel."  2.  Tlie  sin  of 
the  Corinthians  consisted  not  in  the  mere  adoption  of  eminent  names,  but  in  the 
party  spirit  which  attaches  more  importance  to  them  than  to  the  great  cause  which 
all  good  men  have  in  common.  Even  the  sacred  name  of  Christ  may  thus  be  dese- 
crated ;  and  as  the  apostle  rebukes  those  who  said,  "  I  am  of  Christ,"  no  less  than 
those  who  said  "  I  am  of  Paul,"  etc.,  so  our  Lord  refused  to  take  the  title  of  "  good  " 
(Luke  xviii.  19),  and  "  baptized  not,  but  His  disciples  "  (John  iv.  2).  If  the  holiest 
Name  can  thus  be  made  a  party  watchword,  if  Christianity  itself  can  thus  be  turned 
to  the  purposes  of  a  faction,  much  more  may  any  of  its  subordinate  manifestations. 
The  character  of  our  Lord  is  distinguished  from  all  others  by  the  fact  that  it  rises 
far  above  any  local  or  temporary  influences,  and  also  that  it  has,  for  the  most  part, 
escaped,  even  in  thought,  from  any  association  with  them.  So  the  character  of  the 
apostle,  although  in  a  lower  measure,  vindicates  itself  in  this  passage  from  any 
identification  with  the  party  which  called  itself  after  his  name  ;  and  is  a  true 
example  of  the  possibility  of  performing  a  great  work,  and  labouring  earnestly  for 
great  truths,  without  losing  sight  of  the  common  ground  of  Christianity,  or 
becoming  the  centre  of  a  factious  and  worldly  spirit.  3.  It  is  by  catching  a  glimpse 
of  the  wild  dissentions  which  raged  around  the  apostolic  writings  that  we  can  best 
appreciate  the  unity  and  response  of  those  writings  themselves :  it  is  by  seeing  how 
completely  the  dissentions  have  been  obliterated,  that  we  can  best  understatid  how 
marked  was  the  difference  between  their  results  and  those  of  analogous  divisions 
in  other  history.  We  know  how  the  names  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  of  Francis  and 
Dominic,  of  Luther  and  Calvin,  have  continued  as  the  rallying  poiut  of  rival  schools ; 
but  the  schools  cf  Paul  and  Apqjlos  and  Cephas,  which  once  waged  so  bitter  a  war- 
fare against  each  other,  were  extinguished  almost  before  ecclesiastical  history  had 
begun.  Partly  this  arose  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  The  apostles  could  not  have 
become  founders  of  systems,  even  if  they  would.  Their  power  was  not  their  own, 
but  another's.  "  What  had  they  that  they  had  not  received  ?  "  If  once  they  claimed 
an  iiide]iendent  authority  their  authority  was  gone.  Great  philosophers,  conquerors, 
heresiarchs  leave  their  names  even  in  spite  of  themselves.  But  such  the  aj^ostles 
could  not  be  without  ceasing  to  be  what  they  were  ;  and  the  total  extinction  of  the 
parties  which  were  called  after  them  is  in  fact  a  testimony  to  the  Divinity  of  their 
mission.  And  it  is  dilBcult  not  to  believe  that  in  the  great  work  of  reconciliation 
of  which  the  outward  volume  of  the  Sacred  Canon  is  the  chief  monument,  they 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  i. 

were  themselves  not  merely  passive  instruments,  but  active  agents ;  that  a  lesson  is 
still  to  be  derived  from  the  record  they  have  left  of  their  own  resistance  to  the 
claims  of  the  factions  which  vainly  endeavoured  to  divide  what  God  had  joined 
together.      [Dean   Stanley.)  Sects  and  j^crties  : — I.    Their  manifold  vaeiet? 

occasioned — 1.  By  the  peculiarities  of  human  nature  in  general.  2.  National 
differences.     3.  Personal  differences.     4.  Al,tachment  to  individuals,  as  in  the  text. 

II.  Their  unity  still  possible,  there  should  be — 1.  One  language,  one  mind.  2. 
One  judgment  on  fundamental  principle.  3.  Especially  one  faith  in  the  crucified 
Jesus.  4.  And  one  baptism  into  His  name.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Tlie  dissensions  of 
the  early  Church: — I.  How  they  originated.  1.  In  the  disputes  of  the  Jewish  and 
Gentile  Christians.  2.  Hence  one  was  of  Peter  and  another  of  Paul — those  of 
Christ  and  of  Apollos  appear  to  have  been  modifications  of  these.  II.  Who  were 
THE  PROMOTERS  OF  THEM  ?  1.  Not  Paul  or  Peter,  &c.  2.  Not  the  peaceably  disposed, 
or  those  who  loved  Christ  above  all  things.  3.  But — (1)  Some  who  unduly  idolised 
the  human  in  religion.  (2)  Ignorant  persons,  who  had  zeal  without  knowledge 
(Eom.  X.  2).     (4)  Contentious  persons,  who  would  have  their  own  way  (Phil.  i.  16). 

III.  What  WAS  THE  EFFECT  ?  1.  Christ  was  divided.  2.  His  claims  forgotten.  3. 
Some  human  idol  exalted  in  His  place.  (Ibid.)  Every  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of 
Paul  .  .  .  and  I  of  Christ. — The  factious  affecting  one  'pastor  above  another : — We 
may,  and  must,  give  a  Benjamin's  portion  of  respect  to  those  who  excel  in  age, 
pains,  parts,  and  piety ;  but  the  lavishing  by  wholesale  all  honour  on  one,  and 
scarce  retailing  out  any  respect  to  the  other,  is  what  Paul  reproves.  I.  The  mis- 
chiefs that  arise  from  this  practice.  1.  Dissention  betwixt  ministers.  As  the 
Grecians  (Acts  vi.  1)  murmured  against  the  Hebrews,  so  ministers  feel  aggrieved 
that  people  pass  them  by  unregarded.  Perchance  the  matter  may  fly  so  high  as  it 
did  betwixt  Moses  and  Aaron  (Numb.  xii.  2).  It  will  anger  not  only  Saul,  a  mere 
carnal  man,  but  even  those  that  have  degrees  of  grace  to  say,  "  He  hath  converted 
his  thousands,  but  such  an  one  his  ten  thousands."  2.  Dissension  amongst  i^eople. 
Like  the  women  that  pleaded  before  Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  22),  they  contend  "The 
living  minister  is  mine  ;  he  that  hath  spirit  and  activity  :  but  the  dead  minister  is 
thine;  he  cometh  not  to  the  quick,  he  toucheth  not  the  conscience."  "  Nay,"  saith 
the  other,  "my  minister  is  the  living  minister,  and  thine  is  the  dead  one.  Thy 
pastor  is  full  of  the  fire,  of  ill  tempered  and  undiscreet  zeal ;  '  but  the  Lord  was 
not  in  the  fire':  whilst  my  minister  is  like  to  a  'still  voice';  staunching  the 
bleeding-hearted  penitent,  and  dropping  the  oil  of  the  gospel  into  the  wounded 
conscience."  3.  Piejoicing  to  wicked  men,  to  whose  ears  our  discords  are  the 
sweetest  harmony.  Let  not  the  herdsmen  of  Abraham  and  Lot  fall  out,  whilst  the 
Canaanites  are  yet  in  the  land.  4.  Great  dishonour  to  God  Himself.  Here  is  such 
looking  on  the  ambassaiior  that  there  is  no  notice  taken  of  the  king.  II.  To  pre- 
vent THESE  mischiefs,  BOTH    PASTORS  AND    PEOPLE  MUST    LEND    THEIR  HELPING  HANDS. 

1.  I  begin  with  the  pastors.  (1)  Those  who  have  the  thickest  audiences,  (a)  Let 
them  not  pride  themselves  with  the  bubble  of  popular  applause,  often  as  carelessly 
gotten  as  undeservedly  lost.  Have  we  not  seen  those  who  have  preferred  lungs 
before  brains,  and  sounding  of  a  voice  before  soundness  of  matter  ?  J_iet  princes 
count  the  credit  of  their  kingdoms  to  consist  in  the  multitude  of  their  subjects  :  far 
be  it  from  a  preacher  to  glory  when  his  congregation  swells  by  the  consumption  of 
the  audience  of  his  neighbour.  (/;)  Let  them  discourage  immoderate  admiration. 
When  St.  John  would  have  worshipped  the  angel,  "  See  thou  do  it  not,"  saith  he: 
"  worship  God."  Know  thou  who  lovest  to  glut  thyself  with  people's  applause,  it 
shall  prove  at  the  last  pricks  in  thy  eyes  and  thorns  in  thy  side — because 
sacrileKioiisly  thou  hast  robbed  God  of  His  honour,  (c)  Let  them  labour  also  to 
ingratiate  every  deserving  pastor  with  his  own  congregation.  It  was  the  boon  Saul 
begged  of  Samuel,  "  Honour  me  before  my  people."  And  surely  it  is  but  reason  we 
should  seek  to  grace  the  shepherd  in  the  presence  of  his  flock.  (2)  I  come  now  to 
neglected  n)inisters,  whilst  others,  perchance  less  deserving,  are  more  frequented. 
Never  fret  thyself,  if  others  be  preferred  before  thee.  They  have  their  time ;  they 
are  crescents  in  their  waxing,  full  seas  in  their  flowing  :  envy  not  at  their  prosperity. 
Thy  turn  of  honour  may  come  next.  One  told  a  Grecian  statist  who  had  excellently 
deserved  of  his  city,  that  the  city  had  chosen  four-aud-twenty  officeis,  and  yet  left 
him  out.  "  I  am  glad,"  said  he,  "  the  city  affords  twenty-four  abler  than  myself." 
And  let  us  practise  St.  Paul's  precept,  "  bv  honour  and  di.-honour,  by  good  report 
and  disreport,"  and  say  with  David,  "  Lord,  here  I  am  ;  do  with  Thy  servant  as 
Thou  pleasest."  2.  By  this  time,  methinks,  I  hear  the  people  saying,  as  the 
soldiers  to  John  Baptist,  "But  what  shall  we  do?"     (1)  Ever  preserve  a  reverent 


cuAF.  I.]  I.   COBINTHIANS.  29 

esteem  of  the  minister  whom  God  hath  placed  over  thee.  For,  if  a  sparrow  li^hteth 
not  on  the  ground  without  God'»  especiid  providence,  surely  no  minister  is  bestowed 
in  any  parish  without  a  more  peculiar  disposing;  and  surely  tiieir  own  pastor  is 
best  acquainted  with  their  diseases,  and  therefore  Ijest  knoweth  to  apply  spiritual 
physic  thereunto.  And  as  God's  Word  hath  a  general  blessing  on  every  place,  so 
more  particularly  is  it  blessed  to  parishioners  from  the  mouth  of  their  lawful 
minister.  Let  not  therefore  the  stranger,  who  makes  a  feast  of  set  purpose  to 
entertain  new  guests,  be  preferred  before  thy  own  minister,  who  keeps  a  constant 
table,  feeding  his  own  family.  Wlierefore  let  all  the  Ephesians  confine  themselves 
to  their  Timothy  ;  Cretians  to  the.r  Titus ;  every  congregation  to  their  proper 
pastor.  As  for  those  whose  necessary  occasions  do  command  their  absence  from 
their  flocks,  let  them  see  to  it  that  they  provide  worthy  substitutes.  (2)  Let 
them  not  make  odious  comparisons  betwixt  miuisters  of  eminent  parts.  It  is  snid 
of  both  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii.  5)  and  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  25)  that  there  were 
none  like  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  prefers  neither  for  better,  but  concludes  both  for 
best ;  and  so  amongst  miuisters,  when  each  differs  from  others,  all  may  be  excellent 
in  their  kinds.  As,  in  comparing  several  handsome  persons,  one  surpasseth  for  beauty 
of  face  ;  a  second,  for  a  well-proportioned  body  ;  a  third,  for  comelmess  of  carriage  : 
so  may  it  be  betwixt  several  pastors.  One's  excellency  may  consist  in  the  unsnarling 
of  a  known  controversy  ;  another,  in  plain  exjiounding  of  Scripture ;  one,  the  best 
Boanerges ;  another,  the  best  Barnabas  :  our  judgments  may  be  best  informed  by 
one,  our  affections  moved  by  a  second,  our  lives  reformed  by  a  third.  Grant  some 
in  parts  far  inferior  to  others  :  wasnot  Abishai  a  worthy  captain,  though  he  attained 
not  to  the  honour  of  the  first  three?  And  may  not  many  be  serviceable  in  the 
Church,  though  not  in  the  first  rank?  (3)  Entertain  this  for  a  certain  truth,  that 
the  eilicacy  of  God's  Word  depends  not  on  the  parts  of  the  minister,  but  on  God's 
blessing,  on  His  ordinance.  (2'.  Fuller,  D.D.)  Sects  and  jjurties: — I.  How  far 
AKE  THEY  RIGHT  ?  As  far  as  the.v — 1.  Stand  upon  the  common  foundations  of  Christ. 
2.  Busy  themselves  to  save  souls  and  not  to  make  proselytes.  3.  Esteem,  love,  and 
help  each  other.  4.  Exhibit  a  holy  emulation  in  exalting  Christ.  II.  When  are 
THEY  WRONG  ?  1.  When  they  exalt  party  names  and  differences  above  Christ.  2. 
When  they  are  slavishly  attached  to  their  party,  and  make  it  the  great  object  of 
th^ir  zeal.  3.  When  they  note  and  despise  others  and  exclude  them  from  their 
fellowship.  4.  When  they  seek  to  glorify  their  party  above  all  others.  (J.  Lijth, 
D.D.)  Is   Christ   divided?  or  "Is    the   Christ  made   a  sliare?" — Is   He   not 

a  whole,  but  only  a  part  co-ordinate  with  three  others  ?  Is  He  no  lojiger  the 
complete  circle  around  which  is  assemlded  in  its  oneness  the  Corinthian  Cljurch, 
regarding  Him  f i  om  all  sides  as  the  One  Saviour  ?  but  is  He  reduced  to  a  single 
quadrant  of  that  circle,  the  other  quadrants  being  Paul,  ApoUos,  and  Cephas?  If 
this  be  true  the  startling  inference  is  that  Christ,  being  a  Saviour  to  His  own,  the 
other  three  leaders  are  subordinate  saviouis,  each  to  his  own  adherents  ;  and  so  I 
ask  you,  while  I  shrink  from  the  thought  (such  is  the  force  of  the  Greek),  was  Paul 
(to  take  as  an  instance  the  first  named  of  the  three  heads)  crucified  for  you?  Or 
were  ye  baptized  ?  &c.  And  yet  this  is  the  conclusion,  absurd  as  it  is  monstrous, 
nay,  blasphemous,  to  which  you  are  drifting  on  the  waves  of  party  opinions  and  pro- 
fessions. Wherefore  I  beseech  you,  by  that  Name  which  is  above  every  name,  the 
Name  of  Him  who  is  our  Lord,  who  is  the  Christ,  the  one  Saviour  of  all,  that 
divisions  die  among  you,  and  that  union  and  harmony  revive  in  the  pure  atmo- 
sphere of  sameness  of  view  and  purpose,  leading  to  sameness  of  confession. 
Another  translation  slightly  diverging  from  the  above,  but  finally  converging  with 
it  in  the  same  logical  connexion  is  this — ^'Apportioned  is  Clirist?  "  Assigned  as  a 
portion  is  He?  The  word  "portion"  here  denotes  relation  rather  to  its  own  claimant 
or  apprnpriator  than  to  other  co-ordinate  parts.  The  claimant  of  Christ  as  its  own 
portion  exclusively  is  in  this  instance,  of  course,  the  last-named  party  of  Christ. 
If  this  be  the  more  correct  rendering,  an  underlink  of  connection  between  "Appor- 
tioned is  Christ  ?  "  and  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?  "  must  be  mentally  supplied  ; 
an  intermediate  flash  of  thought  so  obvious  that  time  would  have  been  wasted  in 
wording  it.  This  silent  link  is  expressed  by  the  clause  in  italics  :  if  the  Clii  ist,  the  one 
Savioui-,  has  become  the  heritage  of  one  party,  ic/(a<  is  to  become  of  the  saltation  of  the 
other  three  ?  "  Was  Paul  crucitied  for  yon,"  &c.  (Canon  Evans.)  Is  C}irist  divided  in 
— 1.  His  person.  2.  His  offices.  3.  His  salvation.  4.  His  Church.  (IV.  W.  Wythe.) 
The  differences  among  Christians  no  ohjection  to  Christianity  : — I.  How  it  is  that 
MEN  COME  TO  DIFFER  IN  MORALS  AND  RELIGION.  Almost  every  actlon,  character,  or 
doctrine,  on  which  we  are  called  upon  to  make  up  an  opinion,  is  more  or  less 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

complex  ;  that  is  to  say,  has  more  than  one  side  or  aspect.  It  does  not  follow  that 
one  is  true,  and  the  other  false  :  both  may  be  true ;  that  is,  faithful  representations 
of  the  same  reality,  only  under  different  aspects.  I  am  not  aware  of  a  single  vicious 
action  which  was  ever  held  as  right,  unless,  in  the  circumstances,  it  really  had  a 
good  or  plausible  side,  on  which  alone,  from  some  cause,  it  was  contemplated,  the 
whole  action  being  judged  by  this  one  side.  The  same  account  is  also  to  be  given 
of  the  origin  of  most  of  our  differences  in  religious  doctrine  when  sincerely  enter- 
tained. Take,  for  instance,  what  is  perhaps  the  most  fundamental  difference  of 
all,  the  different  opinions  which  have  prevailed  respecting  human  nature.  Who 
does  not  know  that  man  actually  appears  under  all  these  various  aspects  ? — some- 
times but  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and  sometimes  but  little  better  than  a  fiend. 
Hence  the  most  extreme  and  contradictory  views  on  this  subject  are  so  far  well 
founded  as  this,  that  they  are  faithful  representations  of  real  phases  of  human 
nature,  the  error  consisting  not  in  misconceiving  some  single  ph^se,  but  in  judging 
our  whole  nature  by  that  alone.  And  so  it  follows,  that  what  we  call  errors  are  not 
so  much  false  as  partial  views  of  the  reality.  II.  Such  being  the  origin  and  nature 
of  most  religious  differences,  it  will  next  be  in  order  to  inquire  on  what  gkounds 

THEY     C.\N     BE     REGARDED     AS    A    REASON     OR     OCCASION     FOR     SCEPTICAL,     CYNICAL,     OR 

DESPONDING  THOUGHTS.  In  the  first  place,  do  they  afford  us  any  reason  or  pretext 
for  denying  the  trustworthiness  or  competency  of  the  human  faculties?  Certainly 
not.  Could  we  be  induced  to  regard  the  object  under  precisely  the  same  lights  and 
aspects,  we  should  doubtless  see  it  alike  ;  and  better  still,  could  we  be  induced  to 
regard  the  object  under  all  lights  and  aspects,  we  should  doubtless  not  only  see  it 
alike,  but  see  it  as  it  is.  Accordingly,  the  differences  among  Chi'istians  are  not  to 
be  construed  into  evidence  of  the  incompetency  of  the  human  faculties  in  themselves 
considered,  but  onlv  of  their  partial  application.  When  we  begin  our  inquiries 
respecting  any  subject,  we  must  begin,  of  course,  by  looking  at  it  on  one  side  :  our 
views  must  be  partial  at  first ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  they  must  always  continue 
so.  What,  indeed,  is  progress  in  any  inquiry  but  the  gradual  enlargement  of  our 
views?  And  hence  the  acknowledged  fact,  that  thought  and  study,  and  a  more 
generous  culture,  tend  to  dissolve  differences  and  bring  men  together.  To  those, 
therefore,  who  think  to  find  arguments  for  scepiicism  or  despair  in  the  divisions  of 
Christians,  and  who  are  ready  to  pronounce  the  partial  views  which  prevail  as 
worthless,  and  mutually  destructive  of  each  other,  the  answer  is  plain.  First,  even 
the  most  partial  of  tliese  views  are  worth  a  great  deal ;  for  they  are  partial  views  of 
an  all-important  truth,  and  as  smh  contain  much  that  is  enduring  and  eternal. 
Again,  as  the  error  of  these  views  grows  mainly  out  of  their  being  partial,  it  is  one 
which  must  be  expected  to  pertain  to  the  first  stages  of  every  inquiry,  but  gradually 
disappear  as  the  inquiry  g^es  on.  Finally,  though  the  time  may  never  come  on 
earth  when  the  multitude  of  pn-tial  views  will  be  lost  in  a  single  all-comprehensive 
view,  still  this  knowing  "  in  part,"  and  the  trials  and  responsibilities  which  pertain 
to  such  a  condition,  may  be  essential  to  the  discipline  which  is  to  fit  us  for  that 
world,  where  "that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away."  Admitting  all  this, 
however,  I  ask,  then,  what  there  is  in  controversy — I  do  not  say  to  condemn,  for, 
considering  how  they  are  often  conducted,  there  is  enough  in  them.  Heaven  knows, 
to  condemn,  but  to  excuse  in  lookers-on  either  indifference  or  unbehef  ?  Certainly 
of  themselves  they  do  not  argue  indifference  or  unbelief,  but  the  contrary.  An 
age  of  controversy  is  pre-eminently  an  age  of  faith  ;  a  man  is  not  likely  to  dispute 
earnestly  unless  he  believes  in  somt^thing,  and  attaches  importance  to  it.  Besides, 
how  is  it  in  other  things  ?  Name,  if  you  can,  a  sinsjle  interesting  subject  of  inquiry 
which  hfls  not  given  occa^^ion  to  controversy.  The  world  is  as  much  divided  and 
estranged  on  scientific  and  political  and  philanthropic  questions  as  on  religious 
questions.  But  do  m^n  hence  infer  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  truth  in  any  of 
these  matters,  or  that  we  have  no  faculties  to  discover  it?  God  forbid  !  Obviously, 
therefore,  it  cannot  be  controversy,  as  such,  that  is  objected  to  in  this  connection, 
but  something  ppculiar  to  religions  controversy.  First,  it  is  said  that  controversy 
is  well  enough  where  it  really  has  the  effect  to  help  forward  the  truth,  or  to  diffuse 
and  establish  it;  but  in  religion  it  does  neither,  leavi"g  every  ciuestion  just  where 
it  found  it.  I  reply,  that  even  if  this  were  so,  it  would  not  be  to  the  purpose  :  it 
would  follow,  indeed,  that  controversy  is  of  no  use  in  religion,  and  ought  to  be 
avoided  ;  but  it  would  not  follow  that  religion  itself  is  of  no  use,  or  that  controversy 
has  made  it  of  less  use  or  less  certain.  But  the  whole  statement  is  erroneous. 
WIio  has  yet  to  learn  the  invaluable  services  of  discussion  and  controversy  in 
settling  the  laws  of  evidence  on  which  the  genuineness  and  authenticity  of  the 


CHAP.  I.]  1.  CORINTHIANS.  31 

Sacred  Books  deppiul,  hiuI  the  laws  of  interpretation  by  which  their  import  is 
determined  ?  To  discussion  and  controversy  we  also  owe  it,  that  the  Christian 
doctrines  generally  have  been  unfolded,  cleared  up,  and  re-stated.  Again,  religious 
controversy  is  objected  to  because  of  its  asperities  and  spirit  of  denunciation, 
which  on  such  a  subject  aie  peculiarly  odious,  creating  in  some  minds  an  invincible 
disgust  for  religion  itself.  That  religious  controversy,  even  among  Christians,  some- 
times assumes  the  cbaracter  here  given  to  it,  I  confess  ;  but  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it 
is  not  because  Christians  are  Christians,  but  because  Christians  are  men,  having 
the  weaknesses  and  imperfections  of  men.  Once  more.  A  vague  notion  exists,  I 
believe,  in  some  minds  that  the  honour  of  God  is  somehow  compromised  by  the 
disgraceful  altercations  to  which  Christianity  has  given  birth.  The  fact  that  Ho 
does  not  interfere  to  suppress  them  creates  a  feeling  of  uneasiness  and  distiust,  as 
if  the  revelation  were  not  in  reality  from  Him.  Such  persons  would  do  well  to 
remember  that  God  gives  us  truth,  as  He  gives  us  everything  else,  not  to  our 
acceptance,  but  to  our  acquisition.  Even  the  truths  of  revelation  are  expected  to 
do  us  as  much  good  by  exercising  our  fairness  of  mind,  and  our  love  of  truth,  in 
the  acceptance  and  interpretation  of  His  Word,  as  by  the  light  they  give.  To  the 
question,  then,  Which  among  the  various  partial  and  discordant  views  you  are  to 
adopt,  this  is  my  answer — Adopt  your  own  ;  hold  fast  your  own.  Allowing  others 
to  have  their  views,  be  faithful  and  just  to  your  own  view;  endeavouring,  of 
course,  to  enlarge  it  from  day  to  day,  but  adhering  to  it,  meanwhile,  and  reverenc- 
ing it,  as  one  view  at  least  of  truth,  and  of  that  side  of  truth  which  is  turned 
towards  you,  and  which,  therefoie,  you  must  be  presumed  to  be  most  conctrn^d 
to  know.  Above  all,  remember  that,  though  we  are  divided,  Christ  is  not.  [J. 
Walker,  D.D.)  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?^n'a.s  Paul  crunfied? — I.  The 
OCCASION  OF  THIS  QUESTION — the  ftivided  state  of  the  Church  at  Corinth.  Murk 
the  peculiar  ground  of  contention  (ver.  12).  Paul  was  the  founder  of  the 
Church;  and  some  of  the  older  members  might  naturally  feel  pec^uliarly  attached 
to  him.  Apollos  succeeded  Paul — a  man  of  more  finished  eloquence;  and  S'  me, 
who  joined  the  Church  under  his  ministry,  might,  as  naturally,  become  attached  to 
him.  Peter  was  especially  the  apostle  to  the  Jews,  and  the  Jewish  converts  w.  uld 
prefer  him.  Others  affected  to  disparage  all,  and  said,  "  We  are  of  Christ."  Surely 
it  was  a  most  unhap])y  state  of  things  to  make  one  preacher  cla--h  with  another, 
and  to  appear  to  make  any  of  them  cIhsIi  wi'h  Christ.  So  Paul  says,  "  Is  there  a 
separate  Saviour  for  each  of  the  four  parties  ?  for  that  is  what  you  seem  to  mean  "  ; 
then  adds,  "  Was  Paul  crucitied  for  yon  ?  "  II.  The  truth  involved  in  the 
QUESTION.  1.  Some  one  had  been  crucified  for  them.  That  was  a  fact  which  none 
of  their  divisions  could  pretend  to  deny.  But  who  was  this  crucifieii  One?  Was  it 
Paul  ?  No  !  It  was  the  Master,  not  the  servant.  And  Christ  was  crucified  for  us  1 
He  had  no  guilt  of  His  own  to  suffer  for.  1  he  poor  thief  at  His  side  made  this 
acknowledgment,  and  prophecy  had  explained  it  700  years  before — "He  was 
wounded  fur  our  transgressions,"  &c.  2.  And  this  was  the  most  memorable  fact  in 
His  history.  To  talk  about  the  blood  of  Christ  offends  certain  people's  taste,  and 
is  out  of  keeping  with  their  theology.  But  what  is  the  theology  of  tlie  Bible  ?  The 
tabernacle  and  the  temple  ran  with  blood;  for  "wi'hout  shedding  of  blooH  there 
was  no  remission  of  sin."  So  in  the  New  Testament  we  read  that  our  Lord  "  took 
the  cup,"  and  said,  "  This  is  My  blood,"  &c.  And  Peter  reminded  his  fellow-believers, 
"  Ye  were  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,"  and  John  wiote,  "  The  blood 
of  Jesus  Chrii-t,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  And  the  reason  of  all  this 
is  clearly  given.  Sin  is  a  thing  which  a  jnst  and  holy  Ruler  of  the  universe  cannot 
pass  by.  It  must  be  punished — if  not  in  us,  in  another  in  our  stead.  And  the 
grand  message  of  the  gospel  is,  that  God  has  laid  on  Chiist  the  iniquity  of  us  all — 
so  that  "  in  Him  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,"  &c.  Now  if  this  lie  so, 
the  most  memorable  thing  in  the  history  of  Christ  is — that  He  "was  crucified  for 
us!  "  3.  Such  clearly  is  Paul's  tcMching.  Talk  too  much  of  the  blood  of  Christ? 
(chap.  ii.  2).  Th^  theme  distasteful  ar.d  offensive  ?  (Gal.  vi.  14 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  18,  23). 
III.  The  force  of  the  question.  What  claim  have  I  upon  yon  compared  with 
that  of  Christ  ?  Notice  the  delicacy  of  the  apostle's  mind,  He  might  have  »sked 
the  same  with  regard  to  Peter  or  Apollos.  1  Paul  had  some  claim  upon  them,  for 
it  was  he  who  first  brought  the  gospel  to  them.  And  what  Corinthian  believer  but 
was  bound  to  bless  the  apostle's  name?  And  don't  you  sometimes  bless  it,  English 
believer?  Have  you  not  felt  that  the  Apostle  Paul  has  been  one  of  your  best 
friends  ?  2.  But  now  I  hear  him  saying,  "  Don't  talk  of  me — talk  of  my  Master. 
What  claims  have  I  upon  you  compared  with  His  ?    It  was  not  I  that  was  your 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAr.  i. 

Substitute — I  neefied  a  substitute  as  much  as  jou.  You  Corinthians  talk  of  me 
and  of  Apollos  as  useful  preachers.  Who  are  we  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed, 
even  as  the  Lord  gave  to  every  man.  '  We  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord,'  "  &c.  And  so  you  Englishmen  talk  of  me  as  one  whom  you  are 
bound  to  revere  and  love.  But  look  up  immensely  higher  !  up,  where  angels  bow 
before  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain  !  There's  your  best  Friend !  Give  Him  your 
deepest  reverence,  your  warmest  love  !  "Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?  "  3.  The 
text  is  suitable,  by  way  of  warning,  to  these  days  when  the  tendency  is  to  mingle 
Christ  up  with  other  famous  teachers.  And  doubtless  each  of  them  has  taught  the 
world  what  had  previously  been  forgotten.  But  can  any  Christian  put  them  on  a 
level  with  our  Lord?  I  shudder  at  the  thought !  "  Is  Christ  divided  ?  "  Is  there 
one  Saviour  for  the  Chinese,  and  another  for  the  Indian,  and  another  for  the  Arab? 
Was  Confucius  crucified  for  sinners  ?  —  or  Buddha  ?  —  or  Mahommed  ?  Nay, 
brethten  !  Stand  fast  in  the  faith.  "There  is  none  other  name,"  etc.  "Other 
foundation  can  no  man  lay."  [F.  Tucker,  B.A.)  Jeans  the  only  Saviour  of 
men  .-—This  question  was  intended  to  startle  Paul's  readers.  They  had  been  split 
up  into  separate  groups,  designated  by  names  representing  ideas  which  ought  never 
to  be  separated,  viz..  Christian  freedom.  Christian  philosophy,  Church  authority 
and  organisation,  and  personal  devotion  to  Chrif^t.  But  these  Greeks  carried  their 
old  mental  habits  into  the  Church.  For  ages  tbey  had  identified  each  shade  of 
oijiniou  in  philosophy  with  the  namo  of  an  individual  teacher.  It  was  natural  for 
them  to  look  at  Christianity  as  an  addition  to  the  world's  thought,  which  admitted 
of  being  treated  as  other  systems.  Moreover,  religion  is  differently  apprehended 
and  presented  by  different  minds.  The  one  Truih  which  Peter  and  Paul  and 
Apollos  preached  was  presented  in  different  forms.  The  fault  of  the  Corinthians 
lay  in  trt^ating  a  difference  in  the  way  of  presenting  truth  as  if  it  were  a  difference 
in  truth  itself.  To  them  Paul,  &c.,  were  the  teaciiers  of  distinct  religions.  Nay, 
more,  the  holiest  Name  of  all  was  bandied  about  among  the  names  of  His  mes- 
sengers. Hence  the  pain  which  finds  vent  in  the  question,  "  Was  Paul  crucified 
for  you  ?  "  This  question — I.  Suggests  the  difference  between  the  debt 
WHICH  Christians  owe  to  Christ  and  that  which  they  owe  to  the  most  favodbed 
OF  His  servants.  1.  It  was  no  slight  debt  which  the  Corinthians  owed  to  the 
apostle — their  conversion,  their  Church,  their  knowledge  about  subjects  of  the 
highest  interest  to  man ;  his  nature,  God's  nature  and  relations,  and  the  eternal 
future.  It  was  a  debt  which  could  never  be  repaid.  But  the  ajjostle  suggests  its 
utter  relative   insignificance  by   his   question,   "  Was   Paul   crucified   for  you  ?  '' 

2.  Not  that  St.  Paul  had  taught  the  Corinthians  the  faith  of  Christ  without  suffer- 
ing (1  Thess.  ii.  2  ;  Acts  xviii.  5,  6,  12-17).  But  all  such  sufferings  had  differed  in 
kind  from  that  which  was  glanced  at  by  the  question,  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for 
you?  "  3.  His  relation  to  Christ  was  altogether  unlike  that  which  existed  between 
pupils  and  their  Master,  e.g.,  between  Plato  and  Socrates.  To  St.  Paul  Christ  was 
not  merely  the  author  of  Christianity,  but  its  subject  and  its  substance.  St.  Paul 
was  not  indeed  crucified  ;  he  was  beheaded  some  years  later,  as  a  martyr  for  Christ. 
But  excepting  the  testimony  which  he  thus  bore  to  the  truth  he  preached,  his 
death  was  without  results  to  the  world.  He  was  beheaded  for  no  one.  And  had  he 
been  crucified  at  Corinth,  tbe  sin  of  no  single  Corinthian  would  have  been  washed 
away  by  his  blood.  Do,  teach,  or  suffer  what  he  might,  he  was  but  a  disciple. 
II.  Tells  trs  what  it  was  in  the  work  of  Christ  which  had  the  first  claim 
on  the  gratitude  of  Christians.  1.  Not  His  miracles.  They  were  designed,  no 
doubt,  to  make  faith  in  His  Divine  mission  natural  and  easy.  They  were  more 
frequently  works  of  mercy  than  of  power.  They  were  acted  parables.  But  others 
also  have  worked  miracles.  And  the  miracles  of  Christ  have  not  touched  the  heart 
of  the  world  more  than  His  words.  2.  Not  His  teaching.  Certainly  no  human 
speech  will  ever  say  more  to  the  conscience  than  did  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount, 
or  more  to  the  heart  than  did  the  discourse  in  the  supper-room.  Yet  He  Himself 
implies  that  what  He  did  would  have  greater  claims  on  man  than  what  He  said, 

3.  Nor  His  triumph  over  death  at  His  resuryection.  Certainly  that  was  the 
supreme  certificate  of  His  Divine  mission.  But  the  claim  of  the  Resurrection  upon 
our  gratitude  is  so  great,  because  it  is  intimately  bonnd  up  with  the  tragedy  which 
had  preceded  it.  4.  But  His  Cross  (vers.  23,  24  ;  chap.  ii.  2  ;  Gal.  vi.  14),  on  which 
He  reminds  us  of  our  utter  misery  and  helplessness  until  we  are  aided  by  His 
i-pdeeming  mij.'ht  (John  xv.  13  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24  ;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Rev.  i.  5  ;  Rom.  iii.  25  ; 
Eph.  i.  7  ;  2  Cor.  v.  18-20  ;  Heb.  ii.  17).  To  expand,  connect,  explain,  justify 
these  asjects  of  His  atoning  death  is  no  doubt  a  labour  of  vast  proportions.     But  in 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  33 

their  simple  form  they  meet  every  child  who  reads  the  New  Te-tament,  and  they 
explain  the  hold  of  Christ  crucified  on  the  Christian  heart.  And  we  understand  the 
pathos  and  the  strength  of  the  appeal,  "  Was  Paul  crucitied  for  you  ?  "  HI.  Enables 

us     TO     MEASURE     THE     TRUE    WOKTU     OP     EFEORTS     FOR     IJII'ROVINO    '1  HE    CONDITION    OP 

MANKIND.  1.  We  may  well  thank  God  that  He  lias  put  it  into  so  many  hearts  to 
support  institutions  and  enterprises  so  rich  in  their  practical  benevolence.  But 
when  it  is  hinted  that  efforts  of  this  kind  satisfy  all  the  needs  of  man,  we  are 
obliged  to  hesitate.  The  needs  of  the  soul  are  at  least  as  real  as  those  of  the  body. 
The  pain  of  the  conscience  is  at  least  as  torturing  as  that  of  the  nerves.  The 
invisible  world  is  not  less  to  be  provided  for  than  the  world  of  sense  and  time.  W^e 
are  sometimes  almost  pressed,  in  view  of  the  exaggerated  claims  of  a  secular 
philanthropy,  to  ask  whether  tbis  or  that  benevolent  person  was  crucified  for  the 
poor  or  the  suifering.  2.  In  like  manner,  when  Renan  tells  that  we  should  all  be 
much  better  if  we  would  give  increased  time  and  thought  to  the  Emperor  Marcus 
Aurelius,  we  naturally  listen.  That  Marcus  Aurelius  was  marked  by  eminent 
excellences  must  be  frankly  granted.  But  literaiy  infidelity  has  done  this  man  a 
wrong  by  the  very  excesses  ol  his  panegyric.  For  we  cannot  but  ask  whether  his 
characteristic  virtue  was  more  than  a  social  luxury ;  whether  it  had  the  slightest 
effei't  upon  the  degraded  multiiudes  who  lived  close  to  his  palace;  whether  it 
prevented  him  selecting  as  his  colleague  a  worthless  tritler,  or  from  bequeathing  his 
responsibilities  to  a  prodigate  buffoon ;  whether  it  even  suggested  a  scruple  respecting 
his  cruel  persecutions  (•!'  Christians.  These  are  questions  which  history  may  be 
left  to  answer.  And  her  judgment  would  make  another  question  only  more  t^rotesque 
than  profane — "  Was  Marcus  Aurelius  crucified  for  you  ?  "  3.  Yes  ;  only  One  ever 
was  crucified  out  of  love  to  sinners,  and  with  a  will  and  power  to  save  them.  The 
faith  which  St.  Paul  preached  protects  society  against  dangers  which  are  inseparable 
from  human  progress  at  certain  stages.  For  this  faith  in  Christ  crucified  addresses 
itself  to  each  of  thosa  poles  of  soiiiety,  which,  wtien  left  to  the  ordinary  selfish 
impulses  of  human  nature,  tend  to  bt-come  antagonistic.  To  the  wealthy  and  the 
noble  the  figure  of  the  crucitied  Saviour  is  a  perpetual  preacher  of  self-sacrifice  for 
the  sake  of  the  poor  and  i:eedy ;  and  to  the  poor  it  is  no  less  a  peipetual  lesson  of 
tbe  beauty,  the  majesty  of  entire  resignation.  Thus  does  the  tiuth  which  is  at  the 
very  heart  of  the  Christian  creed  contribute  most  powerfully  to  the  coherence  and 
well-being  of  society;  and  we  live  in  days  when  society  is  not  able  to  disjiense  with 
its  assistance.  (Canon  Liddon.)  I  thank  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you,  but 
Crispus  and  Gaius. — PauVs  viode.sty  : — This  is  a  beautiful  trait  of  Paul's  character. 
Most  preachers  delight  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the  public  reception  of  their 
converts.  But  Paul  saw  the  danger  of  this,  as  tending  to  exalt  the  preacher  in 
men's  eyes.  He  therefore  purposely  (ver.  15)  and  systematically  placed  himself  on 
such  occasions  in  the  background  (cf.  Acts  x.  48).  This  he  could  well  afford  to 
do  because  of  the  greater  honour,  given  to  him,  of  preaching  the  gospel  and  thus 
leading  men  to  Christ.  He  wished  men  to  think,  not  of  the  successful  preacher, 
but  of  Him  whose  professed  servants  the  baptized  ones  were.  How  different  was 
the  aim  of  those  who  wrote  Paul's  name  on  the  banner  of  their  party  !  Paul  thanks 
God  for  his  own  conduct.  For  every  good  action  is  prompted  by  God,  and  enriches 
the   actor.       (Prof.  Beet.)  Cliristian  baptism  contains  two  things  :    something 

on  the  part  of  God,  and  something  on  the  part  of  man.  On  God's  part  it 
is  an  authoritative  revelation  of  His  paternity :  on  man's  part  it  is  an  ac- 
ceptance of  God's  covenant.  In  chap.  x.  1,  2  St.  Paul  expresses  the  meaning 
of  baptism  as  symbolising  discipleship.  When  the  Israelites  passed  through 
the  Pied  Sea  they  cut  themselves  off  for  ever  from  Egypt,  so  that,  figuratively 
speaking,  in  that  immersion  they  were  baptized  unto  Moses,  for  thereby  they 
declared  themselves  his  followers,  and  left  all  to  go  with  him.  And  so,  just 
as  the  soldier  who  receives  the  bounty  money  is  thereby  pledged  to  serve  his 
sovereign,  so  he  who  has  passed  through  tbe  bai^tismal  waters  is  pleflged  to  fight 
under  the  Redeemer's  banner  against  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil.  And  so  Paul 
argues  thus  :  To  whom  were  ye  then  baptized  ?  To  whom  did  you  pledge  your- 
selves in  discipleship  ?  If  to  Christ,  why  do  ye  name  yourselves  by  the  name  of 
Paul  ?  If  all  were  baptized  into  that  one  Name,  how  is  it  that  a  few  only  have 
adopted  it  as  their  own  ?  Upon  this  we  make  two  remarks.  I.  The  value  and 
BLESSEDNESS  OF  THE  SACRAMENTS.  1.  They  are  authoritative  signs  and  symbols. 
There  is  very  much  contained  in  this  idea  ;  e.g.,  in  some  parts  of  the  country  it  is 
the  custom  to  give  and  receive  a  ring  in  token  of  betrothal ;  but  that  is  very  different 
from  the  marriage-ring.  It  is  neither  authoritative,  nor  has  it  the  sanction  of  the 
VOL.   I.  3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Church.  It  would  have  been  perfectly  possible  for  man  to  have  invented  another 
symbul  of  the  truth  conveyed  in  baptism,  and  then  it  would  not  have  been  authori- 
tative, and  consequently  it  would  have  been  weak  and  useless.  2.  They  serve  as 
the  epitomes  of  Christian  tiuth.  Antinomianism  had  crept  into  the  Koman 
Church.  Paul  meets  this  by  an  appeal  to  baptism  (Rom.  vi.  1-4).  And  again, 
in  reference  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  the  Church  of  Corinth  that  sacrament  had 
become  a  feast  of  gluttony  and  a  signal  of  division.  This  error  he  endeavours  to 
correct  by  reference  to  the  institution  of  the  Supper  itself :  "  The  bread  which  we 
break,  is  it  not  the  Communion  of  the  body  of  Christ?"  The  single  loaf,  broken 
into  many  fragments,  contains  within  it  the  symbolical  truth,  that  the  Church  of 
Christ  is  one.  Here,  in  the  text,  St.  Paul  makes  the  same  appeal :  he  appeals  to 
baptism  against  sectarianism,  and  so  Ing  as  we  retain  it,  it  is  an  everlasting  protest 
against  every  one  who  breaks  the  unity  of  the  Church.  II.  The  peculiar  meaning 
or  THE  Sacuament.  There  are  those  who  believe  nnd  teach  that  men  are  born 
into  the  world  children  of  the  devil,  and  who  hold  that  the  instrument  for  their 
conversion  into  God's  children  is  baptism  ;  and  believe  that  there  is  given  to  the 
ministers  of  the  Church  the  power  of  conveying  in  that  sacrament  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  effects  this  wondrous  change.  If  a  minister  really  beheves  he  has  this  power, 
then  it  is  only  with  fear  and  trembling  that  he  should  approach  the  font.  But  if 
this  view  be  true,  then  the  apostle  thanked  God  that  he  had  not  regenerated  any, 
that  he  had  not  conveyed  the  Spirit  of  G(  d  to  any  one  but  Crispus  and  Gains,  and 
the  household  of  Stephanas.     (F.  IF.  Robertson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17-31.  For  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  gospel. — Pauls 
^wcaching  : — I.  It  ex.alted  the  Cross  of  Christ  as  the  cenjral  element  of  the 
GOSPEL.  The  apostle  does  not  teach  that  truths  associated  wnth  the  details  of 
Christian  belief  and  living  are  not  proper  themes  for  the  pulpit ;  nor  that  ritualistic 
observances  are  of  no  importance  ;  nor  that  he  considered  as  naught  the  human 
wisdom  seen  both  in  logic  and  skill ;  what  he  meant  was  that  the  gospel  as  the 
means  of  salvation  revealed  by  God  was  everywhere  the  burden  of  his  message. 
Neither  church  observances  nor  creeds,  nor  man's  philosophy  can  become  a  substi- 
tute for  this  essential  truth.  II.  It  made  the  agency  of  God  essential  in  causing 
THE  Cross  of  Christ  to  have  saving  power.  1.  Paul  gives  the  reason  of  man  its 
p'oper  place  in  the  apprehension  of  the  truth,  and  the  truth  so  apprehended  its 
proper  place  as  connected  with  regeneration  ;  but  he  never  teaches  that  the  truth 
alone,  however  fully  understood,  wiU  secure  salvation.  Being  saved  is  not  an  intel- 
lectual process  only,  even  though  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  be  the  truth  considered. 
Only  when  made  the  power  of  God  through  the  attending  influence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  does  it  save.  2.  Paul's  preaching  insisted  that  this  Divine  agency  can 
render  the  weak — (1)  Able  to  appropriate  thp  gospel  in  its  saving  power.  The  pride 
of  high  station  and  marked  ability  would  not  avail,  but  the  humility  of  confessed 
unworlhiness  and  dependence  upon  him  who  would  attract  God's  favour  and  incline 
its  possessor  to  accept  the  Saviour  He  has  provided.  Hence,  the  poor,  the  ignorant, 
the  wicked,  the  child,  will  find  no  barriers  around  the  Cross  when  they  turn  toward 
it  for  help.  (2)  Useful  in  throwing  over  opposition  and  causing  the  gospel  to 
triumph  (ver.  27,  &c.).     III.   It  declared  that  thh:  i;esult  of  the  gospel's  proper 

PRESENTATION  MUST  BE  THAT  GoD,  AND  NOT  MEN,  WILL  HAVE    ALL    THE    GLORY  (veiS.   29, 

31).  Conclusion  :  Paul's  preaching  declaies — 1.  That  tiue  salvation  is  the  penitent 
and  trustful  acceptance  of  the  crucified  Christ.  2.  That  true  religion  is  loyalty  to  God. 
(.7.  Eells,  D.D.)  The  true  wm-k  of  the  preacher  : — Paul  sought  to  tea'-h  that  there 
were  different  functions  which  belonged  to  the  officers  of  the  Church.  Some  were  to 
"  serve  tables,"  some  to  administer  the  ordinances.  He  did  not  cast  contempt  on  the 
ordinances,  but  declared  that  he  had  a  special  work  appointed  him.  I.  The  office 
OF  THE  PREACHER  AROSE  WITH  THE  Saviour.  There  wcrc  instructors  previously. 
The  prophets  were  much  more  teachers  than  predictors.  The  Eabbis  when  Christ 
was  upon  earth  were  teachers.  Christ's  method  of  teaching  was  utterly  different. 
Outwardly  it  was  the  same — He  went  from  place  to  place.  He  taught  sitting,  &c.  ; 
but  the  interior  contents  of  His  teaching  were  very  different.  Christ  spake  "  with 
authority " ;  so  does  every  man  who  speaks  from  the  roots  and  fundamental 
elements  of  truth.  II.  Preaching  is  teaching  in  a  vitalising  way  ethical  truths— 
truths  which  ally  men  to  God  and  to  each  other.  They  must  be  taught  so  as  to 
breathe  the  life  of  Him  who  teaches.     They  must  carry  personal  power.     III.  It  is 

NOT  to  be  thought  THAT  THIS  FUNCTION  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  ChURCH  HAS  CEASED 
EVEN   IN    LIBERALLY    EDUCATED   AND    CULTIVATED    SECTIONS    OF    SOCIETY.       Let     US    look 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS. 


closely  and  ask,  Is  the  function  of  the  preacher  temporary  ?  Will  it  ever  pass 
away  ?  There  is  one  element  belonging  distinctively  to  tlie  preacher  which  will 
for  ever  give  him  a  place  and  function  which  can  never  change  :  the  bringing  of 
the  truth  home  to  men  in  a  living  form.  In  the  light  of  this  observe  the  genius 
and  the  sphere  of  preaching — 1.  From  this  sphere  are  excluded  largely  the  higher 
forms  of  theological  speculation,  for  it  is  not  possible  to  bring  thise  home  to  men 
in  a  living  way.  His  distinctive  business  is  to  deal  with  those  truths  which  he  can 
take  into  his  consciousness,  and,  having  given  to  these  a  personal  expression  from 
himself,  send  them  forth  living  truths.  His  proper  sphere  is  ethical  truth.  That 
which  men  most  need  to  know  is  how  to  love  God  and  man  perfectly.  This  is  his 
•whole  duty.  To  teach  this  duty  is  the  sphere  of  the  preacher.  2.  This  includes 
every  condition  of  mankind.  3.  From  this  it  appears  that  no  man  is  a  true 
preacher  whose  chief  business  is  the  organisation  of  worship,  the  conduct  of  Church 
affairs,  or  mere  pastoral  administration.  The  true  preacher  is  the  ntterer  of  truth. 
4.  Then  as  no  man  can  represent  in  himself  every  form  of  the  human  mind,  or 
have  a  full  conception  of  all  truth,  the  preacher  must  necessarily  l)e  a  partialist. 
The  robin  sings  as  a  robin,  bluebirds  as  bluebirds.  One  man  has  large  power 
of  imagiuation,  another  overflowing  emotion,  etc.  All  are  fragmentary  preachers. 
No  man  was  ever  built  large  enough  to  j^reach  the  whole  of  God.  5.  Pride, 
vanity,  and  unspiritual  life  will  effectually  prevent  the  preafher  becoming 
personally,  experimentally,  a  presentation  of  the  truth  to  the  people.  (//.  U\ 
Ueecher.)  Freachinri : — I.   It  has  been  okdekkd  by   Divine    wisdom  that  the 

GOSPEL  SHOULD,  as  mucli  as  possible,  avail  itself  of  the  okdivauy  channels 
OF  communication  and  influence  in  spreading  through  the  world.  II.  The  secret 
of  the  powee  of  preaching.  1.  It  conveys  far  better  than  any  other  vehicle  the 
aflirmation  of  the  whole  man — his  whole  nature,  his  whole  experience— to  the 
matter  which  he  desires  to  communicate.  2.  It  brinsis  into  play  all  the  aflinities, 
sympathies,  and  aft'ections  of  the  being,  and  is  therefore  a  most  powerful  instru- 
ment in  arriving  at  the  truth.  3.  So  much  is  true  of  all  preaching.  But  in  the 
preaching  of  the  gi.spel  tiiere  is  a  source  of  special  power — the  principle  of  repre- 
sentation— the  power  and  right  to  speak  to  men  in  the  name  of  God.  (J.  Baldwin 
Brown,  B. A.)  FauVs  -preai-hmg  : — 1.  Observe,  Paul    does    not  say  "  we  preach 

Christ  "  as  if  the  declaration  of  the  personal  dignity  of  the  God-man  were  all. 
Neither  does  he  emphasise  the  "  crucified  "  as  if  the  setting  off  of  the  death  of  Jesus 
ns  that  of  a  martyr  and  for  an  example  were  enough.  But  he  combines  the  two. 
The  dignity  of  the  Christ  was  needed  to  give  efficacy  to  the  sacrifit^e  on  the  Cross  ; 
and  the  sacrifice  on  the  Cross  was  required  to  complete  the  work  of  the  Christ.  2. 
In  the  prosecution  of  his  work  Paul  met  with  three  classes,  each  of  which  treated 
his  message  in  a  peculiar  fashion.  The  Jew  and  the  Greek,  without  trying  the 
gospel  on  themselves,  rejected  it  —the  one  for  its  lack  of  power  and  the  other  for  its 
lack  of  wisdom  ;  but  the  third  class,  acting  on  the  only  true  philosophical  principle 
of  proving  the  matter  by  personal  experiment,  found  in  it  both  the  power  of  God 
and  the  wisdom  of  God.  Nowadays  it  is  sturdily  insisted  on  that  nothing  shall  be 
received  save  that  which  rests  on  the  basis  of  observation  and  experiment,  but  that 
is  all  the  gospel  asks  ;  and  here  we  see  that  those  who  reject  it  are  those  who  refuse 
to  put  it  to  the  test.  Which  of  the  two  classes  is  the  more  scientific  ?  The  Baco- 
nian philosophers  should  not  hesitnte  as  to  the  reply.  Christ  crucified  is — I.  '•  The 
POWER  OF  God."  1.  Yes,  but  this  power  is  not  physical  like  the  mif-ht  of  an  army; 
nor  material,  like  that  which  is  connected  with  a  development  of  matter ;  nor 
mechanical,  as  derived  from  any  sort  of  mechanism,  but  dynnmical,  as  exerted  by 
spirit  upon  spirit.  It  is  "  power  unto  salvation."  It  is  not  therefore  to  be  tested 
by  material  gauges,  as  one  measures  the  pressure  on  a  steam-boiler,  or  estimates 
the  horse-power  of  an  engine.  We  are  to  look  for  its  operation  in  the  human  heart. 
Its  trophies  are  in  character,  and  its  results  are  in  life.  (1)  Take  it  in  the  case  of 
an  individual,  and  the  transformation  wrought  on  such  mi-n  as  Paul,  and  Augustine, 
and  John  Newton,  may  well  illustrate  its  reality  and  efficacy.  (2)  Take  it  in  the 
case  of  communities,  and  Christianity  has  either  implanted  or  stimulated  regard  for 
the  personality  of  the  weakest  and  the  poorest;  respect  for  women ;  the  absolute 
duty  of  each  member  of  the  fortunate  classes  to  raise  the  unfortunate ;  humanity 
to  the  child,  the  prisoner,  the  stranper,  the  needy,  and  even  the  brute  ;  unceasing 
opposition  to  all  forms  of  cruelty  ;  the  duty  of  personal  puiity  ;  the  sacredness  of 
marriage  ;  the  necessity  of  temperance.  2.  But  are  we  quite  sure  that  it  is  "  the  power 
of  God  "?  Yes,  for  there  are  only  two  spiritual  powers  in  the  world — that  of  evil 
and  that  of  good.     Very  evidently,  therefore,  a  result  like  that  of  the  conversion  of 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

a  man,  and  the  revolution  of  society,  from  evil  to  good,  must  be  traced  up  to  God. 
Man  cannot  do  it  for  himself,  for  as  water  cannot  rise  above  its  level,  so  the  soul 
cannot  change  its  nature  by  its  own  efforts.  And  what  one  man  cannot  do  for 
himself,  the  aggregate  of  men  cannot  do  for  the  race.  They  had  four  thousand 
years  given  to  them  in  whit-h  to  make  the  experiment,  and  here  (ver.  21)  is  the 
result.  II.  "  The  wisdom  of  God."  1.  Wisdom  is  manifested  in  the  choice  of  such 
means  as  are  best  adapted  to  the  production  of  the  end.  The  problem  to  be 
solved  in  the  salvation  of  men  is,  "  How  shall  a  sinner  be  forgiven  without  weaken- 
ing the  sanctions  of  morality  and  giving  encouragement  to  evil?  "  Now  the  race 
vainly  wrestled  with  that  for  four  millenniums ;  but  the  despair  of  humanity  is 
the  opportunity  of  God,  for  in  "  Christ  crucified  "  we  are  shown  "  a  just  God  and 
a  Saviour."  2.  Wisdom  is  seen  in  the  securing  of  different  ends  by  one  and  the 
same  means.  So  salvation  is  not  merely  forgiveness ;  it  is  also  regeneration  and 
growth  in  holiness.  Its  highest  result  is  character,  and  the  renovation  of  that  is 
produc-d  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  would  have 
been  impossible  save  for  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  on  the  Cross ;  while,  again,  the  love 
of  Christ,  as  manifested  in  His  sacrifice  on  the  Cross,  is  the  great  means  used  by 
the  Spirit  for  the  regeneration  and  sanctification  of  the  believer.  Conclusion : 
From  all  this  four  inferences  follow.  If  Christ  crucified  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation,  then — 1.  Any  sinner  may  be  saved  through  faith  in  Hioi.  2.  There  is 
no  other  way  of  salvation.  3.  When  men  are  saved  through  this  means  the  whole 
glory  of  their  salvation  is  due  to  God.  4.  If  we  would  see  such  results  from  our 
preaching  as  those  which  fallowed  Paul's,  we  must  preach  the  same  gospel,  '*  Christ 
crucified.  '  This  is  the  gospel  for  onr  age,  because  it  is  the  gospel  for  all  the  ages. 
(IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  go>'ppl  as  -preached  hii  Paul: — I.  Theee  is  a  gospel 
TO  BE  PREACHED.  Amid  all  the  diversities  of  doctrine  and  ritual  there  are  some 
things  which  must  be  found  in  all  Christian  preaching  :  that  Christ  alone  can  save 
men ;  that  He  can  save  any  man  and  all  men  ;  that  He  saves  men  completely  and 
for  ever.  No  man  can  be  said  to  preach  the  gospel  who  does  not  make  these  thoughts 
central  and  controlling.  He  may  preach  very  important  and  helpful  truth  ;  but  until 
he  makes  Christ  the  ground,  the  motive,  and  the  end  of  his  teaching,  he  is  not  a 
preacher  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel  is  good  news.  It  is  not  the  publication  of  the 
moral  law.  It  is  not  telling  men  what  they  ought  to  be  and  do.  The  ministry  of 
Christ  was  not  needed  to  teach  that  lesson.  Conscience  proclaims  it,  and  universal 
experience  confirms  it.  It  is  not  equivalent  to  the  affirmation  of  the  eternal  and 
universal  Fatherhood  of  the  Holy  One.  It  implies  this,  but  it  is  more.  That  con- 
soling thought  is  imbedded  in  the  Old  Testament.  Paul  affirmed  more  than  that. 
In  his  preaching  the  person  of  Christ  assumes  central  and  permanent  prominence. 
In  Him  the  law  of  God  is  fulfilled  and  honoured.  In  Him  the  love  of  God  leaps 
from  the  heavens  to  the  earth,  links  itself  with  the  burden  and  guilt  of  humanity, 
challenges  the  powers  of  darkness  and  the  might  of  death,  achieving  a  practical 
and  eternal  victory.  Fear  rules  paganism,  hope  smiles  in  the  Old  Testament,  assur- 
ance is  the  ringing  keynote  of  the  gospel.  So  much  for  the  contents  of  the  gospel. 
It  is  crowded  into  this  sentence  :  "  Believe  iu  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  II.  But  does  the  world  need  such  a  message  ?  Can  we  not  get  along 
fnirly  well  without  it?  Tliat  is  the  very  question  which  Paul  discussed  in  Rom.  i. 
What  does  the  world  need  ?  Righteousness.  That  secured  and  the  millennium 
would  be  there.  But  the  one  thing  most  needed  is  the  thing  most  difficult  to  create 
and  i:)romote.  It  cannot  be  said  that  there  has  been  any  lack  of  earnest  attempts. 
Confucius,  Sakya-Muni,  Zoroaster,  and  Socrates,  tried  to  supply  the  want.  But  the 
multitudes  were  deaf  to  their  appeal ;  and  Rome  at  the  zeniih  of  her  culture  was 
but  a  "  veneered  brutality."  And  mightily  endowed  as  Judiasm  was  it  failed  to 
achieve  even  its  own  reformation.  The  men  who  boasted  in  the  law  trampled  upon 
it  every  day.  A  mightier  hand  than  that  of  Socrates,  or  of  Moses,  was  needed  to  save 
the  world.  A  more  than  hnman  hand,  though  nerved  by  an  inspired  heart,  must 
smite  the  ranks  of  evil.  III.  But  granting  that  the  world  needs  just  the  help  which 
the  gospel  declares  has  been  brought  to  it.  "  Will  even  this  secure  the  desired 
RESULT  ?  "  To  this  we  can  only  answer,  first,  if  it  does  not  then  God  is  clearly  and 
hopelessly  defeated,  for  a  greater  than  Christ  cannot  come  to  the  rescue ;  and 
second,  if  Christ  be  what  the  gospel  affirms  Him  to  be,  the  triumph  of  righteous- 
ness is  a  foregone  conclusion.  Hence  the  tone  of  victory  in  the  New  Testament  is 
always  in  the  present  tense.  "Thanks  be  unto  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory." 
"  This  is  the  victory  that  overcoiueth  the  world,  even  our  faith."  This  is  our 
highest  assurance.     It  receives  impressive  confirmation  in  the  historical  triumphs 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  37 

of  Chinstianity.  Its  moral  conquest  of  the  civilisations  of  Rome  aufl  Greece  are 
unquestioned.  Its  restrainiuK  and  reorganising  energy  during  the  Middle  Ages  is 
freely  admitted.  Its  profound  and  salutary  intluenoe  upon  modern  life  is  beyond 
cavil ;  but  there  is  a  more  du-ect  and  living  proof  of  its  power.  Hundreds  among 
you  can  bear  testimony  to  the  grace  of  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ.  What  the  gospel 
has  done  for  you  it  can  do  for  all.      {A.  J.  F.  Belirends,  D.D.)  The  gospel 

neither  ritual  nor  philosophy  : — I.  A  large  class  of  minds  like  to  make  a  supersti- 
tion OUT  of  their  religion.  Mere  words  aildresse>l  to  the  understanding  and  the 
heart  appear  too  feeble,  too  immaterial.  They  long  to  be  set  in  rapport  with  the 
superhuman  in  some  realistic  way.  Establish  some  "  sign."  Paul,  generalising 
from  what  he  saw  before  his  eyes,  calls  this  demand  of  human  nature  Jewish  ;  but 
it  is  common  everywhere.  It  has  penetrated  every  religion  from  the  days  of  the 
Chaldeans  downwards.  One  after  another  Judaism,  Buddhism,  Parseeism,  Moham- 
medanism, Christianity,  have  succumbed  to  this  demand  for  material  signs.  Each 
of  them  has  degenerated  into  a  system  of  ceremonial  and  stooped  to  pander  to  the 
sensuous  taste  of  its  devotees.  II.  There  is  in  man  a  tendency,  not  so  widespread, 
but  nobler  than  the  vulgar  bent  to  superstition — after  intellectual  satisfaction 
and  an  exhaustive  knowledge  of  troth.  1.  No  sooner  had  Christianity  appeared 
than  this  appetite  seized  upon  it,  questioned  it,  thought  to  find  in  it  what  it  had 
failed  to  find  elsewhere.  Generalising,  again,  Paul  termed  this  the  Greek  habit  of 
mind.  "  The  Greek,"  he  says,  "  searches  after  philosophy  "  ;  but  it  is  as  little 
exclusively  Greek  as  the  bias  to  superstition  is  exclusively  Jewish.  In  our  day  it  is 
no  less  profound,  unsuitable,  or  eager  than  it  ever  was.  Men  claim  that  it  shall  be 
as  systematic,  exhaustive,  and  demonstrable  as  a  science;  that  it  Av^\\  help  to 
answer  the  unanswered  problems  of  existence;  that  it  shall  abjure  all  pretensions 
to  be  supernatural;  that  every  one  of  its  facts  be  found  explicable  on  natural 
grounds ;  and  that  its  boasted  virtue  to  save  shall  piove  as  intelligible  as  the  action 
of  any  other  truth  upon  human  minds.  2.  Follow  out  this  conception  of  Chris- 
tianity to  its  issues,  and  what  have  you?  Not  a  genuine  revelation  from  heaven  ; 
not  tlie  advent  of  a  Divine  power  to  save  ;  but  simply  some  very  beautiful  and  elevating 
truths,  discerned  first  by  a  certain  Jew  of  Palestine  and  by  him  added  to  the 
world's  treasure-house  of  thought,  yet  competing  with  many  discoveries  of  more 
modern  times.  Is  it  not  to  some  such  appraisement  of  the  gospel  that  a  great  deal 
of  modern  discussion  among  the  learned  is  tending?  Nay,  is  there  not  a  way  of 
preaching  and  defending  the  gospel — such  a  way  as  Paul  avoided  in  speculative 
Corinth — which  actually  invites  men  to  rate  its  value  as  low  as  this  among  the  rival 
systems  of  human  wisdom  ?  3.  Against  such  a  misconception  of  the  essence  of  the 
gospel,  what  is  St.  Paul's  protest?  It  is  true,  he  seems  to  say,  the  gospel  is  a 
rational  word,  and  not  a  magical  rite.  It  is  spoken  truth,  and  it  acts,  like  truth, 
through  the  misunderstandings  of  men.  But,  for  all  that,  it  is  not  a  philosophy. 
With  abstract  truth  it  has  little  to  do ;  but  it  proclaims  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and 
proclaims  Him  as  crucified  for  the  sins  of  men.  Its  real  character  is  this — it  is  a 
testimony  from  God  which  we  are  not  called  upon  to  discuss  so  much  as  to  credit. 
It  is  in  this,  accordingly,  that  its  power  lies.  For  power  it  unquestionably  possesses. 
Only  not  the  mere  power  of  wisdom,  but  the  quiet  personal  power  of  the  Speaker's 
authority  and  the  Speaker's  love.  Speculate  about  this  and  it  may  seem  in  your 
sagacious  eyes  folly.  But  cease  to  criticise  and  be  humble  enough  to  believe  it,  to 
surrender  yourself  to  Him  who  speaks ;  then  it  will  prove  itself  to  be  Divinely  wise 
and  strong  in  your  experience.  It  will  work  in  you  as  no  humau  wisdom  works  ;  it 
will  save  you  as  no  intellectual  system  saves.  4.  On  this  side  also  I  think  a  faithful 
Church  needs  just  now  to  speak  out  in  clear  tones.  It  is  not  the  first  time  in  the 
history  of  our  faith  that  the  gospel  has  been  like  to  lose  its  characteristic  spirit  by 
evaporation.  Treat  it  as  you  treat  an  ordinary  system  of  thouL'ht,  and  you  end  (as 
Paul  feared  to  end)  by  making  the  Cross  of  Christ  "  of  none  effect."  You  miss  its 
very  essence  as  a  gospel.  For  what  makes  it  to  be  a  gospel  ?  Just  this,  that  it  is 
God's  own  record  of  His  peculiar  way  of  having  mercy  upon  sinners.  It  is  a  plain, 
practical,  personal  appeal  from  our  reconciling  Father  to  each  wandered  soul  among 
us  ;  or  it  is  nothing.  {J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  foolisliness  of  jn-eachiny  : — 
As  Paul  repudiates  the  idea  that  he  had  given  any  countenance  to  the  founding  of 
a  Pauline  party,  it  occurs  to  him  that  some  may  say,  True  enough,  he  did  not 
baptize;  but  his  preaching  may  more  effectually  have  won  partisans  than  even 
baptizing  them  into  his  own  name  could  have  done.  And  so  Paul  goes  on  to  show 
that  his  preaching  was  not  that  of  a  demagogue  or  party -leailer,  but  was  a  bare 
statement  of  fact,  garnished  by  absolutely  nothing  which  could  divert  attention  from 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


the  fact  either  to  the  speaker  or  to  his  style.  Paul  explains  to  the  Corinthians— I. 
The  style  of  preaching  he  had  adopted  white  with  them.  1.  His  time  in  Corinth, 
he  assures  tliem,  had  been  spent,  not  in  propagating  a  system  of  truth  which  might 
have  been  identified  witb  his  name,  but  in  presenting  the  Cross  of  Christ.  In 
approaching  tliem  he  had  necessarily  weighed  in  his  own  mind  the  comparative 
merits  of  various  modes  of  presenting  the  gospel,  and  he  well  knew  that  a  new 
philosophy  clotlied  in  elegant  language  was  likely  to  secure  a  number  of  disciples. 
And  it  was  quite  in  Paul's  power  to  present  the  gospel  ps  a  philosophy ;  but  he 
"  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  them  save  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  cruci- 
fied." 2.  Paul  then  deliberately  trusted  to  the  bare  statement  of  facts  and  not  to 
any  theory  about  these  facts.  In  preaching  to  audiences  with  whom  the  facts  are 
familiar,  it  is  perfectly  justifiable  to  draw  inferences  from  them  and  to  theorise 
about  them.  Paul  himself  spoke  "  wisdom  among  them  that  were  perfect."  But 
what  is  to  be  noted  is  that  for  doing  the  work  proper  to  the  gospel,  for  making  men 
Christians,  it  is  not  theory  or  explanation,  but  fact,  that  is  eftective.  It  is  the  pre- 
sentation of  Christ  as  He  is  presented  in  the  Gospels  which  stands  in  tne  first  rank 
of  efficiency  as  a  means  of  evangelising  the  world.  The  actor  does  not  instruct  his 
audience  how  they  should  be  affected  by  the  play ;  he  so  presents  the  scene  that 
they  instinctively  smile  or  find  their  eyes  till.  Those  onlookers  at  the  crucifixion 
who  beat  their  breasts  were  not  told  that  they  should  feel  compunction  ;  it  was 
enough  that  they  saw  the  Crucified.  So  it  is  always  ;  it  is  the  direct  vision  of  the 
Cross,  and  not  anything  which  is  said  about  it,  which  is  most  effective  in  producing 
penitence  and  faith.  3.  The  very  fact  that  it  was  a  Person,  not  a  system  of  philo- 
sophy, that  Paul  proclaimed  was  sufficient  proof  tliat  he  was  not  anxious  to  bscome 
the  founder  of  a  school  or  the  head  of  a  paity.  And  that  which  permanently  dis- 
tinguishes Christianity  from  all  philosophies  is  that  it  presents  to  men,  not  a 
system  of  truth  to  be  understood,  but  a  Person  to  be  relied  upon.  Christianity  is 
for  all  men  and  not  for  the  select,  highly  educated  few;  and  it  depends  therefore 
not  on  exceptional  ability  to  see  truth,  but  on  the  universal  human  emotions  of  love 
and  trust.  II.  Why  he  had  adopted  this  style.  1.  Because  God  had  changed 
His  method  (ver.  21).  (1)  Even  the  wisest  of  the  Greeks  had  attained  only  to 
inadequate  and  indefinite  views  of  God.  To  pass  even  from  Plato  to  the  Gospel  of 
John  is  to  pass  from  darkness  to  light.  Plato  philosophises,  and  a  few  souls  seem  for 
a  moment  to  see  things  njore  clearly  ;  Peter  preaches,  and  three  thousand  souls  spring 
to  life.  (2)  That  which,  in  point  of  fact,  has  made  God  known  is  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
No  doubt  it  must  have  seemed  mere  lunacy  to  summon  the  seeker  after  God  away 
from  the  high  speculations  of  Plato  to  a  human  form  gibbeted  on  a  malefactor's  cross. 
None  knew  better  than  Paul  the  infamy  attaching  to  that  cursed  death,  but  he  knew 
also  its  power  (vers.  22-24).  As  proof  that  God  was  in  their  midst  the  Jews  required 
a  demonstration  of  physical  power.  Even  at  the  last  it  would  have  satisfied  them 
had  Christ  stepped  down  from  the  Cross.  The  Cross  seemed  to  them  a  confession  of 
weakness,  and  was  a  stumbling-block  they  could  not  get  over.  And  yet  in  it  was  the 
whole  power  of  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  For  the  power  of  God  that  is 
required  to  ('raw  men  to  Himself  is  not  power  to  alter  the  course  of  rivers  or 
change  the  site  of  mountains,  but  power  to  sympathise,  to  sacrifice  self,  to  give  all 
for  the  needs  of  His  creatures.  It  is  this  love  of  God  that  overpowers  men  and 
makes  it  impossible  for  them  to  resist  Him.  2.  Paul  appeals  to  the  elements  of 
which  the  Church  was  actually  composed.  (1)  It  is  plain,  he  says,  that  it  is  not  by 
anything  generally  esteemed  among  men  that  you  hold  your  place  in  the  Church 
yvev.  26).  It  is  not  men  who  by  their  wisdom  find  out  God  and  by  their  nobility  of 
character  commend  themselves  to  Him  ;  but  it  is  God  who  calls  men,  and  the  very 
absence  of  wisdom  and  possessions  makes  men  readier  to  listen  to  His  call  (vers. 
27-29).  It  is  all  God's  doing  now ;  it  is  "  of  Him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus."  Human 
wisdom  had  its  opportunity  and  aceompli.-hed  little  ;  God  now  by  the  foolishness  of 
the  Cross  lifts  the  despised,  etc.,  to  a  far  higher  position  than  the  wise  and  noblo 
can  attain  by  their  might  and  their  wisdom.  (2)  Paul  thus  justifies  this  method 
by  its  results.  The  Cross  may  seem  a  most  unlikely  weaj)on  with  which  to 
accomplish  great  things,  but  it  is  God  who  uses  it,  and  that  makes  the  difference. 
Hence  the  emphasis  throughout  this  passage  on  the  agency  of  God.  But  for  this 
reason  also  all  ground  of  boasting  is  removed  from  those  who  are  within  the  Chris- 
tian Church.  (3)  In  Paul's  day  this  argument  from  the  general  poverty  and 
insignificance  of  the  members  of  the  Christian  Church  was  readily  drawn.  Things 
are  changed  now  ;  and  the  Church  is  filled  with  the  wise,  the  powerful,  the  noble. 
But  Paul's  main  proposition  remains  :  whoever  is  in  Christ  Jesus  is  so,  not  through 


cnAP.  I.]  1.   CORINTHIANS.  39 

anj'  wisdom  or  power  of  his  own,  but  ben'  se  God  has  chosen  and  called  him. 
And  the  practical  result  remains.      J-t   the  Ohristian,  while   he  rejoices  in  his 
position,  be  humble.     3.  Paul  avers  that  had  he  used  "  enticing  words  of  man's 
wisdom  "  the  hearers  might  have   been   unduly  influenced   by  the  mere  guise  in 
which  the  gospel  was  presented  and  too  little  influenced  by  the  essence  of  it.     He 
feared  to  adorn  the  simple  tale  lest  the  attention  of  his  audience  might  be  diverted 
from  the  substance  of  his  message.     He  was  resolved  that  their  faith  should  not 
stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God.     Here  again   things  have 
changed  since  Paul's  day.    The  assailants  of  Christianity  have  put  it  on  its  defence, 
and  its  apologists  have  been  compelled  to  show  that  it  is  in  harmony  with  the 
soundest  philosophy.     It  was  inevitable  that  this  should  be  done;  but  Paul  con- 
sidered that  the  onlygsound  and  tiustworthy  failh  was  produced  by  direct  personal 
contact  with  the  Cross.     And  this  remains  lor  ever  true.     (M.  Do<h,  D.D.)         The 
true  minister  of  Clirist : — I.  His  commission.     II.  His  paramodnt  wouk.     1.  Not  to 
baptize,  much  less  busy  himself  with  a  thousand  other  things.     2.  But  to  preach 
the  gospel.     III.  His  PKESCRinEO  methods.     1.   Not  with  wisdom  of  words.     2.  But 
simply,  plainly,  pointedly.     IV.  His  motive.     1.  That  nothing  might  hinder.     2, 
But  everything  promote  the  effect  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.     {J.  Lytli,  D.D.)         The 
aim  of  the  niinistry  : — In  a  village  church  in  one  of  the  Tyrolese  valleys,  we  saw 
upon  the  pulpit  an  outstretched  arm,  carved  in  wood,  the  hand  of  which  held  forth 
a  cross.     We  noted  the  emblem  as  full  of  instruction  as  to  what  all  true  ministry 
should  be,  and  must  be — a  holding  forth  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  to  the  multitude  as 
the  only  trust  of  sinners.     Jesus  Christ  must  be  set  forth  evidently  cruoitied  among 
them.     Lord,  make  this  the  aim  and  habit  of  all  our  ministers.     (C.  II.  .S'^)(/)v/eoH.) 
Lest  the  Cross  of  Christ  should  be  made  of  none  effect. — The  Cross  of  Chriat  of 
none  eject : — I.  "  The  Choss  of  Ciikist  "  is  an  ixsTituMEXT  intended  and  .\dapted 
TO  PRODUCE  A  CERTAIN  "  Ki  FECT."     So  far  as  mau  had  to  do  with  it  it  was  intended 
to  abase  a  prophet  whom  many  honoured,  to  kill  as  a  malefactor  a  Man  whose  great 
fault  was  that  He  had  no  fault  at  all.     So  far  as  God  had  to  do  with  it,  it  was 
intended  to  be  a  Divine  force.     The  Cross  of  Cbrist  is  to  be  a  Divine  forc'e  with 
an  "effect"  retrospective,  aspective,  and  prospective.     1.  The  Cross  fulfilled  the 
first  promise ;  it  was  the  "  good  thing  "  of  which  the  sacrifices  were  a  shadow ;  it 
was  the  event  toward  which  the  course  of  all  events  had  tended.     2.  The  Cross  cast 
a  long,  deep  shadow   upon   the   Holy  Land ;  its  peculiar  people ;  its  priesthood, 
temple,  and  ritual ;  a  night-of-death  shadow  to  cover  a  time  of  change  in  which  old 
things  would  pass  away  and  all  things  become  new.     3.  Tiie  Cross  shed  light  into 
the  darkness  of  the  world,  and  indicated  those  stirrings  of  the  Divine  mercy  which 
terminated  in  the  proclamation  of  salvation  to  the  world.     As  matter  of  history, 
since  the  Cross  of  Christ  has  begun  to  take  effect,  it  has  caused  religious  systems 
hoary  with  age,  and  rooted  by  ten  thousand  fibres  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  to  be 
laid  aside  as  worn-out  garments.     It  has  spread  civilisation  over  many  nations  ;  it 
has  been  a  key  to  unlock  the  treasures  of  all  useful  knowledge ;  it  has  elevated  art, 
widened  commerce,  removed  the  fetters  from  the  slave ;  it  has  founded  hospitals 
and  schools,  checked  the  harsh   government   of   rulers,  quelled   the   anarchy  of 
subjects,  restored  woman  to  her  primitive  iDOsition,  imparted  peace  and  joy  to  the 
home,  exalted  nations,  and  is  now  both  the  light  and  leaven  of  the  world.     The 
Cross  of  Christ  alone  saves.     II.  Paul  speaks  of  the  Cross  being  "  made  of  none 
EFFECT."     1.  To  make  the  sun  of  none  effect  would  send  our  world  back  to  chaos, 
but  this  ruin  would  be— 2.  Small  compared  with  negativing  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
And  Paul  tells  us  that  if  he  had  exhibited  the  Cross  with  "  wisdom  of  words,"  it 
would  have  been  powerless  in  his  hands.     He  cannot  mean  intelligible  and  accept- 
able words  ;  for  without  such  the  Cross  could  not  be  manifested  at  all.    By  "  wisdom 
of  words  "  is  meant  the  artifices  of  rhetoric,  &c.     If  the  Cross  were  a  jewel  to  be 
hoarded  and  hid  I  would  make  its  bed  in  wool ;  but  as  it  is  a  gem  to  be  used  let  me 
see  it  as  it  is.     If  the  Cross  were  an  inferior  gem  I  might  add  to  its  worth  and 
beauty  by  the  setting ;  but  as  its  value  is  beyond  price,  let  its  surroundings  be  as 
simple  as  possible.   The  question  is  not,  however,  one  of  taste,  but  of  utility.    Shall 
we  mingle  with  our  daily  bread  that  which  will  deprive  us  of  its  nutritive  eftVct? 
8.  The  Cross  is  made  of  none  effect  when — (1)  It  is  made  identical  with  the  crucifix, 
as  though  the  Cross  were  nothing  more  than  His  crucifixion.     The  crucifix  to  the 
vulgar  eye  puts  exclusively  forward  the  bodily  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  its  effect  is  to 
bring  rs  into  sympathy  with  them.     This  is  the  eff"ect  of  painting,  poetry,  and  music, 
when  employed  upon  the  same  subject.     But  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  not  an  example 
of  suffering  merely,  but  the  "  Lamb  of  God  taking  away  the  sins  of  the  world."     2. 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i-. 

False  doctrine  and  speculation  concerning  it  are  taught.  The  effect  of  the  Atone- 
ment is  in  itself,  not  in  its  philosophy.  And  if  the  attempt  at  explanation  fail, 
and  the  philosophy  he  false,  I  exhibit  a  cross  framed  by  my  own  vain  imagination. 
Then,  what  have  I  done  ?  I  have  led  men  from  living  waters  to  the  appearance  of 
a  fountain  in  shining  sand.  (3)  It  is  exhibited  without  a  personnl  recognition  of  its 
claims.  That  which  you  say  about  it  will  not  be  believed  unless  it  appears  important 
and  true,  and  it  cannot  appear  real  and  momentous  except  as  exhibited  in  faith. 
Faith  begets  faith.  (4)  Its  requirements  are  multiplied  and  complicated.  It  saith, 
"  Come  to  Me  "' ;  "  Lo  k  to  Me  "  ;  "  Believe  in  Me."  If  we  surround  it  with  a  long 
and  difficult  creed  ;  if  we  clothe  it  with  an  elaborate  ritual ;  if  we  plant  it  in  the 
shrine  of  a  particular  ecclesiastical  polity,  and  require  men  to  come  to  it,  by  these 
we  make  it  of  none  effect.  (5)  There  is  lack  of  faith  in  its  power.  It  is  impotent 
in  the  hand  of  an  unbeliever.  Our  faith  does  not  affect  the  value  and  efficacy  of 
the  Cross  in  the  eye  of  God  ;  but  it  does  in  the  eye  of  man.  (6)  When  it  is  used 
for  objects  foreign  to  itself.  Ecclesiastics  have  used  it  to  s  itisfy  their  ungodly 
ambition  ;  political  rulers  as  an  engine  of  government ;  private  individuals  as  a 
spy  in  a  camp  uses  the  password,  and  prejudicfs  has  been  raised  against  it.  Con- 
clusioa  :  1.  What  is  the  effect  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  upon  yourselves  ?  (1)  Child 
of  Christian  parents,  you  have  been  directed  to  it  ever  since  your  eyes  opened  to 
see.  Other  things  have  had  effect.  The  scenes  of  your  early  life  ;  the  books 
you  have  read  ;  the  companions  with  whom  you  associated,  &c.  And  what  has 
been  the  effect  of  the  Cross  of  Christ?  It  has  repelled  you  or  attracted  you. 
Repelled  you!  The  magnet  of  the  eternal  mercy  repelled  you!  (2)  Pupil  of  a 
Christian  school!  (3)  Hearer  of  Christian  preaching  and  possessor  of  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, unless  you  are  saved  by  it  you  will  be  damned  by  it.  Christian  brethren,  what 
is  its  daily  effect  upon  your  hearts  and  lives  ?  Are  you  crucified  with  Christ  ?  Is 
its  effect  to  captivate  your  heart;  to  command  your  energies  ;  to  sanctify  your  life? 
2.  What  is  the  effect  of  the  Cross  in  your  hands  ?  We  more  than  fear  that  Chris- 
tians and  Churches  of  Christ  have  done  much  to  make  the  Cross  of  Christ  of  none 
effect.  (S.  Martin.)  T lie  icorlcfs  greatest  blessing  and  its  greatest  evil : — I.  The 
GREATEST  BLESSING  IN  THE  WORLD — "the  Cross  of  Christ."  By  "  the  Cross  of  Christ" 
the  apostle  did  not  mean  of  course  the  timber  on  which  Christ  was  crucified,  or  any 
imitation  of  that  in  wood,  &c.  He  uses  the  word  as  a  symbol,  as  we  use  the  words 
Crown,  Court,  Bench,  d'c.  He  meant  the  eternal  principles  of  which  the  Cross  of 
Christ  was  at  once  the  effect,  the  evidence,  and  the  expression — i.e.,  all  that  we  mean 
by  the  gospel.  And  this  is  the  greatest  blessing  in  the  world  to-day.  Look  at  it — 
1.  As  a  revealer.  All  true  theological  doctrine  and  ethical  science  come  to  us 
through  the  Cross.  It  is  the  moral  light  of  the  world.  2.  As  an  educator.  The 
Cross  is  to  the  human  soul  what  the  vernal  sunbeam  is  to  the  seed ;  it  i^enetrates, 
warms,  quickens,  and  brings  all  its  latent  powers  out  to  perfection.  3.  As  a 
deliverer.  The  Cross  bears  a  pen  to  cancel  the  sentence,  a  balm  to  heal  the  wound, 
a  weapon  to  break  the  fettering  chain.  Such,  and  infinitely  more,  is  the  Cross. 
What  would  human  life  be  without  it?  A  voyage  without  a  compass,  chart,  or 
star.  11.  The  GREATEST  EVIL  IN  THE  WORLD.  Making  this  Cross  of  "none  effect," 
I.e.,  so  far  as  its  grand  mission  is  concerned.  Sooje  effect  it  must  have;  it  will 
deepen  the  damnation  where  it  does  not  save.  "  We  are  unto  God  a  sweet  savour," 
&e.  This  tremendous  evil  is — 1.  Painfully  manifest.  Intellectually,  socially,  politi- 
cally, it  has  confni-sedly  done  wonders  for  mankind  ;  but  morally,  how  little !  How 
little  genuine  holiness,  disinterested  pliibmthropy,  self-sacrificing  devotion  to  truth 
and  God,  Christliness  of  life !  2.  Easily  explained.  The  apostle  indicates  one  way, 
viz.,  by  "wisdom  of  words,"  i.e.,  gorgeous  rhetoric.  The  Church  has  done  it  by — 
(1)  Its  theologies.  In  its  name  it  has  proponnded  dogmas  that  have  clashed  with 
reason  and  outraged  conscience.  (2)  Its  poiity.  It  has  sanctioned  wars,  established 
hierarchies,  which  have  fattened  on  the  ignorance  and  poverty  of  the  people.  (3) 
Its  spirit.  The  spirit  of  the  Cross  is  self-sacrificing  love,  the  spirit  of  the  Church 
has  been  to  a  great  extent  that  of  selfishness,  greed,  ambition,  and  oppression. 
Malrepicsentation  of  Christ  by  the  Church  is  the  instrument  that  has  made  the 
Cross  of  "  none  effect."  3.  Terribly  criminal.  It  is  wonderful  that  man  has  the  power 
thus  to  pervert  Divine  institutions  and  blessings  ;  but  such  power  he  has.  He  forges 
metals  into  weapons  for  murder,  he  turns  breadcorn  into  liquids  to  damn  the  reason 
and  the  souls  of  men.  A  greater  crime  you  cannot  conceive.  Were  you  to  turn 
all  biead  into  poison,  makf-  the  flowing  rivers  pestiferous,  quench  the  light  of  the 
sun,  nirtntle  the  stars  in  sackcloth,  you  would  not  penetrate  an  evil  half  so  enormous 
as  that  of  making  the  Cross  of  Christ  of  "  none  effect."     Conclusion :  1.  What  is 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  41 

the  spiritual  influence  of  the  Cross  on  us?     Has  it  crucified  unto  us  the  world  ?     2. 

What  are  we  doing  with  the  Cross  ?     Are  we  abusing  it  or  rightly  employing  it  ? 

(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         The   Cross  neutralised  by  theories  about  it  : — The  force   of 

KEVitg  (cf.  chap.  xv.  14;  Kom.  iv.   14)  may  be  couveyeil  by  the  words  "empty  of 

content,  unreal,  not  having  objective  existence,  consisting  only  of  opinions,  senti-  -c         ^/^ 

ment  speculation."     The  Cross  of  Christ  is  a  real  cause  in  the  moral  order  of  ''"'^^'^*^ 

things.     To  substitute  a  system  of  notions,  however  true  and  ennobling,  for  the  fact  -^r" 

of  Cbrist's  death,  is  like  confounding  the  theory  of  gravitation  with  gravitation  itself. 

{Principal  Edwards.)         llie  jyreacliing  ivhich  the  apostle  condemns  as  ineffective  : — 

I.  Scholastic  rREAcniNO,  which — 1.  Aims  only  at  the  intellect,  not  at  the  heart.    2. 

Gives  no  satisfaction  on  the  main  point — religion.     3.  Deals  with  philosojihical 

speculations  which  injure  rather  than  edify.    II.  Rhetorical  preaching.    1.  Which 

proceeds  not  from  a  zeal  for  the  truth,  but  from  a  desire  to  please.     2.  This 

unworthy  mode  of  dealing  with  Divine  truth  robs  the  Cross  of  its  effect,  because  it 

diverts  the  attention  from  the  truth  to  the  speaker  and  distracts  the  heart — because 

it  excites  a  craving  for  merely  intellectual  gratification — because   the  impression 

produced  is  referred  to  the  ability  of  the  preacher  and  not  to  the  truth  itself. 

\j.  Lijth,  D.D. ) 

Ver.  18.  For  the  preachins  of  the  Cross  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness ;  but 
unto  us  which  are  saved  it  is  the  power  of  God. — The  preadiing  of  the  Cross  : — I. 
Its  character.  1.  Simple  in  its  facts.  2.  Humiliating  in  its  doctrines.  3. 
Startling  in  its  announcements.  II.  The  resdlt.  1.  Foolishness  to  them  that 
perish.     2.  The  power  of  God  unto  them  that  are  saved.     (-/.  Lijth,  D.D.)  The 

2oord  of  the  Cross  : — In  ver.  17  Paul  had  renounced  the  "wisdom  of  words."  It  is 
clear,  therefore,  that  there  is  an  eloquence  which  would  deprive  the  gospel  of  its 
due  effect.  This  "wisdom  of  words"— 1.  Veils  the  truth  wiiich  ought  to  be  set 
forth  in  the  clearest  possible  manner.  2.  Explains  the  gospel  away.  It  is  possible 
to  refine  a  doctrine  till  the  very  soul  of  it  is  gone.  Under  pretence  of  winning  the 
cultured  intellects  of  the  age,  it  has  gradually  landed  us  in  a  denial  of  those  first 
priucii^les  for  which  the  martyrs  died.  3.  Is  frequently  used  with  the  intent  of  making 
the  gospel  appear  more  beautiful.  They  would  paint  the  rose  and  enamel  the  lily, 
add  whiteness  to  the  snow  and  brightness  to  the  sun.  With  their  wretched  candles 
they  would  help  us  to  see  the  stars.  To  adorn  the  Cross  is  to  dishonour  it.  One 
of  the  old  masters  found  that  certain  vases  which  he  had  depicted  upon  the  sacra- 
mental table  attracted  more  notice  than  the  Lord  Himself,  and  therefore  he  struck 
them  out  at  once :  let  us  do  the  same  whenever  anything  of  ours  withdraws  the 
mind  from  Jesus.  4.  Is  employed  to  augment  the  power  of  the  gospel.  Paul  says 
it  makes  it  of  none  effect  (see  chap.  ii..  4,  5).  Having  cleared  our  way  of  the  wisdom 
of  words,  we  now  come  to  the  word  of  wisdom.  I.  "The  word  of  the  Cross" 
(R.  v.).  This  is  exactly  what  the  gospel  is.  From  which  I  gather  that  the 
Cross — 1.  Has  one  uniform  teaching.  There  are  not  two  gospels  any  more  than 
there  are  two  Gods :  there  are  not  two  atonements  any  more  than  there  are  two 
Saviours  (chap.  iii.  11;  Gal.  i.  8,  9).  2.  Is  one  word  in  contradistinction  from 
many  other  words  which  are  constantly  being  uttered.  Christ's  voice  from  the 
Cross  is,  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved  "  ;  but  another  voice  cries  aloud,  "  This 
do  and  thou  shalt  live."  The  doctrine  of  salvation  by  works,  or  feelings,  is  not  the 
word  of  the  Cross.  Much  less  is  the  word  of  ceremonialism  and  paestcraft.  3. 
Should  be  allowed  to  speak  for  itself.  It  cries,  let  us  hear  this  word  of  the 
Cross,  for  in  effect  my  text  says,  "Let  the  Cross  speak  for  itself."  (1)  God 
must  be  just.  The  Cross  thunders  more  terribly  than  Suaai  against  sin.  If  God 
smites  the  perfect  One  who  bears  our  sin,  how  will  He  smite  the  guilty  one  who 
rejects  His  love?  (2)  God  loves  men,  and  deliglns  in  mercy.  God  commendeth 
His  love  to  us,  &c.  (3)  The  one  sacrifice  is  accepted  and  the  atonement  is  com- 
plete. "  God  was  in  Christ,"  &c.  (4)  Come  and  welcome  !  "  Whosoever  will," 
&c.  II.  The  word  of  its  despisers.  1.  They  call  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement 
"  foolishness."  (1)  "  Because,"  say  they,  "  see  how  the  common  people  take  it  up. 
Why,  the  very  children  are  able  to  believe  it."  But  are  the  well-known  facts  of 
nature  foolishness  because  they  are  open  to  all?  Is  it  quite  certain  that  all  the 
wisdom  in  the  world  dwells  with  the  superfine  gentlemen  who  sneer  at  everything 
and  take  in  a  Review?  I  wish  that  their  culture  had  taught  them  modesty.  (2) 
Because  this  doctrine  of  the  Cross  is  not  the  offspring  of  reason,  but  the  gift  of 
revelation.  All  the  thinkers  of  the  ages  continued  to  think,  but  they  never  invented 
a  plan  of  salvation.    As  a  thought  it  originated  with  the  Infinite  Mind,  and  could 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

have  originated  nowhere  else.  It  is  God  telhng  men  something  which  they  could  not 
else  have  known,  and  this  suits  not  the  profound  thinkers,  who  must  needs  excogi- 
tate everything.  (3)  Because  anytliing  which  proves  a  man  to  be  a  fool  will  at  once 
strike  men  as  bein^  very  foolish.  Our  conscience  is  dull,  and  therefore  we  retaliate 
upon  those  who  tell  us  unpleasant  truth.  (4)  Because  it  treats  on  subjects  for 
which  we  have  no  care.  If  I  were  able  to  show  how  to  make  unlimited  profit,  all 
the  world  would  listen  ;  but  when  the  sermon  is  only  about  the  Word  of  God,  and 
eternity,  and  the  soul,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus — most  people  turn  on  their  heel. 
They  call  the  gospel  foolishness  because  they  look  after  the  main  chance,  and  care 
more  for  the  body  than  for  the  soul.  (5)  Because  they  regard  all  the  truths  with 
which  it  deals  as  insignificant  trifles.  2.  These  gentlemen — (1)  Are  not  qualified 
to  form  a  judgment  upon  the  subject.  A  blind  man  is  no  judge  of  colours,  a  deaf 
man  of  sound,  and  a  man  who  has  never  been  quickened  into  spiritual  life  of  spii-itual 
things.  (2)  Are  proofs  of  their  own  folly  and  of  the  sad  results  of  unbelief.  Paul 
says  that  such  men  are  perishing.  What  a  calamity  !  Men  who  are  not  living  to 
God  arfe  missing  the  end  of  their  being,  and  like  deserted  houses  are  falling  into 
ruin.  Yonder  is  a  tree  :  around  its  trunk  the  ivy  has  twisted  itself,  grasping  it  like 
a  huge  python,  and  crushing  it  in  its  folds.  Multitudes  have  about  them  sins  and 
errors  that  are  eating  out  their  life — they  are  perishing.  Those  that  believe  not 
in  Jesus  are  drifting  towards  an  immortahty  of  misery  ;  and  yet  while  they  perish, 
they  condemn  the  means  of  rescue.  Fancy  drowning  mariners  mocking  at  the  life- 
boat !  Imagine  a  diseased  man  ridiculing  the  only  remedy  !  III.  The  word  of 
THOSE  WHO  BELIEVE.  What  do  they  say  of  the  Cross  ?  They  call  it  power,  the  power 
of  God.  1.  The  phenomenon  of  conversion  is  a  fact.  Men  and  women  are  totally 
changed,  and  the  whole  manner  of  their  life  is  altered.  The  word  of  the  Cross  has 
delivered  us  from — (1)  The  love  of  sin  :  no  sin  is  now  our  master.  We  fall  into  sin, 
but  we  mourn  over  it,  and  hate  the  sin,  and  hate  ourselves  for  committing  it.  (2) 
From  the  dread  which  once  held  us  in  bondage,  and  made  us  tremble  before  our 
Father  and  our  Friend.  But  now  we  love  Him  and  delight  in  Him.  (3)  From  the 
power  of  Satan.  (4)  From  self  and  from  the  world,  and  from  all  things  that  would 
enthral  us.  We  are  saved.  W^e  feel  that  heaven  is  boin  within  us — born  by  the 
word  of  the  Cross  through  the  Spirit.  2.  The  power  with  which  God  created  and 
sustains  the  world  is  no  greater  than  the  power  with  which  He  made  us  new  men 
in  Christ,  and  by  which  He  sustains  His  people  under  trial ;  and  even  the  raising  of 
the  dead  will  be  no  greater  display  of  it  than  the  raising  of  dead  souls  out  of  their 
spiritual  graves.  Conclusion  :  Believe  in  the  power  of  tlie  Cross  for  the  conversion 
of  those  around  you.  Do  not  say  of  any  man  that  he  cannot  be  saved.  The  blood 
of  Jesus  is  omnipotent.     (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  Two  clauses  of  fjonpel  hearers  : — I. 

The  one  is  pekishing,  the  other  is  being  saVed.  The  perishing  and  the  saving 
are  gradual.  1.  There  is  a  class  gi'adually  losing  sensibility — contracting  fresh 
guilt,  (fee.  They  are  not  damned  at  once.  2.  There  is  a  class  gradually  being 
saved.  Salvation  in  its  fullest  extent  is  not  an  instantaneous  thing,  as  some 
suppose.  II.  To  the  one  class  the  gospel  is  foolishness,  to  the  other  the 
POWER  op  God.  1.  It  is  foolishness  to  them  that  are  perishing,  because  it  has  no 
meaning,  no  reality.  2.  It  is  a  Divine  power  to  them  that  are  being  saved. 
Enlightening,  renovating,  purifying,  ennobling.  The  power  of  God  stands  in  con- 
trast with  mere  human  philosophy  and  eloquence.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
dispensation  of  the  pospel  and  its  effects  : — I.  Its  thejie — the  Cross.  II.  Its  dis- 
pensation— by  preaching.  III.  Its  reception — 1.  To  them  that  believe  not,  both 
the  subject  and  the  means  are  foolishness,  because  they  humble  human  pride, 
discountenance  merit,  oppose  the  wisdom  of  this  world.  2.  To  them  that  believe 
it  is  the  power  of  God  in  the  conscience,  the  heart,  the  life.  IV.  The  issue — 
those  perish — these  are  saved.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  gospel  the  power  of  God : — 
I.  By  the  ' '  preaching  of  the  Cross  "  we  understand  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
There  are  two  circumstances  which  may  have  led  to  the  use  of  this  name.  1.  The 
apostle  did  not  so  preach  the  gospel  as  to  conceal  the  Cross.  This  has  sometimes 
been  done.  The  Roman  Catholic  missionaries  that  went  out  to  the  East  held  back 
the  fact  that  the  great  Saviour  had  died  in  ignominy  upon  the  Cross,  and  told  their 
hearers  only  of  those  facts  concerning  Him  which  had  a  glorious  appearance,  such 
as  His  resurrection  and  ascension.  And  the  first  disciples  may  have  sympathised 
in  such  a  feeling.  The  Cross  tended  to  attach  dishonour  to  Christ  and  to  His 
gospel.  But  the  apostles  did  not  do  so ;  they  told  the  whole  story.  2.  The  cruci- 
fixion supplied,  and  was  the  whole  origin  of,  the  great  to^jics  which  their  preaching 
of  the  gosi^el  contained.     It  would  have  been  nothing  for  Paul  to  have  preached  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTIIIAXS.  43 

resurrection,  etc.,  if  he  had  not  preached  His  death.  These  facts  have  no  evan- 
gelical glory  i)r  meaning  if  you  separate  them  from  the  Cross.  Take  away  the  Cross, 
and  you  take  away  the  very  life  and  soul  of  the  gospel  itself.  II.  Tins  gospel  is 
PERVEKTEi).  1.  By  those  who  say  that  it  derives  its  power  not  so  much  from  the 
death  of  Christ,  but  mainly  from  His  life.  Now  I  do  not  mean  to  depreciate  the  life 
of  Christ,  which  was  superlatively  grand  and  striking  in  all  respects.  But  the  pre- 
senting to  the  world  of  a  life  of  virtue  will  not  in  any  degree  be  influential  in  its 
regeneration,  and  as  for  presenting  an  aspect  of  the  benignity  of  God  this  is  infinitely* 
exceeded  in  the  death  of  Christ.  What  Paul  preached  was  not  Christ's  life,  but 
Christ's  death.  2.  By  those  who  say  that  the  death  of  Christ  has  an  influence,  but 
that  it  is  not  an  atonement.  What  is  it  then  ?  It  is  a  "  way  of  speaking  "  I  To  this 
I  would  say^(l)  If  God  tells  us  about  an  atonement,  and  there  really  is  none,  that 
is  not  truth.  (2)  Unless  the  Atonement  be  a  fact  it  cannot  be  a  power.  III. 
The  GosptL  IS  a  tower  in  that  it  presents  a  set  of  topics  and  considerations 
INTENDED  TO  WORK  UPON  men's  HEARTS  AND  CONSCIENCES.  If  the  atuuing  death  of 
Christ  he  a  fact — 1.  What  a  fact  must  sin  itself  be  !  He  is  (iod  making  a  vast  pro- 
y  vision  by  the  humiliating  death  of  His  own  Sou  for  the  expiation  of  the  sin  of  the 
wot  Id.  What  a  proof  it  is  of  the  lost  state  of  man  !  2.  What  a  fact  is  God's 
justice  !  The  sinner  says,  "  Well,  I  have  sinned,  but  God  is  merciful."  Well,  now, 
,  come  again  with  me  to  the  Cross.  See  a  dying  Saviour  ;  there  is  God's  vengeance 
against  man's  representative.  3.  How  great  the  love  of  God  to  a  rebellious  world. 
See  to  what  an  expense  He  has  gone  to  save  you.  4.  What  a  fact  is  the  foundation 
'of  a  sinner's  hope.  None  need  despair  ;  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  be  saved. 
5.  What  a  fact  is  a  believer's  obligation  to  dcvotedness  and  love.  If  we  have  been 
ibought  at  such  a  price,  we  are  no  more  our  own,  but  our  Purchaser's.  C.  What 
a  fact  is  the  guarantee  of  a  believer's  faith  !  "  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son," 
ttc.  Conclusion  :  1.  How  wonderful  it  is  that  God  should  be  pleased  thus  to  deal 
With  men  !  2.  What  a  thought  it  is  for  ungodly  men  that  there  is  a  Divine  power 
in  the  yospel,  and  that  in  it  God  puts  forth  all  His  powers  of  persuasion.  3.  And 
it  is  for  us  to  remember  that  the  gospel  is  a  power  for  all  the  exigencies  of  the 
Christian    life.       {■/.    //.   Ilinton,  31. A.)  Sah-ation  and  destruction  coutiiniuus 

proceKses : — A  slight  variation  of  rendering,  which  will  be  found  in  the  Eevised 
Version,  brings  out  the  true  meaning  of  these  words.  Instead  of  reading 
"  them  that  perish "  and  "  us  which  are  saved,"  we  ought  to  read  "  them 
that  are  perishing,"  and  "  us  which  are  being  saved."  Tuat  is  to  say,  the 
apostle  represents  the  two  contrasted  conditions,  not  so  much  as  fixed  states, 
either  present  or  future,  but  rather  as  pi'ocesses  which  are  going  on,  and  are 
manifestly,  in  the  present,  incomplete.  That  opens  some  very  solemn  and  practical 
consic(erations.  Then  I  may  further  note  that  this  antithesis  includes  the  whole 
of  the  persons  to  whom  the  gospel  is  preached.  In  one  or  other  of  these  two  classes 
they  all  stand.  Further,  we  have  to  observe  that  the  consideration  which  determines 
the  class  to  which  men  belong  is  the  attitude  which  they  respectively  take  to  the 
preaching  of  the  Cross.  I.  I  desire,  first,  to  look  at  the  two  contrasted  conditions, 
"perishing  "  and  "  being  saved."  W'e  shall  best  understand  the  force  of  the  darker 
of  tbese  two  terms  if  we  first  ask  what  is  the  force  of  the  brighter  and  more  radiant. 
If  we  understand  what  the  apostle  means  by  "  saving  "  and  "  salvation,"  we  shall 
understand,  also,  what  he  means  by  "perishing."  If,  then,  we  turn  for  a  moment 
to  Scripture  analogy  and  teaching,  we  find  that  well-worn  word  "  salvation  "  starts 
from  a  double  metaphorical  meaning.  It  is  used  for  both  being  healed  or  being 
made  safe.  In  the  one  sense  it  is  often  employed  in  the  gospel  narratives  of  our 
Lord's  miracles.  It  involves  the  metaphor  of  a  sick  man  and  his  cure;  in  the 
other  it  involves  the  metaphor  of  a  man  in  j^nril  and  his  deliverance  and  security. 
The  sickness  of  soul  and  the  perils  that  threaten  life  tiow  from  the  central  fact  of 
sin.  And  salvation  consists,  negatively,  in  the  sweeping  away  of  all  these,  whether 
the  sin  itself,  or  the  fatal  facility  with  which  we  yield  to  it,  or  the  desolation  and 
perversion  which  it  brings  into  all  the  faculties  and  susceptibilities  or  the  perversion 
of  relation  to  God,  and  the  consequent  evils,  here  and  hereafter,  which  throng 
aroui  d  the  evil-doer.  The  sick  man  is  healed,  and  the  man  in  peril  is  set  in  safety. 
But,  besides  that,  there  is  a  great  deal  more.  The  cure  is  incomplete  till  the  full 
tide  of  health  follows  convalescence.  When  God  saves  He  does  not  only  bar  up 
the  iron  gate  through  which  the  hosts  of  evil  rush  out  upon  the  defenceless  soul, 
but  He  flings  wide  the  golden  gate  through  which  the  glad  troops  of  blessings  and 
of  graces  flock  around  the  delivered  spirit,  and  enrich  it  with  all  joys  and  with  all 
beauties.     So  the  positive  side  of  salvation  is  the  investiture  of  the  saved  man  with 


4A  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

throbbing  health  through  all  his  veins,  and  the  strength  that  comes  from  a  Divine 
life.  It  is  the  bestowal  upon  the  delivered  man  of  everything  that  he  needs  for 
blessedness  and  for  duty.  This,  then,  being  the  one  side,  what  about  the  other? 
If  salvation  be  the  cure  of  the  sickness,  perishing  is  the  fatal  end  of  the  unchecked 
disease.  If  salvation  be  the  deliveiance  from  the  outstretched  claws  of  the  harpy 
evils  that  crowd  about  the  trembling  soul,  then  perishing  is  the  fixing  of  their 
poisoned  talons  into  their  prey,  and  their  rending  of  it  into  fragments.  II.  Now 
note,  secondly,  the  pkogressiveness  of  both  members  of  the  alternative.  All 
states  of  heart  or  mind  tend  to  increase,  by  the  very  fact  of  continuance.  Look, 
then,  at  this  thought  of  the  process  by  which  these  two  conditions  become  more 
and  more  confirmed  and  complete.  Salvation  is  a  progressive  thing.  In  the  New 
Testament  we  have  that  great  idea  looked  at  from  three  points  of  view.  Sometimes 
it  is  spoken  of  as  having  been  accomplished  in  the  past  in  the  case  of  every  believing 
soul — "Ye  have  been  saved  "  is  said  more  than  once.  Sometimes  it  is  spoken  of 
as  being  accomplished  in  the  jjresent — "  Ye  are  saved  "  is  said  more  than  once. 
And  sometimes  it  is  relegated  to  the  future — "  Now  is  your  salvation  nearer  than 
when  ye  believed,"  and  the  like.  But  there  are  a  number  of  New  Testament 
passages  which  coincide  with  this  text  in  regarding  salvation  as,  not  the  work  of 
any  one  moment,  but  as  a  continuous  operation  running  through  life.  As,  for 
instance,  "  The  Lord  added  to  the  Church  daily  those  that  were  being  saved."  By 
one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  being  sanctified.  So  the 
jjrocess  of  being  saved  is  going  on  as  long  as  a  Christian  man  lives  in  this  world. 
Ah  !  that  notion  of  a  progressive  salvation,  at  work  in  all  true  Christians,  has  all 
but  faded  away  out  of  the  beliefs,  as  it  has  all  but  disappeared  from  the  experience, 
of  hosts  of  you  that  call  yourselves  Christ's  followers,  and  are  not  a  bit  further  on 
than  you  were  ten  years  ago ;  are  no  more  healed  of  your  corruptions  (perhaps 
less,  for  relapses  are  dangerous)  than  you  were  then.  Growing  Christians— may  I 
venture  to  say? — are  not  tiie  majority  of  professing  Christians.  And,  on  the  other 
side,  as  certainly,  there  is  progressive  deterioration  and  approximation  to  dis- 
integration and  ruin.  I  am  sure  that  there  are  people  in  this  place  this  morning 
who  were  far  better,  and  far  happier,  when  they  were  poor  and  young,  and  could 
still  thrill  with  generous  emotion  and  tremble  at  the  Word  of  God,  than  they  are 
to-day.  Now,  notice,  the  apostle  treats  these  two  classes  as  covering  the  whole 
ground  of  the  hearers  of  the  Word,  and  as  alternatives.  If  not  in  the  one  class, 
we  are  in  the  other.  If  you  are  not  more  saved,  you  are  less  saved.  Further, 
note  what  a  light  such  considerations  as  these,  that  salvation  and  perishing  are 
vital  processes—"  going  on  all  the  time  " — throw  upon  the  future.  Clearly  the 
two  processes  are  incomplete  here.  You  get  the  direction  of  the  line,  but  not 
its  natural  termination.  And  thus  a  heaven  and  a  hell  are  demanded  by  the 
phenomena  of  growing  goodness  and  of  growing  badness  which  we  see  round  about 
us.  III.  And  now,  lastly,  notice  the  determining  attitude  to  the  Cross  which 
SETTLES  the  CLASS  TO  WHICH  WE  BELONG.  So  there  are  two  thoughts  suggested 
which  sound  as  if  they  were  illogically  combined,  but  which  yet  are  both  true.  It 
is  true  that  men  perish,  or  are  saved,  because  the  Cross  is  to  them  respectively 
"foolishness,"  or  "the  power  of  God."  And  the  other  thing  is  true,  that  the 
Cross  is  to  them  "  foolishness,"  or  "  the  power  of  God,"  because  respectively  they 
are  perishing  or  being  saved.  That  is  not  putting  the  cart  before  the  horse,  but 
both  aspects  of  the  truth  are  true.  If  you  see  notbing  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  His 
death  for  us  all,  except  "  foolishness,"  something  unfit  to  do  you  any  good,  and 
unnecessary  to  be  taken  into  account  in  your  lives,  that  is  the  condemnation  of 
your  eyes,  and  not  of  the  thing  you  look  at.  If  a  man,  gazing  on  the  sun  at 
twelve  o'clock  on  a  .June  day,  f  ay<  to  me,  "  It  is  not  bright,"  tfie  only  thing  I  have 
to  say  to  him  is,  "Friend^  you  h  id  better  go  to  an  oculist."  And  if  to  us  the  Cross 
is  "  foolishness,"  it  is  because  already  a  process  of  "perishing"  has  gone  so  far 
that  it  has  attacked  our  capacity  of  recognising  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God  when 
■we  see  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  clasp  that  Cross  in  simple  tiust,  we  find 
that  it  is  the  power  wbich  saves  us  out  of  all  sins,  sorrows,  and  dangers,  and  "  shall 
save  us,"  at  last,  "  into  His  heavenly  kingdom."  That  message  leaves  no  man 
exactly  as  it  found  him.  {A.  Maclarcn,  B.I).)  The  gospel  not  a  wisdom  : — This  the 
apostle  demonstrates — 1.  By  the  irrational  character  of  the  central  fact  of  the  gospel 
(vers.  18-25).  2.  By  the  mode  of  gaining  members  to,  and  the  composition  of  the 
Church  (vers.  26-31).  3.  By  the  attitude  taken  in  the  midst  of  them  by  the  preacher  of 
the  gospel.  {Prof.  Godct,  D.D.)  The  triumph  of  tlie  qospel  over  tlie  wisdom  of  this 
world : — Look  at — I.  The  means — the  simple  preaching  of  the  Cross — which — 1,  Is 


CHAP.  I.]  7.  CORINTHIANS.  45 

foali-ihness  to  th'=»  wise.  2.  Yet  triumphs  over  human  wisdom.  3.  Effects  what  the 
wisdom  of  this  world  has  failed  to  do  4.  And  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  Jew 
and  the  pliilosophy  of  the  Greek  demonstrates  Christ  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of 
God.  II.  The  agents — "  not  many  wise,  not  many  noble  are  called."  1.  God  has 
chosen  the  most  unlikely  instrumentalities.  2.  And  made  them  successful  thron^h 
Christ.     3.  That  no  flesh  might  glory  in  His  presence.      (/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The 

divinity  of  the  (/oupel  is  demoiiBtrated — I.  In  them  that  perish — they  deem  it 
foolish— yet  it  confounds  their  wisdom— succeeds  where  i'  has  failed.  II.  Is  thesi 
THAT  AKE  SAVED — because  it  conquers  their  opposition — and  becomes  in  them  the 
power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  19-21.  For  it  is  written,  I  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise. — True 

wisdom : — The  discovery  of  what  is  true,  and  the  practice  of  that  which  is  good,  are 
the  two  most  imj^ortant  objects  of  philo^iophy.  (Voltaire.)  Human  wisdom  : — I. 
Its  character.  1.  Presumptuous  in  its  attempts.  2.  Proud  in  its  assumptions. 
3.  Unsatisfactory  in  its  conclusions.  II.  Its  bestrcction — effected — 1.  By  time. 
2.  By  revelation.  3.  By  the  Divine  Spirit.  4.  By  the  appearing  of  Christ.  (J. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  The  %'a)iity  of  the  tvisdom  of  this  tcorld: — I.  God  pdts  it  to  shame. 
1.  It  often  blunders  in  its  theories.  2.  Always  in  relation  to  Divine  things.  3. 
Generally  leads  to  practical  error.  II.  It  has  utterly  failed  to  regenerate  the 
world.  Instead  of  mending  it  it  has  made  worse — witness  the  philosophy  of  the 
Greeks  and  the  "age  of  reason."  III.  It  is  folly  exposed  by  Christianity, 
which — 1.  Succeeds  where  it  fails.  2.  Triumphs  over  it.  3.  Will  ultimately  destroy 
it.  (Ibid.)  The  gospel  ministry — its  superiority  over  human  m'thods  : — We  have 
here — I.  The  inference  drawn  from  the  effects  of  the  gospel  upon  those  who 
HAD  received  IT.  1.  It  had  accomplished  that  which  the  wisdom  of  the  world  had 
failed  to  do  (vers.  20,  21).  The  wise,  the  scribe,  the  disputer,  include  respectively 
the  thinker,  the  writer,  and  the  speaker.  Thought  and  its  two  mediums  of  expres- 
sion were  the  great  agents  in  the  world's  education,  and  had  succeeded  in  creating 
a  literature  which  remains  unparalleled.  But  what  had  they  done  towards  the 
regeneration  of  mankind?  Nothing.  "  Where  is  the  wise  ?  "  &c.  In  the  world  of 
philosojihy,  of  poetry,  of  art,  I  can  see  their  work ;  but  in  the  realm  of  the  spiritual 
tbey  have  left  the  world  as  they  found  it.  God  turns  the  tables  upon  those  boastful 
wise  ones.  They  call  His  plan  "  foolishness,"  but  its  effectiveness  proves  the  folly 
to  be  with  them.  And  Christianity  is  not  alone  in  its  frustration  of  the  predictions 
of  the  wise.  When  Fulton  constructed  a  steamship  to  cross  the  Atlantic  they  cried, 
"  There  goes  Fulton's  Folly."  Subsequent  history  has,  however,  proved  them  to  be 
the  fools,  and  Fultun  the  wise  man.  So  when  Christianity  was  starting  on  its  grand 
voyage,  laden  with  salvation  to  a  sin-atlflicted  world,  the  wise  called  it  "  foolish- 
ness." But  how  strangely  has  history  proved  their  own  infatuated  folly.  2.  This 
glorious  result  the  gospel  achieved  whilst  disregarding  men's  preconceived  notions 
and  prejudices  (vers.  22-24).  The  Jews  and  the  Greeks  had  their  own  theories  of 
what  ought  to  be  the  character  of  any  religious  message  that  might  be  addressed  to 
them.  The  Jew,  from  the  standpoint  of  his  expectation  of  an  all  (conquering  political 
Messiah,  heralded  by  supernatural  marvels,  looked  for  a  sign.  The  Greek,  from  his 
standpoint  of  intellectual  culture,  sought  for  wisdom.  Of  these,  however,  the 
apostle  took  no  cognisance,  but  interpreting  correctly  the  spirit  of  Christianity, 
boldly  preached  "  Christ  crucified."'  There  is  something  sublimely  unique  and 
grand  in  this  attitude.  Other  religions  seek  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the 
thoughts  and  ways  of  those  whom  they  seek  to  win.  II.  But  notwithstanding  its 
bold  defiance  of  cherished  preferences,  the  gospel,  being  the  power  and  wisdo.m 
OF  God,  supplied  in  their  highest  form  the  very  things  which  its  rejectors  desiderated. 
1.  It  was  the  "  power,"  i.e.,  the  miracle  "  of  God  "  corresponding  with  the  "  sign  " 
which  the  Jews  sought.  The  ordinary  operations  of  nature,  though  the  expressions 
of  His  power,  yet  are  never  called  the  "  power  of  God."  But  the  gospel  is  such  a 
transcendent  revelation  of  God's  love,  such  an  extraordinary  interruption  of  the 
ordinary  course  of  dealing  with  sin,  thar,  it  may  well  be  called  a  miracle  ;  and  its 
moral  effects  upon  those  who  come  within  the  scope  of  its  influence  are  f  o  wonderful, 
as  to  render  it  a  moral  miracle  far  beyond  any  physical  miracle.  2.  It  is  "  the 
wisdom  of  God."  Wisdom  to  the  Greek  meant  learning  and  knowledge,  but  mostly 
only  ingenuity  in  the  use  of  dialectics.  .But  that  which  is  deserving  of  the  name  is 
"the  use  of  the  best  means  for  attaining  the  best  ends."  And  the  Cross  proposes 
the  best  end  within  the  entire  scope  of  Divine  benevolence  to  conceive  of  deliverance 
from  sin,  and  forms  the  best  means  for  attaining  it.     III.  The  gospel   exerxud 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ST'CH   POWER    ON    THE    CONSCIENCES    OP    MEN  BECAUSE    IT  WAS  DiVINE.       If  it  be  foolish- 

ness,  still  it  is  the  foolishness  of  God  ;  and  the  foolishness  of  God  must  be  wiser 
than  men.  If  it  be  we-ikness,  still  it  is  the  weakness  of  God  ;  and  the  weakness  of 
God  must  be  stronger  than  men.  Thus  is  the  success  of  the  gospel  assured  by  the 
simple  fact  of  its  relation  to  God.  IV.  The  thoughts  forming  the  burden  of 
THE  argument.  1.  The  comparative  value  of  the  Cross  and  human  culture  in  the 
moral  regeneration  of  men.  The  apostle  shows  that  it  is  not  a  question  of  degree 
of  efficacy,  but  of  aljsolute  failure  in  the  one  case,  and  of  transcendent  success  in 
the  other.  Culture  has  its  mission,  and  a  most  important  one  in  its  own  proper 
sphere.  But  the  human  heart,  with  its  sin  and  guilt,  has  needs  which  the  highest 
culture  cannot  meet  in  the  remotest  degree.  The  moral  history  of  those  communi- 
ties that  have  attained  to  the  highest  degree  of  cultivation  testifies  most  unmistak- 
ably to  this.  The  only  remedy  for  sin  is  Christ  crucified.  Tlie  faith  of  some  still 
is,  that  "  the  sweetness  of  light,"  of  intellectual  discipline  and  refinement,  will 
dissipate  the  gross  moral  darkness  in  which  men  lie.  A  little  of  any  of  the  salts  of 
sodium  introduced  into  the  flame  of  a  gas  lamp  gives  that  flame  the  power  of 
imparting  to  every  coLmred  object  a  greenish  yellow  tint ;  but  any  black  in  that 
object  remains  still  black.  The  sodium  flame  has  no  power  of  affecting  this  sombre 
hue.  Just  so  is  it  with  education  in  relation  to  sin.  2.  The  simple  method  of 
preaching  as  against  the  rhetorical.  The  apostle  sets  against  the  "  wisdom  of 
words,"  so  esteemed  by  the  Corinthians,  his  own  customaiy  "  plainness  of  speech." 
He  seems  peculiarly  apprehensive  lest  anything  should  stand  between  the  truth  and 
the  conscience  it  is  intended  to  influence.  The  more  the  mind  is  charmed  by  the 
style  of  the  message,  the  le^s  likely  it  is  that  the  conscience  will  be  pricked  by  its 
truth.  Religion  is  so  much  a  thing  of  the  heart,  that  its  truths  come  into  the  soul 
much  more  through  spiritual  insight  and  quickened  sympathy  than  by  logical  pro- 
cesses. At  one  of  the  Westminster  Industrial  Exhibitions  a  workman  exhibited 
two  beautiful  metal  violins.  The  highest  prize,  however,  was  not  awarded  to  him, 
for  the  reason  that  the  instrument  made  of  such  material  did  not  realise  the  purpose 
of  a  violin.  The  superior  metal  looked  prettv,  but  the  coarser  material  gave  forth 
by  far  the  sweeter  sound.  So  high  scholarly  attainments  may  produce  sermons, 
but  they  will,  like  the  metal  violin,  fail  in  their  purpose,  while  the  discourses  of  the 
less  polished  preacher  give  forth  music,  often  more  cnpable  of  touching  the 
heart.  The  cultured  genius  of  Milton  produc-d  "  Paradise  Lost,"  but  the 
uncultured  mother-wit  of  Bunyan  produced  "  The  Pilgrim's  Progress."  The 
refined  acumen  of  Butler  produced  the  "  Analysis,"  but  it  was  the  untutored  fervour 
of  Whitefield  aroused  the  heart  of  England  from  its  spiritual  torpor.  (J.  A.  Parry.) 
Where  is  the  wise?  where  is  the  scribe? — Where!  1.  What  have  they  not 
attempted?  2.  What  have  they  not  promised?  3.  What  have  they  achieved? 
4.  How  are  they  brought  to  nought?  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Philosophy  and.  the 
gnspel  : — The  "  wise  "  refers  specially  to  the  sages  of  Greece.  They  were  called  at 
first  "  wise  men,"  Hnd  afterwards  assumed  a  more  njodest  title,  "  lovers  of  wisdom," 
"  phil(;>sophers."  The  "  scribe  "  refers  to  tlie  learned  among  the  Jews.  The  appeal 
of  the;text,  therefore,  is  to  the  wisdom  or  the  philosophy  of  the  world,  including 
tint  of  the  Greek  or  Jew.  Here  we  have  philosophy — I.  Challenged  by  the 
GOSPEL.  The  apostle  here  challenges  the  wise  men  of  the  world  to  accomplish  the 
end  which  the  gospel  had  in  view.  That  end  was  the  im()artation  to  men  of  the 
saving  knowledge  of  God.  Where,  unaided,  had  it  ever  succeeded  in  accomj)lishing 
this?  Who  amongst  the  wise  will  come  forward  to  give  one  single  instance.  11. 
Confounded  by  thk  gospkl.  "Hath  not  God  made  foolish  ?"  &c.  1.  By  doing 
what  idiilosophy  could  not.  "The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God."  Though  the 
pages  of  nature  lay  open  to  the  eye,  with  God's  signature  in  every  line,  man  failed 
to  discover  Him  (see  liom.  i.l.  2.  By  doing,  by  the  simplest  instrumentHlity,  what 
philosophy  could  not  do.  The  proclamation  of  the  history  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
and  that  by  a  few  simple  men  regarded  as  the  off-scouring  of  all  things,  did  the 
work.  Hath  not  God  iu  this  way  "made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world?  "  III. 
Superseded  by  the  gospel.  "It  i)leased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  to 
save  them  that  believe."  The  pre  .ching  is  not  foolish  in  itself,  only  in  the  estimation 
of  the  would-be  wise  men.  The  great  want  of  men  is  salvation— the  restoration  of 
the  soul  to  the  knowledge,  the  lik  ness,  the  fellowship  of  God.  This  want  philo- 
sophy cannot  supply,  but  the  gospel  does.  It  has  done  so,  it  is  doing  so,  and  it  will 
continue  to  do  so.  (I).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Tlie  coronation  of  nescience  : — Our  vaunted 
knowledge  largely  consists  of  t-hrewd  guesses  concerning  surface  appearances.  The 
last  result  of  culture  is  the  coronation  of  nescience.     Its  proudest  achievement  is 


CHAP,  I  ]  I.   CORISTUIANS.  47 

fixing  tlie  limits  of  tliought.  The  most  sinewy  brain  cannot  scale  those  adamantine 
barriers  that  convert  reason's  highway  into  a  "no  thoroughfare."  (Dr.  Howard 
Dtijfiild.)  The  failure  of  ivorJdlij  plnlosopJii/  : — Lessing,  after  toiling  at  the  task 
of  estHlilishing  a  morality  which  should  be  independent  of  revelation,  confesses  liis 
failure  in  this  plaintive  cry:  "  If  any  one  can  convince  me  that  Christianity  is  true 
he  will  confer  on  me  the  (.'I'eatest  benefit  that  one  can  offer  to  another."  Insiif- 
Jiciencij  of  jiliilusoplnj  : — Philosophy,  in  the  night  of  Paganism,  was  like  the  firefly 
of  t'  e  tropics  making  itself  vi'^ible,  but  not  irradiating  the  darkness.  But  Christi- 
anity, revealing  the  sun  of  righteousness,  sheds  more  than  the  full  sunliglit  of  those 
tropic-i  on  all  that  we  need  to  see,  whether  for  time  or  eternity.  (Coleridge.) 
Christ  the  wisdom  of  God  : — Justin  Martyr  Wiinders  in  search  of  the  highest  wisdom, 
the  knowledge  of  God.  He  tries  a  stoic,  who  tells  him  his  search  is  in  vain.  He 
turns  to  a  second  philosopher,  whose  mercenary  tone  (luenches  any  hope  of  assist- 
ance from  him.  He  appeals  to  a  third,  who  requires  the  preliminary  knowledge  of 
music,  astronomy,  and  geometry.  Just  think  of  a  soul  thirsting  after  God  and 
parilon  and  peace  being  told.  You  cannot  enter  the  pnlace  and  have  access  to  the 
fountain  until  you  have  mastered  music,  astronomy,  and  geometry.  What  a  weary 
climb  for  most !  what  a  sheer  inacces-'ible  preeijiice  for  many  of  us  !  In  his  help- 
lessness he  applies  to  a  follower  of  Plato,  under  v\hose  guidance  he  does  begin  to 
cherish  some  hope  that  the  road  leading  to  the  desired  summit  may  some  day  be 
struck.  But  in  a  meujorable  hour,  when  earnestly  gi oping  after  the  path,  he  is 
met  by  a  nameless  old  nian^  who  discourses  to  him  about  Jesus  the  Christ.  With- 
out any  more  ado,  he  is  at  the  end  of  his  quest.  "  Straightway,"  i^ays  Justin,  "  a 
flame  was  kindled  in  my  soul."  Pride,  the  antagonist  of  the  gospel  of  Christ : — 
I.  In  the  mekting  of  St.  Paul  and  the  old  he.vphendom  at  Corinth  theiie  was 
EVEKYTHiNG  TO  STIR  EACH  TO  THE  VKEY  INMOST  OF  ITS  DEPTHS.  1.  Every  element  of 
society  here  burst,  as  the  whirlwind  breaks  on  the  giant  of  the  forest,  upon  his 
whole  iitellectual,  niornl,  and  spiritual  nature.  In  no  city  of  the  ancient  paganism 
was  the  spirit  of  the  world  stronger.  The  grand  families  of  the  Bacchi:ida%  and 
even  the  descendants  of  the  later  dynasties  of  Cypselus  and  Periander,  with  their 
humanising  ancestral  recollections,  had  all  perished  liy  the  sword  of  Mummius. 
A  century  later  the  discerning  eye  of  Julius  Cipsar  fixed  on  Corinth  as  the  site  of  a 
colony  ;  and  it  grew  up  marked  by  the  unelastic  hardness  of  the  old  soldier,  and 
the  elated  baseness  of  the  children  of  slaves.  But,  planted  where  it  was,  it  could 
not  but  grow  rich  and  prosperous.  New  Corinth  gathered  to  itself  the  traders  of 
the  world,  who  multiplied  at  once  its  wickedness  and  its  wealth.  Many  causes 
combined  to  promote  the  demoralisation  of  such  a  society.  The  wholesome  lessons 
of  ordinary  labour  were  untaught  within  it.  The  barren  soil  of  the  Isthmus  dis- 
couraged agriculture.  Manufacture  it  had  none.  Trade,  stained  deeply  by  all  the 
pollutions  i.'f  heathendom,  was  everything  in  Corinth.  Men  met  there  to  grow  rich 
by  all  means,  or  to  spend  their  acquired  wealth  in  the  most  unrestrained  sensuality. 
Eeligion  amongst  other  poweis  ministered  to  their  exaltation  and  amusement.  The 
disputers  of  this  world  would  speculate  on  Egyptian  mysteries,  mock  at  Jewish 
sui^erstitions,  trifle  with  Greek  mythology,  [ind  be  learned  in  Eonian  auguries. 
Each  man  took  to  himself  his  share  of  this  distinction,  and  so  believing  himself 
wise,  he  in  very  deed  became  a  fool.  Into  such  a  society  the  apostle  cast  himself 
■with  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  2.  If  the  meeting  moved  to  its  lowest 
deep  his  mighty  spirit,  not  less  disturbing  was  it  to  every  existing  element  of 
Corinthian  society  :  not  greater — if  the  sinewy  arm  of  their  fancied  progenitor  had 
cast  one  of  their  own  hills  into  the  blue  waves  which  slept  around  their  isthmus — 
not  greater  would  have  been  the  tumult  of  those  riven  waves,  than  was  the  shock 
to  the  moral  stagnation  of  their  sensual  life  by  the  casting  in  amongst  them  of  the 
marvellous  doctrine  which  the  apostle  preached.  We  may  mark  its  effects  in  the 
brief  record  of  the  Acts,  and  yet  more  in  the  two  Epistles.  In  them  we  may  trace  the 
intense  sharpness  of  the  gospel  conflict  with  the  schismatic  habits  bred  of  a  fierce 
democracy,  with  the  gross  sensuality  of  heathen  voluptuaries,  with  the  speculating 
temper  of  a  false  and  unreal  philosophy,  with  the  cold  scorn  of  abundant  wealth 
which  shut  the  rich  and  noble  out  of  the  heavenly  election.  II.  But  we  may  dis- 
cern THROUGHOUT  THE  CONFLICT  AS  THE   FOUNDATION    AND    PROTECTING    BARRIER  OF  ALL 

OTHER  FORMS  OF  EVIL,  A  SELF-ELATING  PRIDE.  1.  With  this  the  apostle  not  darkly 
connects  an  outbreak  within  the  new  community  of  more  than  Gentile  licentious- 
ness ;  whilst  everywhere  outside  the  Chuich  he  speaks  of  it  as  the  most  insur- 
mountable hindrance  to  the  reception  of  the  truth.  "Where?" — looking  round 
upon  the  gathered  company  with  tlie  saddened  gaze  of  that  discerning  eye — he  asks. 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


"  is  the  wise?"  &c.  Not  one,  he  intimates,  has  listened  to  the  gospel  call.  2.  It  is 
not  difficult  to  see  why  he  thus  treated  this  spirit  of  pride  as  his  master  antagonist. 
It  was  not  merely  because  he  ever  remembered  the  guilty  consequences  of  his  own 
Jewish  haughtiness,  or  because  every  circumstance  of  his  own  conversion  was  ever 
before  his  eyes  ;  but  it  was  pre-eminently  a  thorough  insight  into  man's  nature, 
and  of  the  relations  to  it  of  the  gospel  which  he  iireached.  S.  For  that  nature  does, 
indeed,  bear  its  witness  to  the  absolute  need  of  humility  as  a  prerequisite  to  all  true 
learning.  He  who  would  learn  the  common  truths  of  a  business  or  an  art,  must,  if 
that  learning  is  to  be  successful,  submit  to  take  this  posture  of  humility.  As  the 
truths  to  be  mastered  become  more  difficult  of  discovery,  the  need  of  humility 
increases.  Upon  almost  every  matter,  some  bias,  preconception,  assumption, 
troubles  the  course  of  discovery ;  and  it  needs  a  great  humility  of  spirit  to  lay  these 
down,  and  follow  patiently  the  unlooked-for  course.  Yet  without  doing  so  progress 
is  almost  impossible.  The  history  of  philosophical  discovery  strikingly  illustrates 
all  this.  Of  old,  man  had  gazed  into  the  mystery  of  nature  round  him,  and  sought 
to  impose  upon  it  as  laws  the  guesses  of  his  own,  often  impatient,  intellect.  He 
came  to  it  an  unhumbled  reasoner,  and  he  learned  nothing  from  it.  Science  was 
not,  until  man  consented  humbly  to  abandon  theories,  to  be  content  to  accumulate 
facts,  and  to  let  those  facts  teach  him  by  degrees  their  often  darkly  intimated 
lesson.  One  of  the  greatest  advancers  of  physiological  knowledge  in  this  land  has 
been  known  to  make  ten  thousand  dissections  whilst,  setting  experiment  after 
experiment  aside  without  gaining  the  clue  he  wanted,  he  followed  fact  after  fact 
with  humble  conscientiousness,  until  at  last  the  revelation  which  he  longed  for 
gladdened  his  heart.  The  greatest  English  discoverer  of  mathematical  science 
records  that  he  differed  from  others  only  in  the  greater  largeness  of  his  patience. 
Beyond,  moreover,  the  humility  of  the  mere  waiting  there  must  be  humility  in  see- 
ing old  prepossessions  swept  away.  No  physician  over  forty,  when  Harvey  discovered 
the  circulation  of  the  blood,  ever  received  the  new-found  truth.  The  sacrifice  of 
old  opinions  was  too  severe  a  trial  of  the  humility  of  the  learner.  4.  But  if  in 
these  comparatively  cold  and  colourless  inquiries  humility  must  prepare  the 
learner's  mind,  how  vastly  greater  must  be  the  need  of  it  to  him  who  would 
receive  in  their  simplicity  the  secrets  of  moral  and  spiritual  truth;  for  against  these 
are  arrayed  not  merely  foregone  intellectual  conclusions,  and  the  impatience  which 
the  spirit  feels  at  their  removal,  and  its  weary  shrinking  from  the  labour  of  a 
troublesome  and  passionless  inquiry,  but  also  the  restless  and  impetuous  forces  of 
the  appetites  and  particular  aliections  which  resent  the  imposition  of  a  new  law  of 
restraint,  which  is  absolutely  inconsistent  with  their  habitual  or  uncontradicted 
enjoyments.  Then  the  gospel  required  of  men,  who  proudly  deemed  them- 
selves the  traditional  possessors  of  that  wonderful  mythology  which  genius, 
art,  language,  scenery,  and  climate  had  conspired  to  make  so  beautiful,  to  cast  it 
all  aside  ;  to  receive,  from  what  they  deemed  dull  Jewish  hands,  a  teaching  which 
trampled  on  all  these  wonderful  creations  of  the  natural  imagination  ;  which,  more- 
over, was  not  only  exclusive,  but  unspeakably  real;  which  claimed  the  whole  man, 
his  body  and  mind,  his  soul  and  spirit ;  which  was  not  to  be  speculated  on  or  dis- 
puted about,  but  was  to  be  lived  ;  which  revealed  to  him  such  depths  of  corruption, 
guilt,  and  helplessness  within  himself,  that  he  was  altogether  hopeless  of  pardon, 
unless  the  Eternal  Son  had  died  for  him  ;  and  powerless  for  any  good,  unless  the 
Blessed  Spirit  breathed  into  him  the  breath  of  a  new  life.  Surely,  then,  we  may 
see  why  in  rich,  self-exalted,  trading,  sensual  Corinth,  the  preaching  of  that 
blessed  gospel,  in  which  was  all  the  power  of  God,  must  have  been  "  to  the  Jews  a 
stumbling-block,  and  unto  the  Greeks  foolishness."  III.  The  application  of  all 
THIS  TO  ourselves  IS  A  MOST  DIRECT  ONE.  We,  too,  must  be  converted  and  become 
as  little  children,  or  we  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  and  there  is 
much  within  us  and  around  us  leading  us  to  resist  the  call.  The  trial  is  indeed 
largely  various  to  men  of  different  tempers,  but  to  every  one  it  is  real,  urgent, 
inevitable.  To  one  the  humiliation  lies  in  the  receiving  simply  the  dogmas  of  the 
faith  as  the  truth  of  God,  instead  of  treating  them  as  intellectual  playthings,  and 
so  dissolving  their  reality  in  the  fleeting  colours  of  passing  speculations,  or  develop- 
ing from  some  supposed  internal  consciousness  their  supplements,  or  corrections, 
or  substitutes.  To  another  the  trial  is  the  curbing  the  appetites  of  the  body  and 
the  particular  affections  of  the  mind  by  the  law  of  the  new  kingdom.  To  another 
it  is  the  yielding  up  the  life  to  the  one  will  of  God.  To  another  the  receiving  in 
its  simplicity  the  atonement  wrought  for  us  by  our  Master's  death,  and  craving 
meekly  for  the  iupouring  of  His  Spirit.     To  another  it  is  the  being  led  along,  as 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  COBINTHIANS.  49 

the  apostle  speaks,  with  such  lowly  things  as  outward  rules  and  institutions, 
wheth'-r  it  be  of  the  Church  or  the  pirticular  society  into  which  God's  providence 
has  cast  us.  How  real  is  this  trial,  how  inevitable  are  its  issues  !  Conclusion  :  1. 
Seek  from  God  a  special  gift  of  His  regenerating  Spirit,  a  special  ^ign  of  predesti- 
nation unto  life.  '2.  Set  ever  befure  your  eyes  the  pattern  of  our  Lord's  humility. 
If  the  pathway  be  hard,  His  stf^ps  have  trodden  it.  3.  Keep  watch  over  thine  heart 
with  diligence  and  wisdom.  Beware  of  the  many  wiles  cf  the  proud  deceiving 
spirit.  Seek  to  be,  not  to  seem  humble.  No  pride  is  deadlier  in  its  working  than 
the  pride  of  being  humble,  {lip.  S.  WilberJ'orce.)  Hatli  not  Ood  made  foolish 
the  wisdom  of  this  world  ? — Tliefolhj  of  athehm: — 1.  The  wisdom  of  the  world  and 
the  foolishness  of  the  Cross  are  represented  as  rivals  engaged  in  the  regeneration 
of  the  race.  I3y  the  "  wisdom  of  this  world  "  is  meant  all  speculations  begotten  of 
antipathy  to  tLe  conception  of  God,  and  intended  to  supersede  its  aulhorit}', 
including  the  labours  and  the  spirit  of  those  who  do  not  like  to  retain  (iod  in  their 
knowledge.  Now,  in  this  account  of  the  wisdom  of  the  world  we  cannot  include 
science,  or  its  discoveries,  or  literature.  The  most  exalted  work  of  God  with  which 
we  are  acquainted  is  the  human  mind.  Even  in  partial  eclipse,  it  is  about  the 
brightest  of  the  known  creations — and  when  the  Scriptures  refer  to  it  it  is  always 
in  language  of  respect.  It  is  not  intellectual  labour  honestly  pursued,  nor  the  dis- 
coveries and  conduct  which  are  the  piizesof  its  success,  that  provoke  the  denuncia- 
tions of  Scripture.  It  is  the  mind  that  insists  upon  teaching  eveiybody,  but  will 
not  cndescend  to  be  taught  by  anybody.  It  is  the  mind  that  pnrsucs  as  its  chief 
end  the  distinctions,  the  wors^hip  of  inferior  minds,  and  allows  itself  to  be  liattered 
into  delusions  of  greatness  and  authoiity  until  it  acknowledges  no  other  God  but 
its  own  conceit.  Now,  the  Bible  has  no  mercy  on  men  of  this  class ;  and  for  the  very 
plain  reason  :  in  every  age  these  men  are  the  enemies  of  faith  ;  and,  Avhether  they 
allow  it  or  not,  they  are  equally  the  enemies  of  morality.  They  are  exposed  in  every 
book  of  the  Scriptures.  2.  And  now  let  me  ask,  What  is  the  pre-eminent  virtue 
according  to  our  adversaries,  of  learning  and  speculation?  The  votaries  of  these 
powers  profess,  while  they  have  their  accomplishments  in  refining  taste  and  furnish- 
ing elegant  occupation  for  leisure  hours,  that  their  cliief  mission  is  to  raise  the 
standard  of  life — to  encourage  its  struggles  against  vice,  and  indolence,  and  want; 
to  refine  and  multiply  its  fiery  motions  ;  to  increase  personal  worth,  and  fit  the 
entire  community  for  great  things.  I  agree  with  that.  But  here  I  differ  from  them. 
The  wisdom  which  would  make  the  human  mind,  thus  cultivated,  the  ultimate 
authority  on  all  moral  questions,  and  muke  the  training  of  the  human  faculties  the 
source  of  moral  power — has  been  stultified  by  God  because  it  has  universally  failed. 
In  endeavouring  to  cure  the  sickness  of  humanity  the  wisdom  of  man  has  not 
touched  the  roots  of  tlie  disease.  It  has  salved  the  surface,  but  never  probed  the 
wound.  3.  If  man  were  a  mere  animal  we  might  look  for  a  type  of  the  family 
which  has  been  formed  under  the  most  favourable  conditions,  and  try  to  spread 
those  conditioiis  abroad.  But  man  is  not  an  animal.  I  grant  that  where  climate 
is  kind,  and  territorial  selection  happy,  the  tribe  becomes  a  people,  and  the  people  a 
miyhty  nation.  But  I  deny  that  this  progress  necessarily  means  the  distinctive  great- 
ness of  man.  If  I  look  at  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  or  tlie  Colosseum  at  Rome,  I  see  an 
impressive  image  of  greatness.  But,  then,  greatness  itself  is  really  the  ascendency 
of  moral  intelligence — intelligence  that  grows  righteousness.  The  wisdom  of  the 
world  in  its  higher  moods  confesses  this.  But  where  is  the  people  amongst  whom 
the  wisdom  of  the  world  has  grown  to  righteousness  ?  I  confess  that  anything 
more  sickly  than  the  history  of  civilisation — as  it  is  called — I  cannot  imagine.  I 
visited  Italy  not  long  ago  and  I  studied  in  its  noble  and  pathetic  remains  the  wisdom 
of  Rome.  In  that  city  tlie  man  wlio  wrote  my  text  sjjent  two  years  of  his  life.  He 
was  a  man  of  taste,  and  he  saw  its  beautiful  palaces,  its  exquisite  provision  for  the 
artificial  productions  of  luxury,  its  triumphal  arches,  its  amphitheatres,  and  he  read 
its  literature  and  saw  its  great  men  ;  and  this  was  his  opinion  of  its  philosophy, 
and  his  analysis  of  it.  "  Beware,  lest  any  man  spoil  you  throuoh  philosophy  and 
vain  deceit,"  etc.,  and  the  deeds  that  philosophy  dared  not  rebuke,  and  was  utterly 
helpless  to  arrest,  are  darkly  shadowed  forth  in  another  verse,  "  Have  no  fellowship 
with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  for  it  is  a  shame  to  speak  of  those  things 
that  are  done  of  them  in  secret."  He  writes  with  a  hirge  and  grateful  appreciation 
of  good  wherever  he  may  find  it.  He  says,  "  Whatsoever  things  are  true,"  &c.  Oh  ! 
ponder  the  moral  condition  of  Rome  when  Paul  whs  there — there,  where  the  accom- 
plishments of  men — where  the  wisdom  of  the  world  in  every  department  in  which 
that  wisdom  is  concerned — had  exhausted  its  resources,  morality  was  not  to  be 
VOL.    I,  4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctiap.  i. 

fouml  (soe  Rotn.  i.).  4.  At  all  costs  the  folly,  the  wickedness  of  the  atheistic  spirit 
must  be  made  flagrant.  And  they  were  made  flagrant.  The  athtistic  spirit 
in  the  interests  of  humanity  has  been  from  the  beginning  a  universal  and  an 
unqu-'lified  failure.  It  has  done  nothing  for  humanity  ;  it  has  left  behind  it  nothing 
but  disaster.  It  has  befooled  the  worshipper,  betrayed  the  legislator,  ruined  the 
people,  and  but  for  the  fact  that  God  has  put  a  testimony  into  your  very  mind  to 
controvert  this  atheism — a  testimony  which  sceptical  habits  long  continued  cannot 
subdue,  which  the  most  violent  lusts  cannot  intimidate,  a  testimony  confirmed  by 
nature  around  us,  and  by  the  striking  providence  of  God — but  for  that,  I  believe 
that  the  race  would  have  perished  outright.  The  man  who  impugns  my  verdict  is 
bound  to  point  out,  if  he  can,  in  the  vast  wilderness  upon  which  aiheism  has  been 
working  all  these  ages  past — to  point  out  one  single  acre  reclaimed  from  the  desert 
and  made  to  blossom  like  the  rose.  5.  The  apostle  cries  out  with  pardonable  triumph, 
"  Where  is  the  wise?  "  And  we  may  take  up  the  parable,  and  ask  where  are  they? 
Where  are  the  problems  which  they  say  they  have  made  their  own  ?  I  will  tell  you. 
(1)  The  i^roblem  of  the  degeneracy  of  the  race  and  how  to  arrest  it.  I  wisb  them 
well  over  that.  (2)  The  problem  of  bringing  back  the  departed  manhood  of  the 
savage  tribes.  Let  them  do  their  best  with  that.  (3)  The  problem  of  invigorating 
and  cleansing  the  nations  of  the  earth — the  stagnant  nations  of  China  and  India — 
the  problem  of  providing  an  adequate  supply  of  knnwiedge,  sympathy,  and  heart  to 
meet  the  necessities  of  the  race.  These  are  their  problems.  They  are  a  long  time 
sitting  down  before  them.  Where  are  the  wi>^e  to-day?  Tliey  ought  to  be  in  the 
field  if  they  are  sincei-e.  But  they  do  not  like  the  field.  They  are  at  home,  writing, 
disputing,  criticising  !  They  were  doing  it  in  Paul's  day  :  they  are  doing  it  to-day. 
It  is  their  vocation !  6.  W^bat  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  doing  to-day  ?  Changing 
the  world.  I  was  thinking  the  other  day  whether  I  could  find  out  one  single  force 
acting  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  race  that  had  not  its  origin  from  the  Cross.  I 
cannot  find  one.  Who  discovered  the  interior  world  of  Africa?  Missionaries. 
Who  solved  the  problem  of  preaching  liberty  to  the  women  of  India  ?  Mis- 
sionaries and  their  wives.  Who  first  brought  into  modern  geography  the  hidden 
lands  and  rivers  of  China — unsealed  for  inspection  the  scholarship  and  opened  for 
the  enrichment  of  commerce  the  greatest  emj^ire  of  the  East?  Missionaries. 
Who  first  dai'ed  the  cannibal  regions,  and  converted  wolves  into  a  nation?  Mis- 
sionaries. To  come  nearer  home.  Who  are  those  in  Europe  who  are  now  lifting 
up  their  voices  against  war,  that  horrible  perversion  of  tiie  intellect  and  of  the  soul 
of  man?  Wlio  are  devoting  their  means  and  influence  against  vice  in  the  high 
places  and  low,  and  against  the  infliction  of  wrong  upon  the  defeucel^ss  ?  Who 
are  those  whose  example  of  righteousness  and  purity  and  gentleness  conforms  with 
their  own  spirit  the  legislation  of  governments  and  the  sentiments  of  society?  The 
followers  of  the  Nazarene.     {E.  E.  Jenkins,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  21.  For  after  tliat  in  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God. — 
Wisdom  and  salration: — I.  Paul  meant  that  men  had  tkiei>  to  know  God  in  His 
WISDOM,  not  in  His  kighteousness,  not  in  His  love,  and  had  failed.  1.  The  wisdom 
of  God  is  revealed  in  the  universe,  in  man  and  in  history — revealed  but  hidden.  Wise 
men  have  endeavoured  to  construct  a  i  hilosophy  of  the  universe,  and  to  reach  God  by 
reaching  His  thought  as  it  underlies  the  univei  sal  order.  They  have  not  succeeded. 
In  our  times  the  endeavour  to  master  the  laws  of  Nature  has  achieved  a  brilliant 
success  ;  but  this  is  science,  not  philosophy.  Philosophy  attempts  to  discover  what 
lies  behind  and  above  all  the  laws.  It  asks  whence  and  where  the  universe  came, 
and  is  not  satisfied  with  learning  its  present  structure  or  its  history.  It  attempts 
to  reduce  all  things  to  unity — to  determine  the  relation  of  man  to  all  thmgs,  to 
verify  the  certainty  of  the  real  value  of  human  knowledge,  and  to  discover  the  truth 
about  destiny.  If  it  had  been  succe.^sfui  it  would  have  reached  the  thought  of  God, 
and  so,  in  a  measure,  God  Himself.  2.  But  Paul  declares  that  in  this  great 
adventure  human  wisdom  had  failed;  God,  in  His  wisdom,  remained  unknown  to 
the  wisest.  The  task  of  philosophy  had  i^roved  to  be  beyond  human  strength. 
School  after  school  had  risen  in  Greece,  and  the  supreme  question  remained 
unsolved.  There  was  a  feeling  of  exhaustion,  and  there  was  a  last  desperate 
attempt  to  reach  the  object  by  means  of  transcendent  speculation,  ascetic  morti- 
fication and  ecstasy.  But  Neo-Platonism  failed,  and  ancient  philosophy  sank  in 
complete  exhaustion.  3.  The  Corinthians,  many  of  them,  were  seeking  God  in  the 
old  way ;  and  whon  Paul  came,  they  expected  him  to  satisfy  their  desire  for 
wisdom  and  explain  everything.     When  he  spoke  of  Christ,  and  of  His  death  as  a 


CHAP.  I.J  I.   CORINTHIAJSIS.  51 


propitiation,  they  passed  at  once  with  a  certain  impatience  from  the  fact,  and 
wanted  some  new  and   deeper   speculation  about  sin,   some  discussion  about  the 
nature  of  eternal  life ;  some  account  of  the  reason  why  the  death  of  Christ  should 
be  connected  wiih  these  p;reat  things.     Paul  refused  to  listen  to  their  demands. 
God  had  not  given  him  a  pliilosopiiy  to  make  known  to  men  of  intellectual  activity, 
but  a  series  of  facts  within  the  reach  of  the  least  intelligent.     They  said,  Let  us 
know  the  philosophy  of  your  message.     No,  said  Paul,  for  you  I  have  only  the 
fact.     You  say  it  explains  nothing,  and  that  it  is  a  foolish  thing.     Granted  ;  but 
seeing  that  the  world,  in  its  wisdom,  knew  not  God  in  His  wisdom — III.  It  was 
God's  good  pleasuke  thkough  the  foolishness  of  the  preaching  to  savE  theji 
THAT  BELiEVKD.     Paul  does  Eot  mean  to  say  that  it  pleases  God  to  save  men  by 
foolish    preaching.      There    is    nothing    to    save   men    in   intellectual  feebleness 
and    folly.      This    Epistle    on    the    very    next   page    says,    "  We   speak    wisdom 
among  the  perfect."      When  a  man  has  received  the  Divine  life,  and  that  life  has 
reached  a  certain  maturity,  he  is  capable  of  moving  into  regions  of  thought  even 
sublimer  than  those  wliich  are  familiar  to  the  loftiest  pliilosophy,  and  in  the  light 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  the  thought  of  God  becomes  known  to  him.     But  at    first, 
while  he  is  dealing  with  those  who  have  not  yet  received  Christ,  Paul  will  not 
theorise  or  philosophise.     It  is  not  the  theory   tliat   holds   the  planets  in  their 
orbits,  but  the  force  which  the  theory  attempts  to  explain.     And  if  that  force 
ceased  to  act  you  might  have  the  most  perfect  understanding  of  the  theory,  but  you 
would  all  fly  off  into  space.     Here  are  the  facts — this  is  Paul's  position — resting  on 
the  testimony  of  the  apostles  ;  facts  which  have  witnessed  their  own  reality  to 
millions  of  hearts.     The  Eternal  Son  of  God  became  man,  died  for  the  sins  of  men, 
rose  again,  and  has  not  forsaken  the  world  that  He   came  to  save.     How  do  we 
know  ?     ^Vhy,  age  after  age  men  have  spoken  to  Him  and  He  has  answered  ;  they 
have  brought  to  Him  the  burden  of  guilt,  and  at  the  touch  of  His  hand  the  burden 
has  gone.     Weak,  in  the  presence  of  duty,  they  have  appealed  to  Him  for  strength 
and  have  become  strong.     Tliat  was  the  foolishness  of  Paul's  preaching,  and  this 
has  proved  to  age  after  age  wiser  than  all  the  wisdom  of  man,  for  through  this  men 
have  actually  found  God,  and  through  this  they  have  actually  been  able  to  translate 
the  will  of  God  into  life  and  conduct.     The  Incarnation  is  the  basis  of  a  philosophy 
of  the  universe,  the  death  of  Christ  for  sin  contains  a  philosophy  of  human  nature; 
and  of  the  Divine  order  of  the  moral  universe,  the  resurrection  of  Christ  con- 
tributes new  elements  to  the  philosophy  of  human  life.     Yes ;  on  these  great  facts 
a  majestic  philosophy  may  rest ;  but  between  the  facts  and  our  philosophy  there  is 
a  difference  as  wide  as  between  all  other  facts  and  our  theories  about  them  ;  and  if 
you  must  be  persuaded  to  receive  the  facts  by  the  theories  that  are  constructed  in 
relation  to  them,  your  faith,  to  use  Paul's  words,  will  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  man,  and 
not  in  the  power  of  God.     We  must  begin  with  the  facts  and  pass  to  the  i^hilosophy. 
{R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)      The  insufficiency  of  worldly  irisdo)H  :■ — In  this  verse  we  have  two 
general  parts  especially  considerable  of  us.     First,  the  world's  misimprovement  and 
neglect  of  the  opportunities  of  knowledge,  which  sometimes  were  afforded  unto  them. 
Secondly,  the  supply  of  this  neglect  by  a  new  kind  of  dispensation  to  them.    The 
former  we  have  in  these  words,  "  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God  "  ;  the  latter  we 
have  in  these  :  "  After  that  ...  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness,"  &c.     We  begin 
first  of  all  with  the  former.     First,  the  wisdom  of  God.     What  is  the  meaning  of 
this  ?     The  wisdom  of  God  is  variously  taken  in  Scripture.     First,  it  is  taken  for 
an  essential  attribute  of  God  (Job  xii.  13 ;  Prov.  viii.  14).     But  this  is  not  that 
wisdom   wbich  is  meant   here  in  this  place.     Secondly,  the   wisdom   of   God  is 
sometimes  taken  for  Christ  Himself,  who  is  the  wisdom  of  the  Father  :  thus  here 
in  this  very  text  (ver.  24),  "  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  G  d." 
Thirdly,  the  wisdom  of  God  is  taken  for  that  wisdom  which  is  in  us,  participitive, 
and  by  derivation  from  God.     Thus  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  is  called  the  wisdom  of 
God  (1  K'ligs  iii.  28).     To  Joseph  it  is  said,  "  The  Spirit  of  God  was  in  him  "  in 
regard  of  his  wisdom   (Gen.  xli.  38,  39);  and  Daniel,  it  is  said  of  him  that  he 
was  a  man  "  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  the  holy  gods,  and  wisdom  like  the  wisdom 
of  the  gods,  WHS  found  in  him  "  (Dan.  v.  11).     Fourthly,  the  wisdom  of  God  is 
sometimes  taken  for  the  Scripture  and  Word  of  God,  as  Luke  xi.  49.     Fifthly,  the 
wisdom  of  God  is  taken  more  restrainedly  for  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  the 
great  mysteries  which  are  contained  in  that  (1  Cor.  ii.  7;  Eph.  iii.  10).    Lastly, 
the  wisdom  of  God  is  taken  for  the  creation  of  the  world ;  that  wisdom  which  does 
shine  forth  in  the  creature,  and  the  works  of  God  in  that  respect.     And  so  it  is 
particularly  to  be  understood  here  in  this  place.     When  it  is  said  that  "  the  world 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

knew  not  God  in  the  wisdom  of  Go'1,"  the  meaning  is  this,  that  they  did  not  so 
improve  that  advantage  for  ihe  knowledge  of  God  by  the  creation,  as  int^eed  it 
became  tliem  to  do  so.  This  work  of  the  creation  is  fitly  called  the  wisdom  of 
God,  because  the  wisdom  of  God  does  thert-in  very  much  appear  to  all  such  persons 
as  will  take  notice  of  it  (Kom.  i.  20 ;  Psa.  civ.  24).  The  second  is,  what  is  meant 
by  the  world.  And  surely  here,  as  in  the  first  term,  was  understood  the  world  for 
the  frame  of  it,  so  also  in  this  second  term  is  understood  the  world  for  the 
inhabitants  of  it.  That  world  which  is  opposed  to  the  Church,  these  are  the  world 
-which  the  apostle  Paul  points  here  unto  in  sundry  respects.  1.  Because  they  are 
most  of  the  worl  I  in  regard  of  their  number.  2.  Most  in  the  world  in  regard  of 
their  interest.  3.  Mcst  in  regard  of  their  affections.  The  third  is,  what  is  meant 
by  wisdom,  "  the  world  by  wisdom  "  ;  surely  that  is  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  as  the 
other  was  the  wisdom  of  God.  Well,  but  what  now  do  ye  call  that  here  in  this 
place?  We  may  reduce  it  to  two  branches,  either  first  of  all,  the  wisdom  of  parts 
and  natural  wit  Hnd  sagacity;  or  secondly,  the  wisdom  of  study  and  industry, 
learning  and  philosophy;  tlieir  wisdom  which  consisted  in  knowledge  of  natural 
things.  First,  they  kne*  Him  confuseWly,  but  not  distinctly  ;  they  knew  Him  in 
the  general,  but  not  in  reference  to  the  right  person.  iSeeondly,  they  knew  God 
imperfectly,  and  according  to  some  weak  and  slender  appiehensions  which  they 
had  of  Him  in  their  minds,  but  they  knew  Him  not  in  the  latitude  of  those 
excellence's  which  are  to  be  found  in  Him.  Thirdly,  they  knew  God  notionally, 
and  in  the  speculation;  they  had  some  apprehensions  of  Him  in  their  understand- 
incf.  But  they  did  not  know  Plini  practically  and  in  the  effects,  so  as  this  know- 
ledge had  any  influence  upon  their  hearts  for  the  ordering  of  their  lives  and 
conversations.  Fourthly,  they  knew  God  essentially,  as  considered  in  His  own 
nature,  but  tliey  knew  Him  not  dispensatively  and  representatively,  as  exhibited  in 
Christ.  I  come  now  in  the  next  place  to  the  proposition  itself  thus  explained  as  it 
lies  in  the  text,  that  "  in  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God," 
which  affords  us  this  observation,  as  the  moral  of  all,  that  the  greatest  wits  of  the 
world  having  no  more  but  the  common  ligiit  of  nature,  are  oftentimes  exceedingly 
to  seek  in  the  spiritual  and  saving  knowledge  of  God.  And  I  shall  endeavour  to 
make  it  good  by  a  threefold  consideration,  and  that  founded  upon  the  words  of  the 
text.  First,  the  insuliicien-'y  of  the  medium,  and  that  is  the  glory  of  God  shining 
forth  in  the  creatures,  which  is  here  cnlled  the  wisdom  of  God.  This  of  itself  is 
insufficient  to  the  producing  of  such  a  kind  of  knowledge  as  this  is.  There  is  not 
the  least  spire  of  grass,  but  it  presents  a  god  to  our  thouyhts,  much  more  the  whole 
body  of  the  creation.  This  does  exhibit  God  a  great  deal  more  fully.  But  yet  God 
as  He  is  laid  open  in  the  gospel,  and  as  He  is  mnde  known  in  the  preaching  of  the 
Word,  this  the  creature  does  not  show,  nor  is  able  to  do  it.  Secondly,  from  the 
weakness  of  the  faculty,  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God ;  that  is,  by  its  own 
wisdom,  and  that  wisdom  which  is  within  the  compass  of  itself,  so  it  knew  Him 
not.  The  wisdom  of  the  world  is  insuiKcient  alone  of  itself  to  bring  any  people  to 
the  saving  knowh  dge  of  God :  this  is  clear  out  of  sundry  places  of  Scripture 
(Matt.  xvi.  17).  So  that  we  see  how  men  may  much  abound  in  worldly  wisdom, 
and  yet  fall  short  of  evangelical  knowledge.  First,  because  this  mystery  of  the 
gospel  is  a  thing  which  is  merely  dependent  upon  the  will  and  counsel  of  God 
Himself.  Again  it  is  said  to  be  hid  in  God  (Epb.  iii.  9),  that  is,  in  the  secret  of  His 
own  purpose  and  eternal  counsel.  Secondly,  as  it  is  hid  in  God,  so  it  is  also  hid 
by  God;  and  that  of  purpose,  oftentimes,  from  those  which  are  otherwise  the 
wisest  men  in  the  world  (Matt.  xi.  25).  Thirdly,  the  world  by  the  strength  of 
natural  wisdom  is  not  able  to  ki'ow  God  in  Christ,  in  regard  of  the  disproportion 
betwixt  the  faculty  and  the  object,  the  knowledge  of  Christ  being  of  a  far  different 
and  contrary  nature  and  condition  hereunto.  We  know  that  no  faculty  can  act 
beyond  its  own  sphere,  nor  reach  an  object  which  is  above  itself.  As  bodily  eyes 
cannot  see  spiritual  substances,  no  more  can  wit  and  natural  sagacity  be  able  to 
reach  the  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ,  which  is  an  object  transcendent  unto  it. 
The  improvement  of  this  point  to  ourselves  is  not  (as  some  would  make  it  to  be) 
from  hence  to  cast  a  refiroach  and  disparagement  upon  wit  and  human  learning. 
There  is  a  threefold  disparagement  especially  which  we  do  justly  cast  upon  human 
learning  and  the  w'sdom  of  the  world.  First,  comparative  and  exclusive,  we  do 
disparage  it  and  diminish  from  it  so.  Human  learning,  if  we  compare  it  with 
Divine,  and  worldly  wisdom  with  the  wisdom  from  alcove  ;  here  it  is  as  good  as 
nothing  (Phil.  iii.  8).  Secondly,  we  do  disparage  hnmau  wisdom,  as  a  ground 
or  aigument  of  pride  and  boasting  and   carnal  confidence.     Thirdly,  and  more 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   COniNTIJlANS. 


principally  to  our  present  purpose,  we  do  disjiavajAe  human  wisdom  in  reference  to 
such  au  effect  as  this,  which  is  to  bring  those  that  have  it  to  the  saving  knowledge 
of  God  in  Christ.  Here  the  wisdom  of  the  world  is  too  weak,  and  of  small  or 
no  etifect ;  it  cannot  do  this.  Go  to  now,  let  us  see  then  in  what  sense  we  do 
disparage  this  wisdom  of  the  world ;  namely,  as  in  another  case  we  seem  likewise 
to  disparage  good  works  ;  this  is  not  simply  considered  in  themselves,  but  in  order 
to  justification  and  merit.  The  third  is,  from  the  perverseness  of  the  subjects  ; 
namely,  those  p'-rsons  in  which  this  wisdom  was,  they  did  not  do  their  duty  to  this 
purpose  as  they  should,  and  from  hence  it  comes  to  pass  oftentimes  that  they  are 
as  they  are.  The  world  by  wisdom  miglit  have  known  Him  more  than  they  did,  if 
they  had  given  themselves  to  it.  But  there  was  a  manifold  olistruction  upon  them, 
which  is  a  great  hindrance  hereunto.  At  first,  then-  nou-attendancy,  that  they  d  d 
not  heed  nor  apply  their  minds  to  these  things.  A  scholar  that  looks  oft'  Lis 
book  will  never  learn  his  letters,  let  them  be  written  or  printed  before  hiin  in  never 
so  fair  and  elegant  a  character.  Secondly,  it  proceeds  from  idleness  and  want  of 
taking  some  pains  with  ourselves  to  dive  into  these  things.  A  scholar  must  not 
only  lead  but  study,  that  will  improve  in  any  knowledge.  A  thiid  obstruction  to 
this  knowledge  is  pride  and  scornfulncss  of  spirit,  because  men  think  themselves 
too  good  to  be  taught  or  learn  anytliing.  Well,  to  close  up  all  now  with  a  brief 
word  of  application,  let  us  consider  what  does  result  from  these  truths  for  our  own 
use.  And  first  let  us  here  take  notice  of  the  corrupt  nature  which  is  in  man,  to 
be  abased  and  humbled  for  it.  Secondly,  seeing  the  world  by  wi>dom  knew  not 
God,  let  us  then  labour  to  find  somewhat  more  in  us  than  worldly  wisdom. 
Thirdly,  let  those  who  know  God  and  have  this  worldly  wisdom,  see  what  cause 
they  hive  to  bless  God  and  to  acknowledge  His  goodness  to  them.  And  again,  for 
those  who  desire  this  wisdom,  let  them  learn  hence  to  veil  and  cover  the  other, 
and  lay  it  down  in  order  to  the  oihcr,  where  it  makes  any  opposition  and  resistance. 
Yet  to  conclude,  let  me  add  one  thing  more,  and  that  is  this,  that  tbough  human 
wit  does  not  give  grace  of  itself,  yet  it  does  sometimes  forward  the  means  of  grace, 
and  accordingly  is  to  be  imj^roved  by  us  ;  as  the  star  occasionally  led  the  wise  men 
to  Christ.  Again,  though  parts  make  us  not  good  at  first,  yet  when  we  are  good 
they  are  good  helps  to  mtike  us  better  and  more  useful  in  the  exercise  of  piety ; 
and  so  likewise  are  we  conscionably  to  use  them.  {2'hoiiias  Horton,  D.D.) 
Fliilosophy  and  the  gospel : — I.  The  failure  of  puilosophy.  1.  Exhiijited  in 
ignorance  of  God.  *  2.  Occasioned  by  wisdom.  3.  The  conformity  with  the 
wisdom  of  God.  II.  Tue  success  of  the  gospel.  Though  the  scorn  of  man 
it  is — 1.  The  salvation  of  believers.  2.  The  pleasure  of  God.  (J.  Lytli, 
D.D.)  Gud's  plan  of  salvation  a  remedfi  for  titans  ignorance: — ^To  each  man 
his  highest  welfaie  is  entrusted  as  a  most  solemn  charge.  The  question  is. 
By  what  method  can  he  obtain  salvation?  To  know  what  his  duties  are,  he  must 
be  acquainted  with  his  Ruler.  A  true  knowledge  of  God  is  therefore  indispensable. 
Let  us  consider  the  assertions  of  the  text.  I.  A  true  knowledge  of  God  not 
EEACHED  BY  jian's  WISDOM.  Consider — 1.  The  admissions  of  the  wisest  men  of  old. 
The  lament  of  Plato  was  that  it  w-as  so  hard  to  discover  the  Father  of  the  universe, 
and  he  never  seems  to  have  reached  the  conception  of  God  as  a  self-conscious, 
living,  personal  Being.  Socrates  deeHied  it  the  greatest  happiness  to  know  the 
will  of  tbe  gods ;  but  how  this  knowledge  was  to  be  obtained  he  could  not  say ; 
perhaps  by  a  resort  to  divination.  2.  The  low  morality  of  heathenism  at  its 
brightest  periods.  Vices  tolerated  which  now  are  reprobated.  The  mythologies 
are  disgraceful.  All  this  shows  practical  ignorance  of  God.  3.  The  assertions  of 
modern  philosophy — that  it  has  dislodged  theology  from  its  lofty  pedestal,  and 
made  it  only  a  curious  speculation.  The  world  by  wisdom  now  knows  not  God, 
nor  seems  likely  to.  It  refuses  the  appointed  organ  of  knowledge,  and  resemliles  a 
man  attempting  to  learn  the  meaning  of  sounds  by  the  eye  instead  of  the  ear. 
II.  God's  kkmedy  for  man's  ignorance  is  foolishness  in  the  eyes  of  the  world. 
The  remedy  is  "  preaching,"  including  the  thing  preached  and  the  act  of  preaching. 
This  preaching  is  to  the  wisdom  of  man  foolishness,  for — 1.  It  simply  states  facts, 
not  theories  and  reasonings.  Tue  apostles  came  simply  to  "bear  witness"  to 
Christ.  2.  It  states  facts  likely  to  excite  contempt.  The  Jew  didn't  want  a 
suffering  Messiah;  the  Greek  could  not  understand  a  crucintd  God.  3.  It  makes 
salvation  depend  on  faith,  not  on  wisdom.  "  To  save  them  that  bebeve."  III.  The 
conspicuous  manifestation  afforded  of  the  wisdom  of  God.  Wisdim  is  dis- 
coverable— 1.  In  the  whole  plan,  in  that  man  was  first  taught  his  weakness.  A 
wise  teacher  lets  his  pupil  flounder  a  little  that  he  may  learn  a  les.-on  of  humility. 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

So  the  centuries  before  Christ  are  a  standing  rebuke  to  man,  reminding  liira  of  his 
impotence.  Hence  no  flesh  can  "  glory  in  the  presence  of  God."  The  saint 
cannot,  for  all  he  knows  was  taught  him ;  the  preacher  cannot,  since  the 
"  treasure  "  does  not  depend  on  the  "  earthen  vessel  "  for  its  value  ;  the  facts  lie 
has  to  deliver  are  successful  not  from  his  eloquence,  or  thought,  or  exposition.  2. 
In  the  plan  of  proclamation,  in  that  it  enables  all  Christians  to  be  preachers.  He 
has  only  to  testify  what  he  has  seen,  tasted,  and  felt.  3.  la  making  salvation 
depend  on  faith,  in  that  it  makes  salvation  possible  to  all.  {S.  R.  Aldridge,  B.A.) 
God's  interposition  for  the  world: — I.  Its  condition — ignorant  of  God,  conse- 
quently— 1.  Alienated.  2.  Guilty.  3.  Depraved.  4.  Miserable.  II.  Its  help- 
lessness— unaHeviated  by — 1.  Philosophy.  2.  Art.  3.  Legislation.  4.  Religious 
systems— infidelity.  III.  Its  belief — by  the  foolishness  of  preaching — exemplified 
in — 1.  The  preacher.  2.  The  subject.  3.  The  condition.  4.  The  result.  {J.Burnet.) 
God's  procedure  with  the  world  : — I.  His  wisdom.  1.  In  delaying  the  revelation  of 
the  gospel.  2.  In  affording  man  ample  opportunity  to  test  the  insufficiency  of 
reason.  8.  And  by  his  worldly  wisdom  to  work  out  his  own  misery.  II.  His 
PLEASURE.  1.  In  the  discovery  of  His  mercy.  2.  In  its  free  dispensation  by  the 
foolishness  of  preaching — to  all  that  believe.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  world's  need 
and  God's  remedy  : — I.  The  state  of  the  then  heathen  world.  1.  It  "  knew  not 
God."  It  was  in  no  barbarous  age  that  the  apostle  bore  this  testimony  ;  but  in  the 
evening  of  the  Augustan  age,  when  man's  intellect  had  been  developed  to  the  utmost. 
It  was  not  on  the  Arab's  tent,  nor  the  Indian's  wigwam,  that  these  words  were 
inscribed  ;  but  it  was  on  the  polished  marbles  of  Athens  and  on  the  proud  walls  of 
imperial  Eome.  And  not  only  was  it  of  that  particular  age  he  spoke ;  but  he  seems 
to  look  back  to  the  very  earliest  aues,  "  After  that,"  &c.  After  four  thousand  years 
liad  rolled  by,  looking  back  to  the  place  where  science  was  born  and  cradled,  to 
Egypt  with  its  reptile  gods,  to  Babylon  where  science  was  nourished  and  cherished, 
and  whither  the  Grecian  sages  went  to  light  their  lamps.  2.  It  was  in  a  perishing 
condition.  Men  would  not  have  needed  to  be  s:ived  if  they  were  not  lost.  II.  The 
method  of  relief  which  God  provided.  "  It  pleased  God."  Here  is  something 
in  which  the  Lord  delighted.  And  what  was  it  that  "pleased  God  " ?  It  was  that 
which  man  despised.  Beware  how  you  say  a  word  against  preaching,  and  extol  or 
depreciate  it  in  favour  of  sacraments.  But  what  is  tliis  preaching  ?  Heralding, 
the  calling  of  the  rebel  to  submission,  the  exhibition  of  the  lawful  Sovereign,  the 
proclamation  of  mercy  from  the  "King  of  kings,"  &c.  And  what  is  the  substance  of 
this  preaching  ?  Christ,  in  all  the  glories  of  His  person  ;  in  all  the  sufficiency  of 
His  offices,  and  in  all  the  riches  of  His  grace.  But  this  is  not  all.  There  is  a 
peculiar  character  in  this  preaching,  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  the  apostle 
means  its  simplicity.  It  is  possible  so  to  preach  Christ  and  His  gospel  as  to  strip 
it  of  its  power.  Conceal  it  in  the  tangled  web  of  human  sophistry  ;  garnish  it  with 
the  flowers  of  human  eloquence  ;  obscure  it  with  the  dusky  mantle  of  antiquity ; 
dress  it  up  in  the  gorgeous  dish ;  and  what  do  you  ?  You  destroy  its  hidden  power. 
You  may  attract  the  eye  of  man  from  the  precious  pearl  to  the  gorgeous  setting  of 
it;  and  what  do  you  then  ?  It  is  "  an  uncertain  sound"  which  the  trumpet  gives, 
and  none  will  "prepare  them  for  the  battle."  It  is  only  plain,  affectionate, 
scriptural  declarations  of  God's  truth,  unreserved,  full,  free,  from  the  heart,  and  in 
the  power  and  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  that  can  save  th^m  that  believe.  III. 
The  result  of  the  application  of  this  remedy.  It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness 
of  preaching  to  save — whom  ?  all  the  world  ?  every  creature  ?  No  ;  "  them  that 
believe."  The  effect  of  early  evangelising  efforts  at  best  what  is  it  ?  "  And  it  came 
to  pass,  that  some  believed,  and  some  believed  not."  It  was  nearly  three  centuries 
before  the  civilised  world  became  Christian.  But  in  all  cases  preaching  did  "  save 
them  that  believed  "  ;  and  there  is  the  important  truth  to  flx  the  mind  upon.  Look 
at  the  converts ;  whether  they  were  in  Jewry,  or  in  Corinth,  or  in  Athens  ;  wherever 
it  might  be  the  effect  which  fullowed  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  was  the  same. 
"  As  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God," 
Ac.  Lions  became  lambs;  licentious  men  pure;  impious  men  became  pious. 
These  were  the  elfects  which  uniformly  followed  in  them  that  believed.  {Dean  Close.) 
Divine  wisdom  displaiied  in  the  gosjiel : — I.  The  Christian  religion  is  a  super- 
natural science.  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God."  Genuine  religion  is  a 
subject  of  pure  revelation,  and  cannot  be  discovered  by  human  reason,  in  its  most 
perfect  state.  It  is  a  spiritual  science,  and  can  only  be  comprehended  by  faith, 
and  realised  through  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).     II.  The 

GOSPEL   IS    A   FULL    DEVELOPMENT    OF    THE    METHOD    OF    SALVATION.       "  It    pleased     God 


CH.vr.  I.]  /.   CORINTHIANS.  55 

by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  Ihat  believe."  Thus,  the  gospel  is 
not  only  a  revelation  of  the  scheme  of  salvation,  but  also  an  instrument  of  its 
accomplishment  in  the  believer  (Rom.  i.  10).  III.  The  gospel  is  a  gloiuous 
DISPLAY  OF  INFINITE  WISDOM.  "In  the  wisdom  of  God,"  &c.  The  Divine  Being 
always  acts  according  to  infinite  wisdom  and  eternal  truth.  In  the  dispensation  of 
grace,  the  Lord  has  proposed  the  best  possible  ends,  and  accomplishes  them  by  the 
best  possible  means.  It  is  not  only  a  display  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  but  is  the 
medium  of  all  Christian  knowledge.  IV.  The  gospel  is  a  clear  manifestation 
OF  Divine  benevolence  and  love.  "  It  pleased  God,"&c.  V.  The  gospel  enjoins 
FAITH  AS  AN  EssENTi.AL  PRINCIPLE  OF  SALVATION.  "  It  pleased  God  to  save  them 
that   believe."      (Sketches   of  Servtons.)  Sense,   reusou,   and  faith: — Here  we 

have  three  kinds  of  evidence  referred  to — the  sign  looked  for  by  the  Jews ; 
the  philosophy  sought  after  by  the  Greeks ;  and  the  wisdom  and  power  of 
God.  This  leads  to  observations  on — I.  The  domain  of  sense.  The  present 
age  is  one  in  which  sense  knowledge  is  unduly  exalted.  This  arises  partly 
from  the  vast  advancement  of  physical  science,  and  partly  from  the  de- 
velopment of  commerce  which  leaves  small  time  or  inclination  for  the  study  of 
spiritual  things.  1.  But  sense  knowledge  is — (1)  Exceedingly  limited.  We  know 
very  little  indeed  from  direct  experience ;  information  for  the  most  part  is  based 
upon  testimony.  Even  in  science  the  great  mass  have  neither  time,  means,  nor 
capacity  to  conduct  experiments,  and  thus  to  verify  the  theories  they  so  boMly 
advocate.  We  must  always  believe  much  more  than  we  can  know.  (2)  Often 
deceptive.  The  state  of  our  minds  always  gives  colouring  to  eternal  things. 
We  see  in  nature  just  what  we  bring  to  nature  the  capacity  for  seeing.  The  same 
scenery  produces  very  different  effects  upon  diffei'ent  minds,  and  upon  the  same 
mind  at  different  times.  (3)  Never  extends  be\ond  the  surface  of  things.  Beliiud 
the  domain  of  our  experience  tbere  lies  a  whole  world  of  things  which  we  can  never 
cognize  with  any  organ  of  sense.  2.  Christianity  is  based  upon  as  much  sense 
knowledge  as  will  suffice  to  prove  its  truth.  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  greatest 
fact  in  history  ;  and  at  the  first  its  appeal  was  made  directly  to  the  senses.  To  us 
it  is  a  matter  of  testimony  ;  but  the  testimony  is  irresistible.  If,  like  the  Jew, 
therefore,  we  would  demand  a  sipn.it  is  forthcoming.  II.  The  province  of  rfason. 
1.  This  province  is  also  very  limited.  A  correct  process  of  ratiocination  by  no 
means  ensures  the  accuracy  of  the  conclusion  arrived  at,  for  the  premis'^s  may  be 
incorrect.  Butler  lias  well  remarked,  that  "  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the 
evidence,  with  which  we  are  obliged  to  take  up  in  the  daily  course  of  life,  is  sc;ircFly 
to  be  expressed."  Reason,  of  herself,  is  incompetent  to  inform  man  of  some  of  the 
most  important  facts  which  appear  to  lie  completely  in  her  own  domain.  Slie 
cannot  describe  the  essence  either  of  matter  or  of  mind.  The  freedom  of  tliH  will 
she  has  proved  herself  utterly  incompetent  to  deal  with.  Reason  is  by  no  means 
perfect  in  her  own  domain,  foi' — (1)  The  knowledge  on  which  the  process  is  based  is 
often  too  limited.  (2)  The  instruments  that  are  employed  are  very  defective.  2.  J\Jan 
is  not  left  to  the  guidance  of  reason  alone.  Impulse,  enthusiasm,  feeling,  passion, 
love,  and  faith  are  independent  of  reason,  and  often  lead  to  higher  results.  3. 
Christianity  is  supported  by  reason  as  far  as  their  powers  coin-'ide.  The  evidences 
of  the  Divine  auihoriiy  of  Christ's  religion  are  conclusive  if  judged  of  by  reason. 
Those,  therefore,  who  seek  after  philosophy,  like  the  Greeks,  can  find  it  here. 
4.  Many  Christian  truths  are  higher  than  r<  ason,  but  not  opposed  to  it.  Cliristi- 
anity  leads  into  a  region  where  reason  cannot  follow.  There  are  mysteries  in 
religion,  as  there  are  also  in  nature.  Man  is  surrounded  by  mystery,  and  is  himself 
the  greatest  mystery  of  all.  And  mvstery  deepens  as  knowledge  increases.  III. 
The  region  of  faith.  This  belongs  peculiarly  to  religion.  Here  we  can  discuss 
the  conscience,  the  soul,  and  man's  relation  to  God.  Reason  might  discover  the 
existence  of  Deity,  but  it  could  never  tell  us  of  His  relationship  to  man.  Modern 
science  puts  God,  when  it  admits  Him,  at  the  end  of  the  universe.  Revelation 
places  Him  at  the  beginning.  Scientific  men  do  not  hesitate  again  to  proclaim  the 
unknown  God,  thus  taking  us  back  two  thousand  years  in  history.  There  is  a 
tendency  in  this  age  to  decry  faith,  yet  society  could  not  exist  a  week  without  it. 
Christ  is  described  as — 1.  The  wisdom  of  God.  Everything  seen  in  His  light  is 
clear.  By  Him  we  read  the  riddle  of  ths  universe.  The  purpose  of  God  in 
creation  is  seen  in  Him,  and  nowhere  else.  2.  The  power  of  God.  His  influence 
on  the  ages  is  greater  than  that  of  all  other  systems  combined.  And  He  alone  can 
save  the  soul.  3.  Christ  is  the  "  wisdom  of  God  and  the  power  of  God  "  only  to 
those  who  believe.     They  become  one  with  Him,  and  receive  out  of  the  fulness  of 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

His  grace.  [G.  Scxt  ■n,  LL.D.)  It  pleased  God  toy  the  foolishness  of  preaching 
to  save  them  that  believe. — The  fnoU^hneas  of  prcacldini : — God's  "  folly  "  is  the 
highest  wisdom;  man's  highest  "wisdom"  is  but  folly.  The  foolishness  of 
preaching  is  here  contrasted  with  the  wisdom  of  human  teaching.  I.  Whebein 
DOES  THE  "FOOLISHNESS  OF  PKEACHiNG  "  CONSIST?  1.  God  cbooses  and  uses  the 
simplest  means  to  save  men,  which  human  philos  pliers  would  have  scorned.  It 
is  the  firoclaniation  of  a  message.  God's  plan  is,  first  of  all,  to  tell  men  the  good 
news  of  a  free,  full  salvation.  After  they  have  believed  and  accepted  the  gift  of 
God,  they  are  to  be  taught  more  fully  the  whole  range  of  Christ's  commands.  But, 
at  the  beginning,  it  is  only  pointing  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  ci'ying.  Behold  ! 
2.  God  takes  the  most  humble  and  unlettered  believers  as  His  heralds.  3.  God 
makes  no  heavy  demands  on  the  souls  to  whom  the  gospel  comes.  It  is  only 
"Hear,  believe,  confess."  Salvation  is  thus  put  within  reach  of  all — -even  the 
feeblest   mind   and   greatest  sinner  (Rom.  x.).     II.  In  employing  this  method — 

1.  God  discarded  the  aid  of  all  human  wisdom  in  saving  men :  "  Hath  not 
God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world?"  Not  a  feature  of  His  redemptive 
plan  was  borrowed  from  the  philosophies  of  men.  The  utter  failure  of 
human  i)hilosophy  is  one  of  the  marked  facts  of  history.  It  culminated  in 
Pantheism,  Atheism,  Materialism,  Eationalism,  Agnosticism,  or  in  a  refined 
selfishness,  like  Stoicism  and  Epicureanism.  God  not  only  discarded,  but  con- 
tradittted,  the  teachings  of  man's  philosojihy.  (1)  He  presented  Divine  thougbts 
far  above  the  thoughts  of  man  ;  mysteries  above  comprehension,  though  not  above 
apprehension  ;  things  too  high  and  lofty  for  human  wisdom  to  gra'^p,  and  which  the 
natural  man  could  not  receive.  (2)  He  dared  to  present  paradoxes,  apparent  con- 
tradictions, irreconcilable  by  man's  philosophy,  such  as  the  union  of  two  natures 
in  one  person  in  the  God-man ;  the  union  of  tbree  persons  in  one  God ;  tbe 
doctrines  of  Divine  sovereignty  and  human  free-agency,  an  unchangeable  God  and 
yet  prevailing  prayer,  &c.  (3)  The  whole  philosophy  of  redemption,  of  sin  and  its 
desert,  the  law  and  its  demands,  salvation  by  vicarious  suffering,  A'c. ,  is  above  the 
reason  of  man  to  devise,  or  even  explore.     Into  it  even  the  angels  desire  to  look. 

2.  God  discarded  all  human  merit.  The  gospel  not  only  humbles  the  proud 
intellect,  but  the  prouder  heart.  A  free  salvation  is  the  "  offence  of  the 
Cross."  III.  In  all  this  the  wisdom  of  God  appears.  For — 1.  God  makes  it 
possible  for  all  sinners  to  be  saved.  Whoever  can  sin  can  understand  sal- 
vation. All  philosophies  were  addressed  to  an  elect  few :  witness  Plato's  few 
disciples,  and  Pythagoras,  with  his  esoteric  and  esoteric  schools.  2.  God 
makes  possible  for  all  believers  to  be  preachers  of  the  gospel  and  winners  of 
souls.  3.  God  abolishes  invidious  distinctions  between  sinners  and  believers.  All 
are  on  a  level,  as  guilty,  condemned,  and  helpless  ;  all  on  a  level,  as  saved  by  grace 
■without  works.  4.  God  presents  a  faith  so  grandly  superior  to  all  human  teaching 
that  there  is  no  risk  of  confounding  it  with  man's  philosophy,  or  mistaking  it  for 
a  human  invention.  5.  God  reserves  to  Himself  all  the  glory.  Mau  has  no  ground 
for  boasting  or  self-complacency,  itc.  6.  God  teaches  men  implicit  submission  and 
obedience.  {A.  T.  PitrtiOJi,  D.D.)  TJie  icisdom  of  God  by  j)rcac)iinc! : — First, 
the  order  of  working,  "  After  that,"  &c.  Secondly,  the  affection  to  the  work, 
"  It  jDlcased  God."  Thirdly,  the  means  by  which  the  work  is  wrought,  "  the 
foolishness  of  preaching";  and  fourthly,  the  work  or  design  itself,  "To 
save  them  that  believe."  We  begin  with  the  first,  viz.,  the  order  of  working, 
"After  that,"  where  we  must  note  that  this  word  "after,"  it  carries  a  double 
force  and  emphasis  with  it,  either  first  of  all  as  a  restraining  word;  "after," 
that  is,  not  before:  or  secondly,  as  a  resolving  word,  "after,"  i.e.,  to  be  sure 
then.  First,  take  it  in  tiie  restraining  sense.  First,  that  so  by  this  means  He 
might  the  more  fully  and  palpably  convince  the  world  of  their  neglect ;  let  them 
first  alone  and  see  what  they  will  do  of  their  own  accord,  and  then  come  in  upon 
their  miscarriage.  Secondly,  that  He  might  the  more  discover  the  insufficiency  of 
mere  natural  and  carnal  wisdom,  which  did  not  yet  reach  to  the  knowledge  of  God. 
Thirdly,  that  He  might  gain  to  Himself  the  greater  glory.  He  that  does  anything 
after  another  which  misses,  he  has  from  hence  so  much  the  more  honour  to  him- 
self ;  especially  if  he  that  misses  be  one  that  pretends  to  any  great  matters,  as  here 
it  was.  The  second  is  the  affection  to  the  work,  "  It  pleased  God."  And  this  again 
carries  a  twofold  intimation  in  it.  First,  it  is  a  word  of  freedom  and  spontaneity, 
it  pleased  God,  that  is.  He  did  it  of  His  own  accord  and  inclination,  being  not 
moved  thereunto  by  anything  out  of  Himself.  Secondly,  it  is  a  word  of  'lelight  and 
complacency,  "  it  iileased  God,"  that  is,  it  was  very  acceptable  to  Him  ;  He  took  a 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  5? 


great  deal  of  pleasure  and  contentment  and  satisfaction  in  the  doing  of  it,  as  in 
nothing  more.  The  third  is  the  means  by  which  the  work  is  wrought,  and  that  is 
here  expressed  to  us  to  be  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching.  Wheie  again  there  are 
two  particulars  considerable  of  us.  First,  tlie  means  itself  considered  in  its  own 
nature,  and  that  is  j)reaching,  by  preaching  to  save  believers.  Secondly,  the 
qualification  of  this  means  as  the  denomination  which  is  put  upon  it,  and  that  is 
mean  and  contemptible.  It  is  here  cilled  the  foohshness  of  preaching.  We  will 
begin  first  of  all  with  the  second,  to  wit,  the  means  in  its  denomination,  the 
foolishness  of  preaching.  Not  as  it  is,  indeed,  but  as  it  is  rather  in  men's  appre- 
hension. Now  there  is  a  douole  account  which  may  be  given  hereof  unto  us. 
First,  occasionally  from  others  in  regard  ot  their  carriage  :  for  truly  as  many  men 
order  the  bu^iness,  it  is  the  foolishness  of  preaching  indeed  ;  there  are  some  kind 
of  persons  in  the  world  which  have  a  great  deal  to  answer  to  God  for  the  offence 
which  they  give  in  this  respect,  and  the  scandal  and  ill  report  which  they  bring  upon 
God's  own  ordinance  by  their  unworthy  managing  of  it.  But  then  again  secondly, 
there  is  an  occasidn  given  to  think  preaching  foolishness  from  too  much  niceness 
and  aiiEectation.  When  we  shall  make  preaching  a  mere  business  ot  wit,  and  a 
thing  to  tickle  the  fancy,  an  airy  and  empty  discourse,  carried  with  some  high-flown 
language,  but  never  touching  or  coming  near  the  heart,  nor  uttering  anything  which 
may  be  profitable  to  the  soul.  Secondly,  originally  from  themselves  in  regard  of 
their  own  perverse  reasonings.  And  here  tliere  are  sundry  things  which  they 
falsely  reason  uj^on.  At  first,  they  think  meanly  of  preaching,  from  the  nature  and 
condition  of  the  instruments  which  are  employed  and  improved  in  it ;  poor,  frail, 
and  weak  men  like  themselves.  If  an  angel  might  be  the  dispenser  of  it,  then  it 
may  be  they  would  have  some  hit'h  thoughts  of  it.  Secondly,  in  regard  of  the 
matter  of  it,  and  the  subject  which  it  is  conversant  about.  And  that  is,  Christ 
crucified,  this  is  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  that  is  not  only  the  ordinance,  but 
the  doctrine;  and  not  only  the  preaching,  but  the  thing  preached  about.  And  so 
not  only  in  the  narrative,  but  in  the  hortatory  part  of  it ;  when  it  persuades  men  to 
deny  themselves,  to  cross  their  sweetest  lusts.  Thirdly,  in  regard  of  the  manner  of 
it,  and  way  of  proceeding  in  it.  That  it  comes  not  so  much  with  reason  and 
demonstration,  as  rather  simple  propositions.  Fourth,  from  defect  mingled  with 
pride.  And  so  much  of  that  first,  viz.,  the  denomination  of  the  ordinance,  as  it 
is  here  styled,  the  foolishness  of  preaching.  The  second  is  the  means  and  ordinance 
itself  simply  considered,  and  that  is  preaching ;  this  is  the  means  of  working 
salvation  ;  God  saves  believers  by  preaching.  First,  by  preaching  He  makes  them 
believers ;  and  then  being  believers,  He  bestows  salvation  upon  them.  This  is  the 
order  and  method  that  God  uses.  That  poor  and  mean  ordinance  which  the  world 
thinks  so  scornfully  of,  and  counts  no  better  than  foolishness  ;  yet  it  has  this 
excellency  that  it  is  a  means  to  bring  men  to  heaven  ;  and  God  is  pleased  to  use  it 
to  this  purpose.  If  it  be  foolishness,  it  is  a  saving  foolishness,  and  that's  a  great 
deal  better  than  a  destructive  wisdom.  For  the  better  handling  of  this  present 
point,  there  are  two  particulars  which  may  here  profitably  be  considered  by  us. 
For  the  first,  what  preaching  is  :  it  is  not  merely  to  speak  somewhat  of  religion,  to 
make  a  rambling  and  roving  discourse,  and  uo;hing  to  the  purpose.  But  preaching 
is  a  ministerial  and  authoritative  improvement  of  the  truths  and  doctrines  of  the 
Scriptures,  to  the  good  and  benefit  of  men's  souls,  and  the  procurement  of  their 
eternal  salvation.  The  showing  men  of  their  misery  by  nature,  and  the  benefit 
which  they  may  have  by  Christ,  with  the  appurtenances  thereunto,  this  in  a  word 
is  preaching.  Now  further,  for  the  efficacy  of  this  ordinance,  and  whence  it  comes 
to  be  thus  powerful,  this  is  merely  from  the  ordinance  of  God.  As  it  is  His  insti- 
tution who  has  ordained  and  appointed  it  to  be  so.  "It  pleased  Him,"  there  is  an 
account  of  the  business  indeed.  Alas  !  ^jreaching  considered  in  itself  is  a  poor  and 
empty  voice,  and  were  able  to  do  no  great  matter  at  all.  It  is  not  the  gifts  of  the 
preacher,  it  is  not  the  nature  of  the  argument,  it  is  not  the  strength  of  tiie  matter, 
it  is  not  the  sweetness  of  the  expression,  it  is  none  of  all  these  things  in  th^nlSHlvea 
which  makes  preaching  so  powerful  a  conveyance ;  no,  but  the  ordinance  of  God 
which  has  appointed  to  work  by  these  means,  and  the  Sjiirit  of  God  who  is  pleased 
to  concur  with  it  in  working.  The  improvement  of  this  point  to  ourselves  for 
application  may  be  twofold.  First,  as  it  concerns  ministers,  there  is  a  very  good 
item  for  them  to  quicken  us  and  encourage  us  in  our  work,  and  the  conscionable 
discharge  of  it  without  fainting  and  giving  out.  Again,  let  us  also  hence  learn  so 
much  the  more  faithfully  to  discharge,  and  make  that  our  chief  end  in  under- 
taking it,  which  was  God's  chief  end  in  ordaining  it.     Secondly,  here  is  somewhat 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

also  for  the  people,  and  that  is  so  much  the  more  carefully  to  attend  upon  this 
ordinance  of  preaching,  and  to  take  heed  of  the  despising  of  it  as  a  weak  and  foolish 
thing  ;  they  which  despise  preaching,  they  do  in  elf  eel  despise  believing.  And  further 
let  this  teach  us  with  what  affections  to  come  to  the  ordinances,  the  preaching  and 
hearing  of  the  Word,  namely,  as  those  which  expect  and  desire  salvation  from  it  as 
the  end  whereunto  it  is  intended.  Let  us  not  come  to  a  setmon  as  to  a  prize,  or  a 
mere  trial  of  wits.  Now  the  fourth  is  the  work  or  design  itself  which  we  have  in 
the  last  words — "  To  save  them  that  believe."  Where  among  many  other  things 
which  miglit  be  profitably  observed  by  us  concerning  salvation,  in  the  nature  of  it, 
and  the  causes  of  it,  and  the  means  of  it,  and  the  like,  I  shall  at  this  time  only 
fasten  upon  that  which  is  here  especially  presented  unto  us,  and  that  is  the  subjects 
of  it — believers.  And  here  there  arc  two  things  again  which  this  restraint  does 
extend  itself  to.  First,  here  is  a  restraint  of  the  benefit  of  preaching  to  faith.  And 
secondly,  here  is  a  restraint  of  the  benefit  of  salvation  to  faith.  There  are  none 
which  have  benefit  by  preaching  any  further  than  they  believe ;  and  there  are  none 
which  do  partake  of  salvation,  but  those  only  which  do  believe  neither.  And  for 
saving  faith  has  it  here  attributed  to  itself.  First,  as  the  radical  and  fundamental 
grace,  and  that  which  puts  a  life  and  vigour  into  all  the  rest.  Secondly,  faith  has 
it  attributed  to  it,  because  it  is  that  whereby  we  please  God  (Heb.  vi.  6).  Thirdly, 
it  is  faitli  which  lays  hold  upon  Christ,  who  is  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation 
(Gal.  ii.  20).  Fourtiily,  it  is  faith  which  gives  most  glory  to  God  (Rom.  iv.  20; 
2  Thess.  i.  10).  Fifthly,  faith  is  that  which  does  most  conquer  temptations,  and 
subdue  all  the  enemies  of  our  salvation  (Ephes.  vi.  16).  Lastly,  faith  is  said  to 
save  as  the  condition  which  God  requires  and  will  have  in  them  which  shall  be 
saved ;  and  this  were  enough,  though  nothing  else,  to  give  account  of  it.  In  all 
these  respects  is  salvation  attributed  hereunto.  But  what  is  this  faith  which  we 
speak  of  all  this  while,  and  wherein  does  it  consist?  Sure  it  is  not  a  mere  assent 
to  the  truth  revealed  ;  th'iugh  that  be  somewhat  which  belongs  tliereunto,  yet  this 
is  not  all.  But  saving  faith  is  quieting  faith  too  :  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have 
peace  with  God"  (Eom.  v.).  For  the  rise  of  faith,  it  comes  by  ^ireaching,  and  is 
suitable  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Word.  Tiiose  who  contemn  the  ordinance,  they  have 
none  of  the  grace.  For  the  fruits  of  it,  it  works  by  love.  1.  It  makes  us  afraid  to 
displease  God.  2.  It  makes  us  courageous  for  God.  3.  It  makes  us  love  the 
children  of  God.  4.  It  quite  changes  and  alters  our  converse  from  evil  to  good. 
(Thomas   Hortnn,   D.I).)  The   fouUshne^s   and   excellence  of  xireaching  : — God 

frequently  employs  instrumentality  in  the  accumplishment  of  His  purposes  so 
inadequate,  as  to  make  it  manifest  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  of  Himself. 
It  was  before  the  blast  of  rams'  horns  that  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down,  &q.  ;  and 
it  is  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  that  souls  are  saved.  Note — I.  The  apparent 
FOOLISHNESS  OF  riiEACHiNG.  1.  How  inadequnte  is  the  means  itself  to  accomplish 
much !  How  little  has  human  eloquence  been  able  in  other  fields  to  achieve  ? 
True  ;  once  an  orator's  audience,  wrought  up  by  his  invective,  exclaimed,  "  Let  us 
march  against  our  foe  !  "  But  that  effect  soon  passed  away.  And  in  the  ordinary 
intercourse  of  mankind ;  look  at  the  effect  of  mere  persuasion,  when  it  comes  in 
collision  with  men's  passions,  interests,  aud  tastes.  2.  But  the  inadequacy  of  the 
instrumentality  will  be  still  more  apparent  when  we  remember  that  the  first 
preachers  of  the  gospel  were  not  highly  gifted,  and  had  no  advantage  of  rank,  or 
infiuence.  They  were  unlettered  fishermen,  who  had  no  excellency  of  speech  ;  and 
taking  the  mass  of  ministers  in  all  ages,  how  few  have  had  any  pretensions  to 
transcendant  powers  of  persuasion !  '6.  But  if  we  pass  on  to  regard  the  grand 
iheme  of  preaching  the  foolishness  of  preaching  will  be  still  more  obvious.  The  Cross 
of  Christ  has  ever  been  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block  and  to  the  Greek  foolishness. 
4.  And  yet  more  will  the  foolishness  of  preaching  strike  us  if  we  regard  how 
contrary  to  the  natural  bias  is  that  effect  at  which  preaching  aims.  It  aims  at 
getting  men  to  "  deny  themselves,"  to  crucify  the  fiesh  with  its  affections  aud  lusts  ; 
to  live  for  eternity  and  not  for  time.  II.  Its  keal  wisdom  and  excellency.  1.  It 
is  an  ordinance  of  Almighty  God.  Judaism  was  propagated  by  ceremonies  and 
types;  false  religions  have  usually  been  propagated  by  the  sword;  but  it  is  the  pre- 
eminent peculiarity  of  the  religion  of  Jesus,  that  by  the  simple  appeal  of  truth  to 
the  conscience  and  the  heart,  it  has  its  potency  and  its  tiiumph.  Omniscience 
could  only  devise,  and  infinite  grace  must  have  prompted  the  best  of  all  machinery. 
2.  It  is  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  are  under  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  communicates  Himself  mainly  and  most  frequently 
through  preaching.     3.  The  theme  at  which  the  Jews  stumbled,  and  which  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.    CORINTIIIASS.  59 

Greeks  esteemed  foolishness  is  to  them  that  are  called  "  Christ  the  power  of  God 
and  the  wisdom  of  God."  4.  It  is  attended  with  great  and  gracious  results.  Why 
are  we  not  gathered,  as  our  forefathers  were,  under  the  oak-tree,  to  go  through  our 
dark  orgies  of  impiety  and  blood?  Why  have  we  the  arts,  and  sciences,  and 
literature,  and  all  that  marks  out  a  civilised  people  ?  These  are  the  external 
triumphs  of  Christianity.  But  they  are  nothing  compared  with  its  internal,  its 
eveilastiiig  triumphs.  What  multitudes  has  it  made  to  pass  from  death  to  life,  from 
darkness  to  light,  from  the  bondage  of  Satan,  to  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  Son  of 
God.  Conclusion  :  If,  on  the  one  hand,  preaching  appears  so  foolish,  and,  on  the 
other,  it  is  so  wise  and  powerful — 1.  Do  not  fall  into  the  false  notion  of  the  day, 
that  education  is  to  be  the  grand  regenerator  of  mankind.  2.  How  faulty  must 
many  of  you  be  when  you  go  to  hear  the  preaching  of  the  Word  much  as  the  world 
goes  to  the  theatre ;  when  you  go  to  hear  the  words  of  man  instead  of  the  Word  of 
God.  3.  How  much  does  it  behove  the  Christians  of  this  country  to  multiply  that 
machinery  which  is  God's  great  ordinance,  to  promote  that  righteousness  which 
exaltelh  a  nation.     {Canon  Stowell.)  The  preacliinrj  of  the  (joapel : — The  chief 

means  by  whi<-h  tbe  blessings  of  this  revelation  have  been  communicated  to 
mankind,  is  the  preaching  of  the  Word  —  a  means  of  instruction  which,  in 
the  tune  of  St.  Paul,  was  in  a  great  measure  new  to  the  world.  It  had  been 
employed,  indeed,  in  the  Jewish  synagogue,  at  the  reading  of  the  law  and 
the  prophets  ;  but  that  employment  of  it  was  very  limited,  both  in  respect  of 
the  subjects  which  it  embraced,  and  of  the  persons  to  whom  it  was  addressed  : 
and  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  heathen  nations,  the  practice  was 
alto;:etlier  unknown.  In  Greece,  by  far  the  most  celebrated  of  these  nations 
for  learning  and  refinement,  there  were  magnificent  temples,  in  which  many 
splendid  ceremonies  were  observed  in  honour  of  the  gods,  and  a  variety  of  ollicers 
consecrated  to  the  services  of  devotion;  but  ttiere  was  no  institutinn  like  that  of 
preaching,  for  explaining  to  the  people  the  iJrinciples  of  their  religiou.s  sy>tem. 
Hence,  when  tiie  apostles  of  Christ  went  forth  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
unfolding  clearly  its  doctrines  and  its  objects,  thnirplan  of  conduct  excited  surprise. 
By  the  Greeks  in  particular  it  was  derided  as  foolishness — as  a  scheme  of  reforma- 
tion unskilfully  devised,  and  on  account  of  the  simplicity  and  weakness  of  those 
who  engaged  in  it,  incapable  of  answering  any  valuable  end.  I.  The  preaching  of 
the  gospel  has  contributed  in  a  remarkible  degree  to  ijiprove  the  intellectual 

CAPACITIES  OF   HDMAX    NATURE,  AND    TO    DISSEJtINA  I E,  TllKOUd  i    A    WIOKR    SPHERE,    TIIE 

PRINCIPLES  OF  USEFUL  KNOWLEDGE.  It  threw  iiito  the  circulation  of  human  thought 
a  new  stock  of  most  interesting  principles — jirinciples  well  e-^tahlished  themselves, 
fruitful  in  important  consequences,  and  tilted  to  exercise  all  the  higher  faculties  of 
the  understanding.  It  trained  a  numerous  order  of  men,  and  forced  them,  by  the 
very  nature  of  their  employment,  to  cultivate  thi^r  intellectual  talents,  to  cherish 
habits  of  regular  thought,  and  to  study  the  most  effectual  method  of  elucidating 
and  confirming  the  doctrines  which  they  t  >ught.  This  order  of  men  it  mingled 
with  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  placed  them  in  a  situntion,  where  their  example 
and  instructions  could  not  fail  to  draw  forth  and  improve  the  reasoning  powers  of 
their   hearers.      This   institution   furnishes,    besides — II.   A  rich   inexhaustible 

TREASURE  OF  CONSOLATION  TO  EVERY  INDIVIDUAL  WHO  EJIPLOl'S  IT  WITH  PROPER  MS- 
POSITIONS.  Numerous  are  the  evils  to  which  we  are  subjected  in  the  course  of  our 
earthly  pilgrimage.  In  the  sanctuary  of  God  we  see  the  plan  of  Providence 
unveiled,  and,  through  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  discover  ordi-r  and  beauty  rising 
from  the  darkness.  The  train  of  thouglit  w-hich  is  there  presented  to  us,  and 
rendered  habitual  by  its  frequent  recurrence,  has  a  direct  and  powerful  tendency  to 
calm  the  agitations  of  a  troubled  heart,  and  to  re  establish  our  confidence  in  God. 
We  there  learn  that  God  is  good  to  all ;  that,  through  Christ,  He  is  reconcilable 
even  to  the  guilty ;  that  His  government  of  the  universe  is  free  from  defect ;  that 
the  apparent  disorder  around  us  is  essential  to  the  nature  of  onr  probationary  state, 
and  productive  of  good;  that  even  atHictions  are  frequently  messengers  of  His 
love.  But  the  doctrines  which  the  preaching  of  tiie  gospel  preserves,  and  diffuses 
through  all  orders  of  the  people,  tend  not  only  to  enlighten  the  understandings  of 
men  and  to  alleviate  the  ills  of  life.  They  are  also — III.  Powerful  means  of  our 
MORAL  improvement.  The  system  of  duty  which  the  go.'^pel  contains  is  most 
peifei^t  in  itself,  and  most  wisely  adapted  to  the  exigencies  of  human  nature.  It 
reaches  to  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart;  it  pres(^ribes  with  a  minuteness 
and  accuracy  which  leaves  no  room  for  misconception,  the  conduct  pmper  for  all 
the  situations  in  which  we  may  be  called  to  act ;  and  it  enforces  its  precepts  by 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  i. 

motives  the  most  awful  and  the  most  interesting  which  can  operate  on  the  mind. 
(Jas.  Finlaijson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22-24.  For  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom. 

— Christianity  viewed  in  three  anjiects : — I.  As  associated  with  a  great  fact. 
"  Christ  crucified."  This  maybe  looked  at — 1.  Historically.  As  an  historical  fact 
it  is  the  most — (1)  Famous.  (2)  Influential.  (3)  Best  authenticated.  2.  Theolo- 
gically— (1)  It  unfolds  the  Divine,  and  is  a  mighty  expression  of  God's  idea, 
government,  and  heart.  3.  Morally.  It  is  fraught  with  suggestion  the  most — (1) 
Quickening.  (2)  Elevating.  (3)  Sanctifying.  II.  As  associated  with  populak 
OPINION.  It  had  not  sufficient  of  the  gorgeous  philosophical  ritualism  for  the 
speculative  and  pedantic  Greek,  nor  sufficient  of  the  gorgeous  religious  ritualism 
for  the  sensuous  and  bisoted  Jew.  And  now  to  millions  it  is  nothing.  To  the 
sceptic  it  is  a  fable  ;  to  the  formalist  a  creed  or  a  ceremony.  III.  As  associated 
WITH  Chkistian  consciousness.  "But  unto  them  that  are  called,"  <fec.  The 
Christian  sees  the  highest  wisdom  in  a  system  which,  in  saving  a  sinner — 1.  Mani- 
fests the  righteousness  of  an  insulted  sovereign.  2.  Augments  the  influence  of 
moral  government.  3.  Maintains  intact  all  the  principles  of  moral  freedom.  4. 
Develops,  strengthens,  and  perfects  all  the  powers  of  the  soul.  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Jew,  Greek,  and  Christian : — The  Christian  of  to-day  can  but  ill-understand  the 
Christian  of  the  year  50.  Perhaps  if  he  did,  he  might  feel  much  more  as  did  the 
Greek  or  the  Jew^  than  as  did  the  Christian.  1.  Think  of  Paul  in  Corinth.  (1) 
The  city  was  full  of  Jews,  base  sometimes,  and  poor,  doing  meanest  work ;  rich 
sometimes,  and  able  to  play  as  it  profited  him  most.  (2)  There,  too,  was  the 
Greek,  argumentative  in  his  very  commerce,  and  beating  out  all  questions  con- 
nected with  the  jjrinciples  and  profits  of  trade.  (3)  There,  too,  was  the  Eoman, 
thinking  the  world  had  been  made  to  be  conquered,  and  he  the  conqueror  of  the 
world.  (4)  And  Paul  preached,  and  the  Jew  hated  aud  despised  ;  the  Greek  smiled 
in  his  large  disdain  ;  the  Roman  tolerated  in  his  proud  indifference ;  and  you 
might  have  seen  liim  some  evening  stealing  aloug  the  quay,  the  mean-looking  little 
Hebrew,  who  still  could  not  be  conqueied,  but  resolved  that  his  gospel  should  con- 
quer men,  finding  entrance  by  a  main  stair  to  a  meaner  upper  room,  where  the 
slave  set  free  for  an  hour  by  his  master,  or  the  wharfinger  escaping  from  loading 
and  unloading  his  ship,  or  the  porter  seeking  relief  from  his  weary  burden  by 
day,  met  with  their  small  offerings  to  hear  the  preacher,  great,  in  spite  of  his 
meanness,  in  dignity  and  in  power.  Had  Peter  gone  to  Corinth,  Peter  would  have 
preached  and  hardly  known,  and  less  cared,  how  people  thought  and  what  they 
felt;  but  the  keen,  creative  spirit  of  Paul  could  insert  itself  into  the  brain  of  the 
Pioman,  and  look  through  his  eyes  ;  into  the  intellect  of  the  Greek,  and  judge  with 
his  cynicism ;  into  the  imagination  of  the  Hebrew,  and  feel  with  his  heart,  dream 
with  his  fancy.  2.  Here  you  have  the  reminiscence  of  the  older  time,  and  that 
reminiscence  comes  out  in  three  series  of  antitheses.  (1)  There  are  three  typical 
persons — the  Jew,  the  Greek,  the  Christian.  (2)  The  three  typical  persons  have 
three  characteristic  quests.  The  Jew  requires  a  sign,  the  Greek  wisdom,  the 
Christian  preaches  Christ.  (3)  There  are  three  typical  attitudes  of  the  one  subject. 
Christ  is  to  the  Jew  a  stumbling-block,  to  the  Greek  foolishness,  to  the  Christian 
the  power  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  What  the  Jew  demanded  was  a  vision  of 
power;  what  the  Greek  sought  was  a  source  of  wisdom  ;  what  the  Christian  found 
was  power  and  wisdom  in  one.  Look,  then,  at  these  three  persons,  with  their 
characteristic  quests  and  attitudes.  They  are  old,  they  are  new  ;  they  belong  to 
nineteen  centuries  distant,  they  live  to-day.  I.  The  Jew.  Illustrious  was  his 
ancestry,  and  he  could  feel  that  he  was  in  the  face  of  people  that  were  of  yesterday 
and  of  earth,  while  he  was  of  eternity  aud  of  God.  His  founder  was  Abraham, 
friend  of  God,  greatest  of  faithful  men  ;  his  lawgiver  was  Moses,  author  of  a  law 
straight  come  from  God.  The  literature  of  Greece  and  Rome  was  of  the  earth  ;  his 
was  a  book  God  made.  Nay,  they  worshipped  idols ;  he  worshipped  the  one 
Creator.  And  so,  jiroud  man  was  the  Jew,  proudest  for  this  reason — he  owned  God 
rather  than  God  owned  him.  He  so  owned  God,  that  he  determined  the  very  terms 
on  which  God  was  to  be  held  and  known  by  other  men.  And  so  he  said,  when  he 
stood  before  the  new  gospel,  "  Show  me  a  sign  "  :  but  by  the  very  terms  no  miracle  was 
possible.  The  Jew  said,  "  I  am  God's  great  work  ;  a  greater  than  I  is  not  in  the 
world  :  I  am  the  sign  ;  show  me  a  greater."  2.  Ah,  Jew  !  if  thou  hadst  been  able 
to  see  the  Christ,  thou  hadst  seen  a  greater.  Think  of  Him  ;  child  He  is  of  thine 
own  proud  race,  yet  lowly  in  heart,  giving  rest  unto  the  soul.     Thou  hast  cause 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  Gl 

for  pridp,  O  Jew  !  yet  greater  stiU  for  humiliation.  Out  of  thy  loins  He  sprung; 
yet  for  Him  thou  only  hadst  the  Cross.  See  how  He  "  broke  His  birth's  invidious 
bar";  see  how,  breakinp;  it,  He  became  no  local,  narrow  Jew,  but  Son  of  Man,  yet 
Son  of  God.  See  how,  through  Him,  God  became  the  new  Being  for  man — Father. 
He  stands  manifest  God,  witness  to  this — that  man's  sin  is  God's  sorrow,  naan's 
saving  God's  suffering.  From  millions  the  cry  has  risen  for  the  Father.  Out  of 
heaven  the  Father  stoops  to  seek  the  sons.  Here,  through  His  Son,  he  comes  to 
create  a  great  family  of  God,  and  a  Greek  and  Jew  become  brothers;  Roman  forgets 
empire  and  Hindoo  colour;  negro  loses  slavery,  male  ceases  to  be  man,  female 
ceases  to  be  woman— all  become  one  in  Christ.  Mu'acle  ye  claim  and  seek,  O  Jew  1 
to  you  a  miracle  I  bring  !  II.  The  Greek.  1.  He,  too,  had  his  illustrious 
ancestry.  He  made  this  great  discovery  :  freedom,  manhood  through  freedom. 
Read  the  inscriptions  of  Assyrian  kings  that  tell  you  how  they  vanquished  emi)ires, 
but  tell  you  not  of  the  armies  they  lost  and  the  armies  they  destroyed  without  pity 
or  regret.  Read  the  records  of  Egyptian  monuments,  and  they  will  tell  how  a 
great  king,  to  preserve  his  very  dust,  builds  a  mighty  pyramid,  throwing  thousands 
of  men  away  in  the  building  of  it.  The  Greek,  in  creating  a  free  state,  created  the 
very  idea  of  manhood.  Man  free  is  man  reasonable,  ordered,  a  sof-ial,  joyous, 
complete  life.  He,  too,  discovered  for  all  time  art  and  beauty.  Take  those 
colossal  figures  standing  by  the  Nile — cobl,  impassive ;  take  those  great  Assyrian 
monarcbs — massive,  insensible  to  pity,  sensible  only  of  power;  or  look  at  the 
Hindoo,  with  his  god — many-headed,  many-armed,  many-breasted,  hideous  symbol 
of  a  race  without  beauty  ;  take  the  Greek  discovering  the  human  form  is  Divine. 
Can  you  tell  how  much  the  good  man  owes  to  the  race  that  discovered  beauty  in 
men  ?  Look  at  poetry.  Pithy  speech  for  deepest  emotion.  Think,  too,  what 
philosophy  means — the  passion  for  the  true,  the  search  for  the  good.  We  owe  that 
to  the  Greek ;  but  when  you  spoke  to  him  of  Christ,  he  turned  away  and  said, 
"Where  is  the  wisdom?  He  is  a  barbarian,  and  uses  speech  that  cannot  with 
grace  or  truth  be  called  language.  Think  of  Him,  too,  as  your  later  artist  pictured 
Him,  crowned  with  thorns.  We  love  the  gracious  and  we  love  the  great ;  we  love 
not  this."  2.  But,  O  Greek!  hast  thou  thought  of  the  meaning  of  that  Christ? 
You  love  freedom — you  made  it ;  but  see  how  you  bind  man  still  in  passion  that 
makes  him  a  very  slave.  This  Clirist  can  take  the  man  bound  in  the  bondage  of 
sin,  make  him  a  free  man  who  loves  the  law  of  God  and  loves  to  obey  it,  and 
make  him  a  citizen  of  an  eternal  kingdom.  You  made  art ;  but  think  of  the 
beauty  that  is  in  Christ — how  radiant  the  goodness  that  makes  Him  alone  "the 
altogeiher  lovely."  He  creates  the  rarer  art  of  holy  being,  of  holy  living.  You 
think  your  poetry  is  great ;  but,  see.  He  has  made  all  time,  all  the  universe — nay, 
the  very  eternity  itself,  poetical.  Has  He  not  filled  every  life  that  is  lived  with 
poetic  meaning,  by  bringing  Deity  into  humanity,  by  lifting  humanity  into  Deity. 
And  is  it  thy  wisdom,  0  Greek  !  that  thou  lovest  ?  See,  then,  in  this  Christ  is  the 
great  mystery  of  being — God  that  made  the  world,  the  end  to  which  God  made  it, 
the  means  by  which  He  is  to  reach  His  end,  the  glorious  method  by  which  the 
scattered  and  multitudinous  creatures  who  have  estranged  themselves  from  Him 
may  yet,  through  holy  concord,  and  beautiful  love,  and  perfect  devotion,  be  brought 
into  a  saved  society  in  Him.  O  Greek  !  in  Him  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  of  knowledge  ;  in  Him  thou  hast  all  things.  III.  The  Christian.  It  is  said, 
"  If  thou  wouldst  know  a  poet,  go  and  live  in  the  poet's  land."  So,  if  you  would 
know  Christ,  make  your  appeal  to  Christian  experience.  Two  things  are  in  Him 
— power,  casual,  creative  ;  wisdom,  adaptive,  constructive.  Christ  brings  to  the 
re-making  of  men  power  that  can  take  the  lost  and  re-make  it  until  it  becomes  the 
holiest ;  wisdom  to  take  what  He  has  re-made,  and  shape,  develop,  guide  it,  until 
its  early  promise  becomes  richest  performance.  There  is  power  m  Christ,  for  He 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost ;  there  is  wisdom  in  Christ,  for  Chi  ist  can  sanctify 
what  He  has  saved.  Now  you  are  face  to  face  with  the  evil  and  the  need  of  men ; 
what  other  way  can  you  cure  it  ?  You  may  call  to  your  aid  philosophy.  Philo- 
sophy will  make  a  select  and  cultured  class,  scornful  of  the  multitude,  and  growing 
cynical  through  the  stnse  of  its  own  pre-eminence.  Call  in  social  theory,  that 
argues  that  new  conditions  must  be  created  that  men  may  be  made  happy  and 
peifect.  You  may  invoke  the  Act  of  Parliament ;  and  yet  all  these  together  fail  to 
do  that  which  Christ  has  achieved.      (A.  M.  Faivhairn,  D.D.)  Offensiveness  of 

the  gospel  to  liuman  jride : — 1.  It  comes  in  the  form  of  preaching,  and  offers  its 
blessings  only  to  faith.  2.  It  describes  the  crucified  Jesus  as  the  power  and  wisdom 
of  God.     3,  It  pronounces  all  this,  which  seems  to  men  to  be  folly  and  weakness, 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

to  be  wiser  and  stronger  than  all  the  wisdom  and  power  of  the  world.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)         The  canses  of  the  r,jection  of  the  gospel: — I.  The  Jewish  craving  for 

1.  Thp  ostentatious.      2.  The  miraculous.     II.  The  Gentile  love  foe — 1.  The 

intellectual.  2.  The  aesthetic.  III.  Ix  both  the  pride  that  will  not  submit  to 
the  smiplicity  of  faith.     (Ibid.)  'The  gospel  and  its  opponents  : — Observe — I. 

The  great  hindrances  of  the  gospkl  in  apostolic  times.  1.  Jewish  pre- 
judice. 2.  Gentile  philosophy.  II.  These  are  general  types  of  human 
ERROR — e.(i.,  Pharisaism  and  Sadduceeism;  Epicureanism  and  Stoicism;  Eitaal- 
ism  and  Kationalism ;  self-righteousness  and  self-conceit.  III.  Their  utter 
incompatibility  with  the  gospel.  1.  The  gospel  requires  humility;  these 
are  the  offspring  of  pride.  2.  The  gospel  insists  on  faith.  These  demand 
demonstration.     {H'id.)  How  the  gosijcl  triumphed  : — I.    Its  theme.     Christ 

crucified.  His  Divinity,  sacrifice,  offices,  redeeming  power,  universal  govern- 
ment. II.  Its  difficulties.  1.  Jewish  prejudice.  2.  Gentile  wisdf)m.  HE.  Its 
triumphs  in  them  which  are  called.  1.  Christ  the  power  of  Goii — (1)  Sur- 
mounting difficulties.  (2)  Providing  means— His  Atonement,  Word,  Spirit.  (3) 
Determining  conditions.  (4)  Counteracting  human  depravity.  (5)  Choosing  instru- 
ments. ((3)  H'x[.)Osing  error  and  sin.  2.  Christ  firepower  of  God  in — (1)  The  Incar- 
nation. (2)  The  application  of  the  gospel.  (3)  Its  successes.  (4)  Its  results.  {IhidJ) 
The  Jeivs  vquire  a  sign,  the  G'eehs  seek  u-i'<dom: — In  this  verse  the  apostle  illus- 
trates and  confirms  that  expession  which  had  passed  from  him  in  the  verse  before, 
concerning  the  foolishness  of  piea'hing.  First,  in  the  demand  of  the  Jews  ;  and 
secondly  in  the  pursuit  of  the  Gentiles.  The  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks 
seek  a'ter  wisdom.  First,  we  will  spf  ak  of  them  jointly,  as  they  agree  in  one  notion, 
and  then  severally  in  what  is  proper  to  each.  First,  jointly,  where  we  must  know 
thus  much,  the  demand  of  the  Jews,  "  The  Jews  require  a  sign."  Here  was  an  error 
in  both,  as  concerning  their  re-  eiving  the  gospel  of  Christ :  whence  we  may  observe 
in  general  then,  first  this :  that  the  corrupt  on  of  nature  does  act  and  improve 
itself  differently  in  different  rank^  and  conditions  of  persons.  Here  are  Jews  alid 
Gentiles  both,  people  of  a  several  temper  and  frame,  yet  both  of  them  have  their 
censure ;  tlie  one  in  the  requiring  of  a  sign,  and  the  other  in  the  seeking  after 
wisdom  ;  both  of  them  in  a  several  kind  of  nature  had  their  weaknesses  and 
faihngs.  This  various  working  of  corruption  according  to  the  subject  wherein  it 
is,  may  be  variously  accounted  unto  us  as  proceeding  from  various  causes.  As 
first,  sometimes  from  the  difference  of  age  and  constitution  of  body :  there  are 
some  sins  which  are  more  pro)!er  to  one  age  and  temper,  and  others  which  are 
more  proper  to  another.  Again,  secondly,  somt  times  it  proceeds  from  a  difference 
of  assHultand  temptation  ;  as  there  are  several  tempers  and  coustitutions  in  ngard 
of  men  themselves,  so  there  are  several  drawing  out  of  these  constitutions  in  regard 
of  Satan's  impfiiving  of  them.  Thirdly,  it  proceeds  from  a  difference  of  eniploy- 
ment  and  education,  and  particular  calling,  wherein  men  are  set.  First,  that  we 
should  not  from  hence  at  any  time  be  secure  and  jiresumptuous  in  ourselves  from 
our  freedom  from  any  particular  sin  or  infiimity  whatsoever;  though  thou  art  not 
guilty  of  such  a  sin,  yet  it  may  be  thou  nia\est  be  guilty  of  another,  which  in  its 
kind  may  be  as  bad.  Again,  secondly,  observe  tliis  :  that  all  men  by  nature  have 
some  quarrel  or  exception  or  other  against  the  Word  of  God,  and  some  pretence  to 
put  it  off  from  them.  "  The  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the  Greeks  seek  after 
wisdom  "  ;  neither  of  them  were  every  way  right,  and  so  as  ihey  should  be.  This 
is  that  which  hns  always  been  in  all  ages  and  times  of  the  Citurch.  Thirdly, 
observe  in  general  this:  that  it  is  a  great  matter  for  the  entertainment  of  any 
ministry  what  people  have  been  formerly  used  and  accustomed  unto ;  that  has 
commonly  a  great  sway  with  them.  For  see  here  in  this  present  Scripture  how  it 
was  now  with  these  two  sorts  of  people,  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles-  The  Jews,  they 
had  been  used  to  signs  heretofore  uii'  er  Moses  and  the  prophets,  and  the  efore 
nothing  would  serve  their  turn  now  but  signs  ciill.  And  the  Gentiles,  they  had 
been  used  to  their  philosophy  Hud  ihetoric.  This  shows  us  what  cause  we  have 
therefore,  as  to  he  careful  of  what  p  ineiples  we  admit  at  any  time  of  ourselves,  so 
to  bless  God  that  He  has  any  t  me  in  His  providence  heretofore  so  well  ordered  it  to 
us.  I  come  now  to  them  more  distinctly  m  particular,  to  look  upon  tliem  iu  their 
several  p'opositions,  to  wit,  the  oemnnd  of  the  Jews  by  itself,  and  the  pursuit  of 
the  Gentiles  again  by  itself.  First,  for  the  demand  of  the  Jews—"  The  Jews  require 
a  sign."  This  the  apostle  speaks  of  as  some  kind  of  weakness  and  viciousness  in 
them:  and  so  indeed  it  was,  as  may  appear  in  these  paniculHrs.  First,  it  does 
denote  unto  us  that  sottish-iess  and  stupidity  which  was  in  them.     A  sign  it  is  a 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  63 


thing  which  is  aocommod  .ted  to  the  outward  sense,  and  ordained  for  the  teaching 
of  those  whifh  are  of  low  understandings,  and  which  cannot  attain  to  the  spirituahty 
of  Divine  mysteries  ;  now  thus  it  was  here  with  these  Jews.     And  this  is  the  dis- 
position of  most  men  else  by  nature  to  be  thus  affected  in  themselves.     Thus  it  was 
•with  the  apostle  Thomas  at  Christ's  resurrection  (John  xx.  25).     That  the  more 
carnal  any  people  are,  the  more  they  are  carried  away  after  such  matters,  and  do 
not  rest  themselves  satisfied  in  thai  evidence  which  the  Scripture  holds  out  unto 
them  ;  and  it  proceeds  from  hence,  because  they  have  not  their  senses  exercised  to 
discern  of  things  that  diiier.     Secondly,  here  was  also  their  infidelity  and  unbelief, 
that  is  likewise  implied  in  this,  that  they  asked  a  sign.     Signs,  says  the  apostle  Paul 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  22)  they  are  not  for  them  that  believe,  but  for  them  which  believe  not ; 
and  accordingly  they  have  been  still  used  (as  we  shall  find)  upon  such  occasions  as 
these  are,  either  to  begin  faith  where  it  has  been  wanting,  or  to  strengthen  it  where 
it  has  been  weak ;  they  are  an  argument  of  unbelief  where  they  are  given,  but 
especially  they  are  so  where  they  are  required.     Whilst  the  Jews  demand  a  sign, 
they  t-how  their  infidelity  indeed,  that  they  are  as  yet  in  a  state  of  unbelieving  (John 
i.  11),  "  He  came  to  His  own,  and  His  oau  re.-eived  Him  not."     Thus  it  was  with 
this  people  :  and  if  we  would  know  whence  it  came  to  be  so,  the  apostle  tells  us, 
"  Because  the  god  of  this  world  had  blinded  their  eyes,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  should  shine  unto  them  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4).     Well,  let  it  teach 
us  all  for  our  particulars  to  take  h- ed  "lest  there  be  in  any  of  us  an  heart  of 
unbelief  to  depart  from  the  living  God  " ;  yea,  let  us  take  heed  of  admitting  any 
scruples  and  doubts  in  the  main  points  of  Chrifetianity  ;  for  if  we  begin  once,  we 
shall  never  have  done.     And  that  is  the  second  evil  in  this  demand  of  the  Jews  in 
asking  for  a  sign,  to  wit,  their  infidelity.     The  third  is  their  hypocrisy  ;  there  was 
a  great  deal  of  false-heartedness  and  double-dealing  in  this  request  of  theirs  ;  for 
why,  they  intended  no  such  thing  as  to  receive  the  truth.     This  is  the  manner  of 
hypocrites  to  pretend  an  unsatisfiableness  in  the  means  when  they  do  not  relish  the 
thing ;  when  they  favour  not  the  conclusion,  they  call  in  question  the  argument. 
Fourthly,  here  was  their  insoleney  and  unworthy  behaviour  in  the  laying  of  this 
demand';  and  that  as  expressing  itself  also  in  sundry  particulars,  which  we  may 
briefiy  take  notice  of.     As  first,  here  was  their  preposterousness  and  presumption, 
in  that  they  would  prescribe  and  liaiit  God  to  a  way  of  their  own — they  ask  a  sign. 
But  here  was  the  miscarriage  in  these  Jews,  that  they  would  teach  God,  and  set  Him 
a  rule,  and  point  which  they  would  determine  Him  unto  ;  that  when  as  He  would 
have  it  done  by  preacliing,  they  would  have  it  done  by  miracle.     And  when  the 
apostles  brought  them  a  sermon,  they  would  needs  have  a  sign.     This  is  a  sure 
rule— that  in  the  thmgs  of  God  especially,  as  in  all  other  things,  we  must  be  ruled 
by  God  Himself.     To  ask  a  sign  was  here  a  presumpiion.     Again,  as  there  may  be 
a  fault  in  asking  one,  so  there  may  be  a  fault  likewise  in  refusing  one,  when  God 
offers  one  to  us  :  observe  that  tins  was  the  miscarriage  of  Ahaz  (Isa.  vii.  11).     But 
now  where  God  sets  up  a  sign,  there  they  pull  the  sign,  down.    As  for  example  now 
in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.     Here  they  throw  the  sign  away.     Thus 
those  which  are  so  much  for  signs  at  another  time,  as  with  the  Jews  themselves,  to 
require  them  when  themselves  please  ;  here,  when  God  offers  one  to  them,  they  will 
not  have  one.     Secondly,  here  was  their  peremptoriness  and  importunity,  they 
require  a  sign ;  that  is,  there  is  no  remedy,  but  have  one  they  must  in  all  haste. 
If  they  had  asked  it  modestly  and  soberly,  though  they  had  asked  it,  there  might 
not  perhaps  have  been  so  much  in  it :  there  have  been  those  of  the  servants  of  God 
which  have  asked  signs,  and  they  have  not  been  blamed  for  it ;  Gideon  asked  one 
and  had  it  in  his  wet  and  dry  fleece  (Judg.  vi.  37).     HezeUiah,  again,  asked  one 
(2  Kings  XX.  8,  9).   Thirdly,  hi-re  was  their  malice  and  perverseness,  "  they  require  a 
sign,"   as  if  hitherto  they  had  never  had  any.     The  Jews  had  signs  of   Christ 
exhibited  unto  them,  both  by  Himself  in  His  ovm  particular  Person,  and  likewise 
in  His  servants  the  apostles  ;  they  had  wonders  in  heaven  above,  and  they  had 
signs  in  the  earth  beneath ;  as  it  is  in  Acts  ii.  19,  and  in  ver.  22  of  the  same 
chapter — "  Ye  men  of  Israel  hear  these  words,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man  approved 
of  God  among  you  by  miracles,  wonders  and  signs  which  God  did  by  Him  in  the 
midst  of  you,"  &c.     And  again  (ver.  43),  "  Many  wonders  and  signs  were  done  by 
the  apostles."     And   (Mark   xvi.  20),   "  The  Lord  confirmed  the  Word  by  signs 
following."     So  we  sen  then  they  wanted  not  signs,  and  yet  as  if  they  had  been 
altogether  destitute,  they  here  require  them  ;  this  was  now  an  hurrible  perverseness 
and  malicinusness  in  them,  and  a  slighting  both  of  the  power  and  goodness  of  God 
Himself.     The  second  is  the  inquiry  or  pursuit  of  the  Gentiles,  "  The  Greeks  seek 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cjiap.  i, 

after  -wisdom."  By  Greeks  here  we  are  to  understand  all  other  nations  besides  the 
Jews.  Now  the  great  learning  and  eloquence  of  the  Greeks  was  occasionally  and 
accidently  through  their  corruption,  not  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself,  a  great 
hindrance  to  them  for  their  embracing  of  the  saving  knowledge  of  Christ ;  they 
were  so  taken  with  the  conceits  and  apprehensions  of  their  own  wit  and  excellent 
parts,  that  the  preaching  of  the  Cross  it  seemed  no  better  than  foolishness  to  them ; 
they  would  believe  nothing  now  in  religion  without  an  argument  and  a  demonstra- 
tion. In  brief,  there  are  two  things  especially  which  are  here  by  this  passage  of  the 
apostles  prohibited  to  us.  First,  a  restraining  of  the  truths  and  doctrines  of 
religion  to  the  apprehensions  of  carnal  reason,  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh.  This  was 
the  fault  of  these  Greeks,  and  we  are  to  take  heed  it  be  not  ours.  And  the 
reason  of  it  is  this,  because  indeed  religion  is  a  mystery,  and  the  things  which  are 
propounded  in  the  gospel  they  are  above  the  reach  of  human  wit.  Why  but  then 
must  we  lay  aside  all  kiud  of  reason  in  matters  of  religion?  is  Christianity  an 
unreasonable  business?  and  does  the  gospel  deprive  us  of  our  wits  and  ordinary 
understandings?  No,  no  such  matter;  religion  it  is  not  against  reason  but  it  is 
above  it.  The  sum  of  all  is  this,  that  reason  it  may  be  improved  in  religion,  but 
religion  is  not  to  be  limited  to  reason  ;  faith  and  right  reason  do  not  cross,  thoujih 
indeed  they  do  not  always  meet ;  nay,  indeed,  religion  is  upon  the  point  the  greatest 
reason  and  wisdom  of  all,  because  it  is  the  reason  and  wisdom  of  God  Himself,  who  is 
the  highest  intelligence.  And  that  is  the  first  thing  which  was  here  taxed  in  these 
Greeks  in  the  text,  their  seeking  after  wisdom,  namely,  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh,  in 
restraining  religion  tc  reason,  which  is  a  thing  here  prohibited  to  us.  The  second 
is,  the  wisdom  of  words  in  adulterating  the  ordinance  of  preaching  with  the  aft'ec- 
tation  of  human  eloquence  ;  this  is  not  to  be  done  by  us  neither,  either  in^jreachers 
or  hearers.  This  was  another  thing  in  these  Greeks  seeking  after  wisdom,  they 
refused  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  because  it  was  not  brought  to  them  with  the  excel- 
lency of  speech  and  human  wisdom,  which  the  Apostle  Paul  did  of  purpose  decline, 
as  he  tells  us  (1  Cor.  i.  17  ;  ii.  1).  For  theright  understanding  of  this  pomt,  that  we 
may  not  be  mistaken,  we  do  not  here  prohibit  all  u^^e  of  human  learning  or  elofjnence 
in  reference  to  preaching  ;  but — First,  that  this  be  not  the  chief  business  which  is 
intended  by  us :  we  may  use  these  things  by  the  by,  but  this  is  not  the  main  to  be 
looked  after  by  us,  like  children  that  mort^  legard  the  cover  of  the  book  than  they 
do  that  which  is  contained  in  it.  Secondly,  we  must  consider  the  nature  of  this 
eloquence  and  wisdom,  what  it  is  ;  there  is  a  comeliness  of  expression  suitable  to 
the  nature  of  the  matter  and  arj-'ument  which  is  spoken  unto,  which  may  very  well 
become  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  ;  but  strong  lines  and  bo:nbast  is  such  as  is  very 
uncomely  and  improper.  Thirdly,  for  the  measure  of  doing  it,  it  must  be  done 
very  sparingly  and  moderately  ;  I  mean  the  mixture  of  wit  and  human  learning 
in  preaching;  as  sauce,  but  not  as  meat.  Las'ly,  a  regard  is  to  be  had  to  the 
nature  of  the  auditory  itself,  which  we  have  to  deal  withal,  that  they  be  such  as  are 
capable  of  it,  and  where  it  may  serve  as  an  advantage  to  the  conveyance  of  the 
doctrine  itself.  With  these  and  the  like  explications  there  may  be  a  good  use  of 
human  eloquence  and  speech ;  but  otherwise  in  the  excess  and  failing  in  the 
manner  of  it,  it  is  very  dangerous  and  inconvenient.  And  that  especially,  as  first, 
it  oftentimes  takes  off  the  efficacy  of  the  ordinances  and  makes  the  Word  of  God 
of  none  effect.  Secondly,  besides  this,  it  is  that  which  is  not  so  acceptable  for  the 
most  part  to  a  spiritual  heart.  Thirdly,  God  Himself  does  not  c  nimonly  so  work 
by  them — "  By  the  foolishness  of  prea(  hing  He  saves  them  that  believe."  {Thomas 
Horton,  D.D.)  The  reanovahlcness  of  the  c/osjjel : — Evil  exists,  is  the  result  of  sin, 
which  is  a  want  of  affection  for  God,  and  its  cure  is  by  Christ  crucified.  God  is  limited 
in  His  mode  of  cure  by  the  capacities  and  endowments  of  human  nature.  I.  The 
GOSPEL  CANNOT  BE    A  SYSTEM   OF   foKCE.      It  must  be   One  of  motivc.      II.  Love 

CANNOT    BE    TRANSFERRED  AT  WILL  FROM    ONE    OBJECT  TO  ANOTHER.       God  mUSt  bccome 

man  to  secure  man's  affection.  III.  Hate  in  the  human  heart  can  only  be  con- 
quered  AND   overcome   BY  MANIFESTED   SELF-DENYING   LOVE.       God's  first  WOrk   is   to 

teach  men  their  sinfulness  and  need  of  salvation.  W^ithout  faith  it  is  impossible 
to  please  God.  There  is  no  other  avenue  to  the  human  heart  than  that  which  God 
has  tried.  IV.  The  duties  and  prohibitions  of  the  gospel  are  demanded  by 
our  natures.  Social  scientists  admit  this.  Prayer,  praise,  worship,  are  as  neces- 
sary to  soul-growth  as  food,  exercise,  and  rest  for  bodily  powers.  V.  The  rewards 
and  penalties  of  the  gospel  are  in  accordance  with  nature,  with  reason,  with 
those  principles  upon  which  we  act  in  daily  life.  This  wisdom  of  God  is  perfectly 
adapted  to  man's  wants,  and  meets  man's  necessities.     (Bj).  Felloices.)  But  we 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  COrdNrillANS.  65 

preach  Christ  crucified. — An  ortliodox  preacher  : — I.  The  leading  theme  of  Paul's 
MINISTRY.  1.  The  Person  declii'ed  in  his  ministry.  Christ,,  not  the  patriarclis, 
prophets,  etc.  Men  of  renown  in  history  must  not  supplant  Jesus.  2.  The  atone- 
ment proclaimed  in  his  ministry.  We  have  to  speak  to  the  massps — not  science, 
philosophy,  &c.,  but  a  crucified  Lord.  II.  The  gkeat  mFFicuLTiEs  in  Paul's 
MINISTRY.  1.  The  superstition  of  the  Jews.  They  spurned  the  gospel  because  it 
appealed  to  their  spiritual  nature.  They  did  not  want  a  suffering  Messiah.  If  we 
are  seeking  signs,  we  are  superstitious.  We  are  rejecting  the  tidings  of  "  Christ 
crucified."  2.  The  scepticism  of  the  Greeks.  A  crucified  Christ  appeared  to  them 
a  fable.  Many  in  spirit  are  still  doing  the  same.  III.  The  Divine  characteii  of 
Paul's  ministry.  1.  The  universality  of  the  gospel.  The  glorious  gospel  is  for  all 
mankind.  2.  The  powerfulness  of  the  gospel.  The  death  of  the  Cross  is  the 
greatest  manifestation  of  the  power  of  God.  3.  The  knowledge  of  the  gospel. 
(Jlirist  disj)lays  God's  highest  wisdom.  None  can  instruct  us  aright  but  Christ,  and 
we  shall  never  learn  the  wisdom  of  God  unless  we  sit  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  There  is  no  oth'^r  way  of  salvation  but  what  is  revealed  in  the  gospel 
of  a  crucified  Saviour.  2.  May  we  never  be  of  the  class  who  rejett  and  despise 
God's  method  of  redemption.  3.  Between  the  conflict  of  power  and  wisdom,  Christ 
is  the  living  em''odinient  of  the  greatest  force  in  the  world.  4.  We  must  believe 
the  gospel  before  we  can  experience  its  saving  influence.     (.1.  Biickh';/.)  Our 

jir'-arhuig  : — I.  Its  great  subject.  Christ  crucified.  We — 1.  Declare  the  nature 
of  His  death.  2.  Exhibit  its  benefits.  3.  Persuade  men  to  seek  an  interest  in  it. 
II.  Its  reception.  1.  Some  reject  it  with  contempt.  2.  Some  receive  it  with 
respect  and  advantage.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  St.  Paul's  preaching  at  Cor'nith  : — I. 

What  St.  Paul  preached.  "  Christ  crucified  " — i.e.,  not  so  much  the  sulTerings 
of  Christ  on  the  Cross  as  the  doctrines  connected  with  the  Cross  and  all  the  benefits 
which  are  st^cured  to  us  by  it.  He  preached — 1.  The  dif:n  ty  of  Him  who  suffeied. 
2.  His  humiliation.  3.  His  willingness.  4.  The  shamefulness  of  His  death.  5. 
The  intensity  of  His  sufferings.  His  death  was  lingering,  not  sudden.  He  suffered 
from  men,  from  devils,  from  God.  II.  Some  reasons  for  his  so  preaching. 
There  were — 1.  Personal  reasons.  A  dispensation  was  committed  unto  him.  St. 
Paul  preiched  thus  because  he  was  commanded.  "  Woe  is  unto  me,"  etc.  2, 
Doctrinal  reasons.  He  preached  Christ  crucified  because  by  the  Cross — (1)  God's 
wrath  is  appeased.  God  was  willing  to  be  appeased ;  but  God's  justice  could  not  be 
appeased  except  by  the  death  of  Christ.  (2)  God's  law  is  silenced.  Eor  every 
breach  of  its  commands  the  law  thunders  forth  against  us.  '■  The  soul  that  sinneth 
it  shall  die."  But  Christ  has  undergone  all  the  cuises  of  the  broken  law  in  our 
behalf.  "  He  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for 
us."  "There  is  now  no  condemnation,"  it'c.  (3)  Our  guilt  is  removed.  If  God's  law, 
which  we  have  broken,  has  been  satis6ed  by  Christ,  then  must  necessarily  follow 
the  removal  of  our  guilt.  (4)  The  devil's  power  is  subdued.  (.5)  Holiness  is  pro- 
moted. Dr.  Chalmers  tells  us  that,  so  long  as  he  preached  only  moral  duties,  he 
saw  no  results  of  his  labours.  All  the  vehemence  of  his  powerful  oratory  had  not 
the  weight  of  a  feather  in  making  the  drunkard  sober,  and  the  unchaste  man  clean. 
But  when  he  began  to  preach  the  atonement,  he  saw  in  rich  abundance  the  precious 
fruits  of  holiness  ;  and  so  John  Berridge  tells  us  that  for  six  years  he  preached 
morality  to  his  parishioners  at  Stapteford  till  there  was  hardly  a  moral  man  left  in 
the  parish;  but  when  he  was  taught  by  God's  Spirit  to  lift  up  Clirist,  the  people 
came  flocking  to  the  sanctuary  in  deep  concern  about  their  souls.  ((3)  Heaven  is 
opf'ned.  Conclusion  :  We  hence  see  the  duty  of  ministers,  viz.,  to  walk  in  the 
steps  of  Paul.  1.  He  was  emphatically  a  preacher.  We,  too,  who  are  ministers, 
should  aim  to  be  preachers.  Our  Lord's  commission  ran,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world 
and  preach."  "Christ  sent  me,"  says  Paul,  "not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the 
gospel."  Others,  uninspired  men,  have  said  the  same.  Latimer  said,  "  Take  away 
preaehing,  take  away  salvation.''  St.  Chrysostom  affirms,  "  My  whole  priesthood 
is  to  teach  and  preach  the  gospel.  This  is  my  sacrifice."  2.  But  what  are 
we  to  preach  ?  Christ  crucified.  The  Socinians  preach  Christ,  but  only  as  a 
bright  ex'iriiple,  not  as  a  vacarious  sacrifice.  But  we,  like  St.  Paul,  preach 
Christ  crucified,  because  we  know  that  this  is  the  only  prertching  which  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  will  honour.  As  Cecil  says,  "  A  philosopher  may  philosophise  his 
hearers,  but  the  preaching  of  Christ  will  alone  convert  them.  Men  may  preach 
Christ  ignorantly,  blunderingly,  absurdly,  yet  God  will  give  that  preaching  efficacy, 
because  He  is  determined  to  magnify  His  own  ordinance."  (C.  Clayton,  M.A.) 
Apostolic  jjreaching  : — I.  Its  matter.  The  apostle  opposes  his  theme,  on  the  one 
VOL,    I.  5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

hand,  to  Judaising  teachers,  who  taught  converts  that  they  must  be  circumcised, 
and  keep  the  hiws  of  Moses  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  Gentile  philosophers,  who 
spent  much  time  in  eloquently  haranguing  on  the  beauty  of  virtue  and  the  deformity 
of  vice ;  but  who,  with  all  their  arts  of  rhetoric,  never  could  guide  one  soul  to 
heaven.  II.  Its  manner.  They  exhibited  the  Cross  of  Christ — 1.  As  the  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness.  2.  As  the  only  foundation  of  a  secure  hope  of  acceptance 
with  God.  '6.  As  the  only  legitimate  object  of  a  Cliristian's  glory.  4.  As  the  most 
powerful  incentive  to  obedience.  Conclusion  :  Let  me  ask — 1.  What  think  you  of 
Christ?  2.  What  influence  has  the  subject  had  on  you  ?  [J.  Hooper.)  Apostolic 
jneaching  : — I.  Its  geanp  sdbject.  The  apostles  set  forth — 1.  The  dignity  of  our 
Saviour's  person  as  the  true  Messiah  of  God.  2.  The  perfection  of  His  atonement. 
Having  laid  the  foundation  in  His  Divinity,  this  naturally  followed.  3.  The  pleni- 
tude of  His  redemption.  Christ  died  for  all  men,  and  we  are  therefore  enabled  to 
offer  salvation  to  every  man.  This  is  a  bles-ing  which  leads  to  all  otht-rs.  II. 
The  reception  which  this  doctrine  met  with.  1.  "  To  the  Jews  it  was  a  stumb- 
ling-block." 2.  To  the  Greeks  it  was  foolishness.  3.  "  Unto  them  tb at  are  called, 
both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisd;  m  of  God."  These 
perfections  are  admirably  discovered  if  we  consider — (1)  The  method  that  God  took 
to  make  known  to  the  lapsed  posterity  of  man  His  merciful  designs.  (2)  The  men 
whom  God  selected  to  carry  the  niessage  of  salvation  to  the  world.  (3)  The  easy 
terms  which  the  Lord  hath  fixed  upon  in  order  to  be  benefited  by  the  redtmption. 
(4)  The  great  effects  which  have  been  produced  by  this  doctrine.  {E.  Uakes.) 
Apostolic  preaching  :  its  tlieme  and  effects : — I.  The  great  theme  of  apostolic 
PREACHING.  The  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  was  the  great  centre  of  their  preaching, 
/-^ut  its  range  was  much  wider.  They  preached  Christ  in — 1.  The  Divinity  of  His 
/  person.  2.  The  perfection  of  His  atonement.  3.  The  variety  of  His  offices.  4. 
In>-  The  blessings  of  His  redemption.  5.  The  universality  of  His  government.  II. 
The  diversity  of  the  effects  which  attend  the  publication  of  this  gospel.  1. 
To  the  Jews  it  was  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness ;  "  to  them  that 
are  called" — (1)  The  wisdom  of  God.  This  wisdom  is  displayed  in — {a)  The 
wonderful  method  by  which  the  ditBcnlties  were  removed  which  stood  in  the  way 
of  the  restoration  of  fallen  man.  [h)  The  perfect  adHptation  of  the  means  which  it 
supplies  for  the  attainment  of  human  salvation.  First,  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 
Secoud,  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  (c)  Its  direct  tendency  to  counteract 
one  of  the  most  evident  manifestations  of  human  depravity — viz.,  pride.  (<?)  In 
the  selection  of  the  instruments  who  were  ordained  to  propagate  it.  [e]  The 
period  appointed  for  its  proclamation.  (/)  The  facility  of  those  terms  on  which 
the  benefits  are  conferred.  (2)  The  power  of  God  is  displayed  in — [a)  The  various 
acts  l)y  which  the  stupendous  scheme  was  accomplished,  {h)  The  Divine  influence 
which  attended  the  publication  of  this  doctrine,  (c)  The  triumphant  progress 
which  the  gospel  has  made  against  every  opposition,  [d]  Its  influence  on  man's 
present    and    eternal    destinies.      [J.    Bowers.)  Preaching    Christ   crucified : — 

1.  Preaching  is  an  agency  previously  unknown,  which  Christianity  has  created 
for  itself,  and  just  as  the  gospel  has  been  truly  apprehended  has  it  sought 
expression  purely  throuch  this  form.  Rationalise  it  into  a  philosophy,  and 
the  pulpit  becomes  a  tribune  to  lecture  fiom;  mistake  it  for  a  magical  mystery, 
and  the  pulpit  is  deserted  for  the  altar.  But  Christianity  is  neither  "  a  wisdom  " 
for  "  Greeks,"  nor  "  a  sign  "  for  "  Jews  " ;  it  is  a  lUvine  message  for  which  preach- 
ing must  ever  be  the  appropriate  vehicle.  2.  Wlien  we  set  our  modern  pulpit 
alongside  that  of  apostolic  men  there  is  a  pretty  wide  divergence.  Theirs  was 
simple,  direct,  historic  ;  built  itself  up  on  a  few  facts  which  clung  around  a  central 
Person.  Ours  is  elaborate,  discursive,  theoretical.  To  some  extent  such  difference 
is  not  only  natural,  but  proper.  For  the  apostles  were  missionary  preachers, 
addressing  men  to  whom  everything  was  new.  We  who  minister  among  a  people 
moulded  by  the  truths  which  we  preach  must  traverse  an  ampler  field  and  cannot 
decline  to  use  what  the  Christian  past  has  brought  to  illustrate  or  confirm  the  old 
message.  In  accessory  helps  the  pulpit  grows  yearly  richer  ;  yet  thmugh  this  very 
embarrassing  wealth,  the  preacher  is  in  danger  of  being  beguiled  too  far  from  his 
appointed  work.  I.  The  great  pulpit  theme.  1.  The  gospel  offers  itself  as  a 
plan  of  restoration  ;  and  opens  with  an  event  which  lifts  the  scheme  above  parallel 
— the  descent  into  our  race  of  God  Himself.  At  no  other  point  does  creation 
touch  Divinity  in  such  strange  fellowship.  2.  If  we  estimate  the  singular  moment 
of  this  fact  we  shall  not  wonder  to  find  the  whole  course  both  of  nature  and  of 
providence  looking  towards  it.     (1)  Thus  there  were  laid  in  the  constitution  of 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  67 

nature  materials  for  that  rich  sjnnbolism  which  in  the  light  of  Holy  Scripture  it  is 
our  business  to  read.  Wlien,  e.g.,  the  light  dilfused  through  space  received  a 
home  for  us  in  the  sun,  there  stems  to  have  been  present  to  the  thought  of  God  the 
ultimate  gathering  up  of  His  omnipresent  glory  m  Christ  as  the  spiritual  light  of 
the  world.  And  when,  under  laws  of  organic  life  in  animal  or  plant,  many  parts 
were  knit  together  and  sustained  in  corporate  action  by  a  force  undiscoverable, 
resident  in  one  part,  yet  penetrating  the  whole.  He  meant  to  foreshadow  the 
mysterious  conjunction  of  believing  souls  into  one,  even  Jesus,  through  the  life- 
giving  Spirit  who  proceedeth  from  Him.  (2)  So  also  with  providence.  Those 
strangely  diverging  lines  which  history  traces  have  a  reassembling  point  in  the 
advent  of  Jesus  Christ.  To  prepare  the  nations  for  it  in  the  fulness  of  time,  and 
to  work  out  its  fruits  since,  must  be  the  key  for  the  intricate  movements  of  provi- 
dence in  all  time.  3.  If  the  Christian  scheme  of  salvation  through  incarnate  God 
is  thus  the  world's  centre  of  gravity,  then  its  own  centre'  of  gravity  is  the  Cross. 
Modern  thought  is  strong  because  it  recognises  the  Incarnation  ;  but  it  is  weak 
because  it  fails  to  see  the  necessary  issue  of  the  Advent  in  the  Cross,  The  event 
of  Golgotha  came  to  complete  and  to  explain  the  event  of  Bethlehem.  Christ  took 
our  nature  in  order  to  redeem  our  souls  ;  was  born  that  He  might  die.  Thus  we 
reach  the  heart  of  Christianity.  That  is  a  nerveless  gospel  which  glozes  over  the 
fact  of  atonement  with  vague  phrases;  that  which  ignores  or  denies  it  is  another 
gospel  altogether.  4.  But  on  these  facts  what  is  the  message  which  rests  ?  Not 
merely  that  the  man  Jesus  was  actually  the  Sou  of  God  and  become  one  of  our  own 
race ;  nor  that  He  many  centuries  ago  suffered  generously,  and  for  our  sakes  died ; 
but  that  the  God-Man,  who  did  once  at  Jerusalem  cancel  guilt  and  win  deliverance, 
is  here,  and  able,  therefore,  to  save  all  who  trust  Him.  He  has  a  pardon  which  He 
won  as  man,  yet  bestows  as  God.  This  acting  Christ  witli  His  direct  access  to  and 
contact  with  men.  we  must  preach.  We  preach  a  Christ  who,  because  He  was 
crucified  once,  is  dead  no  more  ;  but  is  even  now  and  always  breathing  power  and 
life  into  human  hearts ;  and  from  this  central  power  of  Christ  to  give  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  the  fruit  of  His  bitter  tree,  there  bianch  spiritual  works  manifold  as  the 
miracles  of  His  earthly  ministry.  II.  The  considerations  which  ought  to  regu- 
late ITS  DELIVERY  FROM  EVERY  PULPIT.  Pentecost  gave  tongues  to  the  discijiles. 
That  was  the  birthday  of  preaching.  The  new  message  brought  new  utterance  ; 
and  times  of  religious  awakening  have  been  signalised  by  a  fresh  development  of 
preaching  gifts.  So  it  was  at  the  revival  of  the  thirteenth  century,  of  the  fifteenth, 
of  the  eighteenth.  What,  then,  is  this  novel  voice  which  Christ's  gospel  has  found 
for  itself  ?  1.  As  to  matter,  nothing  which  is  quite  foreign  can  be  admitted,  and 
everytliing  which  is  cognate  has  a  right  to  be  here  only  in  so  far  as  it  can  serve  the 
preacher's  main  drift,  and  illustrate  or  commend  liis  message.  This  is  no  rule  of 
narrow  exclusion  ;  for  there  is  hardly  a  department  of  human  thouglit  or  knowledge 
out  of  connection  with  Jesus  Christ.  But  the  rule  is  of  constant  value  nevertheless. 
What  ponderous  jDiles  of  sacred  learning  have  sometimes  buried  the  simple 
message  !  What  wire-spun  theological  niceties  have  perplexed  the  hearer  !  Tlie 
gospel  has  been  more  often  discussed  than  preached.  Nothing  has  any  light  to  be 
in  a  sermon  except  because  it  contributes  to  the  clearness  and  effect  of  the  message 
about  Christ.  2.  As  to  the  form  of  the  message,  it  must  be  in  the  main  declarative. 
If  true  to  its  nature  it  cannot  be  anything  else.  It  admits,  indeed,  of  embodiment 
in  a  creed ;  it  has  given  to  philosophy  its  richest,  deei^est  principles  ;  before  it  there 
goes  out  tlie  only  law  of  ethics  :  yet  these  are  none  of  them  the  gospel.  In  its 
naked  essence  it  is  a  salvation  offered  in  the  person  of  a  Saviour.  As  such  it  is  to 
be  published.  This  declarative  form  implies  two  subo'dinate  elements.  We  found 
wrapped  up  in  the  object  of  preaching  two  things,  a  person  and  a  fact.  Now  these 
should  give  to  preaching  at  once  a  historical  and  a  personal  complexion.  That 
Christianity  is  rooted  in  the  past,  and  had  a  birthplace  which  ties  it  to  <me  spot 
of  liistory.  All  that  concerns  the  life  of  Christ,  with  its  foreshadowings,  its 
self-manifestations,  and  each  recorded  step  which  conducted  to  the  achieve- 
ment of  redemption — must  be  prominent  in  the  Cliristian  pulpit.  Yet  the 
historical  is  to  be  blended  with  the  personal  element  ;  and  that  ministry  is 
best  which  leads  straight  to  the  living  helping  Saviour.  {J.  Osirald  Dnhes,  D.D.) 
Christ  crucified  :— First,  the  apostle's  carriage,  as  concerning  the  ordering  of  his 
ministry;  and  secondly,  the  apostle's  doctrine,  as  concerning  the  nature  of  those 
points  and  truths  which  were  delivered  in  it.  First,  for  bis  carriage  ;  this  is  very 
much  hinted  unto  us  in  the  adversative  particle  "  but,"  where  there  ar^^  these 
things  further  considerable  :   first,  his  contrariety  of   spirit ;   we  see  plainly  tbat 


C8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Paul  and  the  rest  of  the  apostles  with  him  went  a  quite  contrary  way  to  that  which 
was  both  required  by  Jews  and  Gentiles ;  the  one  required  a  sign,  and  the  other 
sought  after  wisdom  ;  but  they  accommodated  neither,  but  instead  th>^y  preach 
Christ  crucified.  What  do  we  learn  from  hence  ?  That  it  is  the  duty  and  wisdom 
of  a  miuister  to  cross  men's  carnal  humours  ;  when  people  shall  affect  such  kind  of 
preaching  as  is  unprofitable  for  them,  especially  to  make  them  fail  of  their  expecta- 
tion. Physicians,  when  their  patients  are  immoderate  in  thirsting  after  drink, 
keep  it  from  them  the  rather.  And  the  reason  of  it  is  this,  because  satisfying  of 
such  humours  feeds  them,  and  adds  strength  unto  them.  This  then  meets  with  all 
such  whose  carringe  is  quite  contrary  hereunto,  who  make  not  their  hearers' 
necessities,  but  their  affections,  to  be  the  rule  of  their  teaching ;  and  if  there  be 
any  crotchet  or  humour  more  than  other,  which  does  prevail  and  aboui.d  in  them, 
they  will  be  sure  to  apply  themselves  to  that  in  the  course  of  their  ministry. 
Secondly,  we  have  here  in  this  passage  the  ajjostle's  humility  and  self-denial,  in 
that  he  did  here  lay  aside  those  things  wherein  he  might  otherwise  have  gloried 
and  set  out  himself;  he  here  denied  his  own  wisdom,  and  learning,  and  eloquence, 
and  such  accomplishments  as  these  are,  that  so  he  might  the  better  advance  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  Paul  had  been  caught  up  into  paradise,  and  been  made  partaker 
of  such  admirable  mysteries  as  were  there  revealed  unto  him,  that  he  now  should 
condescend  to  the  preaching  of  such  familiar  points,  and  that  after  such  a  familiar 
manner,  as  he  does  here  intimate  unto  us.  This  I  say  was  a  business  which  was 
very  mu  h  to  be  taken  notice  of  in  him.  "  We  preach  Christ  crucified."  There 
was  a  great  matter  in  that,  for  such  poor  creatures  as  we  are.  What  does  this  now 
teach  us  but  this  much,  that  plain  and  familiar  kind  of  teaching  and  laying  down 
the  mysteries  of  religion  in  an  easy  and  perspicuous  manner,  is  that  which  may 
well  become  the  greatest  and  learnedest  that  are ;  it  is  no  shame  nor  disparage- 
ment for  any  teacher.  And  truly  why  not,  if  indeed  we  consider  all  ?  for  first, 
there  is  a  great  deal  more  of  art  and  skill  sometimes  in  it,  than  otherwise ;  to 
preach  Christ  crucified,  and  such  fundamental  truths  of  religion  as  these  are,  and 
in  that  manner  as  they  ought  to  be  preached,  requires  a  great  deal  more  of  wisdom 
as  belonging  unto  it  than  many  other  points  besides,  which  it  may  be  to  some  vain 
kind  of  minds  seem  far  abi^ve  them.  It  is  an  easier  matter  to  preach  fancies  and 
notions,  than  it  is  to  preach  solid  truths;  it  is  an  easier  matter  to  preach  in  the 
enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  than  to  preach  in  the  powerful  evidence  and 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Secondly,  hs  there  is  more  skill  m  it,  so 
there  is  likewise  more  modesty,  and  less  temp'ation  and  danger  of  miscarriage; 
the  venting  of  strange  speculations,  and  the  preaching  plausibly  to  men's 
humours  and  affections  in  this  respect,  is  not  without  some  hazard  of  pride  and 
self-apj)lause  in  those  that  shall  do  it.  Thirdly,  there  is  also  profit  and  advantage 
hereby  to  our  hearers,  as  concerning  the  good  of  their  souls.  Besides,  if  we  speak 
of  human  learning  and  eloquence  itself,  we  must  know  that  this  does  not  cross 
nor  contradict  2:jlain  kind  of  preaching.  There  may  be  a  great  deal  of  learning 
sometimes  in  a  plain  sermon,  and  in  the  opening  of  a  plain  truth  in  that  sermon. 
Thirdly,  here  is  his  faithfulness  and  impartiality  to  either  part  in  the  indefiniteness 
of  the  subjects  which  this  his  doctrine  extf^nds  unto,  to  Jew  and  Gentile  both 
alike;  he  preaches  Christ  crucified  to  either,  as  a  doctrine  which  might  well 
iit  them  both.  And  in  pnticular  not  only  the  Jews,  which  were  a  people  of  more 
low  capacities,  but  likewise  as  well  to  the  Greeks,  which  were  a  people  of  more 
raised  apprehensions.  And  a  minister  does  not  wrong  his  hearers  with  such  points 
whosoever  they  are.  First,  because  they  are  snch  points  which  are  indeed  of  a 
very  deep  reach  in  religion.  Srcondly,  the  wisest  and  learnedest  that  are,  such 
points  as  these  may  very  well  become  them,  forasmuch  as  they  are  necessary 
points,  aiid  such  as  tend  to  salvation  it'^elf.  If  wise  men  will  be  saved  they  must 
be  glad  to  hear  of  saving  truths:  there  being  but  one  way  to  salvation  for  them, 
and  all  others  besidf'S.  Those  who  have  the  greatest  skill  in  physic,  they  are  glad 
to  take  the  same  potions  for  their  health  which  others  take.  Thirdly,  again,  there 
is  this  besides  considerable  in  it,  that  there  is  an  infinite  depth  in  these  matters, 
which  we  can  never  sufficiently  reach,  or  dive  into,  and  those  that  knew  never  so 
much  of  tliem,  yet  they  are  still  capable  of  knowing  more.  Besides,  fm-ther,  that 
we  need  affections  even  there  where  we  need  not  information.  This  is  a  special 
ground  for  the  preach  ng  of  plain  truths  to  great  wits,  thereby  to  work  upon  their 
hearts,  and  to  draw  their  love  and  affection  to  them.  Let  us  not  disdain  the 
common  doctrines  of  religion,  nor  think  them  too  low  for  us ;  which  as  no  man  is 
too  good  to  preach  of,  so  no  man  is  too  good  to  hear,  nor  to  have  imparted  and 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  COnrXTHIAXS.  69 

communicated  unto  them.  Fourtlily,  there  is  here  one  thing  more  in  his  practice, 
and  tliat  is  this,  namely,  his  wif^doin  and  discretion  in  tLe  course  which  he  liere 
took  for  the  curing  and  removing  of  Ihe  distempers  of  these  Jews  and  Gentiles  in 
reference  to  preat-hing ;  and  that  is  by  the  very  exercise  of  preaching  itself.  Thej' 
counted  it  the  foolishness  of  preaching.  Well,  how  does  the  apostle  now  go  about 
to  free  them  from  this  mistake?  why,  he  does  it  no  otlier  way  than  indeed  by 
preaching  to  them.  And  this  there  is  good  cause  for:  first,  because  a  great 
occasion  of  peojile's  prejudice  against  preaching  is  because  indeed  they  are  un- 
acquainted with  it.  Secondly,  because  there  is  an  authority  in  preaching,  and  an 
efHcacy  which  goes  along  with  it,  wViich  does  command  respect  unto  it.  But  so 
much  of  the  first  particular,  viz.,  the  apostle's  cariinge  as  concerning  the  ordering 
of  his  ministry,  which  we  have  seen  in  four  several  instances.  The  second  is  the 
apostle's  doctrine  for  the  points  delivered  by  him,  and  that  is  Christ  crucified. 
This  was  the  string  which  the  apostle  here  harped  upon,  and  the  lesson  which  he 
principally  tauL'ht;  from  whence  we  mny  observe  this  much,  that  Christ  crucified 
is  the  main  object  and  matter  of  our  preaching.  But  why  Cbrist  crucified,  rather 
than  Christ  exhibited  in  some  other  consideration  ?  why  not  rather  Christ  incarnate, 
forasmuch  as  that  was  the  first  news  of  Him  ?  or  why  not  Christ  risen  again,  or 
Christ  ascended,  which  was  a  great  deal  more  glorious?  Surely  there  is  very  pood 
reason  to  'be  given  for  it :  first,  because  he  would  give  them  the  worst  of  Christ  at 
first,  that  he  might  show  he  was  not  ashamed  of  Him,  nor  of  that  gospel  which 
made  Him  known,  but  that  hereby  he  might  the  better  prepare  them  for  other 
truths,  and  make  them  the  welcomer  to  them.  Christ's  Ci'oss  is  the  first  letter  of 
all  in  a  Christian's  alphabet.  God's  beginnings  with  us  are  commonly  most 
tedious.  His  conclusions  and  closings  are  for  the  most  part  very  sweet  and  , 
comfortable.  Secondly,  because  Christ  crucified,  it  is  virtually  and  implicitly  all 
the  rest;  for  why  w;is  Christ  incarnate?  it  was  for  this  end  that  He  mifjht  be 
crucified.  Thirdly,  this  was  that  mystery  which  did  most  concern  us  for  the  good 
and  benefit  which  comes  by  it;  His  death  was  that  which  pacified  God's  wratli,  and 
paid  the  debt  which  w-as  due  for  our  sins.  Lastly,  Christ  crucified,  because  this 
was  that  which  these  people  had  a  particular  hand  in  as  instrumental  hereunto  ; 
they  had  been  active  in  the  crucifying  of  Christ  themselves.  Therefore  accordingly 
we  shall  find  that  this  was  the  practice  of  the  apostles  in  the  whole  course  and 
way  of  their  ministry.  And  so  it  is  that  which  is  the  chief  work  of  ours,  it  is  the 
doctrine  which  is  to  be  chiefly  preached  by  us ;  and  that  upon  these  following  con- 
siderations. First,  as  it  is  a  doctrine  of  the  greatest  humiliation,  it  is  an  Lumlding 
and  convincing  doctrine.  If  we  ask  how  this  is  d^ne,  I  ans^wer  by  an  act  of  reflec- 
tion and  special  consideration  to  this  purpose,  namely,  as  from  hence  taking  notice 
of  this  grievous  and  odious  nature  of  siu  ;  those  which  make  nothing  of  sin,  they 
may  here  see  what  it  is  now,  in  the  jDrice  which  was  paid  for  it,  and  the  pain  which 
was  endured  to  expiate  it  in  Christ  crucified.  This  doctrine  of  Christ's  Passion,  it 
is  thus  in  this  way  of  procec'ling  adoctrme  of  humiliation,  and  therefore  fittest  to 
be  urged  in  the  course  of  our  ministry.  And  that  because  this  is  a  main  part  of 
our  ministry,  to  humble  men  and  convince  them  of  sin.  Secondly,  this  doctrine 
of  Christ  crucified,  as  it  has  cause  to  be  the  chief  work  of  our  ministry,  forasmuch 
as  it  is  an  humbling  doctiine  ;  so  it  has  cause  likewise  to  be  so  too,  because  it  is  a 
comforting  doctrine,  and  a  doctrine  of  the  greatest  comfort  that  can  be.  First,  as 
Christ's  de^th  keeps  us  from  the  wrath  of  God  and  pnrchnses  peace  to  us  with  God 
the  Father;  for  that  it  dies,  as  we  may  see  in  Col.  i.  19,  20.  Secondly,  it  obtains 
to  us  peace  with  angels,  and  all  other  creatures  besides,  whether  in  heaven  or  earth. 
Thirdly,  it  frees  us  from  the  power  and  dominion  of  sin.  Fourthly,  it  frees  us 
from  the  j^ower  and  tyra>  ny  of  Satan  (Col.  ii.  15).  Fifthly,  from  bondage  and 
thraldom  to  the  ceremonial  law,  Christ  crucified  frees  us  from  hence  (Col.  ii.  14). 
Sixthly,  it  frees  us  from  the  inordinate  fears  of  death  and  final  dis'^olution 
(1  Cor.  XV.  55  ;  Heb.  ii.  14).  Now  this  doctrine  containing  so  much  sweetness  and 
comfortableness  in  it,  what  does  from  hence  follow,  but  that  accordingly  it  should 
be  a  principal  p-irt  of  our  ministry  to  dispense  it.  Thirdly,  as  it  is  a  doctrine  of 
the  richest  and  most  abumlant  grace;  for  it  contains  in  it  the  erceedmg  love  of 
God  towards  mankind,  and  the  height  of  His  mercy  towards  us.  In  Christ 
crucified  there  is  a  combination  of  all  the  riches  and  mysteries  oi  the  gospel :  it 
was  His  love  to  be  incarnate,  to  be  tempted,  to  be  persecuted  for  us  ;  yea,  but  His 
Passion  it  was  the  accomplishment  and  perfection  of  all  the  rest  (John  xv.  13). 
What  is  it  then  to  pi'each  Christ  crucified?  For  answer  hereunto,  we  must  know 
thus  much,  that  the  meaning  hereof  is  not  this,  that  we  should  preach  of  no  other 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

subject  but  only  of  the  death  of  Christ ;  for  there  are  many  other  points  besides 
whicli  it  is  necessary  for  a  minister  to  speak  of,  and  for  a  Cliristian  likewise  to  hear 
of.     First,  for  the  matter  of  our  preaching,  that  we  are  to  preach  this  principally, 
and  to  make  people  sensible  of  this  point  more  especially  above  any  other,  because 
the  hinge  of  the  g  ispel  turns  upon  this  point,  and  we  are  ministers  of  the  gospel. 
Secondly,  for  the  order  of    our  preaching,  to   do   all   in    reference   to  this  ;  then 
we  preach   Christ  crucified,  not   only  when   we  discourse   of    this   argument  for 
the   particular   subject   of   it,  but  likewise  when    we  preach    of    such  points  as 
are    introductive    and   preparatory   hereunto,    or    which    are    superstructed   and 
founded  hereupon.     Thirdly,  for  the  manner  of  our  preaching,  we  then  preach 
Christ    crucified,    when    we    preach    Christ    and    the    doctrine   of    Christ    in   a 
grave   and   sober   fashion  ;    this   is   clear   by  the   opposition   which   the   apostle 
Paul  himself  there  sets  (1  Cor.  ii.    2),   where   he    sets    this   preaching  of    Christ 
crucified  as  opposite  to  the  excellency  of  human  speech.     {'Thomas  Horton,  D.D.) 
Preaching  Christ : — The  expression  means — I.  To  preach  His  docteines.     If  I  say 
that  Newton  is  taught  in  our  universities,  I  mean  his  doctrines  are  taught ;  and  to 
preach  Christ  crucified  is  to  preach  His  doctrines  (Acts  xv.  21).     For  example,  the 
world  savs,  Kesent  an  injury  ;  Christ  says.  Forgive  your  enemies.    If,  therefore,  we 
preach  forgiveness,  are  we  not  thereby  preaching  Christ,  even  though  no  distinct 
mention  may  be  made  of  His  Divinity,  or  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement  ?     The 
world  says,  Indulge  your  inclinations  ;  Christ  says.  Be  pure  in  the  last  recesses  of 
your  mind.     He,  then,  who  lives  a  pure  life  is  teaching  Christ,  even  though  he 
may  not  on  every  occasion  name  Him.     In  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  in  the 
Epistle  of  St.  James,  there  is  not  one  word  respecting  the  Atonement ;  but  if  we 
work  out  the  truths  contained  in  them  we  preach  Christ.     II.  Preaching  tbdth  in 
CONNECTION  WITH  A  PERSON  ;  it  is  not  merely  purity,  but  the  Pure  One  ;  not  merely 
goodness,  but  the  Good  One,  that  we  worship.     Observe  the  advantages  of  this 
mode  of  preaching.     1.  It  makes  religion  practical.     2.  It  gives  us  something  to 
adore,  for  we  can  adore  a  person,  but  we  cannot  adore  principles.     III.  Preaching 
SDRKENDER  TO  THE  WILL  OF  Gon.     St.  Paul  would  Hot  preach  Christ  the  conqueror, 
but  Christ  the  crucified,  Christ  the  humble.     You  may  know  a  man  when  once  you 
know  what  it  is  he  worships.     {F.  W.  Robertson,  M. A.)         Preaching  Christ  and 
preaching  the  times : — Archbishop  Leighton  was  once  publicly  reprimanded  for  not 
"  preaching  up  the  times."     "  Who,"  he  asked,  "  does  preach  up  the  times?  "     It 
was  answered  that  all  the  brethren  did.     "  Then,"  he  rejoined,  "  if  all  of  you 
preach  up  the  times,  you  may  surely  allow  one  poor  brother  to  preach  up  Christ 
and   eternity."     [Principal   Edwards.)         Christ  crucified  : — We  have  here — I.  A 
GOSPEL  REJECTED.     1.  By  the  Jew.     A  respectable  man  the  Jew  was  in  his  day ; 
all  formal  religion  was  concentrated  in  his  person.     To  him  the  fact  that  Jesus  was 
the  carpenter  of  Nazareth  was  proof  positive  that  He  was  not  the  Messiah.     He 
bow  to  the  Nazarine !     Accordingly,  he  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  Paul.     Farewell,  old 
Jew.     Alas  !  that  Christ  who  was  thy  stumbling  block  shall  be  thy  Judge.     But  I 
am  going  to  find  out  the  Jew  here.     You,  too,  have  a  religion  which  you  love — so 
far  as  the  outside  goes.     When  I  tell  you  that  all  your  going  to  the  house  of  God, 
your  singing  and  praying,  all  jjass  for  nothing  if  your  heart  is  not  right  with  God,  the 
Cross  becomes  a  stumbling  block.    Another  specimen  of  the  Jew  is  thoroughly  ortho- 
dox ;  he  thinks  nothing  ot  forms  and  ceremonies.     Here,  up  in  this  dark  attic  of  the 
head,  his  religion  has  taken  up  its  abode  ;  he  has  a  best  i^arlour  down  in  his  heart, 
but  his  religion  never  goes  there.     He  has  money  in  there,  worldliness,  self-love, 
pride  ;  and  accordingly  when  once  you  begin  to  strike  home,  and  let  him  see  what 
he  is  by  nature,  and  what  he  must  become  by  grace,  the  man  cannot  stand  that. 
2.  By  the  Greek.     He  is  a  person  of  quite  a  different  exterior  to  the  Jew.     He  does 
not  care  for  the  forms  of  religion.     He  appreciates  eloquence;  He  admires  a  smart 
saying  ;  he  likes  to  read  the  last  new  book;  and  to  him  the  gospel  is  foolishness. 
Pie  is  thoroughly  wise.     Ask  him  anything,  and  he  knows  it.     If  you  are  a  Mahom- 
edan  he  will  hear  yon  very  patiently.     But  if  you  talk  to  him  of  Christ,  "  Stop 
your  cint,"  he  says,  "  I  don't  want  to  hear  anything  about   that."     This  Greek 
gentleman   believes  all  philosophy  except  the   true  one  ;  he  studies  all  wisdom 
except  the  wisdom  of  God.     Once  when  I  saw  him,  he  told  me  he  did  not  believe 
in  any  religion  at  all ;  and  that  it  was  best  to  live  as  nature  dictated.     Another 
time    he    spoke  well    of    all  religions,   and    believed  they   were  all  right   in  their 
place  ;  and  that  if  a  man  were  sincere,  he  would  be  all  right  at  last.     I  told  him  I 
did  not  think  so,  and  he  said  I  was  a  bigot.     Another  time  I  discussed  with  him  a 
little  about   faith.     He   said,   "Eight;    that .  is   true  Protestant   doctrine."     But 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  71 

presently  I  hinted  something  about  free  grace ;  but  that  was  to  him  foolishness. 
Ah,  wise  man,  thy  wisdom  will  stand  thee  bere,  but  what  wilt  thou  do  in  the 
swellings  of  Jordan?  II.  The  gospel  tuiuuphant.  "Unto  us  who  are  called" 
&c.  Yonder  man  rejects  the  gospel,  despises  grace,  and  laughs  at  it  as  a  delusion. 
Here  is  another  who  laughed  at  it  too ;  but  God  brou'jht  him  to  his  knees.  The 
Jew  and  the  Greek  shall  never  depopulate  heaven.  The  choirs  of  glory  shall  not 
lose  a  single  songster  by  all  the  opposition  of  Jews  and  Greeks.  John  Bunyan 
says,  "  The  hen  has  two  calls,  the  common  cluck,  which  she  gives  hourly,  and  the 
special  one  which  she  means  for  her  little  chickens."  So  there  is  a  general  call  to 
every  man  ;  the  other  is  the  children's  call.  You  know  how  the  bell  sounds  over 
tlie  workshoj)  to  call  the  men  to  work — that  is  a  general  call.  The  father  goes  to 
the  door  and  calls  out,  "John,  it  is  dinner-time  !  " — that  is  the  special  call.  The 
call  which  saves,  is  like  thnt  of  Jesus,  when  He  said,  "  Mary,"  and  she  said  unto 
Him,  "  Rabboni "  ;  when  He  said,  "Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  Me?"  and 
"  Zaccheus,  come  down."  I  cannot  give  the  special  call ;  God  alone  can  give  it, 
and  I  leave  it  with  Him.  III.  The  gospel  adjiiued  ;  unto  us  who  are  called  of  God, 
it  is  the  i^ower  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  This  must  be  a  matter  of  pure 
experience.  If  you  are  CMll^d  of  God  this  morning,  you  will  know  it.  I  do  not  under- 
stand how  a  man  can  be  killed  and  then  made  alive  again  and  not  know  it.  1.  The 
gospel  is  to  the  true  believer  a  thing  of  po«er.  What  is  it  that  makes  the  young  " 
man  devote  himself  as  a  missionary  to  the  cause  of  God  ?  What  is  it  that  con- 
strains yonder  minister,  in  the  midst  of  the  cholera,  to  stand  by  the  bed  of  one  who 
has  that  dire  disease?  And  what  emboldens  that  timid  female  to  go  through  that 
den  of  thieves?  It  is  the  power  of  the  gospel.  But  I  behold  another  scene.  A 
martyr  is  hurried  to  the  stake ;  the  flame  is  lighted  up.  What  makes  him  stand 
unmoved  in  the  flames  ?  The  power  of  the  Cross.  Behold  another  scene.  There 
is  no  crowd  there  ;  it  is  a  silent  room.  There  is  a  poor  pallet,  and  a  young  girl  lying 
on  it,  her  face  blanched  by  ccmsumi^tion.  Joan  of  Arc  was  not  half  so  mighty  as 
that  girl.  Hear  her  sing  :  "  Jesus  !  lover  of  my  soul,"  etc.,  as  she  shuts  her  eye  on 
earth,  and  opens  it  in  heaven.  What  enables  her  to  die  like  that?  The  jriower  of 
Jesus  crucified.  2.  To  a  believer  the  gospel  is  the  jperfection  of  wisdom,  and  if  it 
appear  not  so  to  the  ungodly,  it  is  because  of  the  jJerversion  of  their  judgment.  It 
has  been  the  custom  to  talk  of  infidels  as  men  of  great  intellect.  But  this  is  a 
mistake  ;  for  the  gospel  is  the  sum  of  wisdom  ;  a  treasure-house  of  truth.  Our 
meditation  upon  it  enlarges  the  mind.  It  confers  wisdom  on  its  students.  A  man 
who  is  a  lover  of  the  truth,  as  it  is  in  Jesns,  is  in  a  right  place  to  follow  with 
advantage  any  other  branch  of  science.  Once  when  I  read  books,  I  put  all  my 
knowledge  together  in  confusion  ;  but  ever  since  I  put  Christ  in  the  centre,  each 
science  has  revolved  round  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeou.)  Cliri.it  crucified: — The  Cross 
is  the  preacher's  theme.  In  all  ages  and  lands  this  theme  of  the  apostle  has  lent 
to  the  preacher's  voice  the  most  thrilling  tones,  and  to  his  spirit  the  deepest 
earnestness.  Preaching  is  man's  wisdom  as  well  as  God's.  It  is  the  simplest, 
wisest,  most  natural,  and  most  effectual  way  of  lodging  our  beliefs  in  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  men.  But  among  all  preachers  in  all  ages  the  preachers  of  the 
Cross  stand  pre-eminent.  The  Cross  stirs  the  heart,  chains  the  spirit,  as  no  t)ther 
theme  in  this  universe  can  do.  I.  "  The  Jews  kequiee  a  sign,  and  the  Gkeeks 
SEEK  after  wispom."  "  Jews  and  Greeks."  These  are  not  names  of  the  past. 
The  world  still  divides  itself  thus  in  its  moial  aspects.  1.  The  Jews  require  a  sign. 
Two  thoughts  were  ever  clashing  in  the  Jewish  mind.  The  earlier  splendours  of 
their  national  history,  and  then-  present  bondage  and  shame.  The  restorer  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  was  the  nntionol  description  of  the  expected  deliverer;  but  when 
they  saw  that  the  only  empire  Christ  cartd  for  was  over  the  hearts  and  consciences 
of  men — that  there  was  no  chance  of  a  national  restoration,  they  turned  from  Him. 
But  He  knew  how  little  earth  would  be  helped  by  the  establishment  of  such  a 
society  as  the  Jews  wore  dreaming  of.  There  is  many  a  man  in  a  popular  tumult 
who  will  throw  up  his  cap  and  shout  "  Liberty !"  whose  notion  of  liberty  is  the 
grossest  licentiousness  or  the  sternest  tyranny.  And  many  a  Jew  would  attend  a 
triumphal  progress,  and  rend  the  air  with  Hosannas,  who,  when  he  heard  of  an 
inward  moral  reformation  as  the  first  act  of  obedience,  would  change  his  cry  to 
"  Crucify  Him  !  "  I  take  the  Jewish  "  seeking  for  a  sign  "  as  the  representative  of 
that  seeking  for  an  outward  regeneration  of  society  which  has  lived  in  the  hearts 
of  the  men  of  this  world  in  all  ages.  Socialism  is  its  most  modern  manifestation. 
The  hope  that  if  society  were  rearranged,  property  redivided,  and  a  fair  start  given 
to  all,  man  would  be  blessed.     "  The  difliculty  lies  not  there,"  say  the  preachers  of 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  r. 

the  gospel:  "your  hearts  need  the  cure,  not  your  ch-cumstances."  The  Jews 
"  sought  a  sign,"  a  hint  even,  that  Jesus  w.is  anything  hke  what  their  fancies 
pictured  ;  and  when  He  gave  no  sign  but  His  t^hameful  Cross,  they  shouted, 
"Better  Ca3sar  than  He."  And  the  world  is  full  of  sign-seekers.  Men  looking  for 
redemption,  but  misconceiving  utterly  its  nature.  Prench  republics,  New  Jeru- 
salems,  all  mean  the  same  thing.  Men  expect  that  God  will  begin  from  without 
instead  of  from  within.  2.  The  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom.  The  Greeks  represent 
those  who  try  by  seaiching  to  find  out  God.  Greek  intellect  was  hopelessly  battled 
in  the  search.  Blank  atheism  was  the  result  of  it  in  all  the  philosophic  schools. 
An  altar  to  the  unknown  God  kept  up  the  memory  of  the  effort  in  the  mind  of  the 
populace  ;  but  every  tbinker  on  earth  had  been  brought,  in  the  absence  of  revela- 
tion, to  the  bewildered  question  of  Pilate  "  What  is  truth?  "  Some  said,  "  Theie 
is  such  a  thing,  but  man  can  have  no  hope  of  finding  it."  Some  said,  "Tush! 
there  is  no  such  thing  in  the  universe  at  all."  Tiiat  a  tale  of  a  crucified  man  in  an 
obscure  and  dishonoured  country  should  be  what  they  had  been  fruitlessly  seeking 
for  ages  was  an  insult  to  their  understandings.  In  them  was  the  same  radical 
indisposition  to  accept  a  gospel  which  demanded  au  inward  and  spiritual  change. 
It  was  only  after  long  battles  that  intellect,  with  broken  wing,  fell  bleeding  on  tlie 
bosom  of  revelation,  and  bealed  her  wounds  and  renewed  her  life  at  the  once  hated 
symbol  of  the  Cross.  But  intellect  is  essentially  restless.  In  every  age  the  battle 
is  renewed,  and  has  to  be  fought  out  with  varying  success.  And  in  this  age  the 
wisdom-seekers  are  rampant,  proclaiming  that  not  from  God,  but  from  man  must 
be  asked  the  question,  "What  must  I  do?" — that  our  own  nature,  honestly 
treated,  will  supply  all  that  is  needful ;  that  the  Cress  is  au  insult  to  the  wisdom 
and  benignity  of  the  Father ;  tbat  Jesus  is  the  first  of  men — an  admirable  pattern, 
but  that  they  dream  who  say,  "  He  is  made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  sanctification,  and  redemption."  Far  easier,  far  pleasanter  to  the  eye  is 
it,  to  seek  after  wisdom  than  to  seek  after  holiness.  II.  We  preach  Chk'st 
CEUciFiEi).  Read  Rom.  iii.  21;  v.  1-11;  vi.  3-11;  Phil.  ii.  5-11;  Heb.  ii.  0-18, 
iv.  14-16 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  45-57.  In  Christ  crucified  the  following  facts  are  set  forth 
as  tbe  gospel — 1.  The  love  of  the  Father  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son.  Philip  had 
a  much  det-per  meaning  than  he  was  perhaps  conscious  of  when  he  said,  "  Show  us 
the  Father."  None  of  the  gods  of  heathendom  contented  heathendom,  for  they 
could  not  show  the  Father  ;  they  did  not  know  what  fatherhood  meant ;  but  those 
men  had  a  mighty  gospel  who  could  say,  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  We  tell 
you  not  what  God  ought  to  be  or  do,  or  may  be  expected  to  do,  but  what  God  has 
done.  "  Behold  Christ  Jesus  and  Him  crucified  !  "  There  God  unveils  His 
character — reveals  His  heart.  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto 
Himself."  Jew  seeking  after  a  sign,  Greek  groping  after  wisdom,  turn  hither — 
"  Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us."  Is  this  truth 
folly  or  wisdom  ?  Is  it  weakness  or  power  ?  Is  life  worth  less  to  the  man  who 
knows  that  the  Father  loveth  him,  or  is  it  worth  more  ?  And  the  world,  is  it  better 
or  worse  for  tbe  belief  that  God  loves  it,  and  will,  by  love's  sure  purpose,  redeem  it 
to  Himself?  Get  that  belief  into  tbe  beart  of  the  world,  your  dieam  is  fu  filled — 
your  golden  age  is  restored  !  2.  The  redemption  wrought  by  the  work  of  the  Son. 
The  picture  of  humanity  wbich  God  beholds  is  tbat  of  bondsmen,  bound  to  an  alien 
and  usurping  power.  The  evidence  of  this  condition,  it  meets  us  everywhere.  Sin 
had  entered  into  the  world,  sin  had  mastered  it ;  God  entered  into  it  to  break  the 
bonds  of  sin  and  restore  the  world  to  itself  and  to  Him.  Is  it  nothing  that  the 
preachers  of  this  gospel  should  cry  to  souls  hopeless  of  victory.  Liberty!  a  man  has 
conquered,  a  man  has  lived  fiee  from  sin  ;  a  man  whose  spirit  can  so  chain  your 
spirit  by  its  living  attraction  as  to  ensure  to  you  the  victory  too?  The  public 
justice  of  the  universe  is  satisfied,  its  law  illustrated  and  magnified,  and  the  sinner, 
conscience-stricken,  but  beginnirg  to  cherish  the  hope  of  r.  storaticn,  is  satisfied 
that  a  G  d  of  holiness,  of  justice,  will  still  be  h^noure.],  while  he,  the  guilty,  is 
saved  !  Men  lauphed,  and  called  it  folly  ;  but  hell  trembled,  Satan  cowered,  for 
they  understood  the  attraction  of  the  Cross.  Satan's  Conqueror  cried  out,  "It  is 
finished,"  and  committed  to  such  hands  as  Paul's  the  standaid  of  the  Cross,  who 
cried,  "I  preach  Christ  crucified,"  &c.  3.  The  glory  won  by  the  suffering  and 
Cross  of  Jesus,  which  is  to  illumine  heaven  eternally  (Phil.  ii.  6-11).  The  sun  is 
the  centre  of  the  world  of  nature  ;  the  Cross,  of  the  world  of  spirit.  But  here  is  a 
strange  contraiiictinn.  The  sun  is  the  most  glorious  object  in  creation,  it  fills  all 
heaven  with  its  spb-ndour  ;  but  the  Cross  is  to  all  men  naturally  an  object  of  dread 
and  aversion,  and  is  aisuciated  with  shame,  agony,  and  death.     But  just  as  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   COPdNTHIANS.  73 

sun  has  for  ages  proved  itself  the  centre  of  our  world  of  nature,  the  Cross  has 
proved  itself  the  centre  of  the  world  of  spirit,  has  cliained  the  most  mighty  and 
onward  spirits  to  its  orbit  (l\ev.  v.  G-10).  Here,  mark  you,  is  the  most  splendid 
picture  of  heaven  which  is  anywhere  painted ;  yet  this  must  mean  that  the  Cross, 
far  from  fading  from  sight  when  the  veil  falls  over  earth's  sad  history,  remains  the 
object  of  interest,  the  centre  of  attraction  through  eternity.  That  this  must  be  so 
■will  ajjpear  to  us  if  we  consider — 1.  The  Cross  nmst  remain  for  ever  the  manifes- 
tation of  the  depth,  the  tenderness,  tlie  mightiness  of  the  love  of  God.  2.  While 
the  Cross  shall  be  to  the  saints  for  ever  the  bond  of  fellowship  with  their  risen  and 
glorified  Lord,  the  Lord  Himself,  while  He  remembers  the  Cross  as  the  instrument 
of  His  agony,  beholds  it  as  the  fountain  of  glory  and  of  bliss.  (J.  Ikildwin  Brutcii, 
B.A.)  cJiiist  crucified  : — I.  The  doctrine.  Christ  crucified.  1.  The  light.  2. 
The  hope.  3.  The  law  of  the  world.  II.  Its  offensiveness.  1.  A  stumbling 
block.  2.  Foolishness,  III.  Its  triumphs — in  them  that  believe.  1.  The  power 
of  God.  2.  The  wisdom  of  God.  (J.  Li/th,  D.D.)  Christ,  crucified  .-—It  is  a  very 
strange  conjunction  of  words — the  Anointed  of  God  crucified.  Yet  for  this  very 
purpose  He  was  anointed,  and  our  preaching  is  the  preaching  of  "  Christ,"  that  is 
the  glory  of  His  Person  ;  but  it  is  "  Christ  crucified  "  that  is  in  the  ignominy  and 
shame  of  His  suffering.  In  dividing  the  text  we  will  take  each  woid.  I.  A  word 
OF  POSITION — "But."  1.  It  is  not  everybody  that  does  this;  others  have  other 
things  to  do.  2.  The  "  but "  seems  to  suggest  opposition,  viz.,  the  conten- 
tions which  prevailed  at  Corinth.  What  are  we  to  do  when  we  find  people  quarrel- 
ling? If  we  are  wise  we  shall  let  them  alone,  and  say  throu}.'h  it  all,  "  But  we 
preach  Christ  crucified."  I  have  known  a  Church  divided  into  as  inaiiy  divi- 
sions as  there  were  members,  and  there  has  come  a  warm-heaited  Christian  man 
who  has  just  preached  Christ  crucifi'-d,  and  somehow  before  they  knew  it  the 
members  melted  into  one.  3.  The  "  but"  seems  to  me,  however, to  have  reference 
to  the  very  wise  people  to  whom  the  Cross  was  fooli::^hness.  They  were  "  abreast 
of  the  times,"  they  "  kept  pace  with  progress,"  so  they  jireached  Christ  so  improved 
that  it  was  no  longer  the  gospel,  but  "  another  gosi^el."  I  like  Paul's  grand  way 
of  teaching  the  Gnostics,  or  the  knowers;  he  joined  the  "know-notbings,"  for  he 
says,  "  I  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  you  save  Christ  and  Him  cruci- 
fied." "  Let  these  Gnostics  preach  what  they  like,  but  we  preach  Christ  crucified.'' 
4.  We  know  some  brethren  whose  religion  consists  always  in  mending  the 
religion  of  others.  You  may  be  preaching  niceties  of  doctiine,  of  theories,  of 
prophecy,  &c.,  while  what  is  wanted  is  the  cure  for  the  souls  of  men  who  are 
perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge,  and  the  knowledge  that  they  want  is  wrapped  up  in 
these  two  words,  "  Christ  crucified."  5.  And  had  Paul  been  here  he  would  have 
made  some  remark  about  the  superstitions  of  this  age,  for  there  be  some  that  seem 
to  think  God  is  best  honoured  by  buildings  of  gorgeous  architecture,  and  by 
sumptuous  services.  Our  friend  has  built  a  rered^s,  has  decorated  a  holy  table, 
has  prepared  the  chancel,  and  thinks  he  has  brought  back  mediicval  Christianity; 
but  we  preach  Christ  crucified.  II.  A  word  of  personality — "  We."  Why  do 
we  do  it?  Because — 1.  He  saved  us.  We  cannot  help  preaching  this,  because 
every  day  it  is  the  rest  and  lefuge,  the  joy  and  the  delight  of  our  souls.  2.  He 
inspires  us.  We  preach  Christ  crucified,  because  years  ago  He  laid  His  hand  upon 
us,  and  said,  "  Go,  preach  My  gospel."  3,  It  seems  the  masterpiece  of  God. 
Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  His  majesty,  and  boih  in  nature  and  providence  we 
learn  to  adore  the  ever-present  and  eternal  One.  But  in  Immanuel,  God  with  us, 
there  is  most  of  God.  4.  We  are  fools,  as  the  enemy  says.  (1)  Any  fool  can  say 
that  which  is  uppermost ;  and  trulj',  brethren,  I  am  myself  a  great  fool  in  that 
respect,  for  uppermost  with  me  is  Christ  crucified.  (2)  Fools  can  alwa.^s  say  what 
they  are  told.  They  are  not  great  at  invention.  There  are  some  that  carry  with 
them  a  touchstone,  by  which  they  judge  inspiration  itself — their  inner  conscious- 
ness, and  the  general  tone  of  puldic  opinion.  Paul,  of  course,  did  not  know  much 
about  that,  because  he  was  "  crucified  to  the  world,"  and  the  W'  rid  to  him,  and  he 
did  not  care  much  about  public  opinion.  (3)  Fools  generally  talk  when  tlKyar& 
wonder-struck,  and  we  confess  that  we  have  b^en  astounded  at  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  (4)  Fools  can  generally  speak  if  they  are  forced,  and  we 
do  confess  that  that  is  exactly  one  point  that  accounts  for  our  folly.  "  Woe  is 
unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel."  We  cannot  take  any  credit  when  we  preach 
Chi-ist  crucified,  because  it  lies  within  us  like  fire,  and  we  cannot  help  but  speak  of 
it.  (5)  And  surely  men  may  speak  when  there  is  a  great  danger.  If  there  were  a 
house  on  fire,  and  a  poor  soul  needed  to  be  delivered,  I  do  not  suppose  that  before 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  icuaf.  i. 

a  man  wheeled  the  fire-escape  np  to  a  window  you  would  stop  him  to  see  whether 
he  could  j)ass  an  examination  at  Oxford.  And  so  we  must  be  permitted  while  men 
are  perishing  to  preach  to  them  that  alone  which  will  save  them — namely,  Christ 
crucified.  (6)  We  are  determined,  as  any  other  sensible  fools  would  do,  to  stop  by 
what  we  know  till  we  learn  something  better.  In  the  State  of  Massachusetts  there 
was  a  resolution  passed  that  the  State  should  be  guided  and  governed  by  the  laws 
of  God  till  they  had  time  to  make  some  better;  and  we  have  determined  that  we 
will  preach  Christ  crucified  till  we  find  something  better.  III.  A  word  of  action — 
"  We  j)reach,"  or  proclaim  as  heralds.  We  are  trumpeters  for  Christ,  we  go  before 
Him  to  prepare  His  way.  Hence,  some  have  said  the  preacher  ought  to  preach 
principally  the  s'^cond  Advent.  Undoubtedly ;  but  first  he  should  be  able  to  say, 
"we  preach  Christ  crucified,"  not  "we  preach  Christ  glorified."  Because  to 
preach  means  to  proclaim,  therefore  we  proclaim  Cbrist  as  King.  Submit  your- 
selves unto  Him.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  choice  with  you.  It  is  not  "  Will  you  elect 
some  king?  "  but  "  He  is  King  ;  submit  to  Him."  Neither  are  we  called  upon  to 
adorn  Ch'ist  crucified.  I  think  v.'e  are  getting  into  great  mistakes  about  sermons 
sometimes.  Gild  gold,  and  lay  your  colours  on  the  lily,  but  let  Christ  alone,  and  if 
you  cannot  do  anything  but  just  tell  simply  the  story  of  the  love  of  God  in  providing 
an  ati^ncment.  do  tell  ir,  and  leave  those  fine  words  at  home.  IV.  The  two  last 
woRns — "  Christ  crucified."  1.  Preach  all  of  Christ.  When  Paul  says,  "  We  preach 
Christ  crucified,"  he  seems  to  me  to  say,  "  We  preach  the  most  objectionable  part 
of  Christ."  I  like  a  Christian  man  that  preaches  all  he  believes.  "  Now,  Paul, 
this  is  very  unwise  of  you.  There  is  a  Jewish  gentleman,  a  man  of  large  means; 
if  we  could  get  him  into  the  Church  he  might  very  likely  build  a  chapel,  and  yoiv 
preached  Christ.  And  then  there  was  a  Greek  gentleman.  Now,  why  did  you  not 
preach  Christ  in  His  glory,  or  say  litt'e  about  Him  ?  We  cannot  expect  to  get 
these  Jewish  and  Greek  friends  converted  to  us,  if  we  will  stiffly  remain  by  the  old 
orthodoxy.  The  whole  current  of  thought  leads  you  to  believe  that  there  is  a  great 
deal  in  Mahomedanism  and  Brahminism,  and  it  is  a  great  pity  to  push  these  dis- 
tinctive points  so  Very  far."  I  fancy  I  hear  anybody  saying  that  to  Paul !  Did  we 
come  here  to  please  men?  I  charge  you  never  needlessly  offend  anybody;  but  if 
the  truth  offend  anybody,  let  them  be  offended  ;  for  it  is  much  better  to  offend  all 
the  world  than  to  offend  your  Master.  2.  As  we  preach  all  of  Christ,  so  this  is  all. 
But  we  have  some  other  doctrines.  Yes  ;  but  they  are  all  relating  to  this.  When 
you  have  said  that,  you  have  said  everything.  3.  We  i^reach  Him  as  all.  That  is  all. 
If  you  are  converted,  all  your  salvation  lies  in  Christ  crucified.  "Oh,  but  I  want 
a  new  heart."  Go  to  Him  for  it.  "  Oh,  but  I  want  to  feel  my  need."  He  gives 
you  this,  as  well  as  all  the  rest.  4.  We  will  all  preach  Christ.  "But  we  are  not 
all  ministers,"  saith  one.  I  hope  you  all  preach  Christ,  you  that  are  not  ministers. 
A  minister  once  said,  "  Now  all  of  you  must  teach  Jesus,  and  try  to  bring  others  to 
Christ ;  you  mus^t  all  tell  what  you  know."  There  was  a  black  man  in  the  gallery 
called  out,  "  Dat  will  I  do."  But  his  minister  stopped,  for  Sam  was  the  most 
ignorant  member  of  the  Church,  and  he  said,  "  Sam,  I  do  not  mean  you  ;  because 
you  do  not  know  more  than  your  AB  C. "  "Cat's  right,  sar,"  said  he;  "  dere  be 
some  niggers  don't  know  A  B  C — Sam  teach  them  dat."  You  young  converts  that 
do  not  know  much  about  Christ,  y^u  know  something  other  sinners  do  not  know. 
Go  and  tell  that,  and  each  bit  you  get  go  and  tell  them.  You  will  learn  it  all  the 
better  by  teaching  it  yourself.  .5.  We  pi1?ach  Christ  crucified  to  all.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  C'h7-ist  crucified  : — I.  We  preach,  i.e.,  proclaim,  herald.  Commonly, 
however,  in  the  N.T.,  voice,  in  contradistinction  to  other  agencies,  is  usually 
intended.  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  There  are  additional  instrumentalities 
which  have  been  greatly  honoured.  For  instance,  the  gospel  is  printt^d.  The  press 
is  a  mighty  power  for  good.  Again,  the  gospel  may  be  painted.  Sermons  have 
proceeded  from  studios  as  well  as  frona  studies,  and  the  picture-gallery  has  illus- 
trated impressively  the  glorious  work  of  grace.  Ziuzendorf  traced  back  his  deepest 
convictions  to  the  effect  produced  upon  him  by  a  representation  of  the  crucified 
Saviour.  And  this  is  not  marvellous.  Look  at  the  "Last  Supper  "  of  Leonardo  ; 
the  "Transfiguration"  of  liaphael ;  or,  the  "Light  of  the  World"  by  Holman 
Hunt.  Are  you  unmoved  by  them  ?  Nevertheless,  it  is  chiefly  by  speech  that  the 
mind  is  real hed  and  the  heart  touched.  "It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  to  save  them  that  believe."  An  experienced  missionary  has  remarked, 
"I  have  never  seen  a  Chinaman  weep  over  a  book;  but  I  have  seen  a  Chinaman 
weep  under  a  sermon."  W^e  have  the  sermons  of  George  Whitfield  and  the  orations 
ol  Edward  Irving,  and  the  reason  why  you  are  not  affected  as  others  were  is  because 


CHAP.  I.]  1.   COrdNTIlIANS.  75 

they  heavtl,  whereas  you  only  read.  II.  We  preach  Ciiuist — Paul  habitually  called 
the  attention  of  bi.s  hearers  to  a  Person.  "We  preach  Christ":  Christ  as  He 
was,  the  one  perfect  and  finished  offering  for  human  sin:  Christ  as  He  is,  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  man ;  Christ  as  He  will  be,  the  Judge  of  every  creature. 
In  adopting  such  a  course  the  apostles  followed  the  Master  Himself.  Christ 
preached  Christ.  "  I  say,"  "  I  am,"  "  I  do,"  "  I  will  "  :  how  often  did  these  words 
fall  from  His  lips  !  No  prophet  dared  to  speak  as  He  spoke.  The  power  of  this  Chris- 
tian ministry  is  in  the  presentation,  not  simply  of  great  truths,  but  of  tlie  truth  as  it 
is  in  Christ  Jesus.  III.  We  preach  Cnitisr  ckucified.  Because— 1.  Christ  cruci- 
fied reveals  God.  "  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God."  Write  the  biography  of 
Columbus  and  say  notliing  of  America,  speak  of  Caxton  and  be  silent  about 
printing,  allude  to  Wyckliffe  and  ignore  the  lleformation,  then  may  we  preacli 
Christ  and  forget  Christ  crucified.  2.  Christ  crucified  restores  man.  So  Paul 
found.  He  spoke  from  experience.  A  North- American  Indian  was  asked  the 
means  by  which  he  and  his  brethren  became  Christians.  Tlie  answer  was:  "A 
preacher  came  once,  and  desiring  to  instruct  us,  began  by  proving  that  there  was 
a  God.  On  which  we  said  to  him,  '  Well !  and  dost  thou  think  that  we  aie 
ignorant  of  that  ?  Now  go  again  whence  thou  camest.'  Another  preacher  appeared 
and  said,  '  Ye  must  not  steal,  ye  must  not  lie,'  &c.  We  answered  him,  '  Dost  thou 
think  tliat  we  do  not  know  that  ?  Go  and  l^arn  it  fir-t  thyself,  and  teach  the  people 
that  thou  belongest  to  not  to  do  tliese  things.'  Some  time  after  this,  Christian 
Henry,  one  of  the  brethren,  came  to  me  in  my  hut,  and  sat  down  by  me  and  said: 
'  I  come  to  thee  ni  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  He  acf[uaiiits  thee 
that  He  would  gladly  save  thee,  and  rescue  thee  from  the  miserable  state  in  which 
thou  liest.  To  this  end  He  became  Man,  hath  given  His  life  for  mankind,  and 
shed  His  blood  for  them  !  '  Upon  this  he  lay  dnvn  on  a  board  in  my  hut,  and  fell 
asleep,  being  fatigued  with  his  journey.  I  thought  what  manner  of  man  is  this  ? 
There  he  lies  and  sleeps  so  sweetly.  I  might  kill  him  immediately',  iuul  throw  him 
out  into  the  forest,  and  who  would  care  for  it?  i>ut  he  is  unconcerned.  However, 
I  could  not  get  rid  of  his  words ;  and  though  I  went  to  sleep  I  dreamed  of  tlie  blood 
which  Christ  had  shed  for  us.  Thus,  through  the  grace  of  God,  the  awakening 
among  us  took  place."  What  a  lesson  to  all  Christian  workers !  Behold  the  secret 
of  power.  Christ  crucified  is  the  world's  hope.  {T.R.  Stevenson.)  'Hie  crucifixion 
of  Christ :— I.  Was  most  hitter  axd  painiul.  II.  Was  most  vile  and  shamefol. 
Never  by  the  Romans  legally  inflicted  upon  freemen,  but  only  upon  slaves. 
There  is  in  man's  nature  an  abhorrency  of  disgraceful  abuse  no  less  strong 
than  are  the  little  antipathies  to  pain.  Wl^ence  it  is  not  marvellous  that  as  a 
transcendently  good  man,  Christ  was  affected  by  those  occurrences  so  mightily, 
according  to  that  ejaculation  in  the  Greek  liturgies — "  By  Thy  unknown  sufferings, 
O  Christ,  have  mercy  on  us."  III.  Had  in  it  some  pariicdlar  advantages  con- 
ducing  TO    THE    accomplishment    OF    OCR    LoRD's   PRINCIPAL   DESIGN.      1.     ItS    being 

very  notorious  and  lasting  a  competent  time.  I-'or  if  He  had  been  privately  made 
away,  or  suddenly  despatched,  no  such  great  notii-e  would  have  been  taken  of  it, 
nor  would  it  have  been  so  fully  proved  to  the  confirmation  of  our  fnith  and  convic- 
tion of  infidelity  ;  nor  would  His  excellent  deportment  under  such  affliction  have 
FO  illustriously  shone  forth  ;  wherefore  Divine  providence  did  so  manage,  th>it  as 
the  course  of  His  life,  so  also  the  manner  of  His  di-ath  should  be  most  conspicuous 
and  remarkable.  2.  By  this  kind  of  suffering  the  nature  of  that  kingdotu  which 
He  intended  to  erect  was  evidently  signified — a  kingdom  purely  spiritual,  consi>ting 
in  the  government  of  men's  hearts.  No  other  kingdom  could  He  be  presumed  to 
design,  who  submitted  to  this  way  of  suffering.  3.  By  sucli  a  death  God's  special 
providence  was  discovered,  and  His  glory  illustrated  in  the  propagation  of  the 
gospel.  Thereby  "  the  excellency "  of  Divine  power  and  wisdom  was  much 
glorified  :  by  so  impotent  and  improbable  means,  accomplishing  so  great  effects. 
4.  This  kind  of  suffering  to  the  devout  fathers  did  seem  in  many  ways  significant, 
or  full  of  instructive  and  admonitive  emblems.  (1)  His  posture  on  the  Cross  mif.;ht« 
repres  nt  unto  us  that  large  and  comprehensive  charity  wfich  He  bare  in  His  heart 
toward  us,  stretching  forth  His  arms  of  kindness,  pity,  and  mercy,  with  them,  as  it 
were,  to  embrace  the  world.  (2)  His  ascent  to  the  Cross  might  set  forth  His  dis- 
charging that  high  office  of  universal  High  Priest  for  all  ages  and  all  people,  the 
Cross  being  an  altar.  IV.  Corresponded  to  the  prophecies  and  types  fore- 
shadowing IT.  V.  As  APPLICABLE  TO  OUR  PRACTICE.  No  Contemplation  is  more 
efficacious  towards  the  sanctification  of  our  heaits  and  lives  than  this  ;  for  w-hat 
good  affection  may  not  tbe  meditation  on  it  kindle?  what  viitue  may  it  not  breed 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

and  cherish  in  us  ?  (1)  Love.  (2)  Gratitudo.  (3)  Hope.  (4)  Obedience.  (5) 
Penitence.  (6)  Fear.  (7)  Deterrence  from  wilful  commission  of  sin.  (8)  Joy  in 
'contemplation.  (9)  Charity  toward  our  neighbour.  (10)  Disregard  of  this  world. 
(11)  The  willing  inspection  and  the  cheerful  sustenance  of  the  Cross.  Since  there 
be  such  excellent  uses  and  fruits  of  the  Cross  borne  by  our  blessed  Saviour,  we  can 
have  no  reason  to  be  offended  at  it  or  ashamed  of  it.  (J.  Barrow,  D.D.)  The 
Cross  of  Christ : — Note — I.  Its  simplicity.  1.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  Jews  to 
demand  signs  or  portents.  The  especial  sign  which  they  sought  was  that  of  some 
manifestation  of  the  Shekinah  to  encompass  the  Messiah.  13ut  the  tendency  was 
more  general :  it  was  the  craving  for  the  marvellous  which  still  characterises 
Oriental  nations,  which  appears  in  the  licence  of  Arabian  invention  and  credulity, 
and  which  among  the  Jews  reached  its  highest  pitch  in  the  extravagant  fictions  of 
Eabbinical  writers.  The  proverb  "  Credat  Judseus  "  shows  the  character  which 
tliey  had  obtained  amongst  the  Romans  for  readiness  to  accept  the  wildest 
absurdities;  and  this  disposition  to  seek  for  signs  is  expressly  commended  in  the 
Mishna.  To  a  certain  extent  this  tendency  is  met  by  the  gospel  miracles  (John  ii. 
11;  Acts  ii.  22).  Yet  on  the  whole  it  was  discouraged  (Matt  xvi.  4  ;  John  iv.  48). 
And  what  is  thus  intimated  in  the  Gospels  is  here  followed  out  by  the  apostle.  In 
answer  to  the  demand  for  signs,  he  produced  the  least  dazzling,  the  least  miraculous 
part  of  Christ's  career.  The  more  ample  we  suppose  the  evidence  for  the  Gospel 
miracles,  or  the  more  portentous  their  nature,  so  much  more  striking  is  the  testi- 
mony of  Christ  and  His  apostles  to  the  truth  that  it  is  not  on  them  that  the  main 
structure  is  to  be  built.  2.  This  simplicity  was  also  a  rebuke  to  the  intellectual 
demands  of  the  Greek.  The  subtlety  of  discussion  which  had  appeared  in  the 
numerous  schools  of  Greek  speculation,  and  which  appeared  afterwards  in  the 
theological  divisions  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  needed  not  now,  as  in  the 
time  of  Socrates,  to  be  put  down  by  a  truer  philosophy,  but  by  something  which 
siiould  give  men  fact  instead  of  speculation,  flesh  and  blood  instead  of  words  and 
theories.  Such  a  new  starting-point  was  provided  by  the  apostle's  constant  repre- 
sentation of  the  crucifixion.  Its  outward  form  was  familiar  to  them  ;  it  was  for 
them  now  to  discover  its  inward  application  to  themselves.  II.  Its  hdmiuation. 
In  order  to  enter  into  the  force  of  this,  we  must  picture  a  state  of  feeling  which,  in 
part  from  the  effect  produced  on  the  world  by  this  very  passage  and  the  spirit 
which  it  describes,  is  entirely  removed  from  our  present  experience.  Not  only  is 
the  outward  symbol  of  the  Cross  glorified  in  our  eyes  by  the  truth  of  the  religion 
which  it  represents,  but  the  very  fact  of  the  connection  between  Christianity  and 
humiliation  is  one  of  the  proofs  of  its  Divine  excellence.  But  at  its  first  propaga- 
tion, as  now  in  parts  of  the  world  external  to  Christendom,  it  was  far  otherwise. 
The  crucifixion  was  and  is  a  "  scandal"  to  the  Jews  as  a  dishonour  to  the  Messiah. 
Christ  has  been  called  by  them  in  derision  "  Toldi,"  "  the  man  who  was  hanged"; 
and  Christians,  "the  servants  of  him  who  was  hanged."  And  in  the  Koran,  the 
supposed  ignominy  of  the  crucifixion  is  evaded  by  tbe  story  that  the  Jews,  in  a 
judicial  blindness,  crucified  Judas  instead  of  Christ,  who  ascended  from  their  hands 
into  heaven.  The  same  objection  was  felt  by  the  educated  Greeks  and  Hi 'mans; 
encumbered  as  Christianity  then  was  in  their  eyes  with  associations  so  low.  Nothing 
shows  the  confidence  of  the  apostle  more  strongly  than  the  prominence  he  gives  to 
a  teaching  so  unpopular.  Pliil.  ii.  5-8  contains  the  prophecy  of  the  triumph  of 
Christianity  not  only  in  spite,  but  by  means  of  this  great  obstacle.  And  now  the 
Cross  is  enshrined  in  our  most  famous  works  of  art,  in  our  greatest  historical 
recollections,  in  our  deepest  feelings  of  devotion.  The  society  which  consisted 
almost  exclusively  in  the  first  instance  of  the  lower  orders,  has  now  embraced 
within  it  all  the  civilisation  of  the  world.  {Dean  Stanley.)  The  Atonement 
adapted  to  all : — There  is  a  want  in  the  human  mind  which  nothing  but  thf  Atone- 
ment can  satisfy,  though  it  may  be  a  stumbling  block  to  tbe  Jew,  and  foolishness  to 
the  Greek.  In  the  words  of  Henry  EoRers  :  "  It  is  adapted  to  human  nature,  as  a 
bitter  medicine  may  be  to  a  patient.  Those  who  have  taken  it,  tried  its  efficacy,  and 
recovered  spiritual  health,  gladly  proclaim  its  value.  But  to  those  who  have  not, 
and  will  not  try  it,  it  is  an  unpalatable  potion  si  ill."  (C.  H.  Spiirgeon.)  En 
tnnto  niha  : — The  foolishness  of  God  ?  The  weakness  of  God  ?  Can  God  be  weak  ? 
Can  God  be  foolish  ?  No,  says  St.  Paul.  For  so  strong  is  God  that  His  very 
weakness,  if  He  seems  weak,  is  stronger  than  all  mankind.  So  wise  is  God,  that 
His  very  foolishneps,  if  He  seems  foilish,  is  wiser  than  all  mankind.  Why,  then, 
talk  of  the  weakness  of  God,  of  the  foolishness  of  God,  if  He  be  neither  weak  nor 
foolish?     St.  Paul  did  not  say  these  ugly  words  for  himself.     The  Jews,  who  sought 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  77 

after  a  sign,  the  Greeks,  who  sought  after  wisdom,  said  them.  There  are  men  who 
say  them  now.  Now,  how  is  this  ?  I.  The  Jews  requikf.d  a  sign  ;  a  sign  from 
heaven  ;  a  sign  of  God's  power.  Thunder  and  earthquakes,  armies  of  angels, 
taking  vengeance  on  the  heathen  ;  these  were  the  signs  of  Christ  which  they  expected. 
And  all  that  St.  Paul  gave  them  was  a  sign  of  Christ's  weakness.  Then  said  the 
Jews— This  is  no  Christ  for  us.  Then  answered  St.  Paul— Weak  ?  I  tell  you  that 
what  seems  to  you  weakness  is  the  very  power  of  God.  Weak,  shamed,  despised, 
dying,  He  is  still  Conqueror;  and  He  will  at  last  draw  all  men  to  Himself.  W'hat 
seems  to  you  weakness  is  the  very  power  of  God ;  the  power  of  suffering  all  things, 
that  He  may  do  good  :  and  that  that  will  conquer  the  world,  when  riches  and  glory, 
and  armies,  aye,  the  very  thunder  and  the  earthquake,  have  failed  utterly.  II.  The 
Greeks  sought  after  wisdoji.  They  expected  Paul  to  argue  with  them  on  cunning 
points  of  philosophy  ;  and  all  he  gave  them  seemed  mere  foolishness.  He  could 
have  argued  with  these  Greeks,  for  he  was  a  great  scholar  and  a  true  philosopher, 
but  he  would  not.  What  you  need,  and  what  they  need,  is  not  philosophy,  but  a 
new  heart  and  a  right  spirit.  Then  know  this,  that  God  so  loved  you  that  He  con- 
descended to  become  man,  and  to  give  Himself  up  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
Cross,  that  He  might  save  you  from  your  sins.  And  to  that,  those  proud  Greeks 
answered — The  cross?  Tell  your  tale  to  slaves,  not  to  us.  'To  give  Himself  up  to 
the  death  of  the  cross  is  foolishness,  and  not  the  wisdom  which  we  want.  Then 
answered  St.  Paul,  True,  the  cross  is  a  slave's  and  a  wretch'.s  death ;  and  there- 
fore slaves  and  wretches  will  hear  me,  though  you  will  not  (vers.  20-31).  You 
Greeks,  with  all  your  philosophy,  have  been  trying  for  hundreds  of  years  to  find 
out  the  laws  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  to  set  the  world  right  by  them ;  and  you 
have  not  done  it.  You  have  not  even  set  your  own  hearts  and  lives  right.  But 
what  your  seeming  wisdom  cannot  do,  the  seeming  foolishness  of  Christ  on  His 
Cross  will  do.  That  what  seems  to  you  foolishness  is  the  very  wisdom  of  God. 
Know,  that  when  all  your  ai'guments  and  philosophies  have  failed  to  teach  men 
what  they  ought  to  do,  one  earnest,  penitent  look  at  Christ  upon  His  Cross  will 
teach  them.  And  out  of  them  shall  spring  that  Church  of  Christ,  which  shall 
reign  over  all  the  world,  when  you  and  your  philosophies  have  crumbled  into  dust.' 
Conclusion  :  1.  Let  us  learn — (1)  That  self-sacrificing  love  which  Christ  showed  on 
His  Cross  is  stronger  than  all  pomp  and  might,  all  armies,  riches,  governments; 
aye,  that  it  is  the  very  power  of  God,  by  which  all  things  consist,  which  holds 
together  heaven  and  earth  and  all  there  is  therein.  (2)  That  that  love  is  wiser  than 
all  arguments,  doctrines,  philosophies,  whether  they  be  true  or  false.  2.  Do  you 
wish  to  be  powerful  ?  Then  look  at  Christ  upon  His  Cross  ;  at  what  seems  to  men 
His  weakness ;  and  learn  from  Him  how  to  be  strong.  Do  you  wish  to  be  wise  ? 
Then  look  at  Christ  upon  the  Cross ;  and  at  what  seemed  to  men  His  folly  ;  and 
learn  from  Him  how  to  be  wise.  For  sooner  or  later,  I  hope  and  trust,  you  will  find 
that  true  which  St.  Buonaventura  (wise  and  strong  himself)  used  to  say.  That  all 
the  learning  in  the  world  had  never  taught  him  so  much  as  the  sight  of  Christ  upon 
the  Cross.     (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.) 

Ver  24.  But  unto  themwhicli  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ  the  power 
of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God. — I'lie  offence  and  szfcce.s.s  uf  the  Cross : — God 
will  always  so  ordain  it  in  His  providence  that  some  shall  at  all  times  welcome 
His  gospel.  First,  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  elect.  Secondly,  God 
will  also  have  it  for  the  honour  of  His  own  truth,  and  the  doctrine  itself 
which  is  delivered.  Thirdly,  for  the  encouragement  of  the  labours  of  His 
own  servants  and  ministers  which  are  employed  in  preaching  the  gospel.  This 
observation  should  accordingly  be  improved  by  those  which  are  ministers  to 
quicken  them  in  their  work;  forasmuch  as  there  where  God  calls  them,  He 
will  more  or  less  be  assistant  to  them.  Secondly,  observe  this,  that  a  minister 
for  the  success  of  his  doctrine  is  especially  to  consider  how  it  takes  with  those 
which  are  most  godly  and  religious;  thus  does  the  apostle  Paul  here,  he  does 
not  so  much  trouble  himself  to  think  how  it  was  accepted  of  those  Jews  and  Greeks, 
but  how  it  was  to  them  which  were  "  called."  The  ground  hereof  is  this  :  First, 
because  such  as  these  they  have  best  skill  and  judgment  in  the  work  ;  every  one 
studies  rather  to  approve  himself  in  any  business  which  he  undertakes  to  workmen 
rather  than  to  bunglers.  Secondly,  such  as  these  they  come  to  the  Word  freest 
from  prejudice  and  carnal  affection.  A  drunkard  will  never  like  that  preacher  that 
presses  sobriety,  nor  an  adulterer  him  that  preaches  for  chastity.  Tliirdly,  those 
which  are  godly  and  effectually  called  are  most  to  be  regarded  for  their  entertain- 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ment  of  the  work,  because  they  are  most  intended  in  the  work  itself.  This  con- 
demns th^-  contrary  disposition  and  practice  of  many  who  more  consider  how  their 
doctrine  takes  and  is  accepted  of  those  which  are  great  nnd  wise  and  mighty  in  the 
woild,  thun  how  it  takes  with  those  wliich  are  good  and  pions.  We  come  now  to 
the  words  more  closelv  in  tliemselves,  "But  unto  them  which  are  called,"  &c., 
where  we  hive  these  two  parts  chielly  considerable.  First,  the  success  of  the 
gospel  considered  simply  in  itself,  "  Christ  the  power  of  God,"  &c.  Secondly,  the 
parties  to  whom  it  is  thus  laid  down  two  manner  of  ways.  First,  in  their  personal 
qmlification,  "  To  them  which  are  called."  Secondly,  in  their  national  qualifica- 
tion, "both  Jews  and  Greeks."  To  these  it  is  thus  effectual  and  successful.  We 
be^^in  first  of  all  with  the  parties  ;  and  that  first  of  all  in  their  personal  qualifica- 
tions. "  To  them  which  are  called."  For  the  further  openitig  of  it  to  you  there 
are  these  three  things  especially  considerable  of  us  in  it.  First,  the  Author  of  it 
who  it  is  that,  calls.  Tuat  is  no  other  than  God  hims'  If .  Thus  in  verse  9  of  this 
present  chapter,  "  God  is  faithful  by  whom  ye  were  called,"  etc.  And  2  Thess.  ii.  14 
— "  Wheri-unto  He  called  you  by  our  gospel,"  speaking  of  God.  And  2  Pet.  i.  3 — 
"  Through  the  knowledje  of  Him  that  hath  called  us  "  ;  he  speaks  of  God  still.  It  is 
God  and  He  alone  that  is  the  Author  of  our  effectual  calling.  Theref<n-e  let  us 
learn  to  give  Him  the  praise  and  j^lory  of  all,  "  and  show  forth  the  virtues  of  Him 
that  hath  called  its."  And  let  us  look  upon  His  call  as  the  spring  and  fountain  of 
all  the  good  which  comes  from  us.  First,  freely  of  His  own  accord,  none  moving 
or  persuading  Him  liertunto.  And  secondly,  sweetly  in  the  preservation  of  the 
natural  liberty  of  the  will  in  the  exercise  of  it.  And  thirdly,  yet  strongly  in  an 
irresistible  drawing  of  the  heart  to  the  embracing  of  His  heavenly  motions. 
Secondly,  for  the  subjects  of  this  calling,  who  they  are  which  are  called  ;  this  we 
have  from  God  to  be  only  the  elect  (Eom.  viii.  30).  This  now  accordingly  takes  it 
otf  from  any  personal  qualification  in  ourselves  as  to  be  the  original  and  cause 
hereof  unto  us.  And  this  for  the  snbjf^cts  of  this  calling,  who  they  are;  for  the 
general,  they  are  the  elect.  The  thiid  is  the  terms  from  whence,  and  to  which.  Tbis 
the  Scripture  sets  forth  unto  us  in  sun.lry  expressions,  as  first  from  darkness  to  light 
(Col.  i.  12,  1.^)).  From  the  power  of  Satan  to  God  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  From  the 
world  to  the  fell  'wsbip  of  Christ  and  the  saints  (chap.  i.  9).  Fiom  a  state  of  hell, 
and  wiath,  and  death,  to  a  state  of  life,  and  peace,  and  salvation  (1  Thess.  v.  9  ; 
2  Thess.  ii.  l-t).  These  are  the  tcms  from  whence  and  to  which.  And  this  sets 
forth  Uhto  us  the  excellency  nnd  dignity  of  our  calling  considered  in  itself.  I  come 
now  to  them  in  the  second  place,  in  their  natural  qualification  both  Jews  and 
Greeks;  this  must  be  taken  in  connecti.m  with  the  former  reference.  The 
apostle  had  in  the  v^rse  beiore  laid  a  disparagement  upon.'-uch,  as  concerning  their 
rejection  and  ill  entertainment  of  the  gospel,  affirming  it  to  be  to  the  Jews  a 
stumbling-lilock  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness.  Now  that  he  might  not  be  here 
mistaken  as  condfmning  thi  s^  whole  nations  at  large,  he  here  qualifies  this 
censure.  "But  unto  them  which  are  called  both  Jews  and  Greeks,"  &c.  In  the 
laying  of  censures  at  any  lime  upon  a  community  of  persons,  whether  nations  or 
societies  of  men,  we  must  take  heed  while  we  find  fault  with  some,  that  we  do  not 
iu'letinitely  condemn  all.  This  restriction  is  requisite,  first,  to  prevent  dis- 
couragement in  the  condemned,  that  so  we  may  not  trouble  the  minds  of  those 
which  aie  innocent.  Not  break  the  bruised  reed,  etc.  Secondly,  to  prevent  scandal 
in  the  standers  by,  and  that  others  may  not  be  otfended  at  ttiem  for  it.  Thirdly, 
to  prevent  injustice  in  ourselves,  and  that  we  may  not  give  wrong  judgment. 
This  does,  therefore,  meet  with  the  rashness  or  malice  of  many  persons  in  this 
particular ;  ye  shall  have  some  people  so  to  condemn  an  whole  company,  as  that 
they  spare  none  at  all  in  it.  But  to  speak  more  particularly  to  the  w.rds,  "To 
thcin  which  are  called  both  .Jews  and  Gr  eks."  We  see  here  that  God  has  His 
numbers,  and  portion,  more  or  less  in  all  people  and  nations  wittiout  any  ditference. 
This  may  be  made  good  unto  us  from  thes-'  considerations.  First,  both  Jew  and 
Gentiles  they  are  the  subjects  of  God's  election.  Secondly,  Christ  died  for  both. 
They  have  both  al  ke  intere-t  in  Christ.  Thirdly,  they  have  both  alike  in'erest  in 
the  gospel  and  means  of  salvation  ;  this  was  cleared  by  Peter's  yoing  to  Cornelius 
(Acts  xi.  17,  18).  The  consideration  of  this  present  point  is  thus  far  useful  unto 
us,  as  it  teaches  us  two  things — First,  to  pray  for  the  calling  and  conversion  of  the 
Jews.  And  secondly,  to  pray  for  the  accomplishment  and  fulness  of  the  Gentiles. 
But  then  agnin  a  little  furth>r,  these  w.rds  nv-iy  be  here  taken,  not  only  in  an 
historical  sense,  but  in  a  moral  ;  not  only  as  spoken  particularly  of  these  two 
nations,  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks,  but  likewise  as  spoken  of  such  persons  as  were 


CUAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  79 

noted    either    for    simplicity  or    wisdom — the    Jews   being   notorious    for    their 
stupidity,  and  the  Greeks  famous  for  their  learning.     And  so  there  is  this  in  it, 
that  God  has  His  lot  and  portion  amongst  learned  and  unlearned  both ;  there  is  no 
exception  in  point  of  conversion.     The  ground  hereof  still  is  this,   the  good  plea- 
sure and  will  of  God,  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons.     Therefore  let  tliose  wliich 
are  unlearned  not  here  excuse  themselves.     Again  for  those  which  are  learned,  let 
them  not  rest  themselves  in  their  human  learning.     Now  the  second  is  the  success 
of  this  preaching  itself,  "  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  "  ;  where 
we  may  observe  how  as  the  apostle  crossed  th^se  Jews  and  Greeks  in  what  they 
desired,  so  also  he  did  in  a  sort  comply  with  them.     Christ  is  to  them  which  are 
called  both  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God.     First,  He  is  so   absolutely,  and  con- 
sidered   simply    in    Himself    in   the  whole  oilice  of    His  mediatorship.      For   the 
jiower  of  God,  first,  tliis  showed  itself — First,  in  His  incarnation,  when  He  was 
born  of  a  pure  virgin.     Secondly,  in  His  crucifixion  and  death.     Thirdly,  in  His 
resurrection  (Rom.  i.  4 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  4).     Fourthly,  in  His  ascension  and  coming  to 
judgment  (Mark  xiv.  62;  Matt.  xxiv.  30).     Lastly,  as  in  that  which  was  done  upon 
Him,  so  also  which  was  done  by  Him  (Matt,   xxviii.  IS).     Thus  was   Christ  the 
power  of  (rod.     Secondly,  He  was  the  wisdom  of  God  ;  as  God  in  Him  did  show 
forth  His  wisdom,  and  as  in  Him  were  hid  all  the  treasures  both  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge    (Col.    ii.    3).       And    here    Christ    was    the   wisdom    of    God  in  divers 
explications.     As — First,  in  choosing  such  a  fit  and  accommodate  means  for  the 
reconciling  of  His  justice  and  mercy  both.     Secondly,  in  choosing  such  an  unlikely 
and    unexpected   means,    and    thereby   confounding    the   wisdom    of    the    world. 
Thirdly,  in  furnishing  of  Christ  with  all  such  gifts  as  were  fitting  Him  to  perform 
tliat  office  whicli  He  had  laid  upon  Him.     And  thus  was  Christ  both  God's  power 
and  wisdom  considered  absolutely  in  His  own  oflice.     Secondly,  He  was  so  also 
relatively,  in  order  and  reference  to  believers,  "  To  them  which  were  called  '  He 
was  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God.     First,  I  say  He  was  so  estimalively,  in  the 
apprehensions  and  oi)inions  which  they  had  of  Him;  they  counted  Him  to  be  both 
the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God.     The  reason  of  this  is  this,  because  that  now 
after  conversion  men  liave  a  new  understanding  put  into  them,  and  see  things  with 
other  eyes  than  thej'  did    before.     Secondly,  He  is  so  to  them  which  are  called 
effectively,  in  that  He  has  an  answei-able  influence  upon  their  persons,  and  that  in 
each  particular.     First,  He  is  the  power  of  God  to  them  (2  Cor.  xiii.  3),  "Mighty 
in  you."     And  that  again  in  sundry  respects.     First,  in  His  deatli,  the  mortifying 
of  their  lusts  (Gah  ii.  20;  Rom.  vi.  G).     Secondly,  in  His  resurrection,  for  the 
raising  them  up  again.     First,  corporally  in  their  bodies  (chap.  vi.  14).     Secondly, 
spiritually  in  their  souls  (Col.  ii.  12).     Thirdly,  Christ  is  powerful  in  believers  for 
the  conquering  and  overcoming  of  temptations,  and  fighting  against  principalities 
and  powers  (Eph.  vi.  10,  11).     Fourthly,  in  enduring  of  afiiictions,  which  without 
this  power  they  could  never  sustain.     Lastly,  in  final  perseverance  (1  Pet.  i.  5; 
Jude  24).      Thus   is   Christ  the  power  of    God   to   them.      Secondly,  He  is  the 
wisdom  of  God  to  them  also  in  sundry  respects  likewise.     First,  in  revealing  to 
them  the  mind  and  will  of    God  in  those  thin>;s  which  concern  their  f-alvation 
(chap.  i.  30).    Secondly,  in  giving  them  discretion  to  walk  worthy  of  their  heavenly 
calling,  and  to  honour  religion  by  their  conversation.     Thirdly,  in  giving  them  a 
spirit  of  discerning,  to  judge  ariglit  of  persons,  and  times,  and  things.     Lastly,  in 
teaching  tliem  to  number  their  days,  and  to  consider  their  latter  end  (Deut.  xxxii. 
29  ;  Psa.  xc.  12).    (T.  Hortnn,  D.D.)        Thepowerof  God  and  irisdom  of  God  .-—What 
was  it  in  Christianity  whicli  mainly  incensed  the  stribes  and  Pharisees?     They 
disUked  its  simplicity,  which  contrasted  with  their  ceremonial ;  its  purity,  which 
frowned  on  their  dissoluteness;  but  what  they  above  all  detested  was  the  Cross. 
Nor  could  the  ignominy  and  agony  which  Jesus  underwent  of  themselves  be  fasci- 
nating to  any  one.     What  was  it,  then,  which  induced  so  many  to  acknowledge  in 
Christ  crucified  "the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God"?     I  reply — I.  The 
nrjiLLiATioN  OF  Christ  was  judicial.     So  His  enemies  professed  to  regard  it.     But 
they  were  not  consistent  in  their  accusations,  and  the  sentence  of  Pilate  has  not 
been  confirmed  by  man's  sense  of  justice.     And  yet  justice  was  maintained  ir   His 
death ;    and  this  maintenance  of   justice   commends   and  endears  His   death   to 
indebted  followers.     He  was  cut  o&,  but  not  for  Himself.     But  how  can  the  sinless 
justly  suffer  for  the  sinful?     As  a  matter  of  fact  the  effects  of  iniquity  often  fall 
upon  the  blameless.     But  is  substitution  so  utterly  excluded  from  our  own  fo-ensic 
proceedings,  that  the  very  idea  of  it  should  be  sc"ffed  at  ?    An  established  mode  of 
punishment  is  by  fine,  but  fines  are  often  paid  by  proxy.    If  a  culprit  were  languish- 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

ing  in  a  dungeon  from  inability  to  pay  the  sum  demanded,  and  a  friend  paid  it  for 
him,  the  feehns^  would  not  be  that  righteousness  liad  been  outraged,  but  that  law 
had  been  upheld  while  generosity  was  manifested  and  misery  relieved.  The  clear 
doctrine  of  Scripture  is  that  Christ's  sufferings  were  sacrificial  (Heb.  ix.  26).  Here 
is  a  pathway  for  pardon  in  which  justice  itself  sbines  resplendent,  and  is  more 
honoured  in  clemency  than  by  countless  retributions.  Heie  is  a  road  for  the  sinful 
ascending  to  heaven,  yet  such  as  to  discourage  sin  and  render  it  infinitely  detestable. 
And  if  such  be  the  character  and  influence  of  the  Saviour's  suffering,  is  not  Christ 
crucified  "  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God"?  II.  The  hdjiiliation  or  Christ 
WAS  accompanied  with  manifestations  of  His  dignity.  Certainly  His  abasement 
■was  profound.  And  yet  all  this  humiliation  was  suitable  to  dignity.  His  was  that 
dignity  that  was  often  attacked,  but  never  impaired:  a  dignity  which  appears,  like 
a  majestic  edifice  or  sublime  promontory  seen  at  night,  more  vast  and  iuj posing  for 
the  gloom  with  which  it  is  surrounded.  And  we  never  find  the  Son  in  circum- 
stances of  special  abasement  without  some  accompanying  seal  or  token  of  Paternal 
acknowledgment  and  favour.  Note  the  attendant  circumstances  of  His  birth, 
baptism,  death,  &c.  III.  The  humiliation  op  Christ,  in  its  spirit  and  objects, 
infinitely  transcends  all  other  exhibitions  of  moral  excellence  and  glory. 
View  it — 1.  In  relation  to  the  Sutferer.  AVhat  filial  obedience  when  He  said,  "Tbe 
cup  that  My  Father  hath  given  Me  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  What  fulfilment  of 
righteousness  when  He  met  the  claims  of  a  broken  law,  and,  contemplating  it  in  all 
its  magnitude,  could  say  in  expiring,  "  It  is  finished."  What  friendship  to  sinners 
when  He  died  for  them  to  gain  them  admission  into  His  glory.  2.  In  relation  to 
our  race.  In  this  respect  it  is  the  grand  manifestation  of  God's  love  to  man  (.John 
iii.  16  ;  1  John  iv.  9).  3.  In  relation  to  its  effects.  Who  can  di-pute  their  pro- 
digious influence?  They  have  visibly  changed  the  aspect  of  the  world.  See  the 
power  of  this  love  manifested  in  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  And  this  was  but  a 
single  instance  illustrative  of  countless  multitudes.  {D.  King,  LL.D.)  Christ 
— the  power  and  u-isdom  of  God: — I.  Personally.  Christ  considered  as  God  and 
man  is — 1.  The  power  of  God.  (1)  From  all  eternity.  "  All  things  were  made  by 
Him,"  &c.  (2)  But  when  He  came  to  earth  He  gave  abundant  proofs  of  His 
power  in  His  miracles  and  resurrection.  (3)  He  is  the  power  of  God  now,  for  "  He 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  He  hath  the  reins  of  Providence  in  His  hands, 
and  is  the  Sovereign  Head  of  the  Church,  the  Lord  of  heaven,  and  death,  and  hell. 
2.  The  wisdom  of  God.  (1)  The  great  things  that  He  did  before  all  worlds  were 
proofs  of  His  wisdom.  He  planned  the  way  of  salvation  ;  He  built  the  heavens. 
Mark  the  world,  and  see  all  its  multitudinous  proofs  of  the  wisdom  of  God.  (2) 
And  when  He  became  man  He  gave  proofs  enough  of  wisdom.  In  childhood 
He  astonished  the  dotitors  by  His  questions ;  and  in  manhood  He  confounded 
Pharisee,  Sadducee,  and  Herodian.  And  when  He  paralysed  those  who  came  to 
take  Him  by  His  incomparable  words.  (3)  And  now  that  He  is  our  Advocate  before 
the  throne,  now  that  the  reins  of  government  are  in  His  hands,  we  have  abundant 
proofs  that  He  is  the  wisdom  of  God.  II.  In  His  gospel.  That  gospel  is — 1.  A 
thing  of  Divine  power.  (1)  How  could  it  have  b^en  established  if  it  had  not  in 
itself  intrinsic  might?  By  whom  was  it  spread?  By  learned  doctors,  fierce 
warriors?  No,  by  fishermen,  untaught,  unlettered.  How  did  they  spread  it ?  By 
their  swords?  No,  but  by  their  simple  words.  But  what  was  this  gospel  ?  Was  it 
a  thing  palatable  to  human  nature  ?  No,  it  was  a  gospel  of  morality  most  strict, 
it  was  a  gospel  with  delights  entirely  spiritual.  And  yet  it  spread.  Why  ?  Because 
it 'has  in  it  the  power  of  God.  (2)  How  has  it  been  maintained?  No  easy 
path  has  the  gospel  had.  The  good  biirk  of  the  Church  has  had  to  plough 
her  way  througli  seas  of  blood.  But  "  the  blood  of  the  martyrs"  has  been  "  the 
seed  of  the  Church."  It  has  been  like  the  herb  camomile,  the  more  it  is  trodden 
on  the  more  it  grows.  (3)  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  Church  has  outlived 
persecution,  so  much  as  I  wonder  she  has  outlived  the  unfaithfulness  of  her 
proiessed  teachers.  From  the  days  of  Diotrephes  to  the  latter  times  men  of 
all  sorts  have  come  into  her  ranks  and  done  all  they  could  to  turn  her  aside. 
And,  even  now,  when  I  mark  the  supineness  of  many;  when  I  see  the  want  of 
unctibn  and  prayerfulness,  she  must  have  the  power  of  God  within  her,  or  else  she 
would  have  been  destroyed.  (4)  There  are  not  a  few  of  you  who  would  be  i-eady 
to  beiur  me  witness  that  I  speak  the  truth.  There  are  some  who  were  drunkards, 
&c.,  a.nd  now  you  are  here,  as  different  as  light  from  darkness.  2.  The  wisdom  of 
God.  The  intellects  of  Locke  and  Newton  submitted  to  receive  the  truth  of 
inspiration.     What  a  vast  amount  of  literature  must  be  lost  if  the  gospel  be  not 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  81 

true.  No  book  was  ever  so  suggestive  as  the  Bible.  III.  In  ihe  heakt.  1.  The 
power  of  God — (1)  For  salvatiou.  (2)  In  temptation.  (3)  In  trouble.  2.  The 
wisdom  of  God.  If  you  want  to  be  a  thoroughly  learned  man  the  best  place  to 
begin  is  to  begin  at  the  Bible,  to  begin  at  Christ.  But  wisdom  is  not  knowledge, 
but  the  right  use  of  knowledge  ;  and  Christ's  gospel  helps  us  by  teaching  us  the 
right  use  of  knowledge.  (C.  H.  Sjiiirijeou.)  Chrifituitiitif,  the  wiiidoin  and  i^oivcr 
of  God  : — The  wisdom  of  any  scheme  is  evinced  by  the  excellency  of  its  effects,  and 
the  simplicity  and  fitness  of  the  means  by  which  they  are  produced.  Power  is  seen 
in  the  sure  and  easy  overcoming  of  obstacles  which  lie  in  the  way  of  success. 
Applying  these  tests  to  the  scheme  of  redemijtion,  by  means  of  tbe  atoning  death 
of  Christ,  we  s'liall  see  enough  to  satisfy  us  that  in  it  we  liave  a  trani-cendent 
manifestation  of  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  Consider  the  influence 
of  Christianity  upon — I.  The  world  at  laeoe.  1.  The  wisdom  of  (r.d  is  seen  in 
— (1)  The  exceeding  excellence  of  its  results.  When  it  appi'ared  tlie  S('iritual  con 
dition  of  mankind  was  deplorable.  Among  the  Gentiles  all  knowledge  of  the  true 
Ciod  seemed  to  have  tied,  and  among  the  Jews  tbe  light  of  revelation  was  hid  by 
thicdc  clomis  of  prejudice  and  ignorance.  It  seemed  the  midnight  of  the  worhl,  but 
when  this  darkness  was  at  its  worst  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  arose.  Before  it 
ancient  superstitions  yielded  up  their  sway,  the  stiff  formalisms  of  a  shailowy 
economy  gave  place  to  living  spiritual  realities;  old  traditions  grew  deci'epid, 
religion  came  back  to  be  a  dweller  in  man's  heart,  the  reign  of  vice  became  smitten 
as  with  a  dead  palsy,  the  bonds  of  society  were  re-knit  and  made  firmer  than  ever, 
i  hilosop!iy,  instead  of  pandering  to  man's  passions,  became  the  minister  of  his 
virtues,  poetry  di|)i)ed  her  sparkling  cup  in  the  river  of  the  water  of  life,  art  bathed 
herself  in  the  light  of  h?aven  ;  so  that  over  the  whole  field  of  human  interests 
there  spread  an  infiuence  which  proclaims  the  surpassing  wisdom  of  Him  by  whom 
the  whole  had  been  purposed  and  performed.  (2)  The  simplicity  of  the  means 
employed.  A  few  poor,  illiterate  men  went  forth  t'>  convert  the  race — to  tell  the 
world  that  their  Master  was  incarnate  Deity,  that  He  had  died  for  the  world's  sins, 
and  liad  gone  up  into  henven,  and  that  through  Him  there  was  free  remission  of 
sin  and  eternal  felicity  to  all  who  would  come  unto  God  through  Him.  This  was 
all.  No  glare  of  worldly  power  ;  no  resources  of  worldly  learning  ;  no  artifices  of 
carnal  rhetoric;  no  courting  the  favour  or  the  assistance  of  the  great  or  wise.  (8) 
The  suitableness  and  adaptation  of  these  means  to  the  end  in  view.  The  design 
was  not  to  establish  Christianity  by  any  means.  ('/)  If  fraud  or  force,  e.y.,  be  used 
on  its  behalf,  an  injury  and  not  a  benefit  is  conferred  upon  it ;  for,  being  a  religion 
of  truth  and  love,  it  would  be  self-contradictory  to  suppose  it  capable  of  being  aided 
either  by  falsehood  or  tyranny,  (h)  As  its  aim  is  to  regulate  man's  whole  being  by 
spiritual  principles  and  motives  it  can  only  interfere  with  this  to  mix  up  its  appeals 
with  anything  wnich  addresses  itself  to  man's  carnal  and  earthly  nature,  (c)  As 
its  great  design  is  to  erect  in  man's  soul  an  undivided  empire  for  God,  it  is  neces- 
sary that  he  shall  be  made  to  feel  that  it  is  not  on  the  ground  of  eloquence  or 
science,  but  on  tiie  ground  of  God's  word  to  him  that  his  hopes  of  pardon  and 
grace  must  rest.  {<i)  Who,  then,  does  not  see  in  the  means  employed  an  agency 
most  wisely  adapted  to  attain  this  end  and  no  other  ?  Had  the  apostles  come 
working  no  miracles,  the  jiroof  of  their  Divine  commission  would  have  been  defec- 
tive ;  had  they  wrought  miracles  more  frequently,  they  would  have  incurred  the  risk 
of  attaching  to  them  a  multitude  who  were  attracted  by  their  power,  but  had  no  real 
love  for  their  doctrine.  Had  they  been  men  of  splendid  abilities,  they  might  have 
rested  so  much  upon  these  as  to  hide  from  the  peop'e  the  purely  Divine  character 
of  their  doctrine  and  mission.  Had  they  put  themselves  under  the  protection  or 
soutjht  to  advance  their  cause  by  the  resources  of  human  power,  the  empire 
which  they  would  have  founded  would  not  have  rested  simply  on  the  basis  of  in- 
herent worth  of  the  doctrine  they  taught.  2.  The  power  if  God  is  seen  in  the 
obstacles  it  has  overcome.  These  obstacles  were  of  a  kind  which  might  well  have 
discouraged  any  but  men  who  felt  that  they  were  sustained  by  Omnipotence.  When 
we  think  how  lurd  it  is  to  effect  even  a  slight  refoini  in  some  long  established  and 
corrupt  system  ;  how  interest,  fashion,  and  prejudice,  and  even  sometimes  the 
better  feeUntjs  of  our  nature  rise  up  against  any  attempts  to  displace  time-honoured 
errors  or  usages  :  we  may  well  admiie  the  boldness  of  the  apostles  who  went  forth 
to  overthrow  all  the  religions  that  then  enjoyed  the  homage  of  the  race.  And 
when  we  consider  their  fewness,  illiteracy,  and  poverty,  the  unpretending  character 
of  their  machinery  and  the  repulsiveness  to  human  pride  of  their  doctrines  ;  when 
we  see  all  the  learning,  wealth,  and  power  of  the  world  forbidding  their  progress  ; 
VOL.    I.  6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


when  we  see  the  kindling  of  the  fires  of  persecution  ;  and  when  we  see  how  to  meet 
all  this  they  had  no  weapons  but  words,  we  may  well  stand  in  wonder  at  the 
courage  which  led  the  apostles  of  Christ  to  descend  into  the  arena  to  do  b  ittle  in  His 
cause.  But  they  knew  perfectly  what  they  were  about.  They  knew  that  however 
humble  the  instiuu'ent,  he  becomes  irresistible  when  the  agent  is  the  Altuighty 
(vers.  27,  28).  II.  Upon  individuals.  1.  Here  is  a  man  who  whs  once  afar  from 
God,  resting  on  His  righteous  displeasure.  Behold  him  now  !  He  Las  been 
brought  nigh  to  God  ;  he  has  found  the  pardon  of  all  his  sin  ;  and  he  waits  but  the 
summons  of  the  Judge  to  enter  His  presence  with  a  good  hope  of  a  triumphant 
acquittal  at  His  bar.  How  transcendent  the  change  in  that  man's  condition  and 
character  and  prospects  !  And  how  simply  has  it  all  been  brought  about — by  the 
mere  reception  and  realisation  of  the  truth  concerning  Christ  and  Him  crncilied! 
And  in  spite  of  what  tremendous  obstacles  has  this  been  achieved — obstacles  from 
old  habits  of  evil,  and  the  strong  tide  of  custom  and  fashion,  and  the  incessant 
assaults  of  him  who  goeth  about  seeking  whom  be  may  deceive  and  destroy  !  Who 
can  refuse  to  see  in  such  thing's  a  supernatural  agency  ?  2.  In  judging  of  this 
subject  we  should  not  for;,'et  that  the  redempti')n  of  the  sinner  is  the  laising  of  him 
to  a  higher  state  of  being  and  of  blessedness  than  that  from  which  Adam  fell.  By 
the  work  of  the  gospel  on  his  soul  man  is  brought  nearer  to  God  ;  he  is  placed 
under  higher  motives  to  love  and  serve  God  ;  and  he  draws  from  the  Divine  favour 
restored  a  depth  of  joy  which  those  who  have  never  lost  that  favour  cannot  reach. 
How  wonderful  is  this  !  Who  can  refuse  to  behold  here  the  working  of  Him  whose 
attribute  it  is  "from  seeming  evil"  to  be  "  still  educing  good  " — of  Him  who  is 
"  excellent  in  counsel  "  as  well  as  "wonderful  in  working"?  ((T.  L.  Alexander ,  D.D.) 
Preaching  the  Cross: — An  air  of  singular  antithesis  will  be  observed  to  pervade 
this  passage,  and  the  verses  with  which  it  is  connected.  The  wisdom  of  the  world 
is  contrasted  with  the  inscrutable  wisdom  of  God  ;  and  its  vaunted  science  with 
its  own  i^alpable  folly,  as  evinced  in  an  unnatural  but  universal  ignorance  of  God. 
The  things  which  it  accounts  to  be  foolishness  are  placed  in  honourable  comp'  ti- 
lion  with  those  which  it  falsely  reverences  as  wise.  Again,  the  blind  infatuation 
of  the  Jews  is  set  over  against  the  unprofitable  curiosity  of  the  Greeks  ;  the  pre- 
judice of  the  one  against  the  insolent  derision  of  the  other.  Ey  the  text  itself  our 
attention  is  invited  to  a  brief  but  mo~t  comprehensive  delineation  of  the  character 
and  great  subject  of  the  apostolic  ministry.  It  was  the  preaching  of  "  Christ 
crucified."  And  its  subject  was,  not  the  truths  of  natural  religion,  not  the  precepts 
of  moral  virtue,  but  the  work  and  glory  of  the  Saviour,  as  inseparably  associated 
with  His  own  sufferings  and  death.     Let  us  consider — I.  That  aspect  of  eepul- 

SIVENESS    AND    FOLLY   WHICH     THE     GOSPEL     HAS     IN     EVERY     AGE     PRESENTED     TO     THE 

GREATER  PORTION  OF  MANKIND.  The  attestations  demanded  for  the  establishment 
of  a  new  religious  system  must  obviously  vary  with  the  condition  of  those  to  whom 
they  are  presented.  The  greatest  force  of  argument  may  be  expended  in  vain  if 
it  comport  not,  in  its  form  and  bearing,  with  our  habitudes  of  thought.  There  are 
two  comprehensive  classes  into  which  human  minds  may,  with  reference  to  this 
design,  be  advantageously  divided  :  such  as  are  suscej^tible  of  being  wrought  on 
through  the  medium  of  external  objects,  and  such  as  are  affected  chiefly  by  the 
force  of  abstract  reason.  Now,  to  these  great  classes  there  are  specific  forms  of 
proof  respectively  adapted.  There  is  the  evidence  we  are  accustom^d  to  denominate 
external,  consisting  of  accrediting  signals  and  actual  events — and  that  also  which 
we  call  internal,  namely,  the  reasonableness,  congruity,  utility,  and  moral  fitness 
of  systems,  considered  in  themselves.  Neither  of  these  should  be  wanting  in  a 
religion  that  assumes  to  be  Divine.  The  demand,  therefore,  referred  to  by  the 
apostle,  if  made  with  intelligence  and  candour,  could  not  have  been  disregarded. 
It  was  natural,  and  could  not  be  wrong,  that  they  should  call,  in  the  one  case,  for 
a  sign,  to  show  that  an  institute,  in  all  its  parts  so  singul>tr,  had  truly  the  impress 
of  divinity;  and  in  the  other  for  the  manifestations  of  celestial  wisdom,  to  evince 
that  what  was  alleged  to  be  revelation  was  beyond  the  roach  of  artifice  and  the 
power  of  falsehood.  Their  fault  lay  only  in  this.  It  was  with  perverted  senti- 
ments and  obstinate  preconceptions  this  demand  was  accompanied.  Yet  both 
these  forms  of  evidence  were  amply  and  unitedly  supplied.  They  who,  with  a 
mind  open  to  conviction,  had  beheld  the  Saviour's  miracles,  were  awed  by  the 
revelation  of  His  power.  "  We  kuow,"  said  they,  "  that  Thou  art  a  Teacher  sent 
from  God  ;  for  no  man  can  do  those  miracles  that  Thou  doest,  except  God  be  with 
him."  They  who  had  listened  candidly  to  His  discourses  were  astonished  at  the 
discoveries  of  His  superhuman  wisdom,  exclaiming,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  83 

man,"  In  different  instances,  indeed,  it  would  appear  that  each  of  these  kinds  of 
evidence  alternately  prevailed.  It  was  probably  the  healing  of  the  impotent  man, 
rather  than  the  preaching  of  Paul,  which  constrained  the  multitude  at  Lystra  to 
exclaim,  "  The  gods  are  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness  of  men."  Yet  in  ordinary 
cases  the  internal  evidence  was  inseparably  linked  with  tbe  external,  and  an 
answer  equally  provided  for  the  satisfaction,  or  tbe  silencing,  whether  of  tbose 
who  demanded  a  sign,  or  of  those  who  sought  after  wisdom.  Let  us  observe, 
further,  the  force  of  the  term  here  employed  to  describe  tbe  metbod  adapted  in 
their  publication  of  the  gosp-1 — "  We  preach  " — pi'oclaim,  announce,  in  the  manner 
of  a  herald.  Him  who  was  crucified  at  .Jerusalem.  We  require  of  all  men  allegiance 
in  His  name ;  and,  denouncing  all  rival  pretensions,  ascribe  to  Him  an  absolute 
dominion.  We  present  tbese  claims,  not  as  subjects  of  debate,  but  of  testimony. 
Our  appeal  is  less  to  reason  than  to  conscience,  and  more  to  the  actual  snbjufjation 
of  the  soul  tlian  either.  And  yet,  as  if  the  meanness  of  His  outward  circumstances 
had  not  been  sulliciently  opposed  to  all  Jewish  expectations,  it  was  em|ihatically  as 
"  the  Crucified  "  that  they  proclaimed  Him.  However  easily  they  might  have  cast  this 
fact  into  comparative  obscurity,  by  dwelling  on  His  infiexible  constancy,  His  un- 
paralleled benevolence,  His  heroic  self-devotement,  His  resurrection  ;  yet,  disdain- 
ing all  such  evasions,  they  exultingly  pointed  to  His  crucifixion,  now  as  a  sacrifice, 
now  as  a  triumph,  and  thus  appeared  to  invite  the  united  scorn  and  hatred  of 
mankind.  It  is  not  easy  adequately  to  conceive  what  amount  of  impulsive  and 
imperious  conviction  must  have  been  required,  in  that  earlier  age,  to  proclaim  in 
this  manner,  as  the  Christ,  one  that  had  been  crucified.  To  avow  that  belief,  in 
the  face  of  universal  contempt,  to  defend  it  when  its  bai'e  annunciation  would 
seem  an  outrage  on  the  veiy  name  of  reason,  must  have  demanded,  I  do  not  say 
a  grandeur  of  moral  heroism,  but  a  strt^ngth  and  fixedness  of  persuasion,  such  as 
the  world  has  rarely  witnessed.  But  such  as  the  gospel  appeared  to  the  -Jews  and 
Greeks  of  the  first  ages,  such  is  still  essentially  its  aspect,  when  viewed  in  its 
primitive  and  unsophisticated  character,  to  multitudes  in  every  country.  They 
hate  or  they  despise  it  for  the  same  reasons.  It  presents  to  some  of  them  a  cause 
of  offence  and  irritation  ;  to  others  one  of  ridicule  or  proud  neglect.  There  are 
the  superstitious,  who  loathe  its  simplicity,  and  the  speculative,  who  repel  its 
practical  requirements.  As  to  the  one  class,  it  is  too  spiritual  for  their  reliance  on 
external  ordinances,  and  far  too  humbling  to  flatter  or  confirm  their  self-depen- 
dence. As  to  the  other,  it  is  originally  derived  from  a  source  unknown  to  all  their 
wisdom,  established  by  proofs  not  apprehensible  by  their  investigations  and 
experiments,  and  enforced  by  sanctions  destructive  of  their  vauntid  freedom, 
recommended  by  inducements  which  appeal  not  to  reason,  but  to  faith.  They 
may  both  con-pire  to  acknowledge  somewhat  which  they  call  by  its  name,  but 
which  has  as  little  either  of  its  native  features,  or  its  inherent  energj-.  Elsewhere, 
though  its  doctrines  are  professed,  its  spirit  is  evaporated.  In  opposition,  there- 
fore, to  all  such  attempts  to  modify  or  to  disguise  its  character,  we  fearlessly 
allege  the  conduct  of  tbe  first  disciples.  For  it  should  never  be  forgotten  that 
such  as  was  the  strength  of  their  conviction,  such,  too,  must  have  been  the  fulness 
of  that  proof  by  which  it  was  sustained  ;  and  thus  tbe  measure  of  their  confidence 
is  the  measure  also  of  the  credibility  of  the  whole  frame  and  fabric  of  tbe  gospel. 
Thus,  what  was  evidence  to  them  will  become,  in  a  twofold  manner,  evidence  to 
us;  while  we  see,  not  only  the  belief  in  which  it  issued,  but  that  actual  and  living 
character  which  belief,  thus  generated,  was  found  in  practice  to  create.  Nor  was 
their  confidence  misplaced.  The  gospel  pmved  itself  equal  to  every  emergency, 
and  adapted  to  every  design.  By  this  consideration  we  are  led  to  examine — II. 
Those  transcendent    manifestations  of    the    Divine   power    and    wisdom   with 

WHICH  the  gospel  HAS  BEEN  EVER  SEEN  TO  BE  ACCOMPANIED,  BY  ALL  WHO  HAVE 
RIGHTLY    UNDERSTOOD    ITS    PRINCIPLES,    OR    IMBIBED    ITS    SPIRIT.        Let     US    endeavoUr, 

therefore,  to  form  definite  conceptions  cf  the  sense  wherein  the  apostle  intends  to 
characterise  the  excellency  of  the  gospel,  when  he  calls  it  "  the  power  of  God  and 
the  w  s  lom  of  God."  It  is  plain  that  there  are  two  acceptations  chiefly,  wherein 
this  statement  may  be  understood,  either  as  denoting  that  tl  at  gospel,  and  the 
great  events  which  it  makes  known,  constitute  an  eminent  manifestation  of  God's 
power  and  wisdom,  or  else  that  th^yare  an  instrument  by  which  His  power  and 
wisdom  are  eminently  found  to  oj)ei  ate.  According  as  we  determine  on  the  one  or 
the  other  of  these  applications,  the  great  mediatorial  scheme  will  be  naturally 
brought  into  comparison  with  different  portions  of  the  Divine  workmanship,  to 
which  it  will  be  seen  to  possess  different,  though  not  incongruous,  affinities ;  and 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  analogy  of  which  to  itself  may  aid  us  more  precisely  to  apprehend,  and  more 
impressively  to  feel  its  impoit.  If  we  select  the  former,  the  labour  of  hmnan 
redemption  will  demand  to  be  compared  with  those  manifestations  of  the  Creator's 
agency  presented  in  the  structure  of  tlie  physical  universe,  or  else  with  those  more 
exalted  essences  formed  by  His  word  out  of  nothing,  angels  and  the  spirits  of  men. 
If  the  latter,  then  we  shall  be  taught  to  compare  the  doctrine  of  redemption,  in 
its  practical  effects,  with  the  inexhaustible  energies  of  nature,  and  its  numberless 
and  nameless  influences,  in  quickening,  renewing,  beautifying  that  wondrous 
frame,  whether  of  sentient  or  material  things,  with  which  we  are  surrounded.  By 
the  one,  our  attention  is  directed  to  the  work  and  process  of  redemption  ;  by  the 
other,  to  the  tidings  which  proclaim  it.  It  is  the  Saviour  Himself  on  the  Cross 
that,  in  the  one,  shines  forth  with  all  the  glory  of  omnipotence,  bearing  the  burdens 
of  a  guilty  world  ;  and  in  the  otlier.  it  is  His  gospel,  realising,  through  tlie  grace  of 
His  Spnit,  the  sublime  purpose  of  its  renovation.  Perhaps  it  is  not  necessary 
wholly  to  separate  these  reteiences,  or  to  decide  so  rigoiously  between  them,  as 
that  either  slaould  be  excluded  in  the  observations  that  follow.  If  we  think  of  the 
design  which  was  effecteil  Hud  the  objects  attained  upon  the  Cross,  how  jarring 
claims  were  readjusted  in  the  Divine  administration,  Ijow  infernal  principalities 
were  overthrown,  and  evils  were  decisively  suppressed  ;  if  we  advert  to  the  honour 
which  was  thus  insured  to  the  great  Eitler,  and  the  benefit  acquired  to  His 
dominions,  to  the  progress  of  His  righteousness  and  mercy;  if  we  see  the  curse 
that  had  blasted  the  earth,  now  arrested,  we  are  readj'  to  take  up  the  language 
of  the  text  in  its  first  and  simplest  application,  and  to  speak  of  the  crucifixion  of 
Messiah  as  the  last  and  greatest  of  tho^e  wonders  which  are  for  ever  revealed  in 
the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God.  Or,  if  we  exumine  the  actual  effects  flowing 
from  the  proclamati  m  of  the  gospel,  and  permaneutly  signalising  it  as  an  instru- 
ment for  tlie  renewal  of  mankind,  we  shall  be  equally  prepared  to  adopt,  though 
in  another  sense,  the  sentiment  before  us.  We  speak  not  of  its  efficiency  to 
ameliorate  men's  secular  condition.  Our  present  reference  is  to  consequences  of 
a  higher  character;  it  is  to  those  spiritual  transformations,  of  which  the  gospel 
has  ever,  from  the  fir-t  ages,  been  everywhere  productive.  For  the  altars  of 
heathenism  sank  not  al  ne ;  but  the  strongholds  of  sin  within  the  soul  were  equally 
demolished.  The  night  of  falsehood  was  dissipated,  and  the  phantoms  of  error 
fled.  The  slmiber  of  conscience  was  broken.  Tlie  captivity  of  the  affections  was 
unloosed,  and  the  imprisoned  soul  was  invited  to  Ciist  away  her  chains.  The  world 
was  renewed  around  her.  With  the  utmost  justice,  theiefore,  not  less  than  with 
the  utmost  magnificence,  may  this  doctrine  of  redemption  be  described  under  the 
appellations  here  employed  ;  and  it  is  not  without  reason  that  so  eminent  a  place 
is  assigned  it,  when  the  apostle  calls  it  by  the  names  of  those  two  great  attributes 
which  stand  foremost  in  the  array  of  tlie  Divine  perfections — wisdom  and  power. 
And  it  must  be  so  ;  for  without  consummate  wisdom  a  being  of  unlimited  power 
would  be  most  inapt  to  the  control  of  numberless  free  and  accountable  agents  ;  but 
without  power  e(]ual  to  His  intelligence,  a  being  of  infinite  wisdom,  baiiied  by  His 
own  designs,  and  lost  in  the  immensity  of  His  own  purposes,  would  be  supremely 
and  infinitely  misernble.  Their  combination  in  equal  measitre,  therefore,  as  it  is 
inseparable  from  His  nature,  is  required  aliku  in  order  to  His  rectitude  and  His 
felicity.  Each  has  its  own  sphere  ot  action,  and  each  its  standard  of  independent 
excellence.  It  is  power  which  brings  out  nf  nothing;  wisdom  which  arrays  and 
beautifies.  Power  is  the  source  of  elements ;  wisdom,  of  affinities;  jjower,  of  innate 
forces  and  undirected  energies  ;  wisdom,  of  useful  adaptations  and  beuefi:-ial  results. 
Power  miglit  •■reate  a  chaos  ;  wisdom  must  fabricate  a  world.  His  power  finds  its 
witnesses  in  the  lightning  and  the  whirlwind  ;  His  wisdom,  in  those  delicate  and 
just  proportions  which  fit  the  most  destructive  of  elements  to  sustain  and  nourish 
life.  Perhaps  it  is  power  which  most  astonishes  us  in  the  productions  of  nature  ; 
wisdom,  which  excites  our  greatest  admiration  in  tlie  disposals  of  providence;  but 
the  union  of  both,  which  we  behold,  with  the  sublimest  ravishment,  iu  the  mystery 
of  redemption.  It  is  a  high  and  sovereign  exercise  of  power  to  pardon  sin,  but  an 
arrangement  of  profoundest  wisdom  to  make  that  pardon  consistent  with  the 
honour  of  the  Lawgi\er,  and  the  security  of  His  dominion.  Power  might  rescue  ; 
wisdom  would  redeem.  We  behold  almighty  power  raising  up  from  amongst  the 
nations  the  ance-tiy  of  the  Messiah,  preserving  His  linenge  unbroken  through  so 
many  ages,  and  fulfilling,  by  continued  miracle,  what  had  once  been  uttered  by  an 
unalterable  decree:  "The  si-epire  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver 
from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come ;  and  to  Hiin  shall  the  gathering  of  the 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  conixrniAXs.  85 

people  be."  But  we  discern  not  less  of  wisdom,  so  ordering  all  thinf;s  by  the  co- 
operation of  natural  causes,  that,  when  the  long-look.id-for  Messiah  actually  came, 
the  state,  both  of  the  wt)rld  and  of  His  own  people,  should  be  such  as  to  insure 
His  rejection,  and  to  issue  even  in  His  death ;  and  yet  to  make  the  consequences  of 
His  ministry  the  most  extensively  effectual,  causing  their  tidings  to  spread  and 
their  influence  to  be  experienced  with  the  greatest  speed  and  certainty,  over  every 
land.  How  illustriously  is  the  agency  of  omnipotence  revealeil,  when  at  length, 
though  lifted  up  upon  a  Cross,  He  becDmes  the  C'lnqueror  of  death,  the  Spoiler  of 
the  grave,  the  Deliverer  of  captive  souls,  and  the  Emancipator  of  an  enslaved 
world !  And  yet,  conspicuous  as  are  these  discoveries,  the  features  of  unerring  and 
awful  wisdom  are  at  least  equally  discernible.  It  is  the  part  of  such  wisdom  to 
attain  the  gteatest  ends  without  profuse  or  ineffective  expenditure;  to  restrain  the 
premature  disclosure  of  its  objects;  to  provide,  infalliblv,  against  emergent  occa- 
sions and  contingent  events  ;  to  neutralise  opposition  and  hindrance  ;  or  to  convert 
opponent  forces  into  auxiliaries  and  useful  allies  ;  and  thus  to  secure  its  results,  in 
a  manner  exempt  from  complication  or  emliarrassmeut,  as  well  as  from  osfeutatious 
or  unmeaning  display.  Now,  in  each  of  these  is  revealed  "  the  depth  of  the 
riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God,"  in  the  process  of  redeeming 
mercy.  We  select  but  one  further  discovery  of  the  union  of  these  attributes  as 
exhibited  in  the  gospel,  viz.,  in  the  practical  effect  of  all  upon  the  hearts  and 
conduct  of  men.  When  God  had  created  the  matter  of  the  globe,  and  was  about 
to  put  the  stupendous  mass  first  into  motion,  there  remained  one  problem  as  yet 
unresolved,  on  which  its  welfare  and  permanency  were  essentially  dependent.  It 
was  this  :  What  was  that  specific  direction  in  which  an  impulse  might  be  given 
which  should  originate,  by  the  same  act,  those  complicated  yet  inseparable  move- 
ments which  insure  the  perpetuity  of  its  place  in  the  general  system,  and  the 
regularity  of  those  changes  which  are  demanded  for  its  own  immediate  service  ? 
Here,  then,  was  an  occasion  for  the  combined  and  equal  manifestation  both  of 
power  and  wisdom.  Neitlier  could  accomplisli  the  purpose,  separately  from  its 
fellow.  Heuce  followed  the  sweet  interchange  of  day  and  night,  tlie  grateful 
vicissitude  of  seasons,  the  admirable  diversity  <>f  climate,  soil,  and  temperature, 
the  perpetual  freshness  of  the  air  and  ocean,  the  iiipxhaustible  plenitude  of  life, 
its  constant  renovation,  and  its  numberless  diversity.  All  was  secured  in  a 
moment,  but  destined  to  continue,  without  interruption  or  rest,  until  the  same 
hand  sliould  interpose  to  stay  its  progress  or  to  chanse  its  course.  Such  is  the 
analogous  phenomenon,  but  presented  on  a  sublimer  scale  and  in  connection  with 
more  awful  elements,  in  the  world,  not  of  matter,  but  mind,  and  in  relation,  not  to 
the  physical  events  of  nature,  but  the  destiny  of  the  imperishable  .'•oul.  The 
problem  here  w^as  to  determine  what  was  that  mighty  impulse  whicn,  in  one  act, 
should  combine  all  that  was  essential  to  its  separate  happiness  with  all  that  was 
necessary  to  the  order  of  the  mor^l  univei'se  ;  wliat  that  mysterious  movement 
which,  once  impressed  upon  it,  should  for  ever  continue  unexpended,  securing  the 
completeness  of  its  nature,  together  with  the  ppipetnity  of  its  relations ;  hnw  the 
energy  of  l^uty  could  be  united  with  the  calm  of  depetidence  ;  reciitude  of  action, 
with  simplicity  of  trust ;  quenchless  aspirations,  with  unresisting  submission  ;  th*^ 
consciousness  of  perfect  liberty,  with  the  necessity  of  unceasing  obedience.  That 
impulse  could  be  imparted  only  through  the  agency  of  love.  All  was  effected  bv 
the  Cross.  And  oh  !  what  marvellous  transformations  attest  the  greatness  of  that 
one  and  all-commanding  impulse  !  What  beneficial  consequences  are  insured 
through  the  whole  compass  of  our  spiritual  existence !  What  rich  and  happy 
productions  spring  up  together,  to  revcKl  both  its  energy  and  its  design ! 
Hence  it  is  that  love  derives  her  flame,  adoration  her  incense,  gratitude  her  song, 
hope  her  fairest  visions,  fear  her  most  purifying  terrors,  humility  and  patience 
their  most  permanent  motives  and  firmest  support.  Eeason  here  fiuds  tlie  loftiest 
inquiry,  contemplation  the  sublimest  object,  memory  the  sweetest  recollections. 
And  thus  the  power  of  the  Cross  pr.^vails  to  sanctify  the  whole  character  hoth  of 
thought  and  action  ;  just  as  the  same  sap  which  supplies  the  i-oot  with  moisture 
becomes  verdure  in  the  foliage,  fragrance  and  beauty  in  the  flower.  Sin  is  hence 
made,  not  so  much  to  be  shunned  because  it  is  dangerous  as  to  be  hatfd  because  it 
is  unholy ;  while  the  performance  of  duty  is  secured  rather  bv  its  congeniality 
with  the  tendencies  of  a  renewed  nature,  than  by  its  mere  connection  with  the 
acquisition  of  happiness.  And  the  manner  in  which  these  results  are  wrought 
out  is  one  equally  applicable  to  every  order  of  intellect  and  every  condition  of 
society.    Besides,  the  just  and  practical  belief  of  these  truths  is  far  from  being 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

limited  by  the  boundaries  of  their  strictly  intellectual  revelation.  They  operate 
to  save  and  purify,  not  because  they  are  rational  or  beautiful,  but  because  they 
are  Divine;  bring  in  harmony  with  our  whole  s-piritual  nature,  and  proceeding 
from  the  same  hand  which  has  fashioned  the  constitution  of  our  being.  Many 
a  voyager  is  tiierefore  guided  by  these  lights  from  heaven,  by  whom  the  wonders 
of  their  mechanism  were  never  penetrated  ;  and  their  "  sweet  influences  "  are 
often  realised  where  their  mystic  glories  are  unknown.  And  now  behold  it  in 
its  not  less  wonderful  effects  upon  our  social  affinities  and  conduct,  and  on  the 
relation  of  the  individual  to  the  good  of  the  whole.  To  soften  barbarian  ferocity, 
to  refine  the  habits  of  the  civilised,  to  strengthen  the  bands  of  human  sympathy, 
and  to  entwine  more  firmly  the  links  of  universal  brotherhood  ;  these  are  the 
methods  by  which  it  insures  an  unrestricted  diffusion,  and  an  ever-widening 
control.  Let  us  now  attempt  to  deduce  and  apjjly  to  practical  purposes.  III. 
The  eeflections  which  this  review  is,  in  both  its  poetions,  fitted  to  supply. 
1.  It  cannot,  I  think,  be  doubted  that  a  sanguine  calculator,  judging  from  the 
rapidity  and  number  of  the  first  triumphs  of  the  gospel,  would  have  expected, 
before  this  period,  its  far  more  wide  and  unobstructed  diffusion.  "  Such,"  he 
might  say, '•  were  its  effects  when  it  began  to  be  proclaimed  among  the  nations. 
Why  have  those  effects  in  so  lai-ge  a  meaf.ure  disappeared  ?  But  the  calculation 
would  be  made  in  ignorance  both  of  the  gospel  and  of  human  nature.  Behold 
what  it  is  really  accomplishing  wherever  it  is  faithfully  and  simply  preached. 
Or  let  its  results  be  estimated  in  their  more  essential  character.  The  experience 
of  twenty  centuries  has  borne  uniform  testimony  to  this  truth,  that  no  other 
apparatus  is  adajited  to  the  momentous  work  of  human  renovation  ;  and  that  even 
where  this  is  em|iloyed  its  efficacy  depends,  to  a  very  large  extent,  on  its  application 
being  unencumbered  and  alone.  2.  It  is  natural  to  inquire.  Has  the  Church  been 
at  all  times  duly  considerate  of  the  method  in  which  only  it  might  anticipate 
prosperity,  in  its  efforts  for  the  diffusion  of  the  gospel,  and  how  it  might 
legitimately  commend  it  to  approbation  and  confidence?  As  a  matter  of  Divine 
revelation,  we  should  surely  pr<  sent  it  without  addition  or  retrenchment.  Even 
in  its  external  accompaniments  and  the  circumstances  attendant  on  its  ministra- 
tion, we  should  preserve  the  same  subordination  of  all  things  to  the  discovery  of 
its  native  greatness.  The  stateliness  of  sumptuous  buildings,  and  the  splendours 
of  a  gorgeous  ritual,  are  little  in  harmony  with  the  religion  of  the  Cross.  The 
effulgent  beauty  of  the  gospel  requires  not,  and  its  majesty  forbids,  such  enhance- 
ments. 3.  We  cannot  but  admire  the  method  adopted  by  the  first  advocates  of 
Christianity  to  secure  the  diffusion  of  their  principles,  and  thus  learn  in  what 
mauner  to  pursue  the  same  object  for  ourselves.  They  presented  them,  as  we 
have  seen,  with  the  directness  of  an  unwavering  and  solemn  proclamation.  Must 
man  be  wooed  into  acquiescence,  or  enticed  into  belief,  when  it  is  not  speculative 
principles,  but  stupendous  facts,  on  which  his  redemption  is  suspended  ?  Or  must 
the  gate  of  life  be  set  open  with  the  pomp  of  ceiemonyand  the  voice  of  music, 
before  the  outcast  will  condescend  to  enter  it,  though  the  avenger  of  blood  is 
behind  him  and  the  sword  of  justice  is  alieady  flaming  and  unsheathed  ?  Besides, 
if  we  are  to  judge  what  might  have  been  the  result  of  such  accommodation  by  its 
effect  in  modern  times,  the  expedient  is  one  presenting  little  claim  to  have  been 
employed  at  such  a  period,  or  by  instructors  so  prepared.  4.  How  i^owerful  is  the 
inducement,  and  how  plain  the  directory,  to  seek  for  ourselves  an  interest  in  the 
blessings  of  this  great  salvation !  If  it  be  the  pi-oduction  of  such  wisdom  and 
power  our  hope  can  never  be  disappointed.  5.  What  a  test  is  supplied  in  this 
description  to  ascertain  whether  we  have  truly  received  the  spirit  of  the  gospel ! 
If  it  be  adjusted  by  infinite  wisdom  and  armed  with  infinite  power,  then  what 
should  have  been  its  effects,  and  what  have  they  actually  been  ?  Has  it  conquered 
our  vices,  eradicated  our  evil  propensities,  humbled  our  presumption  ?  Again,  is 
it  unresisted  and  absolute?  Is  one  evil  not  supplanted  by  another,  but  all,  in- 
creasingly, by  this  new  element  of  good?  Is  the  effect  of  Christian  principle 
consistent  and  uniform?  Does  it  pervade  our  total  conduct  and  impart  its 
character  to  all  our  actions  ?  If  not,  what  is  our  religion  but  a  whited  sepulchre, 
beautiful  without,  but  full  of  death  witliin  ?  Let  us  never,  then,  rest  satisfied  with 
dubious  or  inoperative  princijDles.  6.  We  are  taught  how  to  count  on  the  future 
progress  and  final  triumphs  of  the  gospel.  Thus  organised  and  thus  sustained,  it 
might  appear  to  guarantee  even  its  own  perpetuity.  What  need  have  we  to  shrink 
because  of  the  ravings  of  blasphemy,  the  surmises  of  false  wisdom,  the  sorceries  of 
perverted  genius,  the  sneers  of  wit,  the  antipathies  of  taste,  the  caprice  of  passion, 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  87 

the  assaults  of  unbelipf  ?  Has  not  the  pospel  ah-eady  encountered  enemies  at  least 
as  formidable  ?  Finally,  we  cannot  fail  to  be  reminded  how  great  must  be  the 
glory  wherein  all  bhall  issue.  What  the  consummation  when  this  scene  of 
wonder.s  shall  be  perfectly  unfolded  !  {11.  S.  McAll,  D.D.)  Christ  the  power 
of  God  : — 1.  To  redeem  a  world.  2.  To  save  sinners.  3.  To  subdue  sin  and 
Satan.  4.  To  establish  His  kingdom.  5.  To  remove  the  curse  and  make  all 
new.      {J.   Lyth,    D.D.)  The  jwwer   of   God    nt   sclj-gncrijice  : — I.    Is    God    a 

Being  passible  or  ijipassible?      1.    It  would    seem    to    follow   from  the   infini- 
tude of  His  creatively-efficient  power  and  the  immensity  of  His  nature  that  He 
must  be  impassible.     Besides,  He  is  spirit  only,  and  what  we  call  force  cannot 
touch  Him.     2.  But  after  all  there  must  be  some  kind  of  passibleness  in  God,  else 
there  could  be  no  genuine  character  in  Him.    A  cast-iron  Deity  cou'd  not  command 
our  love  and  reverence.     Tlie  beauty  of  God  is  that  He  feels  appropriately  toward 
everything  ;  that  He  feels  badness  as  badness,  and  goodness  as  goodness — pained 
by  one,  pleased  by  the  other.    A  very  large  share  of  all  the  virtues  have,  in  fact,  an 
element  of  passibility  in  them,  and  without  that  element  they  could  rot  exist. 
Indeed,  gi-eatness  of  character  culminates  in  the  right  proportion  and  co-ordination 
of  these  passive  elements.    And  God  is  great  as  being  great  in  feeling.    3.  We  rjiise 
a  distinction  between  what  we  call  the  active  and  the  passive  virtues.    If  I  impart  a 
charity,  that  is  my  active  virtue  ;  if  I  receive  an  insult  without  wishing  to  revenge 
it,  that  is  my  passive  virtue.     And  without  this  in  its  varieties  we  should  be  only 
no-characters,  dry  logs  of  wood  instead  of  Christian  men.     Or,  if  we  kept  on  acting 
still,  we  should  only  be  active  machines  ;  for  what  better  is  the  acti\'<e  giving  of  a 
charity  if  there  be  no  fellow-feeling  or  pitying  passion  with  it  to  make  it  a  charily  ? 
Now  God  must  have  these  passive  virtues  as  truly  as  men.      How,  then,  shall  we 
conceive  Him  to  have  them  when  He  is,  in  fact,  impassible?   The  salvation  is  here  ; 
God,  being  physically  inijiassible,  is  yet  morally  passible,  i  e.,  He  is  a  Being  whose 
very  perfection  it  is  that  He  feels  the  moral  significance  of  things.     He  can  feel 
ingratitude  when  He  cannot  feel  a  blow.     He  can  loathe  impurity  when  He  cannot 
be  injured  by  any  assault.     He  is  pleased  and  gratified  by  acts  of  sacrifice  when  He 
could  not  be  comforted  or  enriched  by  benevolence.     A  thermometer  is  not  more 
exactly  and  delicately  passive  to  heat  than  He  is  to  the  merit  and  demerit  of  all 
actions.     This,  accordingly,  is  the  representation  given  of  Him  in  the  Scrijitures. 
Thus  He  is  bit  ssed  according  to  the  merit  and  beauty  of  whatever  is  done  that  is 
right.     He  .snipUed  a  sweet  savoir  in  Noah's  sacrifice.     He  has  pleasure  in  them 
that  hope  in  His  mercy.     He  is  tender  to  the  obedient,  pitying  them  that  fear  Him 
as  a  father  pitieth  his  children.     On  the  other  hand,  by  how  many  pains  of  feeling 
does  He  suffer  in  His  relation  to  scenes  of  human  wrong.     The  sighing  of  the 
prisoner  comes  before  Him  to  command  His  sympathy.     In  all  the  afflictions  of 
His  people  He  is  afflicted  Himself.     And,  in   the   i-anie  manner.  He  is  sail  to  be 
exercised  by  all  manner  of  unpleasant  sentiments  in  relation  to  all  manner  of  evil 
doings  ;  sore  displeased,  wroth,  &e.      i.  But  this  painful  feeling  in  regard  to  evil — 
what  is  this  but  to  assume  the  unhappiness,  or,  at  least,  the  diminished  happiness 
of  God  ?     How,  then,  shall  we  save  His  infinite  blessedness?     By  just  dropp'ni^  out 
our  calculations  of  arithmetic  and  looking  at  facts.     It  seems  to  be  good  arithmetic 
that,   if    any  subtraction  is   made  from    God's  infinite  happiness.   He  cannot  be 
infinitely  happy.    No,  on  the  contrary.  He  may  even  be  the  more  blessed  because  of 
the  subtraction,  for  to  see  that  He  feels  rightly  towards  evil,  despite  of  the  pain 
suffered  from  it,  to  know  that  He  is  pouring  the  fulness  of  His  love  upon  it,  to  be 
studying  now,  in  conscious  sacrifice,  a  saving  mercy — out  of  this  springs  up  a  joy 
deeper  than   the  pain,  and,  by  a  fixed  law  of  holy  compensation,  the  sea  of  His 
blessedness  is  kept  continually  full.    All  moral  natures  exist  under  this  \a.'v  of  com- 
pensation.    To  receive  evil  rightly  is  to  master  it,  to  be  rightly  pained  by  it  is  to  be 
kept  in  sovereign  joy.     II.  Thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  God's  passive  virtue,  princi- 
pally as  concerned  in  feeling  towards  what  is  moral  just  according  to  its  quality. 

But  THERE  is  a  MORAL  PASSIVITY  VASTLY  HIGHER  AND  REACHING  FURTHER,  VIZ.,  A  PAS- 
SIVITY OF  MERCY  OR  SACRIFICE.  1.  In  this  a  good  or  perfect  being  not  only  feels 
toward  good  or  evil  according  to  what  it  is,  but  willingly  endures  evil,  to  make  it 
what  it  is  not — to  recover  and  heal  it.  No  extraordinary  purity  is  necessary  to 
make  any  one  sensible  of  disgust  in  the  contemplation  of  what  is  vile,  but  to  submit 
one's  ease  to  the  endurance  of  wickedness,  in  order  to  recover  and  subdue  it, 
requires  what  is  far  more  difficult.  2.  Just  here,  then,  we  begin  to  opsn  upon  the 
true  meaning  of  "Christ  the  power  of  God."  There  is  no  so  great  power  even 
among  men  as  that  which  conquers  evil  l>y  enduring  evil.     Just  here  evil  becomes 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

insupportable  to  itself.  It  can  argue  against  everything  but  suffering  patience  : 
this  disarms  it.  All  its  fire  is  spent.  Christ  crucitied  is  the  power  of  God,  because 
He  shows  God  in  ^elf -sacrifice,  because  He  brings  out  and  makes  historical  in  the 
world  God's  passive  virtue.  By  this  it  is  that  He  opens  our  human  feeling,  bad  and 
blind  as  it  is,  pouring  Himself  into  its  deepest  recesses  and  bathing  it  with  His 
cleansing,  new-creating  influence.  There  is  the  highest  efficiency  in  it  for  it  is 
moral  power,  not  physical  force.  Hence  it  is  that  so  much  is  said  of  Christ  as  a 
new-discovered  power — the  power  of  God  unto  salvation:  the  Son  of  God  with 
power ;  the  power  of  Christ.  The  power  is  conceived  to  be  such  that  Christ  is 
really  our  new  Creator.  We  are  His  workmanship  created  unto  good  works.  3. 
But  iiow  does  it  appear  that  so  great  efficacy  is  added  to  the  known  character  of 
God  by  the  life  and  death  of  Christ?  Was  not  everything  shown  to  U8  in  His 
death  explicitly  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament  ?  God  was  represented  there  as  being 
duly  affected  by  all  evil  according  to  its  true  nature;  displeased,  abhorrent,  &c. 
But  to  have  these  things  ascribed  formally  to  God  is  one  thing,  and  a  very  different 
to  have  tbem  lived  and  acted  historically  in  the  worl'l.  Perfections  that  are  set 
before  us  in  mere  epithets  have  little  signiticance  ;  but  perfections  lived  and  acted 
before  the  senses,  under  social  conditions,  have  quite  another  grade  of  meaning. 
And  if  this  be  true  respecting  God's  mere  passivities  of  sensibility  to  right  and 
wrong,  how  much  truer  is  it  when  we  speak  of  Him  in  sacrifice.  No  such  impres- 
sion or  conception  of  God  was  ever  drawn  out,  as  a  truth  positive,  from  any  of 
the  epithets  we  have  cited.  And  nature  gives  it  no  complexion  of  evidence.  We 
could  almost  as  soon  look  for  sacrifice  in  a  steam-engine  as  in  nature.  How 
necessary,  original,  powerful,  then,  is  the  God  of  sacrifice — He  that  endures  evil  and 
takes  it  as  a  burden  to  bear — when  we  see  Him  struggling  under  the  load.  Some- 
where there  is  a  wondrous  power  hid  in  the  Cross  !  And  the  suffering  is  physical 
— a  suffering  under  force.     III.  If,  then,  God  is  physically  impassible,  how  does 

IT    APPEAR    THAT    He    IS    ANY   WAY   EXPRESSED    IN    THE    PASSION    OF    ChEIST  ?     hoW    doeS 

the  passion  present  Him  as  in  sacrifice?  1.  By  the  physical  impassibility  of  God 
is  not  meant  that  He  cannot  suffer  by  consent  or  self-subjectiou,  but  only  that  He 
cannot  be  subjected  involuntarily.  To  deny  His  liberty  to  exist  under  assumed  con- 
ditions whenever  tliere  are  any  sufficient  reasons  for  so  doing  might  even  be  a 
greater  infringement  of  His  power  than  to  maintain  His  natural  passibility.  2.  We 
can  clearly  enough  see  that  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  Passion  of  Christ  which  does 
not  also  exist  in  the  Incarnation  itself.  How  can  the  Infinite  Being  God  exist 
under  finite  conditions?  How  (for  that  is  only  another  form  of  the  same  question) 
can  the  Impassible  suffer  ?  And  yet  it  would  be  a  most  severe  assumption  to  say 
that  God  cannot,  to  express  Himself  and  forward  His  negotiation  with  sin,  subject 
Himself,  in  some  way  mysteriously  qualified,  to  just  these  impossible  conditions.  3. 
Be  this  all  as  it  may,  there  are  ways  of  knowing  that  are  shorter  and  wiser  than 
the  processes  of  the  head.  In  this  Passion  of  Jesns  it  must  be  enough  that  I  look 
on  the  travail  of  a  Divine  feeling,  and  behold  the  spectacle  of  God  in  sacrifice.  This 
I  see  and  nothing  less.  He  is  visibly  not  a  man.  I  feel  a  divinity  in  Him.  He 
floods  me  with  a  sense  of  God,  such  as  I  receive  not  from  all  God's  works  and 
worlds  beside.  And  when  I  stand  by  His  Cross  I  want  no  logical  endorsement ; 
enough  that  I  can  see  the  heart  of  God,  and  in  all  this  wondrous  Passion  know  Him 
as  enduring  the  contradiction  of  sinners.  Why  should  I  debate  the  matter  in  my 
heart  when  I  have  the  God  of  sacrifice  in  my  heart?  He  that  endures  me  so,  sub- 
dues me,  and  I  yield.  O  Thou  Lamb  of  God,  that  takest  away  the  sin  of  the 
world!  what  Thou  didst  bear  in  Thy  blessed  hands  and  feet  I  cannot  bear.  Take 
it  all  away.  Hide  me  in  the  depths  of  Thy  suffering  love.  Conclusion  :  1.  Here 
let  us  In'arn  to  conceive  more  fitly  the  greatness  of  God.  His  greatness  culminates 
in  sacrifice.  If  He  were  only  wi'^e,  omnipotent,  eternal,  just ;  even  that  would  pre- 
sent Him  as  an  object  worthy  of  profoundest  reverence,  but  in  the  Passion  of  Jesus 
He  is  more.  There  His  power  is  force  ;  here  it  is  sacrifice.  There  He  astoni^hes 
the  eye ;  here  He  touches  and  transforms  the  heart.  The  God  of  mere  amplitude 
will  do  to  amuse  the  fancy  of  the  ingenious — the  God  of  sacrifice  only  can 
approve  Himself  to  a  sinner.  2.  And  here  it  is  that  our  gosjjel  comes  to  be  so 
great  a  power.  It  is  not,  on  one  hand,  the  power  of  omnipotence  falling  in  secretly 
regenerative  blows.  Neither  is  it,  on  the  other,  any  mere  appeal  of  gratitude 
drawing  the  soul  to  God  by  the  consideration  of  what  He  has  done.  No ;  this 
wonderful  power  is  God  in  sacrifice.  This  is  the  power  that  has  new-created  and 
sent  home,  as  trophies,  in  all  the  past  ages,  its  uncounted  myriads  of  believing, 
new-created,  glorified  souls.    3.  And  you  that  have  known  this  dawning  of  the  Lord, 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   COrdNTHIANS.  89 

what  a  certification  have  you  in  this  sacrifice  of  God's  pympathy  !  How  intensely 
personal  He  is  to  you  !  Go  to  Hiiu  in  your  every  troulile.  When  the  loads  of 
conscious  sin  are  heaviest  on  you,  and  you  seem  even  to  be  sinking  in  its 
mires,  address  Him  as  the  God  of  sacrifice.  Have  it  also  as  your  lesson,  tluit  you 
yourself  will  be  most  iu  power  when  readiest  in  the  enduring  of  evil ;  that  you 
will  bear  fruit  and  be  strong,  not  by  yo;ir  force,  not  by  your  address,  not  by 
your  words,  but  only  when  you  are  with  Cbrist  in  sacrifice.  (//.  Bu^hncU,  D.D.) 
The  mi/steri/  of  power : — I.  The  Cross  kepkesents  thiiee  onEAx  ideas  which  sum 

TIP   WHAT    IS    NEEDED   BY    US   ALL   FOR    THE    FDLFILMENT    OF    VOCATION.       1.    The  idea  of 

Duty.  In  the  moral  mystery  of  the  Passion  we  see  this  special  characteristic  in 
the  Kepresentative  Man.  He  perfectly  subordinated  every  sinless  desire  of  ease,  or 
wish  for  deliverance,  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  infinite  claim  of  duty,  though  it  drove 
Him  to  His  death.  2.  The  idea  of  Love.  I  am  assured  in  the  gloom  of  the 
Passion  that  "  God  is  Love."  And  this  force  of  the  Passion  has  strength  to  attract 
the  soul  to  the  Eedeemer  with  infinite  desire.  Love  implies  generosity  of  service  ; 
"loved  me,  gave  Himself  for  me"  rouses  the  generous  answer  "love  for  love." 
Now  this  is  a  spiritual  power  of  the  Passion  drawing  and  enabling  me  to  love  God. 

3.  The  idea  of  Holiness.  Thus  we  name  that  perfect  loveliness  which  is  the  sum 
of  the  moral  glory  of  God.  Now  to  the  creature  there  is  a  possibility  of  the  grasp 
and  apprehension  of  the  heavenly  beauty.  The  fact  was  seen  in  Jesus  crucified, 
and  by  the  infinite  merits  of  the  Passion  is  guarantee  I  to  man  a  share  in  the 
grace,  in  the  life  of  the  Man  of  men.  Je<us  crucified  is  the  source,  the  promise  of 
this  power.  IL  Ix  the  Cross  there  is  Divixe  power.  1.  I  have  watched  the  wild 
waves  of  an  Atlantic  storm.  The  wind  was  screaming  to  a  pitch  of  tempest,  the 
clouds  rolled  mass  on  mass  of  inky  blackness,  only  relieveil  by  a  glow  of  vivid  fire. 
The  waves  towered  high,  then  sank  again  in  restless  mountains  and  unstable  valleys 
of  seething  sea.  A  splendid  spectacle  !  the  spectacle  of  nature  in  exercise  of 
unrestrained  tremendous  power  !  2.  I  have  watched  the  great  engines  in  Chicago 
pumping  up  with  steady  unabated  beat  their  three  hundred  million  gallons  hour  by 
hour  from  the  central  depths  of  Michigan,  for  the  use  of  that  strangest  city  of  the 
New  World.  3.  I  have  started  turning  into  the  Seuola  di  San  llocco  at  Venice, 
brought  suddenly  face  to  face  with  that  grand  and  pathetic  picture  of  the  Crucified, 
displayed  there  these  centuries  in  living  colour  from   the  genius  of    Tintoretto. 

4.  Nature,  Mechanical  Livention,  Art — each  show  the  mystery  of  power.  But  the 
power  that  consoles  the  sunken  spirit,  kindles  the  heart's  best  affections,  changes 
and  invigorates  the  stern  or  failing  will,  and  transforms  the  corrupted  soul  to  the 
hkeness  of  the  Divine  ideal— a  power  moral,  spiritual,  supernaturJ — that  is  the 
greatest  of  all.  Ah !  that  is  found  in  the  Crucified  ;  it  becomes  the  possession  of 
the  creature  by  union  with  Christ.  IH.  In  the  Cross  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation.  1.  What  is  it  to  be  saved  ?  Is  it  to  make  a  satisfactory  investment  in 
insurance  against  final  punishment,  when  here  in  our  mortal  pilgrimage  we  have, 
so  to  speak,  "taken  our  fiing,"  and  passion  and  ambition  have  had  their  unre- 
stricted play?  Certainly  not.  (1)  It  is  to  be  placed  habitually  on  a  higher  plat- 
form of  thought,  and  to  be  awakened  to  a  sincerity  of  manly  and  abiding  sorrow  fur 
aught  in  our  motives  or  actions  unworthy  or  wrong.  (2)  It  is  to  have  that  light  of 
the  heart,  that  strength  of  the  will,  that  eager  purity  of  the  affections,  by  the  force 
of  which  we  breast  the  waves  of  sorrow,  sustain  ourselves  with  meekness  under  the 
strain  of  success,  and  in  the  darkest  hours,  as  in  the  brightest  moments,  do  not 
fail  in  unselfishness  and  truth.  (3)  It  is  to  rise  ont  of  the  ruts  of  convention  ;  it  is 
to  strangle  the  treachery  of  self ;  it  is  to  have  the  clear  eye  and  spiritual  under- 
standing of  the  inhabitant  of  eternity  ;  to  be  advancing  in  fitness  to  play  our  part 
as  citizens  of  that  blessed  commonwealth  which  is  quickly  coming— "the  new 
heaven  and  the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  (4)  In  one  word, 
it  is  to  have  the  heart  of  a  man,  as  his  Creator  conceived  him,  pure,  tender, 
and  loving ;  it  is  with  that  heart  to  love  God  supremely,  perfectly  ;  and  in 
God  to  lose  self  in  love  for  others — that  is  to  be  slaved  !  2.  Can  th's  be  ours  ? 
Thou  hast  answered,  "It  can,"  O  my  Jesns !  my  Redeemer!  The  lesson  of  it 
comes  from  the  Crucified ;  its  power,  its  possibility  from  the  precious  blood. 
[Canon  Knox-Little.)  Christianiti/s  Divine  power: — Note  three  preliminary 
considerations.  1.  Christianity  is  the  only  historical  religion.  Buddhism, 
Brahminism,  and  Mahomedanism  have  a  history,  but  Christianity  alone  is 
founded  upon  a  history.  It  could  not  have  arisen  anywhere  else  than  where  it  did. 
It  was  the  outgrowth  of  Judaism,  and  the  realisation  of  the  Messianic  idea. 
Christianity  is  historical,  too,  because  it  is  founded  upon  the  history  of  Jesus.    You 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

cannot  separate  Christianity  from  Christ.  Its  doctrines  are  simply  the  inter- 
pretation of  Christ's  history.  2.  There  was  a  preparsition  everywhere  for  the  spread 
of  Cbristianity,  if  it  could  prove  its  truth.  The  civilised  world  was  then  under  the 
rule  of  Rome.  The  old  religions  were  losing  their  hold,  so  there  was  a  disposition 
to  listen  to  a  new  religious  claimant.  There  was  also  peace  throughout  the  empire. 
There  was  in  providence  "  the  fulness  of  time."  But  these  favouring  circumstances 
would  not  have  availed  if  the  Christian  preachers  could  not  have  vindicated  the 
truth  of  the  history  on  which  it  rested.  3.  While  Christianity  had  strong  passions, 
selfish  interests  and  prejudices  to  overcome,  it  had  yet,  in  man's  moral  and  spiritual 
necessities,  wants  which  it  professed  to  meet.  And  now,  let  us  proceed  to  consider 
the  conflicts  which  Christianity  had  to  wage,  and  in  which  it  showed  its  power  and 
attested  its  truth.  I.  The  conflict  with  a  corkupt  Judaism.  With  the  Judaism 
of  Moses  and  the  prophets  Christianity  could  have  no  conflict.  "  Think  not  that 
I  came  to  destroy  the  law  or  the  prophets,"  &c.  1.  But  that  a  contest  with  con- 
temporary Judaism  was  inevitable  will  be  seen  in  the  study  of  its  leading  features. 
Note — (1)  The  prevalent  view  as  to  the  character  and  mission  of  the  Messiah.  The 
Messiah  was  the  hope  of  the  Jews.  But  they  misread  the  prophecies ;  and  they 
invested  Him  with  a  worldly  dignity  which  was  never  claimed  for  Him.  (2)  It  did 
not  enter  into  their  minds  that  there  would  be  any  material  change  in  their  worship 
under  the  Messiah.  There  were  still,  they  believed,  to  be  the  priests,  the  temple, 
and  its  imposing  ritual.  (3)  The  Jews  had  long  been  God's  peculiar  people;  and 
they  believed  that  they  would  still  continue  to  be  so.  2.  When  the  Messiah  came, 
where,  they  asked,  was  His  kingly  splendour  ?  Where  was  the  national  restoration 
His  coming  was  to  bring  ?  But  the  apostles  taught  the  kingship  of  Jesus  ; 
that  salvation  was  only  by  believing  in  Him;  that  the  sacrificial  worship  was  to 
cease  ;  that  salvation  was  for  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews.  How  would  you  expect  this 
religion  to  be  received  by  the  Jews?  Just  as  we  find  it  was  received,  with  a  con- 
tempt and  hatred  which  soon  took  form  in  a  bitter  persfcution.  But  in  spite  of 
the  whole  power  of  tlie  hierarchy,  and  the  prejudices  and  persecutions  of  the 
people,  Christianity  did  root  itself  in  Jerusalem.  The  bitter  opposition  encountered 
here  was  met  wherever  the  apostles  found  Jews.  But  by  and  by  the  new  faith 
conquered  ;  the  Church  supplanted  the  synagogue.  II.  The  conflict  with  philo- 
sophy to  the  Gentile  wokld.  When  Christ  came,  the  literary  activity  in  the 
Roman  empire  was  great ;  and  in  the  miin  centres  of  population  there  were  schools, 
or  colleges,  which  were  crowded  with  students.  1.  Ltt  us  look,  tlieu,  at  the 
teaching  of  these  schools,  and  we  shall  see  what  Christianity  had  to  encounter.  The 
Stoics,  while  holding  that  God  was  the  soul  of  the  world,  were  yet  virtually 
pantheists.  In  morals,  they  were  distinguished  by  their  austerity.  They  con- 
sidered that  a  man  had  reached  i^erfection  when  he  was  indifferent  alike  to  pleasure 
and  pain.  The  Epicureans,  on  the  contrary,  were  practically  atheistic.  Having 
nothing  either  to  hope  or  fear  from  death,  they  set  themselves  to  extract  from  this 
world  all  its  pleasure.  Their  maxim  was :  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow 
we  die."  2.  Now  where  was  the  likelihood  of  Christianity  commending  itself  to  Stoic 
or  Epicurean,  if  beneath  its  doctrine  there  had  not  been  the  solid  ground  of  incon- 
testable fact  ?  The  idea  of  Greek  philosophers  accepting  a  Jew  as  their  teacher, 
p.nd  a  crucified  Jew  as  their  Saviour !  Nor  were  they  more  conciliated  when  they 
had  a  fuller  exposition  of  Christian  truth  and  duty,  and  came  to  see  how  much  was 
demanded  of  them  in  the  crucifixion  of  all  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  And  Paul  was 
not  blind  to  this.  But  Christianity  triumphed.  The  philosophers  could  not 
controvert  its  facts ;  and  humbling  though  its  teaching  was  to  their  pride,  and 
opf)osed  to  their  passions,  it  yet  won  its  way.  And  before  many  years  went  by, 
f  ome  of  the  ablest  and  most  cultured  of  them  were  found  among  the  defenders  of 
Christianity.  III.  The  conflict  with  pagan  religions.  1.  These  were  in  doctrine 
and  worship  directly  opposed  to  Christianity.  The  heathen  were  surrounded  with 
gods,  and  their  whole  public  and  private  life  was  interwoven  with  the  service  of  these 
gods.  The  old  pagan  religion  had  entwined  itself  round  the  entire  man.  And 
then  the  ceremonial  of  heathen  worship  was  most  imposing.  It  had  its  magnificent 
temples.  Moreover,  this  old  religion  was  patronised  and  upheld  by  the  State. 
2.  Now  the  very  claim  of  Christianity  was  fitted  to  arouse  the  votaries  of  this 
idolatry  against  it.  It  declared  that  there  is  no  god  but  the  God  who  is  in 
Jesus  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself.  Here  it  would  tolerate  no  com- 
promise, would  allow  of  no  divided  homage.  And  then  Christianity  had  neither 
splendid  temple,  nor  imposing  service.  It  came  recommended  neither  by  the 
worldly  greatness  of  its  founder,  nor  that  of  its  apostles.     It  demanded  an  entire 


I.   COniMTJIIAXS.  91 


revolution  of  their  life,  a  revolution  which  could  only  have  the  effect  of  impoverish- 
ing tens  of  thousiimls  who  were  fattening  on  the  revenues  of  idolatry.  Had  the 
gospel  history  not  been  true,  no  attempt  could  have  been  more  hopeless  than  to 
overthrow  the  old  idolatry.  But  mighty  although  the  forces  opposed  to  Christi- 
anity were,  yet  it  overthrew  them.  IV.  The  conflict  with  the  licentious  spirit 
OF  THE  AGE.  Under  the  old  pagan  religions,  a  man  might  be  held  to  be  religious 
without  being  moral.  But  under  Christ  morality  is  a  part  of  religion.  Christianity 
threw  its  light  on  the  evil  of  sin,  disclosed  its  awful  doom,  and  called  on  men  ns 
they  valued  their  eternal  peace  to  yield  to  that  Divine  Saviour  who  had  died  for 
them  and  risen  again,  and  in  simple  faith  to  give  their  hearts  to  be  ruled  by  Him, 
to  be  made  holy  by  Him.  It  was  no  cheap  attachment  which  it  sought.  Now, 
could  the  apostles  ever  have  gained  converts  from  the  degraded  masses  if  they  had 
not  been  able  to  show  them  that  the  gospel  history  was  true ;  and  if  the  people  had 
not  felt  that  there  was  that  in  it  which  spake  as  nothing  else  had  done  to  their 
conscienoe  and  their  heart  ?  Conclusion  :  1.  The  success  of  Christianity  in  the 
face  of  these  forces  is  thus  a  conclusive  proof  that  it  is  from  God.  But  that  that 
conclusion  may  be  confirmed,  we  must  look  at  the  i  apidity  with  which  Christianity 
spread.  Hardly  had  the  third  century  closed,  when  tlie  Emperor  Maximinus — one 
of  the  bitterest  enemies — was  constrained  to  say,  in  one  of  his  edicts,  that  ahnost 
all  "  had  abandoned  the  worship  of  their  ancestors  for  the  new  sect."  2.  And  what 
has  been  its  history  since?  A  chequered  but  most  instructive  one.  Other  religions, 
like  those  of  Buddhism  and  Mahomelanism,  have  risen  and  spread  widely;  but 
they  have  shown  tluit  they  have  no  reviving  power.  ^Yherever  tin  y  have  decayed, 
they  have  never  been  restored.  But  Christianity  has  in  it  a  power  of  revival  which 
causes  it  to  send  forth  new  branches.  Yes,  while  the  old  religious  are  dead  or 
dying,  Christianity  is  living  and  extending.  3.  And  this  progress  is  precisely  what 
was  predict'-d.  When  a  reformer,  who  is  inflamed  Vv'ith  enthusiasm,  begins  his 
work,  he  usually  anticipates  a  speedy  trium]ih.  But  Jesus  buoyed  up  His  peojile 
with  no  such  hopes.  He  told  tliem  that  they  would  have  tribulation  in  the  world, 
but  assured  them  that  ultimately  His  kiugdom  would  triumph.  Ami  the  result 
has  been  in  accordance  with  the  prophecy.  {A.  Oliver,  B.A.)  Cltrist  the  wis<l(>)ii 
of  God : — 1.  In  His  eternal  nature.  2.  In  His  incarnation.  3.  In  His  mediation. 
4.  In  His  exaltation.  5.  In  the  application  of  the  gosp>-l.  6.  In  its  glorious 
results.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christ  the  icixdom  of  Gad  : — I.  In  the  mysterious 
constitution  of  His  person.  He  is  styled,  by  one  of  the  prophets,  "the  Wonder- 
ful." The  more  we  gaze  upon  Him,  the  higher  the  wonder  of  His  person  will  rise. 
But  the  wisdom  of  Gud  became  eminently  conspicuous  in  the  constitution  of  Clnist 
as  a  propitiation  for  sin.  Two  natures  were  required,  a  suffering  and  a  satisfying 
sacrifice.  Suffering  would  not  do  without  satisfaction;  satisfaction  could  not  be 
made  without  suffering.  1.  An  infinite  satisfaction  w-as  requii'ed,  consequently, 
there  was  but  one  nature  that  could  present  it.  And  here  is  that  foundation 
on  whicli  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  rests.  2.  But  another  nature  was  requisite  for 
suffering  ;  for  Deity,  abstractly  considered,  cannot  suffer.  And  not  only  was 
suffering  required,  but  human  suffering;  the  penalty  attached  to  the  transgression 
of  the  law  was  suited  to  a  human  nature.  But  it  was  necessary  that  this  himian 
nature  should  be  pure.  A  "  holy  thing  "  was  required  :  the  Jamb  was  to  be  without 
blemish  and  without  spot.  3.  It  was,  moreover,  necessary  that  these  two  natures 
should  be  constituted  one  person  ;  and  the  union  of  the  two  natures  was  as  perfect 
as  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God  required  ;  for  there  was  no  change  or  confusion  of 
the  natures.  The  Deity,  with  all  its  ineffable  glory  was  not  deteriorated  by  its 
union  with  humanity.  I  know  that  tliere  is  wisdom  displayed  in  every  evolution  of 
the  Divine  character;  and  great  as  it  was  to  make  man,  it  was  greater  to  make 
God-man.  II.  In  the  glorious  results  of  His  atonement.  1.  The  consummation 
of  God's  great  purpose  to  redeem  man.  The  great  redeeming  plan  commenced  with 
the  Father,  who  "  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  And  here  is  the  difficulty — Gi>d  is  an 
infinitely  righteous  Being.  God  saw  the  fearful  havoc  which  sin  had  wrought,  and 
how  was  He  to  repair  it?  Justice  required  the  execution  of  the  penalty.  There 
were  but  two  modes  of  proceeding.  The  wisdom  of  God  might  have  been  displayed 
in  destruction.  But,  oh,  how  much  more  illustriously  does  His  wisdom  shine  in 
the  recovery  of  man  !  2.  The  manifestation  of  the  Divine  attributes  in  their 
perfect  and  harmonised  glory.  Here  you  behold  justice,  truth,  goodness,  love  ;  but 
they  are  altogether.  When  did  we  ever  behold  such  a  spectacle?  Tiie  attributes 
of  the  Divine  Being  hid  been  displayed  in  angelic  history — all  His  amiable 
attributes,  in  reference  to  those  who  kept  their  first  estate,  and  all  His  fearful 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

attributes  in  the  history  of  those  who  rebelled  ;  but  there  were  two  separate  and 
distinct  theatres  for  these  revelations.  Nor  does  the  human  history  furnish  a 
parallel.  The  path  of  providence  has  occasionally  exhibited  one  attribute  and  then 
another.  Sometimes  justice,  as  in  the  deluge,  or  in  the  overthrow  of  the  cities  of 
the  plain  ;  sometimes  truth,  as  in  the  emancipation  of  the  Hebrews  ;  at  one  time, 
stern  justice,  and  then  at  another,  smiling  mercy ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  the 
gospel  to  exhibit  them  in  combined  and  harmonious  lustre  ;  and  when  Jesus  came 
to  redeem  our  world,  all  God's  attributes  came  rejoicingly  with  Him:  "Justice 
and  mercy  met  together — righteousness  and  peace  embraced  each  other."  3.  The 
triumphant  manner  in  which  our  Lord  conquered  His  enemies.  Christ  met  Satan 
in  His  own  way — the  Cross  was  Satan's  own  weapon.  But  by  that  very  Cross  was  the 
illustrious  seed  of  the  woman  bruising  the  serpent's  head,  and  destroying  the  powers 
of  darkness ;  and  it  was  by  the  Cross  that  Christ  spoiled  and  triumphed  over 
principalities  and  powers,  made  a  show  of  them  openly,  and  held  them  up  to 
angelic  scorn.  4.  The  firmer  establishment  of  the  Divine  government.  The 
Divine  governmpnt  is  a  government  of  motive,  and  all  other  kinds  of  government 
are  coercive  and  irrational.  Was  there  ever  such  a  revelation  of  God's  love  as  that 
which  beamed  on  the  Cross  ?  And  does  not  love  beget  love  ?  Where  much  is 
forgiven,  much  is  loved ;  and  such  a  view  of  God  attaches  all  spirits  to  Him. 
III.  In  the  practical  dispensation  of  His  gospel.  The  Church,  you  know,  is  the 
theatre  by  which  the  wisdom  of  God  is  made  known  to  principalities  and  jDowers. 
Angels  are  our  fellow-students,  and  what  do  they  see?  First  of  all  the  agents — 
poor  Galileans,  with  nothing  to  offer  to  the  learned,  nothing  to  the  commei'cial  man, 
nothing  to  the  politician.  If  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel  had  been  invested 
with  all  the  attractive  learning  of  the  schools,  the  most  splendid  truths  of  the 
gospel  would  have  been  obscured  by  human  greatness;  but  the  less  there  was  of 
man,  the  more  there  was  of  God.  And  do  you  not  perceive  how  strikingly  the 
wisdom  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  adaptation  of  the  discoveries  of  Himself  to 
our  conceptions  ?  There  sits  a  poor  fatherless  child,  there  a  j)oor  widow,  yonder 
a  desolate  orphan  ;  and  th«  gospel  proffers  them  all  that  consolation  which  God 
only  can  impHrt.  But,  besides  this,  there  is  the  accompanying  influence.  To  the 
mere  eye  of  philosophy  this  is  notliing ;  but  a  poor  man  comes  in,  and  he  gazes, 
and  there  is  nothing  to  strike  him  ;  but  by  and  by  the  scales  fall  from  his  eyes, 
by  and  by  a  new  influence  comes  over  the  heart,  and  he  exclaims,  "  God  is  in  this 
place,  and  I  knew  it  not !  "  Witness  the  poor  publican,  smiting  on  his  breast, 
groaning  out  the  sinner's  only  plea,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner"  !  [T.  Lessey.) 
The  gospel  is  the  siun  of  wisdom  ;  an  epitome  of  knowledge  ;  a  treasure-house  of 
truth;  and  a  revelation  of  mysterious  secrets.  Ah,  dear  friends!  if  ye  seek 
wisdom,  ye  shall  see  it  displayed  in  all  its  greatness  ;  not  in  the  balancing  of  the 
clouds,  nor  the  firmness  of  earth's  foundations  ;  not  in  the  measured  march  of  the 
armies  of  the  sky,  nor  in  the  perpetual  motions  of  the  waves  of  the  sea ;  not 
in  vegetation  with  all  its  fairy  forms  of  beauty,  nor  in  the  animal  with  its  marvellous 
tissue  of  nerve,  and  vein,  and  sinew  ;  nor  even  in  man,  that  last  and  loftiest  work 
of  the  Creator.  But  turn  aside  and  see  this  great  sight !  an  incarnate  God  upon 
the  Cross  ;  a  substitute  atoning  for  mortal  guilt ;  a  sacrifice  satisfying  the  vengeance 
of  heaven,  and  delivering  the  rebellious  sinner.  Here  is  essential  wisdom ; 
enthroned,  crowned,  glorified.  Admire,  ye  men  of  earth,  it  ye  be  not  blind  ;  and 
ye  who  glory  in  your  learning,  bend  your  heads  in  reverence,  and  own  that  all  your 
f-kill  could  not  have  devised  a  gospel  at  once  so  just  to  God,  so  safe  to  man. 
(C.  H.  Spnrgeon.)  Divine  jMlosophy  : — 1.  Our  age  is  eager  in  its  pursuit  of 

knowledge.  It  professes  to  be  a  truth-loving  and  a  truth-seeking  age.  It  has 
obtained  afar  insight  into  the  dark  processes  of  that  which  is  called  "nature." 
"Wherever  it  has  turned  its  steps,  it  has  found  stores  of  truth.  In  all  this  there  is 
wisdom  whioh  we  do  well  to  study.  Yet  all  these  are  but  parts — a  whole,  of  which 
nothing  less  than  the  infinity  of  Godhead  is  the  measure.  Hence  it  is  that,  while, 
in  all  the  regions  of  creation,  may  be  sepn  portions  of  this  wisdom,  only  in  the  Son 
of  God,  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  incarnate  Word,  is  the  mighty  whole  contained.  He, 
and  He  only,  is  "  the  wi-domof  God."  2.  By  the  expression,  "  the  wisdom  of  God," 
thus  applied  to  Christ,  is  not  merely  meant  that  He  is  infinitely  wise.  Suppose  we 
have  an  able  architect,  and  a  goolly  palace  built  by  him,  into  which  he  has  thrown 
his  whole  genius  ;  we  say  of  himself,  he  is  skilful,  but  we  say  of  his  work,  there  is 
his  skill,  there  is  the  outward  personification  of  all  that  is  in  him,  and  without 
which  you  d'uld  not  have  known  what  is  in  him.  Of  other  buildings  erected  by 
him  we  may  say  there  is  some  skill ;  but  only  of  his  masterpiece  should  we  say 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS  83 

that  it  is  tlie  skill  or  the  wisdom  of  the  man.  So  with  the  poet  and  his  mnijnum  opus. 
Thus  it  is  with  resavd  to  Chiist.  In  the  works  of  creation  God  has  displayed 
fragments  of  His  wisdom  :  but  in  Christ  He  has  summed  up  and  put  forth  the 
whole  of  it.  3.  Wisdom  is  one  of  the  last  things  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of  con- 
necting with  the  name  of  Christ.  We  connect  with  it  salvation,  pardon,  life, 
righteousness,  love.  Yet  it  is  wisdom  that  God  so  especially  associates  with  Christ. 
"  He,  of  God,  is  made  unto  us  wisdom."  "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge."  When  God  looks  at  Him,  that  which  He  especially  sees 
in  Him  is  wisdom.  4.  The  subject  is  a  very  wide  one  ;  we  take  up  here  only  that 
section  of  it  which  relates  to  the  peison  of  the  Christ.  (1)  In  this  there  are  two 
parts— the  Divine  and  the  human ;  and  these,  both  in  themselves  and  in  their 
union,  distinction,  adjustment,  co-operation,  harmony,  make  up  that  glorious 
Person.  The  whole  Creator  is  in  Him,  and  the  whole  creature  is  in  Him  ;  yet  both 
retaining  the  properties  distinct  and  unchanged  by  the  union.  In  man  is  seen  God  ; 
in  God  is  seen  man.  All  that  is  glorious  in  the  Godhead,  and  all  that  is  excellent 
in  manhood,  is  gathered  into  one  person,  and  fully  exhibited  in  Him.  By  this 
union  these  two  parts  are  revealed  to  each  other;  heaven  is  revealed  to  earth,  and 
earth  is  revealed  to  heaven.  (2)  It  seems  to  be  union  only  at  a  single  point ;  for  it 
is  with  one  body  and  one  soul  that  the  Godhead  is  united.  But  that  single  point  is 
enough ;  that  one  link  unites  the  natures.  In  order  to  moor  a  ship  we  do  not 
require  a  thousand  cables,  each  fastened  to  a  separate  plank  or  spar ;  one  strong 
cable,  fixed  at  one  point,  makes  fast  the  whole,  and  connects  the  entire  vessel  with 
its  anchor.  (3)  Nor  was  it  with  one  particubir  stage  of  our  being  that  tliis  union 
was  formed ;  but  with  all ;  from  the  hist  moment  of  conception  in  the  womb  to 
death  and  the  grave.  Had  the  Son  of  God  united  Himself  with  manhood  in  its 
maturity,  there  would  have  been  no  union  and  no  sympathy  with  the  different 
stages  of  human  life  and  growth.  (//.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  <jospel  adajyted 
to  the  state   and   circtmstanccs   of  man : — I.    That  man,  although  endued  with 

THE  CAPACITY  OF  KECEIVINO  INFOKiLATION,  YET  BY  HIS  OWN  UNASSISTED  EFFORTS 
IS  TOTALLY  UNABLE  TO  ACQUIRE  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THOSE  TRUTHS  WITH  W'HICH 
IT  CHIEFLY  IMPORTS  HIM  TO  BE  ACQUAINTED.  II.  ThAT  UPON  HIS  BEING 
ENLIGHTENED  WITH  THE  TRUE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD  AND  OF  HIS  DUTY,  HE  MUST 
NECESSARILY   BE    IMPRESSED   WITH    A    DEEP    SENSE    OF    HIS    OWN     DEPRAVITY   AND    GUILT. 

III.  That  he    has   a    consciousness   of    moral   obligation,  and    ideas  of  moral 

EXCELLENCE,  WHICH  EXPERIENCE  TELLS  HIM  HE  CANNOT  BY  HIS  OWN  EFFORTS  FULFIL 
AND  REALISE.  IV.  ThAT  HE  IS  SUBJECTED  TO  MANY  AFFLICTIONS,  FOR  WHICH,  UPON 
THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  REASON,  HE  CANNOT  ACCOUNT,  NOR  DISCOVER  TO  WHAT  GOOD 
PURPOSE  THEY  TEND.  V.  ThaT  ALTHOUGH  HE  FEELS  BOTH  PRESAGES  OF,  AND 
DESIRES  AFTER  A  FUTURE  STATE  OF  BEING,  YET,  FROM  THE  LIGHT  OF  NATURE,  HE 
NEITHER     DERIVES     ASSURANCE     OF     ITS     EXISTENCE,     NOR     ANY     CERTAIN     INFORMATION 

CONCERNING  IT.  [Johu  Kemp.)  Christ  is  our  xcisdom: — I.  How  are  we  to  under- 
stand THIS  ?  1.  Objectively.  As  He  atone  is  the  object  about  which  all  true 
wisdom  is  conversant  (Col.  ii.  3).  Wisdom  is  either  Divine  or  human,  the  wisdom 
of  God  or  of  men.  He  is  the  wisdom  of  God,  as  the  power  of  God  (chap.  i.  24), 
because  the  Divine  power  and  the  Divine  wisdom  were  never  so  manifest  in  any- 
thing that  ever  He  did  as  they  were  in  Christ,  that  is,  in  the  great  work  of  our 
redemption  by  Him.  All  His  works  are  made  in  wisdom  (Psa.  civ.  24 ;  Prov.  iii. 
19).  He  governs  the  world  in  wisdom,  wisely  ordering  all  events  to  the  great  end 
of  His  own  glory  and  His  people's  good.  But  above  all,  in  our  redemption  by 
Christ.  In  Eph.  iii.  10  it  is  called  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  such  as  angels 
wonder  at.  He  alone  is  the  object  of  all  our  true  wisdom.  There  are  other  things 
about  which  wisdom  is  conversant,  but  none  like  Christ  (1  Cor.  ii.  2  ;  Phil.  iii.  7,  8). 
2.  Effectively,  as  He  is  the  author  and  tinisher  of  all  that  in  us  which  is  true 
wisdom.  Now,  that  is  grace ;  grace  is  true  wisdom,  and  nothing  else  is  so.  How 
is  it  said  He  is  made  unto  us  of  God  wisilom?  (1)  In  respect  of  eternal  appoint- 
ment and  designation.  (2)  In  respect  of  effectual  application,  in  the  fulness  of 
time.  What  are  the  special  acts  of  this  wisdom,  by  which  it  may  appear  whether 
we  are  so  turned,  so  made  wise  ?  (1)  If  Christ  be  made  unto  us  wisdom,  we  ha,ve 
been  in  some  measure  convinced  of  our  own  folly;  this  is  the  first  step  (chap.  iii. 
18).  A  fool  thinks  himself  wise  (Prov.  xxvi.  12).  As  the  Pharisees  (.John  ix.  40). 
A  wise  man  knows  himself  a  fool,  as  David  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  22).  Agur  (Prov.  xxx.  2,  3). 
Now  inquire.  How  is  it  with  me  ?  What  is  the  opinion  I  have  of  myself  ?  (2)  If 
Christ  be  made  unto  us  wisdom,  we  are  brought  to  seethe  excellency  and  usefulness 
of  wisdom,  and  begin  to  prize  it  at  a  high  rate,  and  to  beg  it  of  God  rather  than 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

anything  else  in  the  world.  (3)  If  Christ  be  made  unto  us  wisdom,  we  have  chosen 
God  for  our  chief  good  and  highest  end,  snd  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  our  alone  way 
to  Him.  If  so,  we  aie  wise  ;  if  not,  to  this  day  we  are  fools.  The  proper  act  of 
wisdom  is  to  determine  the  choice  to  right  ends  ;  as  in  other  things,  so  in  spiritual 
things,  lhe  things  of  the  soul.  Imjuire  wh^t  is  your  chief  good  and  highest  end. 
(4)  If  Christ  be  made  unto  us  wisdom,  it  hath  taught  us  to  fear  the  Lord,  and  to 
depart  from  evil  (Job  xxxviii.  28).  There  is  this  difference  between  wisdom  and 
knowledge — knowledge  is  in  speculatives,  wisdom  is  in  practice.  Many  have  a 
great  deal  of  the  former  that  have  none  of  the  latter;  good  heads,  but  bad  hearts 
and  bad  lives.  See  the  p'operties  of  heavenly  wisdom  (James  iii.  17).  It  was 
thus  with  David  (Psa.  cxix.  98-101 ;  Eph.  v.  15,  16).  (5)  If  Christ  be  made  unto 
us  wisdom,  it  hath  made  the  things  of  time  to  be  as  nothing  to  us,  and  the  things 
of  eternity  to  be  all  in  all ;  it  has  altered  our  thoughts  and  pursuits.  Wirat  are  the 
good  things  temporal,  riches,  honour,  pleasure,  in  coinparison  with  the  good  things 
eternal  ?  II.  The  pe.\ctical  intebences.  If  Christ  be  made  wisdom  to  those  that 
are  in  Him,  and  only  to  those,  then — 1.  They  that  are  not  in  Him  are 
not  wi^e.  Nabal  is  tneir  name,  and  folly  is  nxith  them.  Christless  people 
are  fools.  I  prove  it  by  three  arguments:  (1)  They  choose  like  fools.  Is 
he  not  a  fool,  that  when  a  pebble  is  offered  to  him  by  one  and  a  pearl 
by  another  chooses  the  pebMe  and  refuses  the  pearl?  Was  not  Esau  a  fool 
in  parting  with  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage?  (2)  They  count  like  fools. 
They  count  themselves  wise,  and  religious  people  a  company  of  fools,  when 
themselves  are  the  fools,  and  the  religious  wise  (J.  hn  vii.  48,  49  ;  Luke  xviii.  10). 
Ihey  count  upon  time  to  come  as  their  own,  and  presume  accordingly;  when,  alas  ! 
it  is  not  so.  They  count  upon  go.ng  to  heaven  when  they  die,  but  are  miserably 
mistaken.  (3)  Tliey  carry  it  like  fools.  The  carriage  of  a  fool  is  vain  and  frothy  ; 
there  is  no  seriousness  in  him.  He  carries  it  like  a  fool  that  hugs  his  worst  enemy 
to  his  bosom,  and  turns  his  back  upon  his  best  friend  ;  and  doth  not  the  sinner  so  ? 
2.  They  that  are  sensible  of  their  want  of  wisdom,  and  would  be  wise,  may  learn 
hence  whither  to  go,  and  what  to  do,  that  they  may  attain  it.  The  way  is  to  apply 
thyself  to  the  blessed  Jesus,  who  is  made  unto  us  of  God  wisdom.  And  plead  this 
text — Lord,  art  Thou  not  made  unto  us  of  God  wisdom  ?  What  need  is  there  of 
this  plea  ?  Universal  need,  every  day,  in  everything.  They  that  have  most  have 
need  of  more.  (1)  We  cannot  carry  it  as  we  should  in  any  relation  without  wisdom, 
neither  as  superiors,  inferiors,  nor  eciuals.  What  need  have  magistrates  of  wisdom 
(Psa.  ii.  9) !  A  conviction  of  this  made  Solomon  ask  as  he  did  (1  Kings  iii. 
7-10).  Ministers  are  in  the  same  situation  (Col.  i.  28).  What  a  plague  are  foolish 
shepherds  (Zech.  xi.  15).  So  are  masters  of  families,  husbands,  wives,  parents. 
(2)  Nor  can  we  carry  it  as  we  should,  in  any  condition,  without  wisdom.  If  v.e 
prosper  and  thrive  in  the  woild,  there  is  need  of  wisdom,  to  manage  it  so  that  we 
be  not  ensnared,  not  destroyed  by  it.  If  in  affliction  it  is  necessary,  that  we  may 
keep  the  mean  between  fainting  and  despising.  (3)  Nor  can  we  carry  it  as  we 
should  in  any  duty  to  be  done  to  God  or  man  without  wisdom.  If  we  pray,  we 
need  wisdom  that  we  do  not  ask  amiss.  (4)  Nor  can  we  carry  it  as  we  should  in 
any  difficult  case  that  lies  before  us,  nor  tell  how  to  determine  for  the  best,  without 
wisdom  (Eccles.  x.  10).  3.  Here  is  matter  of  unspeakable  comfort  to  all  true 
believers,  that  Jesus  Chri-t  is  made  wisdom,  that  is.  as  some  interpret  it,  tliat  all 
tbat  infinite  wisdom  that  is  in  Him  as  God,  and  all  that  infused  wisdom  which  He 
had  as  God-man  wherein  He  grew  (Luke  ii.  52),  is  all  made  over  to  us,  to  be 
employed  for  our  good.  Apply  it— (1)  To  our  particular,  private  affairs,  especially 
in  the  great  turns  of  our  lives.  If  thou  art  in  Christ,  He  will  order  them  for  thee, 
and  He  will  order  them  wisely  (Eph.  i.  11),  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  will. 
Therefore  submit  to  His  disposals  quietly,  patiently  ;  of  choice,  cheerfully  ;  wisdom 
would  have  it  so.  (2)  To  the  public  affairs  of  the  Church  and  nation.  [Fhilij) 
Henry.) 

Vers.  25-28.  Because  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men;  and  the  weak- 
ness of  God  stronger  than  men. — Tiw  rjospd  as  contcmpUiti  d  htj  mnn  and  employed 
hy  God  :- — I.  Its  doctkine — is  foolishness,  yet  wiser  than  men.  II.  Its  agencies — 
are  weak,  yet  stronger  than  men.  {J.  Lytli,  D.IK)  For  ye  see  your  calling, 
brethren. —  Tlie  Christian  calliny  : — 1.  lhe  word  "calling"  means  the  great  primary 
truth  of  religion,  viz.,  that  our  erring  life  is  governed  by  a  will  above  it,  and  is 
capable  of  receiving  influences  of  attraction  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  A  man's 
common  employment,  too,  is  spoken  of  as  his  "  calling."     But  this  usage  discovers 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  COIUNTI^A^■S.  95 


the  same  origin  ;  for  it  must  have  sprung  up  in  days  when  it  was  verily  believed  that 
each  man's  business  in  the  world  was  a  sacred  appointment.  A  living  faith  not 
only  justifies  that  view,  but  requires  it;  for  it  supposes  that  in  the  soul  which  has 
confessed  its  calling  there  is  a  power  of  holy  consecration  supreme  over  all  the 
choices  and  pursuits  of  the  mind.  2.  The  expression  stirs  some  feeling  of  mystery. 
Moi'e  is  suggested  than  the  understanding  clearly  grasps.  But  there  is  something 
here  that  is  plain  enough  to  common  sense,  and,  to  earnest  moods  at  least,  very 
welcome.  How  many  weelis  will  any  of  us  be  able  to  live  without  coming  to  some 
spot  where  it  will  be  felt  as  a  rational  comfort  to  believe  that  all  our  way  was 
ordered  for  us  by  Ilim  who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning  ?  If  there  is  a 
"  ca'ling,"  there  is  one  who  calls,  and  who  when  calling  has  a  right  to  be  heard.  It 
follows  that  there  is  one  object  in  existence  so  pre  eminent  that  to  accomplish  that 
is  to  fa' til  the  great  purpose  of  our  being,  and  to  fail  of  that  is  to  miss  the  chief 
end.  It  is  only  triflers  who  conceive  of  their  life  as  without  a  plan,  and  have  never 
heard  the  call  of  the  Master,  "  Go,  work  to-day  in  My  vineyard."  So  true  is  this, 
that  it  has  been  observed  of  the  most  elKcient  and  commanding  men  in  the  history 
of  the  world,  that  they  were  apt  to  represent  themselves  as  led  on  by  some  Power 
beyond  themselves — a  demon,  a  genius,  a  destiny,  or  a  Deity.  But  the  apostle 
refers  to  sonif-thing  higher  and  holier  than  any  dreamy  sentiment  like  this. 
Standing  on  the  verities  of  the  g  ispel,  speaking  to  those  that  have  nominally 
assented  to  it,  he  summons  them  to  a  more  solemn  and  searching  sense  of  what 
it  requires  of  them  :  "  Ye  see  your  calling,  brethien."  The  truth  is  clear ;  you  see 
it.  It  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God,  «ho  calls.  Christ  has  lived,  and  He  asks  living 
followers.  '6.  It  is  remarkable  how  perseveringly  the  New  Testament  clings  to 
this  particular  conception  of  the  Christian  relation.  Disciples  are  said  to  be  "  the 
called  of  Jesus,"  "  called  out  of  dai'kness  into  marvellous  light,"  "  called  unto 
liberty,"  "called  to  peace,"  "called  to  eternal  life,"  "  called"  first,  to  be  afterwards 
"justified  and  glorified,"  "  called  to  inherit  a  blessing,"  "called  in  one  body"  and 
"  one  liope,"  "  called  by  God's  grace  "  to  "  holiness,"  to  "  His  kingdom  and  glory," 
with  "a  holy  calling,"  "a  heavenly  calling. "  The  apostles  are  "called"  from 
one  j)lace,  work,  suffering,  joy,  to  another.  To  "  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  "  is 
made  the  business  of  a  careful  conscience.  To  make  our  "  calling  and  election 
sure"  is  the  victory  (f  our  warfare.  The  promise  that  subdues  all  anxiety  as  to 
the  result  is  "  Faithful  is  He  which  calleth  you."  Notice  the  prominent  teachings 
of  this  language.  I.  That  the  business  of  a  Christian  life  is  something  special — 
a  "  calling  "  by  itself,  to  be  distinguished  from  all  other  occupations.  A  Christian 
character  springs  from  its  own  root,  grows  by  its  own  laws,  and  bears  its  own 
peculiar  fruit.  It  must  have  a  beginning,  which  the  New  Testament  everywhere 
speaks  of  as  being  born  into  a  new  life.  Then  there  must  be  a  growing  into 
greater  strength  and  goodness,  without  end.  Here,  therefore,  is  a  new  principle  of 
conduct.  It  is  a  Divine  calling.  Paul  speaks  as  if  no  pursuit  were  to  be  thought 
of  in  compaiison  with  it.      II.  That  this    idea  of  a  "calling"  individualises 

NOT    ONLY    THE    CHRISTIAN    OBLIGATION,    BUT    THE     CHRISTIAN    PERSON.        Paul    had   nO 

conception  of  a  social  Christianity  apart  from  the  personal  righteousness  of  the 
men  that  make  up  society.  It  is  your  calling.  It  is  quite  vain  for  us  to  congratu- 
late each  other  on  a  state  of  general  integrity  and  order  if  we  tolerate  depravity  in 
ourselves  or  the  class  to  which  we  belong.  If  we  have  a  community  here  of  a 
thousand  people,  in  which  we  want  to  see  the  Christian  graces  fiourishmg,  our 
only  way  is  to  go  to  work  and  turn  one  and  another  of  the  thousand  into  a 
Christian  person,  each  beginning  with  himself.  How  weary  and  indignant  God 
must  be  at  hearing  the  Pharisaic  praises  of  a  Christian  religion,  legislation,  litera- 
ture, country,  from  speakers  and  writers  who  allow  Christianity  to  conquer  no  one 
of  their  propensities  to  pleasure  or  to  pride  !  The  vocation  is  an  individual  matter. 
Ye  see  it,  each  for  himself.  The  work  is  for  each.  "Repent,"  "  Thou  shalt  love 
the  Lord  thy  God,"  "  Take  up  the  cross  and  come  after  Me,"  are  for  each.  "Ye 
see  your  calling."  III.  That,  notwithstanding  all  this,  Christ's  truth  is  a 
MATTER,  not  OF  PARTIAL,  BUT  OF  UNIVERSAL  APPLICATION.  The  Christian  Spirit, 
revelation,  privilege,  and  promises  are  not  meant  for  a  class  of  men  culled  out 
arbitrarily  here  and  there  ;  not  for  a  few  persons  of  special  constitutional  proclivi- 
ties or  whose  circumsfances  happen  to  predispose  them  for  a  spiritual  plane  of 
being,  making  it  easy  for  them  to  reach  it.  The  Bible  makes  no  such  exceptions. 
"Whosoever  will."  Nor  is  the  Christian  calling  a  whit  the  less  universal  and 
impartial  for  the  reason  that  it  is  special,  requiring  a  personal  consecration.  On 
the  contrary,  its  speciality  is  the  very  ground  of   its  universality.      Ttie   more 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

definite,  important,  and  searching  you  make  the  Christian  command  to  be,  the 
more  will  the  principles  of  its  righteousness  send  their  pressure  into  every  depart- 
ment of  life,  and  the  spirit  of  its  charity  diffuse  its  fragrance  into  every  nook  and 
corner  of  the  household  of  humanity.  If  there  were  any  variations  excusing 
men  from  this  calling,  they  might  be  expected  to  exist  either  in  their  nature,  their 
place,  or  their  time.  Yet  how  far  these  things  are  from  constituting  an  apology 
for  disregarding  the  duty  of  a  disciple !  1.  Take  the  inequalities  of  intellectual 
equipment.  There  is  not  much  likelihood  of  men's  seeking  a  release  from  taking 
up  the  Christian  work  and  cross  on  a  plea  of  mental  infirmity.  More  probably  the 
plea  of  exemption  will  arise  in  the  opposite  quarter,  and  be  a  pretence  of  gifts  or  a 
culture  superior  to  the  need  of  faith,  independent  of  the  humiliating  doctrines  of 
the  Crucified  (vers.  20-24).  2.  Take  the  excuse  of  unfavourable  outward  fortuoes. 
What  are  those  fortunes  ?  Poverty  and  hardship  ?  Unto  the  poor  the  gospel  was 
first  preached,  and  in  every  age  it  is  with  them  that  its  simple  and  consoling 
truths  have  found  their  most  cordial  and  fruitful  reception.  Wealth  and  station? 
But  unto  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  shall  much  be  required.  Or  is  it  the  busy 
and  contented  state  cf  pecuuiaiy  mediocrity  or  a  competency?  Yet  that  is  the 
very  state  which,  of  all  others,  a  wise  man  is  represented  as  praying  for,  and 
which  common  sense  would  pronounce  most  favourable  to  a  useful  and  healthy 
piety.  Indeed,  the  whole  honest  spirit  of  our  religion  disallows  the  evasive  notion 
that  any  position  can  liberate  the  child  of  God  from  loving  his  Maker,  serving  his 
Saviour,  and  living  in  godly  charity  with  his  fellow-men.  3.  The  changing  aspects 
of  the  times  are  just  as  powerless  to  acquit  any  single  conscience  of  its  account- 
ability for  a  Christian  walk  and  conversation.  Principles  do  not  change  with 
periods.  The  Christ  of  whom  it  is  written  that  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever,  is  not  subject  to  fluctuation,  either  in  the  measiu'e  of  His  affection 
or  in  His  demands  for  allegiance.  Conclusion:  Ye  see  your  calling — 1.  Families. 
On  every  domestic  sanctuary  Christ  lays  the  law  of  a  consecrated  and  lioly  economy. 
Set  thy  house  in  order ;  for  these  earthly  tabernacles  are  to  be  dissolved.  And 
while  they  last  they  take  in  no  calm,  no  abiding  light,  save  through  invisible 
windows  that  open  upward  into  the  unshadowed  and  undivided  heaven.  2.  Parents. 
To  exercise  your  trust  you  will  have  to  feel  that  the  Christian  character  of  every 
child  committed  to  your  charge  is  immeasurably  the  most  urgent  interest  of  your 
parental  ofSce.  3.  Men  of  action.  "  I  have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  because 
ye  are  strong,  and  the  Word  of  Gndabideth  in  you."  {Bp.  Hitntiiuiton.)  Behold 
your  calling  : — A  concrete  fact  of  faith.  Our  vague  and  vagrant  life  is  attracted 
by  a  magnetism  and  swayed  by  a  will  superior  to  itself  and  supremely  wise  and 
good — the  Spirit  of  God.  Behold  your  calling— I.  Is  of  God.  Supreme,  authori- 
tative, irreversible.  The  call  of  wisdom  and  love.  "  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth 
you."  II.  His  GLOEioDS,  COMPREHENSIVE  BLESSINGS.  Called  out  of  darkuess  into 
marvellous  light — "  unto  liberty,"  "  to  peace,"  "  to  eternal  life,"  to  "  holiness,"  to 
"His  kingdom  and  gb^ry."     It  is  "  a  heavenly  calling,"  "  a  holy  calling."     III.  Is 

TO  SPECIAL,  DISTINCTIVE  MODE  OF  LIVING.  IV.  Is  INTENSELY  PERSONAL.  V.  INCLUDES 
THE  WHOLE  MAN  IN  ALL  HIS    RELATIONS  IN  LIFE.       {Homiletic  MontllllJ .)  HOW   that 

not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called. — 
Not  many  wise,  dx.,  are  called : — I.  The  fact.  1.  Undeniable.  2.  Lamentable. 
3.  Worthy  of  consideration.  II.  The  eeapon.  Not  that  God  despises  human 
wisdom,  etc. — it  is  His  gift — but  that  these  gifts  are  perverted — 1.  By  pride,  in 
judging  the  things  of  God  which  are  beyond  human  understanding.  2.  By 
unbelief  which  rejects  salvation.  3.  By  moral  blindness  occasioning  self-suffi- 
ciency and  independence.  (•/.  Lyth,  D.L>.)  The  few  and  the  many  : — 1.  There 
is  a  great  difference  between  a  historical  statement  and  a  doctrinal  one.  The 
former  tells  you  something  which  is  true  with  reference  to  a  particular  place  or 
time  ;  the  latter  what  is  always  and  everywhere  true.  It  must,  therefore,  often  be 
a  grave,  often  a  most  ridiculous  blunder,  to  take  the  one  for  the  other.  2.  Now, 
here  is  a  statement  which  has  been  often  taken  as  if  it  were  doctrinal,  though  it  is, 
in  fact,  historical,  with  mischievous  results ;  for  if  these  classes  are  always  to  be 
reckoned  unchristian  and  unbelieving — (1)  Thoughtful  men  of  all  classes  would,  on 
that  account  alone,  hesitate  to  embrace  the  gospel.  If  Christianity  were  only  fit 
for  the  mob,  its  prospects  woidd  be  poor,  especially  as  the  education  of  the  people 
will  not  suffer  from  having  now  been  made  a  national  affair.  (2)  It  would  be  a 
misfortune  for  the  world  if  what  we  call  civilisation  advances.  Each  generation  more 
nearly  than  its  predecessor  approaches  to  the  condition  of  the  privileged  classes  of 
society — the  wir;e,  the  mighty,  the  noble.     3.  On  the  other  hand,  consider  the  text 


I.  CORINTHIANS.  97 


as  historical,  and  it  is  plain  enough.     We  still  sometimes  hear  explanations  given 
of  how  it  is  that  the  learned  and  the  great  and  the  noble  are  not  Christians,  but — 

(1)  These  explanations  account  for  what  is  not  the  fact,  for  there  are  as  many 
Christians  among  cultivated  and  aristom-atic  people  as  in  any  other  class  ;  and — 

(2)  These  explanations,  as  a  rule,  would  not  account  for  the  fact,  if  it  were  one. 
It  is  nonsense,  e.g.,  to  say  that  wise  men  in  their  conceit  reject  Christianity  because 
it  is  simple  or  because  it  is  supernatural ;  for  there  is  more  conceit,  not  witii  those 
who  have  some  knowledge,  but  with  those  who  have  none.  4.  Now  if  we  glance  at 
Corinth,  it  is  easy  to  understand  why  the  classes  specified  were  more  reluctant  than 
others  to  embrace  Christianity.  I.  As  regards  the  "wise  jien  after  the  flesh.  " 
1.  By  these  the  apostle  did  not  mean  the  great  sages  of  antiquity.  It  would  certainly 
not  be  anything  to  boast  of  if  we  had  to  suppose  that  Chri>tianity  rejected  them  or 
they  it ;  for  one  could  wish  that  the  majority  of  Christians  had  attained  to  as 
lofty,  as  enlightened  ideas  as  some  in  the  golden  age  of  Greek  wisdom  entertained 
and  taught.  But  we  have  to  do  herewith  the  men  of  a  degenerate  time — smatterers, 
would-be  wise  men,  pretenders  to  universal  knowledge,  which  is  often  largest  and 
loudest  where  ignorance  and  frivolity  divide  between  them  the  empire  of  the 
human  mind.  2.  Nor  were  they  thinkers  of  our  modern  type.  (1)  The  principles 
according  to  which  our  scientific  men  conduct  their  inquirifs  are  modern  dis- 
coveries.  Our  wise  men  try  to  discover  the  facts  of  nature,  life,  and  history,  and 
construct  their  theories  according  to  the  facts.  But  exactly  the  reverse  was  the 
common  way  of  the  wise  men  here  spoken  of.  (2)  Our  modern  tliinkers  are 
seekers  after  truth,  and  they  are  as  likely  to  discover  the  truth  of  Christianity  as 
other  people,  if  not  more  so.  These  ancient  wise  men,  on  the  other  hand,  were 
rather  like  our  ignomnt  and  superstitious  masses,  who  take  a  side  without  candid 
inquiry,  and  are  resolute  to  defend  their  side  just  because  it  is  theirs.  (3)  Our 
literal y  and  scientific  men,  as  far  as  they  are  faithful  to  their  vocation,  inquire 
each  man  for  and  by  himself,  and  own  no  alhgiance  to  a  paity  or  a  master,  but  to 
truth  alone.  But  tliese  ancient  wise  men,  as  leaders  or  adherents  of  their  school, 
enjoyed  what  credit  and  influence  they  had,  and  were  jealous  of  new  opinions,  as 
possibly  inimical  to  their  authority  and  its  repute.  II.  As  regards  the  mighty  and 
the  noble.  1.  When  Christianity  was  new  it  had  all  the  disadvantages  of  novelty. 
(])  So  it  most  repelled  those  who  had  least  to  gain  and  most  to  lose  by  any  change. 
These,  of  course,  were  the  privileged  clnsses  here  mentioned.  (2)  Kemember,  too, 
that  the  changes  which  Christianity  threatened  were  the  most  violent,  and  there- 
fore the  most  distasteful  possible  to  these  classes.  They  were  free,  and  a  great 
part  of  the  community  were  their  slaves.  It  is  now  a  maxim — thanks  lo  Chris- 
tianity— that  property  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  riglits.  But  that  maxim  had 
no  existence  then.  (3)  Then  it  was  not  some  magnate  of  their  own  lofty  order, 
or  even  of  their  own  race,  who  told  those  lords  of  many  to  become  the  servants  of 
all ;  it  was  a  company  of  artisans,  fishermen,  slaves,  foreigners.  (4)  Then  consider 
that  the  go^jjel  was  gospel  in  those  days.  It  was  a  plain,  straightforward  declaration 
of  the  truth  that  God  is  love,  and  man's  true  life  is  love  ;  that  to  be  selfish  is  to  be 
damned,  to  love  is  to  be  saved.  2.  The  gospel  has  no  longer  these  disadvantages. 
When  sons  of  nobles  are  ill-paid  clergymen,  and  sovereigns  and  statesmen  are 
gratuitous  defenders  of  the  faith,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  great  and  noble, 
any  more  than  the  poor  and  lowly,  from  professing  Christianity.  And,  as  regards 
the  practice  of  Christianity,  the  case  is  not  different.  The  mighty  and  the  noble, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  now  accept,  along  with  their  honours  and  their  privilegf  s,  a 
host  of  duties,  public  and  social,  which  are  enjoined  rather  by  public  opinion  than 
by  law.  So  much  aie  things  changed,  property  now  has  not  only  duties  as  well  as 
rights,  but  has  fewer  rights  than  duties,  and  there  are  at  least  as  many  of  these 
classes  as  of  any  other  who  exhibit  the  true  spirit  of  Christianity  in  lives  of  faith 
towards  God  and  charity  towards  men.  (J.  Service,  D.D.)  The  henefits  arising 
from  human  learning  to  Christianity  : — 1.  Of  all  the  apostles  St.  Paul  was  the  one 
endued  with  the  greatest  natural  powers,  cultivated  with  the  most  assiduous  care, 
and  one  would  have  expected  him  ever  to  have  been  the  advocate  of  knowledge. 
Against  this,  however,  the  text  is  often  quoted.  But  this  admits  of  a  double  con- 
struction— either  "  that  not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh  "  were  called  to  believe 
the  gospel,  or  were  called  to  preach  the  gospel.  Now,  that  the  former  interpreta- 
tion is  erroneous  will  be  apparent  when  we  tell  you  that,  although  during  Christ's 
life  the  majority  of  the  Pharisees  and  rulers  did  not  believe  on  Him  (John  vii.  48 ; 
comp.  xii.  42),  immediately  after  the  day  of  Pentecost  a  great  company  of  the 
priests  became  obedient  unto  the  faith  (Acts  vi.  7),  and  also  that  "  many  of  those 

VOL.   I.  7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


who  used  curious  arts  at  Ephesus  brought  their  books  together,  and  burned  them 
before  all  men"  (Acts  xix.  19,  20).  Since  these  two  classes,  converted  to  the  faith, 
are  to  be  reckoneil  amongst  the  wise  and  learned,  with  truth  it  cannot  be  said,  "  Not 
many  wise  men  after  the  flesh  are  called"  to  become  disciples  of  the  Messiah.  So 
we  conclude  that  the  text  means  that  "not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,"  &c., 
called  the  Corinthians  into  the  gospel.  2.  Should,  however,  the  correctness  of  the 
present  version  be  maintained,  we  still  deny  that  it  was  written  to  warn  us  against 
the  acquisition  of  human  learning,  for  the  use  and  abuse  of  knowledge  are  not 
identical,  and  the  text  thus  understood  could  only  apjjly  to  the  Greeks,  who  pre- 
ferred their  wisdom  to  revelation,  and  to  the  Jews,  who,  having  misinterpreted 
their  Scriptures,  required  a  sign  to  confirm  that  misinterpretation.  The  passage 
which  was  intended  to  apply  to  such  as  these  can  never  be  quoted  to  condemn  that 
which  only  becomes  reprehensible  when  it  is  not  made  subservient  to  the  religion 
of  our  Lord.  This  is  a  conclusion  worthy  your  attention,  inasmuch  as,  if  dis- 
proved, it  would  tend  to  cause  the  pious_scholar  to  throw  aside  all  the  aids  he  might 
derive  from  history,  criticism,  and  science  in  explaining  and  defending  the  oracles 
of  God.  That  such  a  course  would  prove  a  serious  detriment  to  rehgion  the  records 
of  our  race  abundantly  testify.  "Where  ignorance  has  prevailed,  there  infidelity 
or  superstition  has  abounded,  whilst  in  the  train  of  knowledge  more  accurate  con- 
ceptions of  the  Deity  and  of  social  duties  have  ever  followed.  When  Christianity 
was  spreading  many  of  the  wise,  indeed,  rejected  it,  but  the  more  obstinate  were 
found  among  those  whose  prejudices  in  favour  of  their  ancient  faith  remained 
unshaken,  because  their  minds  had  not  been  trained  by  knowledge  to  estimate  the 
value  of  those  doctrines  propounded  for  their  acceptance.  Note,  then — I.  The 
ADVANTAGES  OF  KNOWLEDGE  TO  RELIGION.  1.  Tlie  aiinals  of  the  Eeformatiou  speak 
an  unmistakable  language  in  favour  of  human  acquirements.  2.  It  is  from  the 
arsenal  of  knowledge  that  the  most  formidable  weapons  have  been  taken  wherewith 
to  resist  the  assaults  of  infidelity.  3.  The  benefits  of  a  knowledge  of  science, 
history,  &c.,  to  the  missionary  are  simply  incalculable.  4.  The  cultivation  of 
learning  greatly  conduces  to  a  right  understanding  of  the  Bible.  II.  The  oppo- 
sition TO  knowledge  commenced  in  primitive  times.  Whilst  Origen  and  Clement 
recommended  the  study  of  literature,  Tertullian  declaimed  against  it  as  the  source 
of  those  heresies  which  disturbed  the  peace  of  the  Church.  Because  philosophers 
had  erred  philosophy  was  condemned  ;  and  yet,  in  defiance  of  the  experience  which 
has  pi'oved  that  there  is  no  necessary  connection  between  philosophy  and  infidelity, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Newton  and  Bacon  and  Pascal  and  Boyle  have  submitted 
their  powerful  minds  to  the  teaching  of  the  gospel,  the  same  objection  and  the 
same  ]5lea  is  boldly  advanced.  III.  The  abuses  to  which  it  is  liable.  1.  Prior 
to  the  promulgation  of  the  gospel  (though  there  then  existed  minds  as  powerful  as 
any  which  have  since  adorned  the  pages  of  history)  the  grossest  immorality  pre- 
vailed amongst  the  wise  ones  of  the  earth.  Hence  we  deduce  the  fact  that  by  itself 
"the  wisdom  of  the  world"  now,  as  then,  is  unable  to  reform  the  morals  of 
mankind.  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God";  and  the  writings  of  infidels 
have  confirmed  the  assertion  of  our  apostle.  2.  Knowledge  is  fatally  abused  when 
Scripture  is  wrested  from  its  obvious  meaning  in  order  to  make  it  coincide  with 
some  cherished  theoiy  or  to  advance  some  favourite  doctiine.  Suppose  that  by  an 
induction  of  facts  we  arrive  at  a  conclusion  opposed  to  a  certain  portion  of  the 
Bible,  our  dutj'  is  to  extend  our  observation  till  we  obtain  a  result  in  accordance 
with  that  indicated  in  the  Word  of  God.  (D.  II.  Cotes,  LL.B.)  God's  strange 
choice  : — Note — I.  The  Elector.  Some  men  are  saved  and  some  men  are  not 
saved.  How  is  this  difference  caused  ?  The  reason  why  any  sink  to  hell  is  their 
sin,  and  only  their  sin.  But  how  is  it  that  others  are  saved?  The  text  answers 
the  question  three  times — "  God  hath  chosen."  This  will  be  clear  if  we  consider — 
1.  The  facts.  God  elected  fallen  man,  but  not  the  fallen  angels;  Abraham,  the 
Jews,  David,  &c.  God  is  a  king.  Men  may  set  up  a  constitutional  monarchy, 
and  they  are  right  in  so  doing;  but  if  you  could  find  a  being  who  was  perfection 
itself,  an  absolute  form  of  government  would  be  undeniably  the  best.  The  absolute 
position  of  God  as  king  demands  that,  especially  in  the  work  of  salvation.  His  will 
should  be  the  great  determining  force.  2.  The  figures — (1)  Salvation  consists  in 
part  of  an  adoption.  Who  is  to  have  authority  in  this  matter  ?  The  children  of 
wrath  ?  Surely  not.  It  must  be  God  who  chooses  His  own  children.  (2)  The 
Church,  again,  is  called — (a)  A  building.  With  whom  does  the  architecture  rest? 
With  the  building  ?  Do  the  stones  select  themselves  ?  No ;  the  Architect  alone 
disposes  of  His  chosen  materials  according  to  His  own  will.     (?))  Christ's  bride. 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  99 

Would  any  man  here  agree  to  have  any  person  forced  upon  him  as  his  bride  ? 
II.  The  election  itself.  Now  observe — 1.  How  strange  is  the  choice  He  makes. 
"  He  bath  not  cbosen  many  wise,"  &c.  If  man  had  received  the  power  of  choosing, 
these  are  just  the  persons  who  would  have  been  selected.  "  But  God  hath  cliosen," 
&c.  If  man  had  governed  the  selection,  these  are  the  very  peisons  who  would  have 
been  left  out.  2.  It  is  directly  contrary  to  human  choice.  Man  chooses  those  who 
would  be  most  helpful  to  him  ;  God  chooses  those  to  whom  He  can  be  the  most 
helpful.  We  select  those  who  may  give  us  the  best  return ;  God  frequently  selects 
those  who  most  need  His  aid.  We  select  those  who  are  most  deserving ;  He  selects 
those  who  are  least  deserving,  that  so  His  choice  may  be  more  clearly  seen  to  be 
an  act  of  grace  and  not  of  merit.  3.  It  is  very  gracious.  It  is  gracious  even  in  its 
exclusion.  It  does  not  say,  "  Not  any,"  it  only  says,  "Not  many"  ;  so  that  the 
great  are  not  altogether  shut  out.  Grace  is  proclaimed  to  the  prince,  and  in 
heaven  there  are  those  who  on  earth  wore  coronets  and  prayed.  4.  It  is  very 
encouraging.  Some  of  us  cannot  boast  of  any  pedigree  ;  we  have  no  great  learning, 
we  have  no  wealth,  but  He  has  been  pleased  to  choose  just  such  foolish,  despised 
creatures  as  ourselves.  III.  The  elected.  They  are  described — 1.  Negatively. 
(1)  "Not  many  wise  men  aftm-  the  flesh."  God  has  chosen  truly  wise  men,  but 
the  so2)hoi — the  men  who  pretend  to  Nvisdom,  the  cunning,  the  metaphysical,  the 
rabbis,  the  doctors,  the  men  who  look  down  with  profound  scorn  upon  the  illiterate 
and  call  them  idiots,  these  are  not  chosen  in  any  great  number.  Strange,  is  it  not  ? 
and  yet  a  good  reason  is  given.  If  they  were  clioseu,  why  then  they  would  say, 
"  Ah  !  how  much  the  gospel  owes  to  us  !  How  our  wisdom  helps  it !  "  (2)  "  Not 
many  mighty."  And  you  see  why — because  the  mighty  might  have  said,  "  Chris- 
tianity spreads  because  of  the  good  temper  of  our  swords  and  the  strength  of 
our  ann."  We  can  all  understand  the  progress  of  Mahommedanism  during  its 
first  three  centuries.  (3)  "  Not  many  noble,"  for  nobility  might  have  been  thought 
to  stamp  the  gospel  with  its  prestige.  2.  Positively.  "  God  hath  chosen  "—(1) 
"  The  foolish  things  "  ;  as  if  the  Lord's  chosen  were  not  by  nature  good  enough  to 
be  called  men,  but  were  only  "  things."  (2)  "  The  weak  things  " — not  merely  weak 
men,  but  the  world  thought  them  weak  things."  "Ah  !  "  said  Caesar  in  the  hall,  if  he 
said  anything  at  all  about  it,  "  Who  is  King  Jesus  ?  A  poor  wretch  who  was  hanged 
upon  a  tree  !  Who  is  this  Paul  ?  A  tent-maker !  Who  are  his  followers  ?  A  few 
despised  women  who  meet  him  at  the  water-side."  (3)  "  The  base  things  " — things 
without  a  father,  things  which  cannot  trace  their  descent.  (4)  "  Things  that  are 
despised,"  sneered  at,  persecuted,  hunted  about,  or  treated  with  what  is  worse, 
with  the  indifference  which  is  worse  than  scorn.  (5)  "  Things  that  are  not  "  hath 
God  chosen.  Nothings,  nonentities.  IV.  The  reasons  for  the  election.  1. 
The  immediate  reason.  (1)  "  To  confound  the  wise."  For  one  wise  man  to 
confound  another  wise  man  is  remarkable  ;  for  a  wise  man  to  confound  a  foolish 
man  is  very  easy;  but  for  a  fooli>h  man  to  confound  a  wise  man — ah!  this  is  the 
linger  of  God.  (2)  "To  confound  the  mighty."  "Oh!"  said  Caesar,  "we  will 
soon  root  up  this  Christianity  ;  off  with  their  heads."  The  different  governors 
hastened  one  after  another  of  the  disciples  to  death,  but  the  more  they  persecuted 
them  the  more  they  multiplied.  All  the  swords  of  the  legionaries  which  had  put 
to  rout  the  armies  of  all  nations,  and  had  overcome  the  invincible  Gaul  and  the 
savage  Briton,  could  not  withstand  the  feebleness  of  Christianity,  for  the  weakness 
of  God  is  mightier  than  men.  (3)  "To  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  are." 
What  were  they  in  the  ap  stle's  days  ?  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Venus,  Diana.  Here 
comes  Paul  with  "There  is  no  God  but  God,  and  Jesus  Chiist  whom  He  hath 
sent."  He  represents  "the  things  that  are  not."  So  contemptible  is  the  heresy 
of  Christianity  that  if  a  list  were  made  out  of  contemporary  religions  of  different 
countries  Christianity  would  have  been  left  out.  But  where  are  Jupiter,  &c.,  now  ? 
What  was  true  in  Paul's  day  is  true  to-day.  Existing  superstitions,  though 
attacked  by  those  who  are  things  that  are  not,  shall  yet  cease  to  be,  and  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  the  pure  simple  faith  backed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  shall 
bring  to  nought  the  thuigs  that  are.  2.  The  ultimate  reason  is  "  that  no  flesh 
may  glory  in  His  presence."  He  does  not  say  "  that  no  niMn  "  ;  no,  the  text  is  in 
no  humour  to  please  anybody  ;  it  says,  "  that  no  flesh."  What  a  word  !  Here  are 
Solon  and  Socrates,  the  wise  men.  God  points  at  them  with  His  finger  and  calls 
them  "flesh."  There  is  Ccesar,  with  his  imperial  purple;  how  the  Praetorian 
guards  shout,  "  Great  is  the  Emperor  !  long  may  he  live  !  "  "  Flesh,"  saith  God's 
Word.  Here  are  men  whose  sires  were  of  royal  lineage.  "Flesh,"  says  God. 
"  That  no  flesh  may  glory  in  His  presence."     God  puts  this  stamp  upon  us  all, 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 


that  we  are  nothing  but  flesh,  and  He  chooses  the  poorest,  the  most  foohsh,  and 
the  weakest  flesh,  that  all  the  other  flesh  that  is  only  flesh  and  only  grass  may  see 
that  God  pours  contempt  on  it,  and  will  have  no  flesh  glory  in  His  presence.  (C. 
H.  Sjjurijeon.)  Weak  things  chosen: — Luther  says  :  "Next  unto  my  just  cause 

the  small  repute  and  mean  aspect  of  my  person  gave  the  blow  to  the  Pope ;  for 
when  I  began  to  preach  and  write  the  Pope  scorned  and  contemned  me.  He 
thought,  '  'Tis  but  one  poor  friar  ;  what  can  he  do  against  me  ?  '  I  have  main- 
tained and  defended  this  doctrine  in  Popedom,  against  emj)erors,  kings,  and 
princes ;  what,  then,  shall  this  one  man  do  ?  "  We  all  know  what  the  one  man 
did,  and  we  often  see  that  weak  ones  who  come  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts 
conquer  where  stronger  ones  have  failed.  The  Lord  often  chooses  weak  things  in 
order  that  we  may  more  easily  see  that  the  victory  is  due  to  Him.  God's  choice  of 
instriniumts  : — A  native  convert  originally  belonging  to  one  of  the  lowest  castes  thus 
delivered  himself  in  my  hearing :  "  I  am,  by  birth,  of  an  insignificant  and  contemp- 
tible caste — so  low  that  if  a  Brahmin  should  touch  me  he  must  go  and  bathe  in  the 
Ganges  fur  purification  ;  and  yet  God  has  called  me,  not  merely  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  gospel,  but  to  the  high  office  of  teaching  it  to  others.  My  friends,  do  you  know 
the  reason  of  God's  conduct  ?  It  is  this  :  If  God  had  selected  one  of  you  learned 
Brahmins,  and  made  you  the  preacher,  when  you  were  successful  in  making 
converts  b\  standers  would  have  said  it  was  the  amazing  learning  of  the  Brahmin 
and  his  great  weight  of  chaiacter  that  were  the  cause;  but  now,  when  any 
one  is  converted  by  my  instrumentality,  no  one  thinks  of  ascribing  any  of 
the  praise  to  me,  and  God,  as  is  His  due,  has  all  the  glory."  {H.  Townley.) 
The  gospel  ministi-y — its  pon-er  exemplified  in  the  Corinthians  : — In  proof  of 
the  superiority  of  the  gospel  over  human  learning,  the  apostle  points  to  their 
own  knowledge  of  the  working  of  the  Divine  power  and  wisdom.  Two  facts  are 
adduced  in  jjroof.     I.  The  unfavourable  condition  in  which  the  gospel  found 

THEII,    and    how    it    MADE    THEM    THE    SUBJECTS    OF    ITS    POWER.       The    apOStle    dividcS 

society  into  two  classes — 1.  The  one  consisting  of  the  wise,  the  mighty,  and  the 
well-born — the  man  of  thought,  the  man  of  action,  and  the  man  of  leisure.  These 
three  he  further  describes  as  those  who  "are"  (ver.  28) — those  who  are  deemed 
somebody,  the  recognised  of  the  world  ;  those  for  whose  sole  interest  all  things  are 
deemed  to  exist — what  would  now  be  termed  "  society."  2.  The  other  class  con- 
sists of  the  foolish,  the  weak,  and  the  base,  or  despised,  &c.  Those  forming  this 
class  are  further  described  as  those  which  "  are  not."  They  were  those  who  had 
no  status,  and  were  ignored  by  the  world  as  things  utterly  beneath  notice.  Of  this 
class  were  the  bulk  of  the  Corinthian  believers.  "  For  ye  see  your  calling."  Thus 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  gospel  chose  as  the  subjects  of  its  gracious  operations — 
(1)  Those  whom  the  so-called  wise,  mighty,  and  noble  utterly  neglected,  those  who 
in  the  estimation  of  the  world  "  are  not."  (2)  Those  who  were  incapable  of  helping 
themselves.  Supposing  they  had  been  able  to  help  themselves,  society's  neglect  of 
them  would  not  have  mattered  so  much.  Their  utter  helplessness  is  indicated  by 
the  descriptive  epithets.  But  to  such  as  these  came  the  gospel.  This  proves  its 
truly  benevolent  character,  and  sets  it  in  direct  contrast  to  the  world's  ways  and 
metiiods.  The  spirit  of  this  world  is  always  to  give  where  it  sees  the  prospect  of  a 
return.  The  ancient  gods  always  bestowed  their  favours  upon  those  who  brought 
to  their  altars  the  costliest  sacrifices.  The  world  follows  the  example  of  its  gods. 
But  it  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  that  it  seeks  out  the  foolish,  the  weak,  the  base, 
and  df  spised  (Matt.  xi.  4,  5).  It  was  a  new  thing  in  the  world  to  supply  a  gospel 
to  the  poor.  A  gospel  preached  to  the  poor  must  be  something  more  than  human. 
God  alone  can  afford  such  grace  as  this.     II.  Its  effects  upon  its  subjects  far 

TRANSCENDS     THE     WORLD'S     HIGHEST     GOOD    AND     MOST    DESIRABLE    POSSESSIONS.       The 

world's  highest  good  are  wisdom,  might,  and  nobility,  i.e.,  culture,  prowess,  and 
rank.  But  the  gospel  bestows  upon  its  subjects  far  higher  things  (ver.  30).  1. 
•'  Things  that  are  not,"  i.e.,  without  a  status  in  the  world,  obtain  one  in  Christ — 
one  infinitely  surpassing  anything  the  world  can  boast  of.  2.  In  Christ  they  are 
endowed  with  qualities  far  transcending  the  world's  best  gifts.  Has  the  world  wisdom, 
might,  and  nobility  ?  The  gospel — (1)  Endues  men  with  a  wisdom  far  surpassing  in 
worth  the  world's  highest  philosophy  or  culture — the  wisdom  that  makes  wise  unto 
salvation.  (2)  It  confers  a  might  far  surpassing  iu  degree  and  nature  the  might  of 
the  world — the  might  of  rii.'ht.  (3)  It  endows  with  a  nobility  far  more  glorious 
than  that  of  blood,  the  nobility  of  holiness.  Noliility  gives  a  right  of  entrance 
into  the  highest  society,  holiness  into  the  heavenly  society.  It  requires  blood  to 
give  the  social  nobility  that  men  prize.     Similarly  the  spiritual  nobility  comes  of 


CHAP.  I.]  1.    COniNTHIANS.  101 

the  blood  of  Jesus  Cbrist,  which  clpanseth  from  all  sin.  And  by  virtue  of  this  we 
become  endowed  with  rank.  The  blood  is  royal  blood,  and  they  who  come  under 
its  influence  become  royally  related — they  become  kings  and  priests  to  God  His 
Father.  (4)  They  who  "  are  not  "  are  redeemed.  This  state  of  "  being  not,"  i.e., 
of  being  without  social  status,  implies  a  state  of  slavery.  But  He  Who  was  made 
for  them  redemption  brings  them  freedom  from  the  bondage  and  degi'adation  of 
sin,  a  freedom  far  more  glorious  than  any  social  one.  From  being  slaves  of  sin, 
and  though  still  slaves  of  men,  they  become,  not  merely  free,  but  sons  of  the 
heavenly  King.  {A.  J.  Parry.)  But  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the 
world  to  confoiind  the  wise. — God's  choice  of  the  ice<ik  and  foolinh  to  confound  the 
wii^e  and  mighty  : — Dr.  Vinton  was  a  sceptical  physician,  A  friend  advised  him  to 
read  "  Butler's  Analogy,"  which  satisfied  his  reason.  A  short  time  after  he  was 
called  to  the  dying  bed  of  a  little  girl  who  whispered  that  she  had  something  to  say 
to  him,  that  she  hardly  had  the  courage,  as  it  was  about  his  peace  with  God  ;  but 
she  added,  "  To-morrow  morning,  when  I  am  stronger,  I  will  tell  you."  And  on 
to-morrow  morning  she  was  dead.  This  led  to  Dr.  Vinton's  conversion,  and  a 
grand  life  in  the  ministry  was  the  result.  Who  shall  deny  that  "  God  hath  chosen 
the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty  "  ?  (Bp. 
PhiUijys  Brooks.)  God's  choice  of  feeble  agencies  : — I.  The  fact.  1.  God  has  chosen 
feeble  agencies.  2.  Has  by  them  confounded  the  mighty.  II.  The  importance  of 
IT.  It  shows  that  Christianity — 1.  Eegards  all  men  alike.  2.  Is  independent  of 
human  help.  3.  Is  sustained  only  by  the  power  of  God.  III.  The  lesson.  1.  The 
humble  should  be  thankful.  2.  The  proud  humble.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  God  destroying 
the  conventionally  great  by  the  conventionally  contemptible  : — I.  Evils  exist  under 
CONVENTIONALLY  RESPECTABLE  FORjrs.  In  Corinth  dangerous  errors  wore  the  costume 
of  wisdom.  Power  was  also  on  their  side.  Statesmen,  wealth,  and  influence  stood 
by  them,  and  they  appeared  "  mighty."  Here,  as  in  Corinth,  evils  wear  fine 
clothing,  and  pass  under  great  names.  1.  Infidelity  writes  and  speaks  in  the 
stately  formularies  of  philosophy  and  science.     It  is  a  "  wise  "  thing  of  the  world. 

2.  Licentiousness  passes  under  the  grand  name  of  liberty.  The  vaunted  religious 
liberty  of  England's  population  means  often  only  power  to  neglect  sacred  ordinnnces. 

3.  Social  injustice  does  most  of  its  fiendish  work  in  the  name  of  law.  4.  Selfish- 
ness goes  under  the  taking  name  of  prudence.  5.  Bigotry,  superstition,  fanaticism, 
wear  the  sacred  name  of  religion.  6.  War  is  called  glory.  Could  we  take  from  sin 
the  mantle  of  respectability  that  society  has  thrown  over  it,  we  should  do  much 
towards  its  annihilation.  II.  God  is  determined  to  overthrow  evil  by  conven- 
tionally CONTEMPTIBLE  MEANS.  1.  Negatively.  This  language  does  not  mean — 
(1)  That  the  gospel  is  an  inferior  thing.  The  gospel  is  not  "  foolish,"  "  weak,"  or 
"  base."  As  a  history  of  facts,  as  a  sj'stem  of  thought,  .is  a  code  of  laws,  it  is 
incomparably  the  grandest  thing  within  the  whole  range  of  human  thought,  ^^^lat 
light  it  throws  on  man,  the  universe,  God  !  What  influence  it  has  exerted,  and 
what  changes  it  has  wrought !  (2)  That  the  men  appointed  as  its  ministers  are  to 
be  inferior.  This  passage  has  been  abused  to  support  the  claims  of  an  ignorant 
ministry,  than  which  few  things  have  tended  more  to  degrade  Christianity.  There 
are  several  things  to  show  that  the  gospel  ministry  req  uires  the  highest  order  of  mind. 
(a)  The  character  of  the  work  :  "  Teaching  men  in  all  wisdom."  (b)  The  character  of 
the  system.  What  a  system  it  is  to  learn  !  What  mines  of  truth  lie  lieneath  the  surface 
of  the  letter  1  What  digging  is  required  to  reach  the  golden  ore  !  Simpletons  call 
the  gospel  simple,  but  intelligence  has  ever  found  it  of  all  subjects  the  most  profound 
and  ditiicult.  The  greatest  thinkers  of  all  ages  have  found  the  work  no  easy  task, 
(c)  The  character  of  society.  Who  exerts  the  most  influence  upon  the  real  life  of 
the  men  and  women  around  him  ?  The  man  of  capacity,  thought,  sound  judgment. 
If  the  gospel  ministry  is  to  influence  men,  it  must  be  employed  by  men  of  the 
highest  type  of  culture  and  ability.  (d)  The  spirit  of  the  work.  Humble, 
charitable,  forbearing,  reverent.  Such  a  spirit  as  this  comes  only  from  deep 
thought  and  extensive  knowledge.  Ignorance  generates  a  spirit  of  pride,  bigotry, 
intolerance,  and  irreverence,  [e]  The  character  of  the  apobtles.  Where  can  you 
find  greater  force  of  soul  than  Peter's,  a  more  searching  sagacity  than  James's,  a 
more  royal  intellect  than  Paul's,  a  finer  intuitional  nature  than  John's  ?  They 
were  men  of  talent  and  men  of  thought.  And  more,  they  all  understood  Hebrew 
and  Greek.  We  require  a  long  college  course  for  this,  and  then  only  very  partially 
reach  their  linguistical  attainments.  2.  Positively.  It  means — (1)  That  the  gospel 
was  conventionally  mean.  It  was  so  in  the  estimation  of  the  age.  The  schools, 
Veligious,  institutions,  and  great  men  of  the  day  regarded  it  with  contempt.     It 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

was  a  "  foolish  "  thing  to  the  Greek,  a  "  weak  "  thing  to  the  Jew,  and  a  "  base  " 
and  "  contemptible  "  thing  more  or  less  to  all.     (2)  The  first  ministers  were  con- 
ventionally mean.     They  were  not  selected  from  chairs  of  philosophy,  or  seats  of 
civil  power,  or  homes  of  opulence.     They  were  fishermen.     The  system  and  its 
ministers,  however,  are  merely  conventionally  contemptible,  nothing  more.      But 
these,  like  many  other  things  that  erring  man  regard  as  insignificant  and  mean, 
shall  do  a  great  work.     The  flake  of  snow  is  insignificant,  but  it  is  commissioned 
to  build  up  a  mountain  that  shall  overwhelm  widespread  districts.   The  coral  insect 
is  insigniticant,  but  it  builds  up  vast  islands,  beautiful  as  paradise.     The  insignifi- 
cant things  do  the  w;ork  of  the  world.     They  clothe  the  earth  with  verdure,  and 
provide  subsistence  for  man  and  beast ;  they  rear  majestic  forests,  and  provide 
materials  for  building  our  cities  and  our  fleets.      Even  so  the  gospel.     What  work 
it  has  already  done  !     What  systems  it  has  shattered !     What  towering  institutions 
it  has  levelled  to  the  dust !     It  has  "brought  to  nought"  a  vast  world  of  things; 
and  so  it  shall  proceed  until  all  the  "  things  that  are  "  great  in  the  estimation  of 
man,  but  bad  in  themselves,  are  for  ever  brought  to  "  nought."     The  little  pebble 
shall  smite  the  giant  and  send  him  reeling  to  the  grave  ;  the  little  stone  shall  shiver 
the  colossus  and  scatter  its  particles  to  the  winds.     Conclusion  :  From  this  subject 
we  may  infer — 1.  That  so  long  as  evils  exist  in  the  world  great  commotions  are  to 
be  expected.     God  hath  chosen  this   system  to  confound,  to  put  to  shame,  and 
bring  to  nought  things  that  are.     "  It  will  overturn,  overturn,  overturn,"  the  whole 
system  of  human  things.     The  gospel,  when  it  first  enters  a  soul,  confounds  it. 
When  it  enters  a  country  and  begins  its  work  it  is  revolutionary  in  its  action.     In 
the  first  ages  it  confounded  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin,  and  the  heathen  j^riesthood,  and 
the  Gentile  philosophy.     2.  That  the  removal  of  evil  from  the  world  is,  under  God, 
to  be  effected  through  man  as  man.     The  gospel  is  to  make  its  way,  not  by  men 
invested  with  political  power,  scientific  attainments,  or  brilliant  oratory,  but  by  men  as 
men,  endowed  with  the  common  powers  of  human  nature,  inspired  and  directed  by  the 
living  gosjiel.     Let  no  one  say  he  is  too  poor  or  too  obscure,  too  destitute  of  artificial 
endowments  to  minister  the  gospel  to  others ;  all  that  is  wanted  is  the  common 
sense,  the  common  affection,  and  the  common  speech  of  man.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Yea,  and  things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are. — The  "  tliinus 
iclticli   are   not":     OoiVs  cliosen   htstriiments  for   adrancuifi   His  kingdom: — This 
clause  is  the  last  of  a  series  of  clauses,  of  which  each  that  precedes  it  prepares 
the  way  for  it,  and  by  natural  progress  leads  the  mind  toward  it.     The  foolish  and 
the  weak,  the  base  and  the  despised  things — it   is  only  natural  that  from  the  last 
and  lowest  of  these  the  apostle  should  step  to  the  things  which  are  not ;  that  is, 
which  have  no  existence  that  is  recognised  by  mankind  ;  which  arrest  no  thought, 
excite  no  fear,  and  are  not  prominent  enough  to  be  scorned.     And  these  things,  he 
says,  the  Lord  hath  chosen,  to  bring  to  nought  the  things  that  are  ;  the  great 
institutions,  establishments,  forces,  which  mark  or  mould  the  constitution  of  society. 
He  hath  chosen  them  for  this  purpose,  to  the  end  that  His  name  may  be  magnified 
by  their  agency,  and  His  glory  be  revealed  in  their  ultimate  triumph.     That  the 
"  things  which  are,"  at  any  time,  in  human  society,  however  venerable,  are  always 
liable  to  be  disjilaced  by  others  which  were  not  in  existence,  or  were  not  of  recog- 
nised importance  when  the  former  were  established.     These  are  facts  familiar  as 
any  fact    of    nature,   which    impress   immediately   the   most   careless    observer. 
"Things  which  are  not,"  so  far  as  men's  earlier  knowledge  is  concerned,  which 
exist  but  in  embryo,  and  are  only  to  be  developed  by  a  keener  observation,  are 
yet  usually  superior  to  the  things  which  precede  them,  and  more  replete  with  a 
vitalising  energy  ;  that  thus  each  industrious  community  is  likely  to  surpass  in  its 
later  years  the  attainments  of    its    earlier,  and    the    race    itself    to  be  gradually 
enriched  and   elevated   as    the    centuries    proceed  ;    these   also   are  facts   which 
modern   history  clearly  illustrates.      But  these   things   of   which  the  age  knows 
not  and  dreams  not    are   all   the   time  present  to  the  mind  of   the  Most  High  ; 
they    are    indeed    His    preordained    instruments,    irot    only    for    working    the 
changes  which  shall  come  in    the  aspects  or  in  the  life  of    society,  but  for  the 
grander  purpose  of  establishing  supremely  His  kingdom  in  the  world.     So  hei-e, 
as  everywhere,  does  Christianity  vindicate  its   origin  in  God's  mind,  by  placing 
us  at  once  upon  the    highest    levels    of    truth,    and   opening   to   our   minds  the 
widest  range  for  reflection.     Let  us  review  the  scenes  amid  which  the  text  was 
written,  and  then  the  events  which  became  its  immediate  and  complete  vindica- 
tion.     It   was  written  from  that   delightful   and   populous    city  planted  by   the 
Ionian  colony  on  the  hills  overlooking  "  the  Asian  meadows,"  along  the  Cayster. 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   COniNTHIANS.  103 

In  this  city  of  Ephesus,  important  and  peculiar,  partly  Greek  but  still  more 
Oriental  in  its  manners  and  sj^irit,  the  metropolis  of  a  province,  and  with  a 
commerce  that  drew  to  its  wharves  the  representatives  of  all  nations,  in  which 
schools  of  iDhilosophy  seem  so  much  to  have  abounded  that  one  of  them  was 
opened  to  Paul  for  his  labours,  yet  in  which  the  Eastern  superstitious  and  magic 
haughtily  confronted  philosophy,  and  still  had  a  power  which  they  had  not  either 
at  Atheus  or  at  Eome.  In  this  city,  where  the  East  and  the  West  were  com- 
mingled, and  within  whose  spacious  walls  and  harbour  was  assembled  so  busy  and 
so  various  a  life,  the  apostle,  coming  westward  from  Antioeh,  abode  for  more  than 
two  years,  and  from  thence  wrote  this  Epistle.  It  was  written  to  Corinth,  that 
wealthier,  more  brilliant,  and  more  luxurious  town  planted  upon  the  celebrated 
Greek  Isthmus,  and  by  its  position  attracting  the  trade  not  only  of  Greece,  but 
of  all  the  countries  whose  shores  were  washed  by  either  of  the  seas  between 
whose  almost  meeting  waves  it  fortunately  stood.  It  is  evident,  then,  at  once, 
what  were  the  institutions  which  Paul  describes  as  "  things  that  are " ;  the 
great  established  powers  in  society,  which  withstood,  or  at  least  did  not  harmonise 
with,  the  extension  of  Christianity.  Foremost  amongst  them  we  must  reckon,  of 
course,  that  haughty  Judaism,  dogmatic  and  secular,  into  which  the  religion 
given  by  God  to  the  people  of  His  election  had  by  degrees  been  transformed, 
and  which  now  had  the  seat  of  its  dominion  in  Palestine,  but  the  outposts  of  its 
influence  in  many  cities  of  the  empire.  Ennobled  and  vitalised  as  it  had  been 
at  the  beginning,  by  the  supreme  truth  of  the  being  of  God,  eternal  and  holy, 
almighty  and  wise,  the  Creator,  moral  Governor,  and  Judge  of  the  universe,  it 
received  a  practical  impressiveness  from  the  discoveries  which  it  made  of  His 
presence  and  providence,  and  of  His  perfect  law.  Yet  from  this  religion  the 
nation  had  early  and  persistently  swung  away  into  grossest  idolatries,  reproducing 
in  gold  the  Egyptian  Apis  beneath  the  very  pavement  of  sapphire  on  which  the 
feet  of  God  were  treading  above  the  mount ;  in  their  subseijuent  history,  polluting 
the  hills  which  looked  out  upon  Jerusalem  with  the  fury  and  lust  of  sacrilegious 
observances.  Second  in  order  of  these  "  things  that  are " — these  powerful 
institutes  of  the  day  of  the  apostle,  opposed  to  Christianity— must  be  reckoned  of 
course  the  heathenism  which  prevailed  outside  of  the  Jews  among  all  nations ; 
which  confronted  Paul  everywhere,  ancient  as  man,  but  still  vigorous  in  strength, 
imperial  in  place,  and  arrayed  in  universal  opposition  to  the  gospel.  First  of  all 
it  is  to  be  recognised  by  us  that  this  heatlienism  which  so  withstood  Christianity 
was  not  an  altogether  artificial  system  in  auy  nation ;  that  it  grew  out  of  real 
and  even  deep  motions  in  the  general  mind,  and  was  not  in  its  substance  a 
matter  of  chance  or  a  creature  of  contrivance,  least  cf  all  an  arbitrary  and 
fabricated  arrangement  either  of  statecraft  or  of  priestcraft ;  nay,  that  it  hnd  a 
certain  real  moral  life  in  it,  and  was  related  not  to  depiaved  desire  alone,  to  the 
lust  aud  the  pride  which  it  never  denied  and  too  often  deified,  but  related  also, 
however  insufficiently,  to  needs  which  the  soul  always  feels  to  be  inmost  and 
knows  to  be  abiding.  Its  answer  was  a  vain  one,  but  it  sought  to  give  an  answer, 
to  questions  which  never  since  the  exile  from  Eden  have  ceased  profoundly  to 
agitate  the  race.  Unconscious  prophecies  of  better  things  lurked  in  many  of  its 
forms  and  in  some  of  its  traditions.  Its  sacrifices  were  efforts  to  staunch  the  flow 
from  bleeding  hearts.  And  while  the  popular  mind  acknowledged  chiefly  the  hold 
of  its  ceremonies  aud  shows,  the  thoughtful  found  also  some  solace  or  stimulus  in 
its  sublimated  legends.  Then  further  it  must  be  noticed  that  as  existing  iu  any 
nation  it  took  the  form  most  germane  to  that  people,  to  its  genius  and  spirit,  to 
its  circumstances  and  habits ;  and  that  everywhere  it  allied  itself  with  whatever 
was  strongest,  whatever  most  attracted  men's  minds.  Thus  in  Greece,  from  the 
first,  it  enshrined  itself  in  art  ;  made  eloquence  its  advocate  ;  was  indebted  for  the 
memorable  form  which  it  assumed  to  tlie  noble  poetry  in  which  its  mythologies 
were  melodiously  uttered.  In  Rome  the  same  power  allied  itself  with  politics,  and 
became  a  military  force.  Still  further  we  must  remember  that  in  no  land  was  this 
recent ;  in  none  was  it  devoid  of  that  dignity  and  authority  which  were  derived 
from  a  high  antiquity  ;  while  to  all  the  peoples,  in  proportion  to  their  advancement, 
it  was  associated  with  whatever  was  to  them  most  renowned  and  inspiring  in  their 
history.  It  was  dear  to  them  as  the  bond  which  connected  their  life  with  heroic 
ages.  There  remains  a  third  thing  to  be  recognised  as  standing  among  the 
"  things  that  are  " — the  powerful  institutes  and  establishments  of  society,  opposed 
to  Christianity — when  Paul  was  writing  from  Ephesus  to  Corinth.  But  this  was 
also  the  most  powerful  of  all ;  the  most  dangerous  to  assail,  to  human  view  the 


101  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

most  icaccessible  to  change  or  decay;  supreme  over  every  force  that  could  touch 
it,  and  comparing  with  them  all  as  the  Mediterranean  with  the  restless  streams 
■which  sought  and  sank  into  it.  It  was,  of  course,  the  authority  and  ])ower  of 
imperial  Eome.  It  was  hardly  as  yet  at  its  uttermost  height,  this  imperial  power; 
for  scores  of  years  still  slowly  passed  before  that  age  of  Trajan  and  the  Antonines 
which  marked  its  consummate  might  and  splendour  ;  while  it  was  later  even  than 
this  that  Severus  carried  his  victorious  arms  to  Ctesiphon  and  Seleucia,  transferred 
the  entire  legislative  power  from  the  senate  to  himself,  and  scattered  the  profuse 
memorial  of  his  reigu  over  Africa  and  the  East.  And  so  was  this  empire  now 
exhibited  to  Paul,  encircling  the  sea  which  was  the  centre  of  his  thoughts,  from 
Carthage  to  Alexandria,  from  Alexandria  to  Ephesus,  and  on  to  the  very  pillars  of 
Hercules,  with  no  sign  of  weakness.  Confidering  its  history,  its  growth,  it  seemed 
Imrdly  so  much  a  construction  of  man,  this  empire  of  Eome,  as  one  of  the  pre- 
ordained elements  of  nature  ;  reaching  in  its  exhaustive  roots  to  the  centres  of 
history,  and  draining  the  earth  to  give  it  nutriment.  So  it  stood  before  Paul,  as 
at  Ephesus  he  saw  it,  as  everywhere  he  met  it,  as  he  knew  and  felt  it  environing 
the  earth.  And  Paul  knew  that  this  mightiest  establishment  of  government  on 
the  earth,  this  impregnable  des^Dotism  which  was  touciied  by  no  fear,  against  which 
human  power  seemed  vain,  that  this  should  also,  in  God's  own  time,  be  wrecked 
and  "brought to  nought."  But  how  should  it  be  done?  By  what  agencies  should 
each  of  these  prophesied  victories  over  Judaism,  heathenism,  and  the  terrible  iron- 
limbed  empire  of  Home,  be  brought  to  pass  ?  Not,  he  affirms,  by  the  forces  which 
already  are  at  work  in  the  world,  and  which  may  be  still  further  multiplied,  and 
made  to  bear  on  this  new  issue  ;  not  by  armies  revolting,  or  statesmen  conspiring, 
or  philosophers  projecting  new  answers  to  heathenism  ;  not  by  nations  reclaiming 
their  ravaged  rights,  or  the  still  existing  senate  combining  with  the  people  to  bury 
the  haughty  imperial  prerogative  in  a  cataclysm  of  revolution.  The  forces  which 
God  shall  employ  for  this  work,  and  to  which  He  shall  give  a  might  irresistible, 
are  simply  thus  far  the  "things  which  are  not";  the  things  which  He  alone  can  bring 
out  of  the  secrets  of  thought  and  life,  and  make  triumphant  on  their  mission. 
How  utterly  insignificant  was  Christianity  in  the  beginnings  before  one  temple  had 
sprung  toward  heaven  ;  before  one  treatise  had  wrought  its  princii)les  into  scientific 
statement,  or  clothed  them  in  the  grace  and  the  majesty  of  letters;  before  any 
government  had  sought  to  incorporate  its  rules  into  statutes ;  before  any 
one  of  all  the  great  names  now  associated  with  it  had  become  its  bulwark  in  the 
popular  confidence.  In  the  simply  spiritual  elements  it  involved,  it  was  set  against 
this  array  which  opposed  it ;  and  of  all  the  auxiliaries  which  it  afteiward  gained, 
not  one  had  as  yet  aj^peared  on  the  earth.  How  utterly  insignificant  seemed  then 
its  force  !  How  incredibly  inadequate  to  the  end  to  be  accomplished  !  The  truths 
which  had  been  taught  the  apostles,  and  afterward  recalled  to  them  and  unfolded 
more  fully  by  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  and  which  were  to  be  enshrined  in  evan- 
gelical narratives,  not  one  of  which  had  yet  been  written — these  were  the  primary 
instruments  to  be  used,  with  the  oral  proclamation  of  their  principles  and  laws, 
for  the  spread  of  God's  kingdom,  and  the  overthrow  of  whatever  withstood  its 
advance.  And  these! — it  seemed  like  binding  the  lightning  in  the  meshes  and 
knots  of  metaphysical  argument.  Epistles  and  talks  in  the  synagogue  against 
armies  !  The  might  that  lay  on  letters  and  lips  against  the  might  that  ruled  from 
thrones  !  The  publication  of  doctrines  against  establishments  of  iDower  as  rooted 
as  the  hills  !  And  yet  these  vvere  the  very  agencies — these  "  things  which  were 
not  "  in  every  sense — which  were  not  regarded,  and  which  hitherto  existed  only  in 
germ,  these  Gospels  and  Epistles  which  were  still  to  be  written,  these  teachings  and 
preachings  which  had  scarcely  commenced,  these  Christian  forces  in  lite  and 
character  which  hardly  thus  far  had  appeared  on  the  earth — these  were  the 
forces  which  God  had  chosen  to  bring  to  nought  the  "  things  that  were  " — the 
ancient,  immense,  and  impregnable  institutions  that  stood  in  all  their  august 
might  and  tremendous  effectiveness  fronting  the  gospel.  Not  with  energy  only, 
but  with  an  exact  precision  of  speech,  had  Paul  then  described  them.  The 
philosopher  thought  of  them,  if  he  thought  of  them  at  all,  with  a  contempt  only 
greater  than  that  which  he  gave  to  the  most  absurd  or  childish  of  fables.  The 
soldier  regarded  them  less  than  the  mists  which  had  hovered  last  year  around  the 
crests  of  the  hills.  To  the  Jew,  in  comparison  of  his  august  forms  and  world- 
challenging  miracles,  they  seemed  as  frail  and  shadowy  as  dreams.  The  whole 
wisdom  of  the  world  anticipated  as  little  an  impression  from  them  as  we  that  the 
tiny  animalculffi  in  tin  ocean,  streaking  its  waves  with  phosphorescent  glow,  will 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  103 

arrest  the  revolutidn  of  shaft  and  wheel,  and  stay  the  steamship  on  its  march. 
Those  secondary  forces,  too,  which  were  in  time  to  be  evolved  by  God's  plans,  and 
confederated  in  effective  aUiance  with  those,  although,  of  course,  existing  in  em- 
bryo, they  were,  if  possible,  still  more  unrecognised,  and  even  uurealist'd,  when 
Paul  was  writing.  The  awakening  spiritual  longings  under  Judaism,  at  which  his 
ministry  to  so  large  an  extent  was  sympathetically  aimed  ;  the  awakening  moral 
instincts  within  heathenism,  whose  premonitions  he  must  have  felt,  of  which 
Plutarch  soon  afterward  became  so  illustrious  an  example ;  the  gradual  jjrogress  of 
moral  decline  in  all  the  systems  that  were  rooted  in  error  and  maintained  by  force 
— all  these  were  things  which  one  by  one  came  into  development,  each  in  its  time, 
as  the  truths  and  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  went  forward,  but  which  were  as 
latent,  when  i'aul  looked  forth  from  Ephesus  on  the  sea,  as  were  the  germs  of 
modern  oaks.  And  those  still  additional  procedures  and  events,  also  auxiliary  to 
these  more  silent  forces,  already  were  purposed  in  the  mind  of  the  Most  High  ; 
already  He  saw  their  seeds  unfolding;  but  how  vaguely,  if  at  all,  were  they  thus 
far  foreshown  even  to  Paul ;  how  entirely  unsuspected  were  they  yet  by  the 
world !  Tlie  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  arms  of  Titus,  who  seems  to  have 
felt  himself  but  the  instrument  of  a  power  wliich  he  could  not  comprehend  and 
could  not  contravene,  in  his  overthrow  of  the  city  ;  the  consequent  extinction 
of  the  Jewish  nationality,  the  final  obliteration  of  all  distinctions  between  the 
tribes,  and  the  scattering  of  their  impoverished  remnant  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth — this  was  a  fact  lying  still  as  hidden  among  God's  i^lans.  Judaism  was 
surpassed  and  terminated  in  a  higher  religion,  more  adequate  to  man's  wants, 
more  illustrative  of  God's  glory.  Heathenism  was  not  only  broken  down,  but  it 
was  made,  thenceforth  and  for  ever,  the  veriest  outcast  of  civilisation.  The 
Boman  Lojpire  was  as  finally  extinguished  as  if  the  crust  of  the  globe  had  been 
opened  to  swallow  it  up.  And  all  was  wrought  within  a  few  centuries  by  what 
at  the  outset  had  appeared  so  unreal  or  so  ineffectual.     (R.  S.  Stoirs,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  But  of  Him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  wlio  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  redemption. — The  life  of  the  Christian 
from  Cliri^t : — In  using  these  words  the  apostle  seems  to  have  in  mind  the  principal 
phases  of  Christ's  being.  I.  Wisdom,  by  His  life  and  teaching.  II.  Eigiiteousness, 
by  His  death  and  resurrection.  HI.  Sanctification,  by  His  elevation  to  glory. 
IV.  PiEDEMi'TioN,  by  His  future  return.  (Prof.  Godet.)  The  itnion  of  tlic  genuine 
discivle  irilh  his  ilaater : — This  union  is— I.  Most  vital.  "  In  Christ,"  not  merely 
in  His  school,  dispensation,  character,  but  in  Himself,  as  branches  are  in  the  vine. 
He  is  their  life.  II.  Divinely  formed.  "Of  Him" — Whom?  God.  It  is  the 
Eternal  Spirit  that  brings  the  soul  into  vital  connection  with  Christ.  "  My  Father 
is  the  Husbandman."  III.  Blessedly  productive.  1.  Wisdom.  2.  Pighteous- 
ness.  3.  Sanctification.  4.  Ki-demption,  come  out  of  this  union.  What  transcen- 
dent blessings  are  these !  IV.  Exultingly  adoring  (ver.  31).  It  inspires  the 
highest  worship.  It  causes  the  soul  to  triumph  to  God  Himself.  (D.  Tliomas,  D.D.) 
The  connection  of  Cltrist  with  Christians  : — I.  A  most  intimate  connection  exists 
BETWEEN  CHr.isT  AND  CHRISTIANS.  "In  Christ."  The  connection  is — 1.  Eeal. 
"Ye  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Kot  imaginary;  not  theoretical;  not  prospective.  2. 
Vital.  Not  that  of  a  sapless  branch  with  a  decayed  root ;  not  that  of  a  pulseless 
arm  with  a  lifeless  head.  3.  Essential  to  the  continuance  of  spiritual  life.  Not 
merely  a  life  like  Christ's,  but  a  life  that  is  a  part  of  Christ's  life.  The  temiDcra- 
ment  of  Christ  pervades  the  whole  body.  II.  This  connection  has  been  formed 
BY  God.  "  Of  Him."  Our  Lord  referred  to  Divine  operation  as  well  as  supervision 
when  He  said,  "  My  Father  is  the  Husbandman"  (Comp.  Kom.  xi.  17-24).  Union 
with  Christ  is — 1.  Not  natural.  Our  natural  condition  is  one  of  sei^aration  and 
alienation.  2.  Not  affected  by  human  agency  ;  neither  our  own,  nor  another's.  3. 
Effected  by  Divine  agency — (1)  Incomprehensible  in  the  mode  of  operation.  (2) 
Inexplicable  in  the  selection  of  its  subjects.  III.  This  connection  has  been 
PRODUCTIVE  OF  MOST  ADVANTAGEOUS  RESULTS  TO  CHRISTIANS.  These,  as  Well  as  the 
connection,  are  of  Divine  ordination.  1.  Observe  the  firogression  of  thought.  (1) 
There  is  the  truth  by  which  the  mind  is  arrested,  instructed,  convinced,  strengthened, 
and  elevated.  (2)  There  is  the  work  icithout  us  by  virtue  of  which  we  are  accepted 
and  treated  as  righteous  ;  conjoined  with — (3)  The  work  witldn  us  by  virtue  of 
which  we  are  purified  and  made  actually  righteous.  (4)  There  is  the  final  deliver- 
ance from  all  evil ;  when  with  the  redemption  of  the  body  the  soul  will  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God ; 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  TLLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


•when  salvation  will  be  consummated  in  the  glorification  of  all.  2.  Chi'ipt  is — (1) 
Our  wisdom.  He  said  "  I  am  the  truth."  He  is  "  the  light  of  the  world."  He  is 
that  by  which  we  are  enlightened.  The  condition  of  the  non-Christian  is  described 
in  Eph.  iv.  18,  and  Eom.  x.  3.  Ignorant  of  our  real  spiritual  state,  Christ 
enlightens  us  respecting  it.  Ignorant  of  our  relation  to  God,  Christ  reveals  our 
alienation  from  Him,  and  invites  us  to  be  reconciled.  Ignorant  of  whMt  is  to  be 
done,  Christ  tells  us  what  is  essential.  Ignorant  of  the  way  of  salvation,  Christ 
says,  "I  am  the  way,"  &c.  (2)  Our  righteousness.  The  revelation  of  truth  is  not 
all  we  want.  Christ  was  not  only  the  Revealer  but  the  Doer,  not  only  the  Teacher 
but  the  Mediator.  The  condition  of  the  non-Christian  is  represented  as  one  of 
condemnation,  guilt,  and  rebellidii.  Out  of  this  we  are  brought  by  Christ.  He  is 
our  Representative ;  in  nature  and  character  perfect ;  possessing  immaculate 
righteousness  ;  therefore  competent  to  appear  and  act  for  us.  His  life  and  death  of 
obedience  are  accepted  on  our  behalf,  and  we  are  accepted  through  Him.  The 
rebel  is  pardoned ;  alienation  is  displaced  by  friendship ;  as  virtually  righteous  he 
is  received  into  God's  family,  a  joint  heir  with  Christ.  (3)  Our  sanctificntion. 
The  condition  of  the  non-Cluistian  is  one  of  corruption  and  defilement.  Christ 
will  have  all  His  followers  conformed  to  His  image.  The  process  of  sanctification 
is — (a)  Effected  by  direct  and  indirect  agency.  Direct.  The  influence  of  Spirit 
upon  spirit.  "  The  Spirit  dwelleth  in  you,"  Ac.  Indirect.  Christian  ordin»nces 
and  privileges,  providential  circumstances,  social  influences  ;  every  temptation 
resisted,  trial  endured,  difficulty  overcome,  passion  quelled,  habit  corrected ; 
triumph  over  self,  steadfast  opposition  to  evil,  loss  suffered  for  the  cause  of  Christ; 
manful  exhibition  of  godliness,  true-hearted  adherence  to  principle,  (b)  Invisible 
and  indescribable.  More  mystery  respecting  the  internal  work  of  the  Spirit 
than  the  external  work  of  Christ.  Facts  perceived  by  the  senses  are 
more  easily  described  than  those  perceived  by  consciousness,  (c)  Sometimes 
prolonged.  If  immediacy  may  be  regarded  as  a  characteristic  of  justi- 
fication, progressiveness  is  characteristic  of  sanctific  ition.  It  is  the  work  of 
our  lifetime.  ((/)  Generally  apparently  incomplete.  But  we  cannot  unveil  the 
spiritual  world.  What  constitutes  completeness  ?  Enough  for  us  to  aim  at  her 
lofty  attainment.  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Father,"  &c.  (4)  Our 
redemption.  Eeference  to  the  final  release  from  the  bondage,  d>»ngers,  and  trials 
of  humanity.  The  condition  of  the  non-Christian  is  one  of  bondage  to  sin  (2  Pet. 
ii.  19).  Christ  makes  His  people  free.  The  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God  includes  not 
only  release  from  the  condemnation  of  law  and  from  the  power  of  sin,  but  also 
from  the  laws  and  limitations  of  human  nature ;  from  the  habits  which  bind  us, 
and  dispositions  which  enslave  us ;  from  the  annoyances  of  earthly  life ;  from 
associations  with  evil;  from  injurious  influences,  human  and  satanic.     IV.  This 

CONNECTION    AND    ITS    RESULTS   ARE    DESIGNED   TO    PROMOTE    THE    GLORY    OF    GoD     (vCTS. 

29,  31).  Not  to  glorify  ourselves,  but  to  live,  in  time  and  in  eternity,  to  the  glory  of 
His  grace,  who  "  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved."  (T.  T.  Waterman,  B.A.) 
The  relation  of  Christ  to  His  jyeople  : — He  is  set  forth  as  made  unto  us — I.  "  Wis- 
dom." A  controversy  has  been  carried  on  as  to  the  character  of  real  wisdom  from  the 
days  of  Job  (Job  xxvi  1.  20).  But  his  definition  is  the  only  correct  one  (ver.  18). 
1.  What  is  wisdom  unconnected  with  Christ  ?  It  can  elevate  man's  mind  by  lead- 
ing it  up  the  pathway  of  science,  it  can  help  to  the  study  of  men  and  manners,  it 
may  solve  some  of  the  higher  problems  of  morality.  But  its  best  efforts  are  only 
as  the  light  of  the  taper  compared  with  the  sun.  It  cannot  bestow  peace  or  joy  in 
the  moment  of  trial,  or  in  the  day  of  death.  2.  W'hat  is  wisdom  connected  with 
Christ  (James  iii.  17)?  II.  ''Righteousness"  (Jer.  xxiii.  6;  Rom.  viii.  33).  III. 
"  Sanctification."  1.  It  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  justification  and  sanc- 
tification. They  differ  essentially — (1)  In  their  nature  ;  the  one  being  an  altera- 
tion of  his  state  in  the  sight  of  God,  the  other  a  change  in  his  character  before  man 
and  his  conscience.  (2)  In  their  causes ;  the  former  is  imputed  through  Christ's 
obedience,  the  latter  is  communicated  by  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence.  2.  Sanctifi- 
cation is  a  difficult  work,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  in  it.  (1)  Our  nature  is 
opposed  to  it.  (2)  The  world  generally  is  opposed  to  it.  (3)  Satan  with  all  his 
varied  instruments  are  opposed  to  it.  3.  But  yet  it  is  possible  and  easy  ;  for  Christ 
is  made  such  unto  us.  How  is  this  ?  It  is  simply  to  have  Christ  enter  the  lists 
with  sin  in  us  (Phil.  iv.  13 ;  1  Thess.  v.  23).  IV,  "Redemption."  Our  present 
redemption  is  only  partial.  We  have  a  privilege  to  come  into  God's  presence,  &c. 
Nevertheless  the  "  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God"  yet  remains  to  be  enjoyed. 
Then  every  fetter  shall  be  knocked  off.     The  mind  no  longer  shall  be  hindered  in 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  107 

its  investigations ;  the  heart  shall  be  deceitful  no  more ;  the  body  itself  shall  no 
more  be  weary.  [G.  F.  Galaher,  M.A.)  What  is  Christ  to  us: — I.  Odr  prophet 
TO  IMPART  WISDOM.  1.  Anoiotiiig  us  with  His  Spirit.  2.  Eeveuling  Himself  in  us. 
3.  Giving  us  understanding  to  know  Him  as  the  only  way  to  the  Father.  II.  Our 
High  Priest  to  impart  righteousness.  1.  Making  atonement  for  us.  2.  Pro- 
nouncing our  absolution.  3.  Constantly  interceding  for  us  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.  III.  Our  King  to  communicate  holiness.  1.  Pouring  out  His  Spirit.  2. 
Euling  in  our  hearts.  3.  Giving  us  dominion  over  sin.  IV.  Our  fin.ul  deliverer 
FROM  all  evil.  {E.  Ffciser.)  God's  device  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  : — I.  The 
WHOLE  OF  man's  SALVATION  IS  FROM  Christ.  God  lias  made  or  constituted  Him 
the  fountain  of  all  salvation,  from  whom  it  must  be  conveyed  to  all  that  shall 
partake  of  it  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  24).  1.  Man  is  ignorant  naturally  of  the  v>ay  to  true 
happiness  ;  he  has  lost  God,  and  knows  not  how  to  find  Him  again.  For  remedy 
of  this  Chi-ist  is  made  "  wisdom  "  (Col.  ii.  3),  and  He  is  constituted  the  grand 
Teacher  of  all  that  seek  for  eternal  happiness.  2.  Man  is  unrighteous,  and  canuot 
stand  before  a  righteous  God.  Now,  the  natural  man,  for  remedy  of  this,  goes 
about  to  work  out  a  righteousness  of  his  own.  But  when  it  appears  in  the  light  of 
the  holy  law,  it  is  nothing  but  as  a  moth-eaten  garment,  that  canuot  cover  the  soul 
before  the  Lord  (Isa.  Ixiv.  7).  For  remedy  of  this  Christ  is  made  righteousness. 
He,  by  His  obedience  to  the  law's  commands,  and  suffering  the  wrath  it  threatened, 
hath  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness,  which  is  a  large  garment,  able  to  cover 
all  tliat  betake  themselves  to  it.  3.  Man  is  unholy,  unfit  for  communion  with  a 
holy  God  here  or  hereafter.  The  natural  man,  to  help  himself  in  this  point,  calls 
together  his  natural  powers,  and  endeavours  to  turn  the  stream  of  his  life  into  the 
channel  of  tbe  law.  Some  prevail  this  way  to  the  reformation  of  their  outward 
conversation ;  but  there  is  as  much  difference  betwixt  true  holiness  and  their 
attainment  as  between  a  living  body  and  an  embalmed  corpse.  Others  find  all 
their  endeavours  to  no  purpose,  and  so  they  come  to  despair  of  sanctificatioii,  and 
therefore  even  lay  the  reins  on  the  necks  of  their  lusts  (Jer.  ii.  25).  But  for  remedy 
in  tbis.  Christ  is  made  sanctification.  There  is  a  fulness  of  the  Spirit  of  holiness 
lodged  in  Him,  to  be  communicated  to  the  unholy;  and  to  Him  God  sends  the 
unholy  sinner,  that  out  of  His  fulness  he  may  receive,  and  grace  for  grace.  4.  Man 
by  the  fall  is  become  liable  to  many  bodily  infirmities  and  miseries,  and  at  length 
must  go  to  the  grave.  Nature  could  find  no  remedy  for  this.  But  man's  salvation 
cannot  be  complete  without  a  remedy;  therefore  Christ  is  made  "  redemption," 
who  w-ill  give  in  due  time  deliverance  to  His  people  from  misery  and  death  (Eom. 
viii.  23).  And  in  this  sense  He  calls  Himself  "  the  resurrection  and  the  life."  II. 
All  who  are  saved  must  be  saved  by  virtue  of  union  with  Christ.  As  the 
stock  is  stay,  strength,  and  sap,  to  the  branches,  so  is  Christ  wisdom,  &c.,  to  those 
who  are  united  to  Hitn.  The  sap  of  the  stock  is  not  conveyed  to  branches  that  are 
not  in  it ;  neither  is  Christ  wisdom,  Ac,  to  any  but  those  who  are  in  Him.  He  is 
the  Saviour  of  His  body  ;  and  we  must  be  partakers  of  His  salvation  as  members  of 
His  body.  (T.  Boston,  D.IK)  Adaptedness  of  Christianity  to  vtan's  spiritual 
7iecessities : — This  is  a  very  strong  evidence  of  its  Divine  character.  1.  An 
individual  is  taken  suddenly  ill  in  the  street.  Persons  gather  round  him,  adminis- 
tering many  things  for  his  relief ;  but  all  is  in  vain.  A  stranger  draws  near, 
examines  his  symptoms,  and  from  his  ca^e  administers  a  medicine.  Immediately 
he  is  relieved,  arfd  they  all  cry  out,  "  He  is  a  doctor  !  "  His  ability  to  make  a 
correct  diagnosis  and  to  prescribe  the  proper  medicine  demonstrates  his  profes- 
sional character.  2.  We  are  all  of  us  sinful,  and  suffering,  and  dying.  Can  any 
one  provide  a  relief  ?  Men  have  been  experimenting  ever  sinoe  the  days  of  Cain  ; 
the  wisest  and  best  have  utterly  failed.  It  follows,  then,  that  if  there  be  a  provision 
by  which  we  can  be  saved  from  sin,  such  provision  must  come  from  God.  3.  We 
claim  that  in  the  gospel  God  has  made  such  a  provision,  which  is  very  compre- 
hensively stated  in  our  text.  God  is  its  author,  Christ  is  its  medium  or  agent,  and 
wisdom,  etc.,  are  its  benefits.  Christ  is  made  unto  us — I.  Wisdom.  1.  What  is 
the  first  great  need  of  mankind?  Light  ;  knowledge  of  God,  of  His  law,  of  Christ, 
of  the  way  of  salvation,  of  duty  and  interest.  2.  We  have  evidence  of  this  in  the 
general  practice  of  Christian  parents  in  seeking  the  spiritual  welfare  of  their 
children,  which  is  to  impart  instruction.  And  when  our  missionaries  go  to  heathen 
countries,  their  first  work  is  the  same.  And  is  it  not  a  constant  effort  of  the 
Church,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  to  spread  religious  knowledge  through  the 
Sabbath  school,  the  pulpit,  and  the  religious  press?  3.  The  gospel  provides  this 
light.     Hence  Jesus  Christ  is  made  unto  us  "wisdom,"  by  furnishing  to  us — (1) 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

The  Bible.  But  for  His  mediation  we  should  never  have  received  it.  These 
Scriptures  are  able  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation.  (2)  The  institutions  of  the 
Church.  (3)  The  lives,  activities,  and  instrumentalities,  of  Christian  believers, 
who  are  "the  light  of  the  world."  (4)  The  teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  His 
Divine  illumination.  His  assistance  enabling  us  to  apprehend  and  understand  the 
written  Word.  II.  Righteousness.  1.  Light,  in  its  first  revealings,  does  not  always 
bring  comfort  and  hope.  When  we  see  our  moral  condition  we  discover  ourselves 
to  be  lost  sinners  ;  as  absolutely  helpless  as  was  a  poor  man  once  upon  therock  just 
above  the  falls  of  Niagara.  Certainly  he  saw  and  felt  that  if  he  ever  regained  the 
shore  and  the  home  of  his  love,  it  must  be  through  some  agency  other  than  his 
own.  And  when  we  discover  our  sinfulness  and  helplessness,  how  anxiously  do  we 
inquire  where  help  may  be  found  1  2.  Eighteousness  is  a  conformity  to  law.  If  we 
observe  the  laws  of  the  State  there  is  no  unrighteousness  in  us  in  relation  to  those 
laws.  And  if  we  could  observe  the  law  of  God,  there  would  be  no  unrighteousness 
in  us  in  respect  to  His  law.  It  is  because  we  have  transgressed  that  law  that  we  are 
imrighteous.  3.  Being  thus  under  condemnation,  Christ  rendered  a  jDerfect  obedi- 
ence to  that  law,  and  having  thus  honoured  it,  He  submitted  to  its  penalties  in  our 
stead.  Thus  Christ  has  wrought  out  a  righteousness  for  us;  He  has  made  it 
possible  for  us  to  obtain  the  remission  of  our  sins.  4.  But  if  this  were  the  extent 
of  the  atonement,  it  would  leave  us  still  unrighteous  in  character,  unconformed  to 
the  law  in  our  motives  and  spirit.  It  was,  therefore,  necessary  that  there  should 
be  "  the  washing  of  regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  ;  so  that 
Jesus  Christ  might  work  a  real  righteousness  within  us.  5,  If  the  provision  were 
to  stop  here  it  would  still  fail  of  meeting  the  whole  case,  because  we  are  accountable 
to  God,  and  our  conduct  subsequent  to  this  great  exercise  of  mercy  toward  us  must 
be  in  conformity  with  the  jDrinciples  and  spirit  of  His  law.  We  consequently  need 
the  constant  help  of  our  Lord  and  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  6.  And  even  with  these 
helps  we  are  not  able  so  fully  to  meet  the  claims  of  this  law  that  we  do  not  need 
constantly  to  depend  upon  the  atonement.  III.  Sanctification.  But  the  regene- 
rate have  still  fuither  spiritual  needs.  1.  The  converted  man  hates  sin  ;  aud  when 
he  finds  it  in  his  heart  he  is  afflicted.  To  him  there  is  nothing  so  lovely,  so 
precious,  as  holiness.  How  he  hungers  and  thirsts  after  it !  He  cannot  be  satisfied 
until  he  realises  it,  any  more  than  a  famishing  man  can  be  satisfied  without 
food  and  drink.  His  heart,  his  soul,  cries  out  for  the  nature  and  image  of  God! 
2.  Can  we  realise  this  full  salvation?  Yes,  for  "He  is  able  to  do  exceeding 
abundantly,"  &c.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  son  cleanseth  ns  from  all  sin." 
When  we  are  thus  brought  to  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenlj- — IV.  Is  there  still 
anything  further  needed?  Yes,  we  still  need  Christ  as  our  Redemption.  To 
redeem  is  to  deliver  from  some  obligation,  or  embarrassment,  or  danger,  or 
necessity,  from  which  a  person  is  unable  to  deliver  himself.  1.  We  are  subject  to 
affliction,  and  we  need  the  presence,  and  power,  and  comfort,  of  Christ  to  enable 
us  to  stand.  2.  We  have  many  duties  to  perform.  Wlio  of  himself  is  competent  to 
work  the  works  of  our  Divine  Master  ?  None  of  us  ;  but,  through  Christ  strengthen- 
ing us,  we  can  do  all  things,  meet  all  our  obligations  to  our  own  souls,  to  our 
fellow-men,  and  to  God.  3.  And  how  about  the  dying  hour  ?  With  the  Captain  of 
our  salvation  with  us,  we  can  meet  death  with  joy,  accounting  it  a  gain.  {Bp. 
Janes.)  Christ  Jesus  the  believer's  icisdom,  and  rigliteoiisness,  and  sanctification, 
and  redemption : — Let  us — I.  Explain  the  words.  Christ  is  made  unto  us — 1. 
Wisdom.  (1)  As  in  knowing  Him  we  know  everything  that  is  essential,  and 
especially  God,  "  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal."  God  in  nature  is  God  above  us  ; 
God  in  providence  is  God  beyond  us ;  God  in  law  is  God  against  us ;  but  God  in 
Christ  is  God  with  us  and  for  us.  (2)  As  He  is  the  Author  of  our  wisdom.  He 
opens  the  eyes  of  our  understandings,  and,  by  His  Spirit,  "  leads  us  into  all  the 
truth."  And  the  knowledge,  which  He  imparts,  is  always  distinguished  by  its 
influences  and  effects.  Wisdom  is  a  defence,  and  money  is  a  defence,  but  the 
excellency  of  this  wisdom  "  is  that  it  giveth  life  to  them  that  have  it."  2. 
Eighteousness.  "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  of  righteousness,  to  every  one  that 
bplieveth."  3.  Sanctification.  (1)  The  formeris  arelative  thing,  this  is  a  personal. 
The  former  is  the  change  of  our  state,  this  the  change  of  our  nature ;  the  former 
is  a  work  complete  at  once,  but  the  latter  is  gradual,  and  carried  on  through  the 
whole  of  life.  But  then,  though  these  are  distinguishable,  they  are  never  separate. 
(2)  But  what  is  this  "  sanctification."  It  must  be  something  more  than  mere 
reformation  or  morality.  A  man  cannot  be  sanctified  indeed,  unless  he  be  moral ; 
but  he  may  be  moral,  without  being  sanctified.     Sanctification  is  a  transformation 


;hap.  I.]  I.   COraXTHIANS.  109 

by  "  the  renewing  "  of  the  mind  ;  the  implantation  of  new  principles  ;  a  separation 
from  the  Spirit  and  course  of  the  world,  and  a  deliverance  from  the  dominion  and 
the  love  of  sin,  and  a  dedication  of  ourselves  to  the  service  and  glory  of  God.  4. 
Redemption.  The  resurrection  is  called  so — (1)  Because  it  is  the  effect  of  the 
Saviour's  purchase  ;  for  He  ransomed  the  bodies  of  His  people,  as  well  as  their 
souls.  (2)  Because  of  the  grandeur  that  awaits  us.  II.  Apply  the  words.  If 
we  be  "made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom."  1.  We  see  the  state  we  are  all  in  by 
nature.  We  see  that  we  are  destitute  of  all  these  things,  and  that,  if  ever  we  have 
them,  we  must  obtain  them  from  another.  2.  We  see  the  value  and  importance  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  3.  We  need  not  wonder  that  He  should  be  the  subject  of  the 
whole  of  revelation.  4.  He  ought  to  be  the  theme  of  every  minister.  5.  We  see 
the  wretched  and  dreadful  state  of  unbelievers.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath 
life;  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  life,"  hath  not  "  wisdom,"  etc. 
6.  What  can  be  so  worthy  of  our  pursuit  as  to  seek  after  union  and  communion  with 
Him.  This  was  the  apostle's  conviction — "That  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found 
in  Him."  7.  We  learn  the  happiness  of  all  those  who  belong  to  Him — or  rather  to 
whom  He  belongs,  (ir.  Jay.)  ]]'i':(loni,  rifihtcousness,  sanctijication,  and  redemp- 
tion derived  from  Christ : — This  is  one  of  the  most  comprehensive  texts  in  the 
Bible.  It  is  a  short  but  full  inventory  of  the  invaluable  blessings  of  the  gospel ; 
enough  to  make  a  poor  sinner  rich,  and  a  miserable  sinner  happy.  I.  Wisdom. 
1.  Wisdom  chooses  the  best  objects,  and  then  pursues  the  best  means  of  obtaining 
them.  2.  All  wisdom  is  from  God  ;  but  there  is  a  peculiar  and  superior  kind  of 
wisdom,  viz.,  religion  (Prov.  xxviii.  28)  ;  and  this  St.  Paul  terms  being  "  wise  unto 
salvation,"  and  James,  "  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above."  3.  Christ  is  the  original 
fountain  of  wisdom.  He  is  "  wisdom  "  itself  (Prov.  viii.  ;  Col.  ii.  3)  ;  so  that  what- 
ever true  wisdom  is  found  in  the  world  is  derived  from  Him,  even  as  the  natural 
sun  is  the  source  of  all  the  light  of  this  world.  Accordingly,  we  find  Him,  by  His 
personal  ministry,  diffusing  wonderful  light,  and  when  He  ascended  into  heaven 
He  committed  this  work  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  The  natural  man  knoweth  not  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  "  ;  but,  by  His  gracious  help,  "  they  are  spiritually  dis- 
cerned," and  believers  learn  "  the  mind  of  Christ."  4.  Other  kinds  of  wisdom 
have  their  value  ;  yet  what  do  they  avail?  "  I  have  spent  my  life,"  said  a  great 
scholar  on  his  dying  bed,  "  I  have  spent  my  life  in  laborious  tritling  !  "  Compared 
with  heavenly  wisdom,  all  literary  attainments  will  be  as  a  grain  of  sand  to  a 
mountain,  or  a  drop  of  water  to  the  ocean.  II.  Eighteocsxess,  i.e.,  perfect  con- 
formity to  the  will  of  God.  The  word  signifies  that  which  is  full  weight  or 
measure,  the  standard  being  God's  holy  law.  And  is  there  any  man  thus  righteous  ? 
No;  "  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth";  that  is,  one  "that  doeth  good,  and 
sinneth  not."  Yet,  without  a  perfect  righteousness,  no  man  can  be  justified.  But 
must  we,  then,  despair?  Yes  ;  of  making  ourselves  righteous  ;  but  not  of  becoming 
righteous  by  other  means,  for  "  Christ  is  made  unto  us  righteousness  "  (Rom.  iv. 
24).  But  do  any  suppose  that  we  may  therefore  become  careless  about  good  works  ? 
Let  them  attend  to  the  declaration  that  Christ  is  made  unto  us — III.  Saxctifica- 
TiON.  1.  By  this  we  mean  the  renewing  of  our  nature  in  the  image  of  God,  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.  2.  Sanctification 
differs  from  justification.  Justification  respects  the  state  of  man  ;  sanctification 
respects  His  nature,  disposition,  conduct.  A  man  may  be  tried  for  his  life,  and  he 
may  be  acquitted  ;  but  if  he  have,  at  the  same  time,  a  mortal  disease  upon  him,  he 
will  die.  The  province  of  a  judge  and  a  physician  are  very  different.  Justification 
is  the  net  of  God  as  a  Julge  ;  sanctification  is  the  work  of  God  the  Spirit  as  the 
great  Physician  of  souls  ;  and  we  find  both  these  works  united  in  Psa.  ciii.  3.  It  is 
also  to  be  observed  that  our  title  to  heaven  is  founded  only  on  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  by  which  we  are  justified ;  but  in  sanctification  consists  our  meetness  for 
heaven.  3.  Christ  is  made  unto  us  sanctification.  (1)  Because  He  first  relieves  us 
by  His  atoning  sacrifice  from  the  guilt  and  defilement  of  sin.  (2)  By  His  inter- 
cession (John  xvii.  15,  17).  (3)  By  His  Word — its  doctrines,  precepts,  examples, 
promises,  and  threatenings.  (4)  By  union  to  Him.  (5)  By  His  example.  (6)  By 
His  love,  which  is,  of  all  motives  to  hohness,  the  strongest  and  most  etfectual.  IV. 
Redemption.  If  Christ  be  made  unto  us  wis  lorn,  we  are  delivered  from  the  powers 
of  darkness;  if  righteousness,  we  are  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  law;  if 
sanctification,  we  are  delivered  from  the  dominion  of  sin.  In  these  things 
consists  the  redemption  of  the  soul.  But  the  "  redemjition  of  the  body  " 
seems  to  be  intended ;  and  this  agrees  with  Rom.  viii.  21.  (G.  Burder.) 
Christ  the  believer's  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption  : — 1. 1  would 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

point  out  to  you  the  fouxtain  fkom  which  all  those  blessings  flow,  that  the 
ELECT  OF  God  partake  of  in  Jesds,  "who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,"  the  Father, 
He  it  is  who  is  spoken  of  liere.  Not  as  though  Jesus  Christ  was  not  God  also;  but 
God  the  Fatlier  is  the  fountain  of  the  Deity.     11.  I  come  to  show  what  these 

BLESSINGS  ABE  WHICH  ARE  HERE,  THROUGH  ChRIST,  MADE  OVER  TO  THE  ELECT.   1. 

Christ  is  made  to  them  "wisdom";  but  wherein  does  true  wisilom  consist? 
Were  I  to  ask  some  of  you,  perhaps  you  would  say  in  indulging  the  lust  of  the 
flesh  ;  but  this  is  only  the  wisdom  of  brutes.  Others  would  tell  me  true  wisdom 
consisted  in  adding  house  to  house ;  but  this  cannot  be  true  wisdom,  for  riches 
often  take  to  themselves  wings,  and  fly  away.  But  perhaps  you  despise  riches  and 
pleasure,  and  therefore  place  wisdom  in  the  knowledge  of  books  ;  but  it  is  possible 
for  you  to  tell  the  numbers  of  the  stars,  and  call  them  all  by  their  names,  and  yet 
be  mere  fools;  learned  men  are  not  always  wise.  "  Know  thyself,"  was  a  saying 
of  one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece ;  this  is  certainly  true  wisdom,  and  this  is  that 
wii-dom  spoken  of  in  the  text,  and  which  Jesus  Christ  is  made  to  all  elect  sinners. 
They  see  the  necessity  of  closing  with  a  Saviour,  and  behold  the  wisdom  of  God  in 
appointing  Him  to  be  a  Saviour  ;  they  are  also  made  willing  to  accept  of  salvation 
upon  our  Lord's  own  terms  :  thus  Christ  is  made  to  them  wisdom.  2.  "  Righteous- 
ness." Christ's  whole  personal  righteousness  is  made  over  to,  and  accounted 
theirs.  3.  Christ  is  not  only  made  to  them  righteousness,  but  sanctilication;  by 
sauctification  I  do  not  mean  a  bare  hypocritical  attendance  on  outward  ordinances, 
nor  do  I  mean  a  bare  outward  reformation,  and  a  few  transient  convictions,  or  a 
little  legal  sorrow  ;  for  all  this  an  unsanctitied  man  may  have  ;  but  by  sauctification 
I  mean  a  total  renovation  of  the  whole  man.  Their  understandings,  which  were 
before  dark,  now  become  light  in  the  Lord  ;  and  their  wills,  before  contrary  to,  now 
become  one  with  the  will  of  God ;  their  affections  are  now  set  on  things  above  ; 
their  memory  is  now  filled  with  Divine  things  ;  their  natural  consciences  are  now 
enlif/htened  ;  their  members,  which  were  before  instruments  of  uncleauness,  and  of 
iniquity  unto  iniquity,  are  now  instruments  of  righteousness  and  true  holiness. 
But,  before  we  enter  upon  the  explanation  and  contemplation  of  this  privilege — 
(1)  Learn  hence  the  great  mistake  of  those  writers  and  clergy  who,  notwithstanding 
they  talk  of  sanctiti cation  and  inward  holiness,  yet  they  generally  make  it  the 
cause,  whereas  they  should  consider  it  as  the  effect,  of  our  justification.  For 
Christ's  righteousness,  or  that  which  Christ  has  done  in  our  stead  without  us,  is 
the  sole  cause  of  our  acceptance  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  of  all  holiness  wrought  in 
us :  to  this,  and  not  to  the  light  within,  or  anything  wrought  within,  should  poor 
sinners  seek  for  justification  in  the  sight  of  God.  (2)  From  hence  also  the  Anti- 
nomians  and  formal  hypocrites  may  be  confuted,  who  talk  of  Christ  wdthnut,  but 
know  nothing,  experimentally,  of  a  work  of  sanctitication  wrought  within  them. 
4.  Let  us  now  go  on,  and  take  a  view  of  the  other  link,  or  rather  the  end,  of  the 
believer's  golden  chain  of  privileges,  "  Eedemption."  But  we  must  look  very  high  ; 
for  the  top  of  it,  like  Jacob's  ladder,  reaches  heaven,  wheie  all  believers  will  ascend, 
and  be  placed  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  By  the  word  redemption  we  are  to  under- 
stand, not  only  a  complete  deliverance  from  all  evil,  but  also  a  full  enjoyment  of 
all  good  both  in  body  and  soul.  (G.  Wlutfield,  M.A.)  The  fourfold  treasure  : — 
I.  Our  spiritual  existence.  1.  Its  origin,  "  Of  Him,"  i.e.,  as  some  think, 
"through  Him."  Are  you  this  day  united  to  Christ — a  stone  in  that  building 
of  which  He  is  both  foundation  and  topstone — a  limb  of  that  mystical  body 
of  which  He  is  the  head  ?  Then  you  did  not  get  there  of  yourself.  "  By 
the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  He  "hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively 
hope."  2.  Its  dignity.  Being  in  Christ  you  are  of  God.  God's  husbandry, 
people,  children,  beloved.  Some  have  thought  it  a  great  thing  to  be  of  a  prince's 
household  ;  but  you  are  of  the  Divine  family.  3.  Its  essence.  We  have  no  lite  except 
as  we  are  "  in  Christ  Jesus."  Out  of  Christ  we  abide  in  death.  II.  Our  spiritual 
WEALTH.  Here  are  four  things,  and  in  the  original  the  second  and  third  have  a 
peculiar  connecting  link.  The  wisdom  stands  alone,  and  the  redemption,  but  the 
righteousness  aud  sanctitication  have  a  special  link,  as  though  we  should  be  taught 
that  they  always  go  together.  Christ  is  made  unto  us — 1.  Wisdom.  The  apostle  had 
been  speaking  of  some  other  wisdom  which  set  itself  up  in  opposition  to  thn  Cross. 
Now,  instead  of  pointing  to  his  own  brain,  or  to  the  statue  of  Socrates  or  Solon,  he 
says  Christ  is  made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom.  There  are  those  who  will  have  it  that 
the  gospel  such  as  was  preached  by  Bunyan,  Whitetield,  and  Wesley,  was  very  well 
for  the  dark  times  in  which  they  lived ;  but  that  there  is  wanted  in  this  intensely 
luminous  century  a  more  progressive  theology.      We   are  afraid  that  instead  of 


CHAP,  r.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  Ill 

bringing  greater  light,  the  advanced  thinkers  have  made  darkness  worse.  Christ 
makes  ns  wise — (1)  By  His  teaching.  All  you  waut  to  know  of  God,  of  sin,  of  life, 
of  death,  of  eternity,  &c.,  Christ  has  either  personally,  or  by  His  Spirit  in  the  Word 
of  God,  taught  you.  Anything  that  you  find  out  for  yourself  over  and  above  reve- 
lation, is  folly.  (2)  By  His  example.  You  shall  never  be  a  fool  if  you  follow 
Christ,  except  in  the  estimation  of  fools.  (3)  By  His  presence.  Let  none  of  us 
ever  be  so  foolish  as  to  suppose  that  when  we  have  received  Jesus  we  have  occasion 
to  blush  when  we  are  in  the  company  of  the  very  wisest.  Carry  a  bold  face  when 
you  confront  the  brazen-faced  philosophy  which  insults  your  Lord.  2.  Eighteous- 
ness.  The  doctrine  of  imputed  righteousness  is  firmly  established  in  the  Word  of 
God;  yet  it  is  possible  to  put  too  much  stress  upon  "imputed,"  and  scarcely 
enough  upon  "righteousness."  Not  only  is  Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  me, 
but  it  is  mine  actually,  for  Christ  is  mine.  3.  Sanctification.  (1)  Because  we  are 
in  Christ  we  have  the  basis  of  sanctification,  which  consists  in  being  set  apart.  (2) 
The  power  by  which  we  are  sanctified  comes  to  us  by  virtue  of  our  union  with 
Christ.  The  Holy  Spirit  who  sanctifies  us  through  the  truth  works  in  us  by  virtue 
of  our  union  with  Jesus.  (3)  Let  Jesus  always  be  the  motive  for  your  sancti- 
fication. Is  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  some  professors  should  look  to  Christ 
alone  for  pardon  nnd  justification,  and  run  away  to  Moses  when  they  desire 
sanctification  ?  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us  "  ;  not  fear  of  hell.  4.  Ke- 
demption.  Somebody  says  :  "  That  ought  to  have  come  first ;  because  redemption 
is  the  first  blessing  that  we  enjoy."  Ay,  but  it  is  the  last  as  well.  You  are  not  yet 
redeemed  altogether.  By  price  you  are — but  you  are  not  yet  redeemed  by  power. 
In  a  measure  you  are  set  free  by  Divine  power,  but  thei'e  are  links  of  the  old  chains 
yet  to  be  snapped  from  off,  and  there  is  a  bondage  still  about  you  from  which  you 
are  ere  long  to  be  delivered.  You  are  "waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit  the 
redemption  of  the  body."  Conclusion :  If  all  this  be  the  case,  then  let  all 
our  glory  be  unto  Him.  What  insanity  it  is  to  boast  in  any  but  in  our  Lord 
Jesus!  How  foolish  are  they  who  are  proud  of  their  wisdom,  of  their  w-ealth, 
&c.     (C.  H.  Sijuriieon.)         Christ  the  wisdom  of  believers  : — I.  Because  of  those 

NEW  AND  ILLUSTKIOUS  REVELATIONS  WHICH  HE  HAS  GIVEN  TO  US  OF  Goi>.       Christ  is  the 

great  Teacher  of  God.  1.  By  declaration.  In  the  course  of  His  ministrations  He 
did  not  reason  concei-ning  God.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  Man, 
therefore,  must  darkly  reason,  and  doubtfully  infer.  "  The  only-begotten  Son,  who 
lay  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,"  neither  acquired  nor  made  known  this  knowledge 
in  that  way.  "  He  hath  declared  Him."  An  instance  of  this  declaratory  mode  of 
teaching  we  have  in  His  conversation  with  the  Samaritan  woman  (John  iv.  21-24). 
What  instruction  is  here!  What  a  contrast  to  the  teachings  of  men  1  2.  By  action. 
In  His  life.  He  was  the  visible  image  of  God's  purity ;  in  His  works,  of  God's  power; 
in  His  condescending  compa-sion,  of  God's  yearning  goodness  ;  in  the  freeness  of 
His  gifts,  of  God's  abumlant  grace  and  liberality ;  in  His  intercourse  with  His 
disciples,  of  God's  regard  for  pious  humble  souls  ;  in  His  denunciations  of  judg- 
ment, of  God's  justice  ;  and  in  His  death,  the  brightest  and  most  awful  demonstra- 
tion was  given  of  His  holiness,  justice,  and  love  united.  II.  By  the  views  which 
He  has  given  us  of  the  moral  condition  of  man.  The  sinfulness;,  helplessness, 
and  danger  of  mankind  have  all  been  acknowledged  and  felt;  but  in  what  new  and 
awful  views  ai-e  they  placed  by  Christ !  Sin  is  not  a  trifle.  See  the  proof  of  this 
in  the  sufferings  of  thy  Saviour.  It  is  not  in  man  to  make  atonement  for  sin. 
Behold,  the  Victim  which  God  appointed  was  both  God  and  man.  The  punishment 
of  sin  is  not  light.  If  the  Substitute  so  suffered,  what  must  the  principal  suffer, 
should  he  reject  his  Saviour?  By  those  sufferings  justice  was  satisfied,  and  God 
reconciled  to  man  ;  and  this  light  is  thrown  upon  our  condition,  that,  sinful,  ixi-lp- 
less,  and  endangered  as  it  is,  we  are  all  invited  to  obtain  mercy.  III.  In  the  dis- 
coveries He  has  made  of  the  nature,  extent,  and  possibility  of  holiness.  The 
foulest  blot  in  creation  is  an  unholy  spirit.  The  brightest,  the  loveliest  idea  that 
can  enter  the  human  mind  is  that  of  moral  order,  and  the  purity  of  the  heart. 
The  nature  of  real  holiness  is  explained  to  us  by  Christ.  It  is  not  a  ceremonial 
holiness — the  mistake  of  superstition.  It  is  not  merely  a  regulation  of  the  heart 
and  conduct — the  mistake  of  philosophers.  It  is  not  a  sentimental  approval  of  what 
is  fair  and  good — the  mistake  of  men  of  imagination.  It  is  the  conversion  of  the 
heart  to  God  ;  the  renewal  of  the  primitive  image  of  God  in  man.  The  possibility 
of  this  is  explained  by  Christ.  Without  hope  there  could  be  no  effort.  The  agency 
exhibited  by  Christ  in  the  accomplishment  of  our  sanctification  is  equal  to  the  effect. 
His  Spirit  is  the  sanctifier ;  and  the  whole  process  of  our  consecration  to  God  is 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  mighty  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  the  means  which  He  has  appointed 
in   Older   to   that   end.      {R.  Watson.)  Wisdom   in   Christ: — Having  Christ, 

behevers  have  a  key  which  unlocks  the  mysteries  of  God's  eternal  purpose  of  mercy 
and  of  the  present  life  ;  and  knowing  this  eternal  purpose  and  the  eternal  realities, 
they  are  able  to  choose  their  steps  in  life.  {Prof.  Beet.)  Union  with  Clirist  the 
only  icay  to  sanctification  : — Consider  Eom.  vii.  4  ;  John  xv.  5  ;  Gal.  ii.  20.  I. 
The  holiness  derived  from  Christ.  It  is  that  disposition  of  heart  and  course  of 
life  which  is  conformable  to  God's  holy  law,  and  pleases  Him.  1.  True  holiness  is 
universal  in  respect  of  the  commands  of  God  (Psa.  cxix.  6).  A  profane  life  is  a 
sure  evidence  of  a  profane  heart  (Gal.  v.  19,  &c.).  2.  True  holiness  is  not  only  in 
external  duties,  but  necessarily  includes  internal  obedience  of  the  soul  to  the  will 
of  God  (Psa.  xxiv.  3).  3.  In  true  holiness  there  is  a  bent,  inclination,  and  pro- 
pensity of  heart  to  obedience.  By  Adam's  fall  the  hearts  of  men  got  a  wrong  set 
(Rom.  viii.  7  ;  Hosea  xi.  1).  Now,  in  sanctihcalion  it  i^  bent  the  other  way,  towards 
God  and  godliness  (2  Thess.  iii.  .5),  that  as  the  needle  iu  the  compass,  touched  with 
a  good  loadstone,  turns  towards  the  north,  so  the  heart,  touched  by  sanctifying 
grace,  inclines  Godward  and  Christward.  4.  As  the  love  of  God  is  the  great  com- 
prehensive duty  of  holiness,  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  ;  so  love  runs  through 
all  the  duties  of  religion,  to  give  them  the  tincture  of  holiness  (Heb.  vi.  10).  5. 
True  holiness  is  influenced  by  the  command  of  God.  The  will  of  God  is  not  only 
the  rule,  but  the  reason  of  a  holy  life  (John  v.  30).  6.  True  holiness  has  for  its 
chief  end  the  glory  of  God  (chap.  x.  31).  He  that  is  the  first  cause  of  all  goodness 
must  needs  be  the  last  end  of  it.  7.  Lastly,  true  holiness  is  universal  as  regards 
man.  (1)  Mortification  is  universal  (Gal.  v.  24).  It  is  no  true  mortification  where 
one  lust  is  spared.  (2)  Vivification  is  universal  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  As  when  the  body 
of  Christ  was  raided  there  was  life  put  into  every  member  ;  so  when  the  soul  is 
raised  to  live  the  life  of  holiness,  the  image  of  God  is  rex^aired  in  all  its  parts,  and 
the  soul  embraces  the  whole  yoke  of  Christ,  so  far  as  it  knows  the  same.  So  that 
sanctification  sets  a  man  on  every  known  duty.  II.  This  holiness  is  derived  from 
Christ,  according  to  the  grand  device  of  infinite  wisdom  for  the  sanctifying  op 
AN  UNHOLY  WORLD.  1.  God  made  the  first  Adam  holy,  and  all  mankind  was  so  in 
Him  (Eccles.  vii.  29).  2.  Adam,  sinning,  lost  the  image  of  God,  so  that  all  mankind 
are  naturally  dead  in  sin.  3.  Man's  sanctification  by  himself  thus  being  hopeless, 
it  pleased  God  to  constitute  a  Mediator,  to  be  the  head  of  sanctifying  influences  to 
all  tbat  should  partake  of  them.  4.  Though  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ 
the  sanctification  of  His  people  is  infallibly  insured,  as  the  corruption  of  all  man- 
kind was  by  the  fall  of  Adam ;  yet  we  cannot  actually  partake  of  Christ's  holiness 
till  we  have  a  spiritual  being  in  Him,  even  as  we  partake  not  of  Adam's  corruption 
till  we  have  a  natural  being  from  him.  5.  As  Christ  is  the  prime  receptacle  of  the 
Spirit  of  holiness,  as  the  head  of  all  the  saints;  so  the  continual  supphes  of  tbat 
Spirit  are  to  be  derived  from  Him  for  the  saints'  progress  in  holiness,  till  they  come 
to  perfection.  And  faith  is  the  great  mean  of  communication  betwixt  Christ  and 
us  (Acts  XV.  9).  III.  Uses.  1.  Of  information.  This  lets  us  see — (1)  The  abso- 
lute necessity  of  holiness.  (2)  In  vain  do  men  attempt  sanctification  without 
coming  to  Christ  for  it.  (3)  Unholiness  ought  not  to  stop  a  sinner  from  coming  to 
Christ,  more  than  a  disease  ought  to  hinder  a  man  to  take  the  physician's  help,  or 
cold  from  taking  the  benefit  of  the  fire.  (4)  True  faith  is  the  soul's  coming  to 
Christ  for  sanctification  as  well  as  justification.  For  faith  must  receive  Christ  as 
God  offers  Him,  and  He  offers  Him  with  all  His  salvation.  Now  He  is  made 
sanctification.  Wherefore  the  soul,  being  willing  to  take  Christ  with  all  His  salva- 
tion, to  be  sanctified,  comes  to  Him  for  it.  2.  Of  exhortation.  Come  then  to 
Christ  for  sanctification,  and  note  the  following  motives.  (1)  If  ye  be  not  holy  ye 
will  never  see  heaven  (Heb.  xii.  14).  (2)  Ye  will  never  attain  holiness  if  ye  come 
not  to  Christ  for  it.  (a)  While  ye  are  out  of  Christ  ye  are  under  the  curse  ;  and  is 
it  possible  for  the  cursed  tree  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  holiness  ?  (6)  Can  ye  be 
holy  without  sanctifying  influences,  or  can  ye  expect  that  these  shall  be  conveyed  to 
you  otherwise  than  through  a  Mediator,  by  His  Spirit?  (c)  Ye  have  nothing  where- 
with to  produce  holiness.  The  most  skilful  musician  cannot  play  unless  his  instru- 
ment be  in  tune.  The  lame  man,  if  he  were  ever  so  willing,  cannot  run  till  he  be 
cured.  Ye  are  under  an  utter  impotency,  by  reason  of  the  corrui^tion  of  your 
nature,  [d)  If  ye  will  come  to  Christ  ye  shall  be  made  holy.  There  is  a  fulness  of 
merit  and  spirit  in  Him  for  sanctification.  Come  then  to  tlie  fountain  of  holiness. 
The  worst  of  sinners  may  be  sanctified  this  way  (chap.  vi.  11).  (7'.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Christ  our  righteousness  : — One  day,  as  I  was  passing  into  the  field,  and  that  too 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  113 

with  some  clashes  on  my  conscience,  fearing  lest  all  was  not  right,  suddenly  this 
gentence  fell  upon  my  soul,  "  Thy  righteousness  is  in  heaven  "  ;  and  methought 
withal  I  saw  witli  the  eyes  of  my  soul  Jesus  Cbrist  at  God's  right  hand.  There,  I 
say,  was  my  righteousness,  so  tbat  wherever  I  was,  or  whatever  I  was  doing,  Go.l 
could  not  say  of  me,  "  He  wants  a  righteousness,"  for  that  was  just  before  Him.  I 
also  saw,  moreover,  that  it  was  not  my  good  frame  that  ma  le  my  righteousness 
better,  nor  my  bad  frame  that  made  my  righteousness  worse  ;  for  my  righteousness 
was  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  "  The  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  Now  did 
my  chains  fall  off  my  legs  indeed.  I  was  loosed  from  my  alllictions  and  my  irons ; 
iny  temptations  also  tied  away,  so  that  from  that  time  those  dreadful  Scriptures  of 
God  leit   off  to   trouble   me.     (John  Bunyan.)         Christ  is  our  snnctijication  : — ■ 

1.  What  is  sanctificatiox  ?  1.  It  is  to  be  changed  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  Saucti- 
fi'!ation  makes  a  great  change  ;  the  judgment  is  changed,  the  disposition,  the 
way,  the  company.  2.  It  is  to  be  cured.  Sin  is  the  sickness  of  the  soul. 
The  only  physician  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  raised  up  of  God  for  that  purpose  ; 
no  hand  but  His  can  heal  us.  3.  It  is  to  be  cleansed.  Sin  is  the  pollu- 
tion of  the  soul ;  and  it  is  pollution  in  grain,  such  as  nothing  can  wash  us  from 
but  the  fountain  opened,  and  that  fountain  is  Christ  (Zech.  xiii.  1).  4.  It  is  to  be 
clothed.  A  sinful  condition  is  a  naked  condition  (Rev.  iii.  17).  And  what  must 
poor  naked  souls  do,  but  come  to  Christ,  to  His  shop,  and  here  buy  of  Hmi  white 
raiment  (llev.  iii.  18  ;  Zech.  iii.  3,4).  "  I  clothed  thee  also  with  broidered  work," 
c\L'C.  (Ezek.  xvi.  10-14).  Grace  is  rich  raiment,  princely,  prie-tly,  comely  clothing, 
that  waxeth  not  old.  5.  It  is  to  be  consecrated.  Sanctifying  is  the  same  with 
consecrating,  that  is,  setting  apart  from  common  and  profane  to  holy  and  spiritual 
uses,  as  persons,  places,  vessels,  times,  were  undnr  the  Old  Testament.  II.  How  is 
Jesus  Chuist  made  all  this  to  us?  1.  Piincipally  by  the  working  of  His  Spirit 
and  grac>^.  Tiie  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the  Sunctifier.  When  He  comes  into  the  heart 
to  dwell  there.  He  renews,  and  He  regenerates,  and  He  raises,  and  He  reconciles. 
It  is  through  Jesus  Christ.  If  He  had  not  satisfied  and  died,  to  make  God  friends 
with  us.  He  would  never  have  sent  the  Spirit,  to  make  us  friends  with  Him.  2. 
Instrumentally  by  the  Word,  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth"  (John  xvii.  17). 
Error  never  sanctities.  Truth  only  doth  that  (James  i.  17  ;  Titus  i.  1).  The  Wuid 
of  truth  begins,  and  the  same  carries  on  this  good  work.  III.  The  practical  improve- 
ment. 1.  Shall  I  propound  one  needful  question  to  you  ?  Are  ye  sanctified  ?  is 
Jesus  Christ  made  of  God  sanctifi'-ation  to  you  ?  It  is  a  thing  that  may  be  known. 
There  are  three  marks  :  (1)  Where  Christ  is  made  to  us  sanctification,  it  is  become 
natural  to  us  to  walk  in  all  holy  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  I  say  natural,  not 
to  the  old,  but  to  the  new,  nature.  Then,  says  one,  I  fear  I  am  not  sanctified.  I 
reply,  The  trial  is  not  to  be  made  by  any  one  single  action  at  any  one  time,  but  by 
our  course  and  way.  How  is  it  ordinarily  with  us  ?  There  is  no  man  but  doth 
something  that  beasts  do  ;  but  is  he  therefore  a  beast?  There  is  no  beast  but  doth 
something  tbnt  a  man  doth  ;  but  is  he  therefore  a  man  ?  (2)  Where  Christ  is 
made  to  us  sanctification,  holiness  is  highly  prized  and  dearly  loved,  and  more  and 
more  of  it  earnestly  desired.  I  believe  it  is  never  otherwise  among  the  truly  sanc- 
tified. (3)  Where  Christ  is  made  to  us  sanctification.  He  is  owned  and  acknow- 
ledged as  our  all  in  all.     The  crown  is  set  upon  His  bead.     To  us  to  live  is  Christ. 

2.  I  shall  suppose  you  now  propounding  to  me  unother  needful  question.  What 
may  I  do  that  Christ  may  be  made  to  me  sanctification  '?  (1)  We  must  be  inwardly 
and  thoroughlv  convinced  that  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  He  should  be  so.  If 
we  mean  to  please  God  in  this  world.  None  but  the  sanctified  are  accepted  of  Him. 
He  hath  no  pleasure  but  where  His  image  is.  Our  sacrifices  are  an  abomination, 
our  xn-ayers  an  abomination,  otherwise.  Till  the  tree  is  good  the  fruit  cannot  be 
good.  And  also,  if  we  mean  to  enjoy  God  in  the  other  world.  "  Without  holiness 
no  man  shall  see  the  Lord"  (Heb.  xii.  14).  (2)  We  must  apply  ourselves  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  bv  faith  and  prayer.  (3)  We  must  attend  upon  the  ordinances.  These 
are  the  conduit  pipes  through  which  the  grace  of  sanctification  is  conveyed  to 
poor  souls.     3.  What  must  they  do  to  whom  Christ  is  already  made  sanctification? 

(1)  They  have  cause  to  bless  God  for  it  every  day,  all  their  days  (Psa.  ciii.  1-3). 

(2)  They  must  press  after  further  degrees  of  sanctification,  more  and  more.  Dying 
to  sin.  Living  to  righteousness.  (Philip  Henry.)  Christ  is  our  redemption: — 
That  Jesus  Christ  is  made  of  God  unto  all  men  that  are  in  Him  redemption.  I. 
What  does  this  mean — "  made  redemption  "  ?  He  is  made  of  God  redemption  to 
us ;  that  is,  God  hath  ordained  and  appointed  Him  from  all  eternity,  and  in  the 
fulness  of  time  raised  Him  up,  and  sent  Him,  to  be  the  author  and  procurer  of 

VOL.    I.  8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

reclemiDtion  for  us;  or,  which  is  all  one,  to  be  a  redeemer  to  us  (Luke  i.  68).     Now 
to  redeem  is,  in  general,  to  recover  thuse  that  are  in  bondage  out  of  bondage,  as 
the  Jews  were  released  by  Cyrus  out  of  their  captivity  in  Babylon.     Eedemption, 
viz. — 1.  By  power ;  when  those  who  kept  us  in  bondage  are  conquered  and  over- 
come.    2.  By  exchange  ;  when  one  prisoner  is  let  go  for  another.     'A.  By  price ; 
when  a  sum  of  money  is  paid  to  buy  off  a  prisoner,  more  or  less,  according  as  the 
quality  of  the  prisoner  is.     Now  this  last  is  properly  redemption,  and  this  last  is 
the  way  in  which  Jesus  Christ  hath  made  us  free.     To  this  puipose  we  are  told  of 
a  covenant  of  redemption   which  was  transacted  from  all  eternity  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  the  terms  whereof  were — That  if  the  Son  would  come  and  be 
man  and  die,  that  dying  of  His  should  be  accepted  as  the  price  or  ransom  of  all  the 
elect,  how  many  soever  there  were.     The  Son  accepted  of  this  motion,  did  what 
was  to  be  done,  suffered  what  was  to  be  suffered,  and  so  became  our  redemption. 
See  some  footsteps  of  this  covenant  tiansaction  in  two  Scriptures  (Psa.  xl.  6-8  : 
Isa.   xlix.    2,    6,   9).     But — II.  What  kind    of   redemption   is    this?     1.  Needed 
redemption.     It  is  the  redemption  that  we  needed.     He  came  to  supply  all  our 
needs.     Now  among  other  needs,  being  in  bondage,  we  needed  one  to  redeem  us; 
not  only  one  to  clothe  us,    being  naked  ;  to  feed  us,  being  hungry  ;  to  wash  us, 
being  filth}' ;  to  heal  us,  being  wounded ;  to  cure  us,  being  sick  ; — but  to  redeem 
us.     If  He  had  done  ail  this  for  us  in  our  bondage,  and  left  us  still  in  bondage,  we 
had  been  miserable  notwithstanding.     2.  It  is  a  nonsuch  redemi^tion,  when  com- 
pared with  other  redemption.     Whether  personal,  as  Joseph  out  of  prison,  or  Peter 
(Acts  xii. ),  or  Daniel  out  of  the  lions'  den.     Whether  public,  as  from  Egypt,  from 
Babylon.     It   surpasses   them   all   in   number,    way,  and   consequences.     3.  Dis- 
tinguishing redemption.     It  is  denied  to  the  angels  that  sinned.     The  commons 
are  ransomed,  the  nobles  left  behind.     He  i^aid  no  price  to  redeem  them.     4.  It  is 
divers,  manifold  redemjDtion  according  to  the  manifold  evils  that  we  lay  under. 
They  are  of  three  sorts — temporal,  spu'itual,  eternal.     (1)  He  is  redemption  to  us 
from  temporal  evils.     Such  as  concern  the  body,  and  the  life  that  now  is  ;  such  as 
sickness,  death,  poverty.     Not  that  they  shall  not  befall  us,  but  that  thej'  shall  not 
hurt  us.     The  sting  of  them  is  taken  out  (Psa.  xci.  10).     (2)  Which  is  better,  it  is 
redemption  to  us  from  spiritual  evils.     These  are  worse  evils  than  the  foi'mer, 
because  they  affect  the  better  part  of  us.     The  guilt  of  sin  ;  whereby  we  are  bound 
over  to  punishment,  the  fear  whereof  causes  bondage  (Heb.  ii.  14).     To  redeem  ns 
from  this.  He  is  made  righteousness   to  us  for  our  justification.     The  filth  and 
power  of  sin  ;  whereby  sin  hath  dominion  over  us,  and  we  are  perfect  slaves  to  it, 
the  vilest  of  slaves  (John  viii.  84).     To  redeem  us  from  this  He  is  made  sanctifica- 
tion  to  us.     (3)  There  is  another  sort  of  evils  yet,  and  those  are  eternal  evils ;  and 
by  redemption  here  we  are  especially  to  understand  our  deliverance  from  those. 
Because  it  is  mentioned  after  righteousness  and  sanctifieation  as  a  thing  different 
from  them  ;  and  because  of  what  we  find  in  other  Scriptures,  where  redemption  is 
applied  to  something  in  the  other  world  :  "  Waiting  for  the  redemption  of  the  body  " 
(Rom.  viii.  23),  that  is,  the  resurrection  and  glorification  of  our  bodies  :  compare 
Luke  xxi.  28  with  Eph.  iv.  30,  the  day  of  redemption.     1.  What  those  eternal  evils 
are  which  redemption  frees  us  from.     (1)  It  frees  us  for  ever,  not  only  from  the 
guilt,  and  filth,  and  power  of  sin,  but  from  the  very  being  of  it  also.     (2)  It  frees  us 
from  Satan  ever  having  any  more  to  do  with  us,  either  as  a  tempter  or  as  a 
tormentor.     He  is  busy  now  with  the  saved  (1  Pet.  v.  8),  and  he  will  be  more  busy 
hereafter  with  those  that  perish  (Matt,  xviii.  34).     But  where  the  redeemed  are  he 
comes  not  (Piom.  xvi.  20).     (3)  It  frees  us  from  all  sorrow  and  suffering,  of  what 
kind  soever,  in  mind  or  body  (Piev.  xxi.  4).     (4)  It  frees  us  from  all  society  with 
wicked  and  uugodly  men,  and  that  for  ever.     They  are  blended  here,  and  it  pleases 
neither  (Psa.  cxx.  5,  6).     But  there  is  a  redemption  coming  (Matt.  xxv.  33).     2. 
What  there  is  that  is  positive  in  this  redemption.     (1)  As  soon  as  the  redeemed  die 
their  souls  immediately  go  to  God,  to  the  vision  and  fruition  of  Him  in  glory  (Luke 
xxiii.  43  ;  Phil.  i.  23).     (2)  At  the  resurrection,  at  the  last  day,  the  same  soul  and 
the  same  body  shall  come  together  again.     Though  we  are  not  redeemed  from 
death,  we  are  to  be  from  the  grave  (Isa.  xxvi.  19  ;  Hos.  xiii.  14).     (3)  To  all  eternity 
there  shall  be  a  fulness  of  uninterrupted  joy  and  felicity ;  a  remaining  rest ;  a 
Sabbath  without  a  week  of  working  days  after  it,  perpetual,  eternal.     3.  I  shall 
show  how  Jesus  Christ  is  made  this  to  us,  this  future  redemption.     He  is  the 
pui'chaser  of  it ;  it  was  bought  with  His  blood,  bought  back.    We  had  mortgaged  it 
for  an  apple,  and  must  never  have  retrieved  it,  had  not  He  died  (Eph.  i.  14).     He 
is  our  forerunner  in  it  (Heb.  vi.  20).     He  went  thither  as  our  attorney  or  proxy,  to 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  115 

take  possession  of  the  purchase  in  our  name  and  stead  (John  xiv.  1,  2).  It  is  He 
that  Himself  actually  puts  us  into  possession  of  it.  At  the  resurrection  it  is  His 
voice  and  trumpet  that  raises  the  dead ;  He  is  the  resurrection.  It  is  He  Himself 
alone  that  is  the  sole  object  of  all  our  future  happiness  ;  to  be  with  Him,  to  see  and 
enjoy  Him,  is  our  future  redemption  (Rev.  xxi.  23).  III.  Thk  impkovement.  1. 
Then  it  concerns  us  all,  by  all  means,  to  give  all  diligence  to  make  sure  to  ourselves 
our  interest  in  this  redemption.  2.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  made  of  God  this  redemp- 
tion to  you,  then,  in  God's  name,  take  the  comfort  of  it.  Lift  up  the  head  and 
hands  that  hang  down  ;  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,  and  again,  I  say,  rejoice." 
3.  Then  live  as  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  Christ  our  sauctijlcatioii : — •"  I 
remember  a  short  time  ago,  when  I  was  conducting  a  service  at  Oxford,  a  working 
man  came  into  the  meeting.  He  was  the  first  penitent  that  night,  and  he  has  frequently 
told  me  since  that  he  had  been  most  honestly  and  sincerely  trying  for  twenty  years 
to  be  a  true  Christian,  but  he  had  failed  every  day  and  almost  given  up  in  despair 
when  he  came  by  accident  and  heard  this  truth— that  his  failure  was  due  to  the 
fact  that  he  had  been  trying  to  be  a  Christian  in  his  own  strength.  He  then  went 
into  the  inquiry-room,  trusted  in  Christ,  and  was  united  with  Christ,  shared  the 
life  of  Christ,  and  from  that  day  to  this  he  has  done  what  he  could  not  do  for 
twenty  years  before,  although  he  was  really  trying,  because  he  was  stioug  in  the  life 
which  he  shared  with  Christ.  Are  not  some  of  us  in  danger  of  supposing  that  we 
can  make  ourselves  better  Christians,  more  Christlike  Christians,  by  our  own  reso- 
lution, and  efforts,  and  rules,  and  discipline  ?  "     (Hiiijli  Frice  HikjIio;,  M.A.) 

Ver.  31.  He  that  glorieth,  let  Mm  glory  in  the  Lord. — Glonjinri  in  the  Lord: — 
There  is  an  irresistible  tendency  in  us  to  glory  in  something  or  other.  All  classes 
of  men  glory.  Good  people  have  the  tendency  to  glory,  and  sometimes  they  glory 
in  unworthy  objects,  and  therefore  God  has  prepared  a  cure  for  it — not  by  repress- 
ing the  instinct,  but  by  givinp;  it  a  worthy  subject.  The  pievention  or  cure  of 
glorying  in  men,  in  riches,  and  in  self,  is  glorying  in  the  Lord  Let  us — I.  Globy 
ONLY  IN  THE  Loan.  Because — 1.  The  theme  is  too  great  to  admit  of  another.  If 
God  tills  all  in  all,  there  can  be  no  other  god  ;  and  if  the  glory  of  God  be  infinite, 
then  there  can  be  no  second  glory.  2.  Any  other  object  highly  provokes  the  Most 
High.  He  has  said,  "  Mj  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another,  nor  My  praise  to  graven 
images."  ^Yhere  the  ark  of  the  Lord  is,  Dagon  must  come  down.  God  will  be  all, 
or  nothing.  Think  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Belshazzar,  and  Herod.  3.  There  is  no 
other  fit  ground  for  glorying.  (1)  If  there  were  some  other  object  in  which  we 
thought  we  could  glory,  yet  since  it  came  from  Him  it  would  be  idle  to  glory  in  the 
streams,  we  had  better  boast  in  the  fountain-head  from  whiidi  the  stream  descends. 
(2)  Moreover,  all  things  in  this  world  are  fieetinp,  and  wherefure  should  we  glory  in 
that  which  to-day  is,  and  to-morrow  will  pass  away?  Let  your  glory  be  in  that 
which  will  last  as  long  as  your  own  being.  (3)  Besides,  there  is  nothing  in  this 
world  worth  glorying  in,  in  comparison  with  God.  He  is  the  sun  ;  the  stars  must 
hide  their  heads  when  He  appears.  Let  us  bless  the  eternal  ocean  of  all-sufficient 
glory  and  goodness,  and  not  turn  aside  to  magnify  our  little  Abanas  and  Pharpars. 
4.  When  we  do  so  we  shall  be  in  accord  with  the  true  order  of  the  universe.  (1) 
With  creation  "  The  heavens  are  telling  the  g'ory  of  God."  "  All  Thy  woi-ks  praise 
Thee,  0  God."  Creation  is  a  temp'e  in  which  every  one  speaks  of  His  glory.  (2) 
With  Providence.  "For  of  Him  and  through  Him  and  to  Him  are  all  things,  to 
whom  be  the  glory  for  ever."  (3)  With  the  angels.  What  is  their  song  ?  "  Glory 
to  God  in  the  highest."  (4)  With  the  Divine  Trinity ;  for  what  does  the  Father  do 
but  glorify  the  Son  ?  What  does  the  Son  aim  at  when  He  savs,  "  Father,  glorify 
Thy  Son  "  ?  It  is,  "  that  Thy  Son  also  may  glorify  Thee."  What  does  the  Holy 
Spirit  do  when  He  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  shows  them  unto  us  ?  Has 
not  Jesus  said  of  Him,  "  He  shall  glorify  Me  "  ?  II.  Gloky  heartily  in  the  Lord. 
Because  of — 1.  His  love.  Glory  in — (1)  Its  antiquity.  "  I  have  loved  thee  with 
an  everlasting  love  !  "  (2)  In  its  wonderful  benefactions.  (3)  In  its  freeness.  He 
loved  us  because  He  would  love  us ;  not  because  we  were  lovely,  but  because  He 
was  love.  Glory  in  it,  therefore,  all  the  day  Ion?,  for  well  you  may.  "  He  loved 
me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  2.  His  faithfulness.  Whom  once  He  loves  He 
never  leaves,  but  loves  them  to  the  end.  3.  His  holiness.  "Bless  the  Lord,  0  my 
soul,"  and  "  All  that  is  within  me,  bless" — His  gracious  name,  is  it?  No.  His 
loving  name  ?  No  ;  but  "  His  holy  name,"  because  the  whole  includes  all  the  parts, 
and  the  holiness,  or  the  wholeness  of  God  is  a  grander  thing  than  any  one  of  the 
distinct  attributes  which  make  up  His  character.     Gloiy  in  the  holiness  of  God,  for 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

there  is  none  holy  as  the  Lord.  It  is  this  which  angels  glory  in,  for  as  they  veil 
their  faces,  they  say,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  of  hosts."  4.  His  all-sufficiency, 
and  the  liberality  with  which  He  distributes  His  mercies  among  His  chosen.  In 
Christ  Jesus  is  not  one  good  thing  given  to  us,  but  every  good  thiug.  Do  we  need 
to  be  instructed  ?  Christ  is  our  wisdom.  Do  we  need  to  be  clothed  in  the  sight  of 
God  with  a  righteousness  that  shall  render  us  acceptable  ?  Christ  is  our  righteous- 
ness. Do  we  need  to  be  purified  and  cleansed  ?  Christ  is  our  sanctification.  And 
do  we  need  to  be  set  free  and  delivered  from  all  bondage  ?  Christ  is  our  redemption. 
5.  The  nearness  and  dearness  of  the  relationship  which  God  holds  to  us.  The  man 
who  can  bow  his  knee,  and  say  from  his  heart,  "  Our  Father,"  has  more  to  glory  in 
than  the  emperor  of  the  grandest  nations.  Is  Christ  my  Brother?  I  am  ennobled 
by  that  relationship.  III.  Glory  in  the  Lord  gkowingly.  That  is  to  say,  we  should 
glory  in  God  in  proportion  as  we  learn  more  of  Him,  and  receive  more  from  Him. 
Glory  growiiigly  in  the  Lord  as  you  know  more  of  Him — 1.  By  revelation.  And  as 
you  see  more  of  Him,  go  and  tell  abroad  more  of  Him,  and  let  others  know  what  a 
glorious  God  you  serve.  2.  By  experience.  Never  let  a  special  season  pass  without 
praising  Him  ;  and  as  answers  to  prayer  increase,  as  grace  is  given  to  you  in  times 
of  need,  and  as  you  see  converting  work  going  on  in  others  glorify  Him  more.  By 
and  by,  as  time  rolls  on,  we  shall  know  more  of  the  Lord,  and  get  to  be  more  like 
Him,  and  approach  nearer  to  the  glory  itself.  Beholding  that  glory,  as  in  a  glass, 
we  are  changed  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  image  of  the  Lord.  IV.  Glory  in 
THE  Lord  practically.  1.  By  owning  that  you  belong  to  Him.  A  man  does  not 
hide  away  that  which  he  glories  in.  Charge  a  veteran  with  having  been  at  Waterloo, 
and  he  will  glory  in  it.  Accuse  an  artist  of  being  a  lloyal  Academician,  and 
he  will  own  the  charge.  Abuse  me  for  loving  my  wife  and  children,  and  I  smile  at 
you.  Why,  then,  blush  to  be  called  a  follower  of  Jesus  ?  2.  By  talking  about  Him 
on  all  fit  occasions.  We  are  too  reticent  in  our  piety.  As  the  rose  betrays  itself 
by  its  perfume,  and  the  glowworm  by  its  shining,  so  should  our  glorying  in  the 
Lord  discover  us  to  all  observers.  A  foreigner  may  speak  English  well,  but  he  is 
known  by  his  accent,  and  the  accent  of  grace  is  quite  as  marked  as  that  of  nature. 
3.  By  standing  up  for  Him  when  He  is  opposed.  If  you  hear  the  proud  ones 
ridicule  His  gospel,  and  despise  His  people,  put  in  a  word  for  Jesus.  4.  By 
being  calm  under  your  troubles.  5.  By  ha^ing  a  contempt  for  those  things  which 
others  value  so  much.  Do  not  be  greedy  after  tl;e  world.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
True  glorying : — Man — I.    Loves   to   glory.      II.    Has  nothing   in    himself   of 

WHICH    HE    CAN    GLORY.        III.     ShOULD     GLORY     IN     THE     LoRD — who — 1.     HaS    givcn 

him  all.  2.  Redeemed  all.  3.  Is  become  his  portion  for  ever.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
God  exalted  (171(1  creatures  humbled  bi/  the  goxpel : — That  men  are  sinners  I  shall 
assume.  If,  then,  there  is  any  salvation  for  them,  it  must  be  by  grace.  And  such 
a  salvation  cannot  fnil  to  exalt  God  and  humble  the  sinner.  None  will  deny  that 
the  world  are  proud.  The  tendency  of  the  gospel  to  exalt  God  and  humble  the 
creature  appears — I.  In  its  outward  administration.  This  includes — 1.  The 
humble  appearance  of  Christ  in  our  world.  When  we  understand  the  reasons  of 
this  humble  appearance  of  Christ,  we  see  in  it  the  wisdom  of  God;  but  had  it  been 
left  to  us  beforehmd,  we  should  have  assigned  Him  the  most  magnificent  state. 
Thus  did  the  wisdom  of  man  pronounce.  Indeed,  the  pride  of  man,  showing  itself 
ill  lofiy  pretensions  to  the  omniscience  of  wisdom,  was  seen  to  be  the  most  intrepid 
enemy  which  the  religion  of  heaven  had  to  encounter.  It  therefore  was  a  main 
point  in  the  outset  to  overwhelm  this  enemy  with  convictions  of  his  own  ignorance 
iind  folly  and  of  the  far  superior  wisdom  of  God.  In  all  these  proud  pretensions 
reason  aspires  to  a  place  for  which  it  was  never  designed.  It  is  not  its  province  to 
penetrate  the  mysteries  of  the  universe  by  its  own  ken,  but  to  work  up  into  judg- 
ments materials  furnished  by  information.  It  is  tlie  eye,  but  it  cannot  see  without 
light.  In  no  other  science  but  that  which  relates  to  the  incomprehensible  God  and 
to  the  interests  and  government  of  the  universe,  does  reason  attempt  to  build  on  its 
own  independent  discoveries.  The  anatomist  does  not  presume  to  tell  you  how  a 
man  ought  to  be  made,  but  with  all  submission  proceeds  to  examine  the  animal 
system  which  God  has  exposed  to  his  view.  And  why  does  man  act  so  differently 
in  this  case  from  what  he  does  in  all  others  ?  Because  in  other  sciences  he  wishes 
to  obtain  accurate  knowledge ;  in  this,  relief  to  his  conscience  and  fears  and  morti- 
fied pride.  He  does  not  like  God,  and  wishes  to  modify  Him  after  his  own  taste. 
2.  Another  way  in  which  the  outward  administration  of  the  gospel  took  the  pride  of 
the  world,  was  in  the  weakness  of  the  instruments  employed,  the  simplicity  of  their 
piea  hing,  and  their  triinnphant  success.     Instead  of  angels  or  Jewish  doctors  or 


CHAP.  I.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  117 

Grecian  philosophers,  Christ  chose  fishermen.  II.  The  same  tendency  aiteaks 
IN  THE  TEXTDRE  OF  THE  GOSPEL.  This  is  noticed  in  our  text  and  tlie  preceding 
vei-se.  "But  of  him  are  ye  i)i  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom 
and  righteousness  and  sanctitication  and  redemption  ;  that,  according  as  it  is 
written,  He  that  glorieth  let  Lim  glory  in  the  Lord."  1.  Our  wisdom.  Instead  of 
ignorant  and  prejudiced  reason,  on  which  the  wise  men  of  the  world  proudly  rested 
for  the  discovery  of  God,  Christ,  the  great  Prophet  of  the  world,  was  appointed  to 
lay  open  the  secrets  of  the  eternal  mind,  and  to  bring  "  life  and  immortality  to 
hght"  ;  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in 
the  borom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  2.  Our  ri.hteousness.  There 
is  nothing  to  whicli  men  more  strongly  adhere  than  to  the  claims  of  their  own 
merit.  The  whole  texture  of  the  gospel  is  fitted  to  put  down  this  arrogant  pre- 
tender, to  annihilate  the  last  lurking  pride  of  man.  (1)  The  atonement.  (2)  The 
obedience  of  Christ.  (3)  The  intercession  of  Christ.  But  the  soul-humbling  and 
God-exalting  process  is  not  yet  ended.  Not  only  are  the  atonement,  obedience, 
and  intercession  of  Christ  thus  provided,  in  a  way  to  support  the  rights  and  claims 
and  government  of  God,  to  condemn  sin,  and  cover  pi'ide  with  eternal  confusion ; 
but  no  man  is  allowed  to  share  in  this  salvation  until,  from  the  bottom  of  his  heatt, 
he  has  approved  of  all  these  measures  and  all  their  expressions  ;  until  he  has 
taken  back  all  his  proud  speeches  against  God,  and  bent  his  imperious  head  to  his 
Maker's  feet.  Even  pardon  itself  buries  the  sinner  still  lower  in  the  dust.  This  is 
none  of  that  poverty  of  spirit  which  involves  degradation.  It  is  only  viewing  things 
according  to  truth.  III.  The  same  tendency  of  the  gospel  appeals  in  its 
APPLICATION.  Christ  is  made  of  God  unto  us  sanctifieation,  "  that,  according  as  it 
is  written,  He  that  glorieth  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord."  As  the  race  were  con- 
demned by  the  law  to  the  curse  of  eternal  abandonment,  the  Spirit  could  not  come 
to  men  without  the  mediation  of  Christ.  The  heathen  philosophers  depended  on 
the  self-determining  power  of  the  will  for  all  their  personal  virtue,  and  on  their  self- 
taught  ethics  for  the  reformation  of  the  world.  In  opposition  to  all  these  proud 
aspirations,  the  gospel  casts  the  world  for  sauctification  on  the  Spirit  of  God  and 
the  purchase  of  Christ.  Nor  is  this  all.  In  their  spiritual  death  it  finds  nothing 
in  them  to  aid  their  resurrection,  and  ascribes  to  God,  not  only  the  whole  power, 
but  a  conquering  power,  "  the  working  of  mighty  power,"  as  great  as  that  "  which 
He  wrought  in  Christ  when  He  raised  Him  from  the  dead  and  set  Him  at  His  own 
right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places."  Thus  every  part  of  the  gospel  is  calculated  to 
abase  the  pride  of  man,  to  break  and  subdue  and  humble  the  sinner,  to  support  the 
rights,  the  claims,  the  government  of  God,  and  to  give  all  the  glory  to  Him. 
Whatever  light  or  holiness  or  title  to  salvation  we  possess,  comes  from  God  through 
the  Eedeemer.  Whatever  brings  out  God  to  view,  exalts  Him,  abases  siiin<-rs,  and 
humbles  and  blesses  the  creation.  Let  us,  then,  see  what  and  how  much  of  God  is 
revealed  in  the  plan  of  salvation.  In  the  first  place,  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost  are  brought  out  to  view  in  their  own  proper  and  infinitely  important 
characters  ;  a  distinction  never  whispered  to  the  universe  in  any  of  His  other  works. 
In  the  next  place.  His  inflexible  resolution,  at  all  hazards,  to  support  His  moral 
empire  over  the  creation,  comes  out ;  disclosing  His  infinite  attaidiment  to  all  the 
principles  of  His  law  and  to  the  happiness  which  it  subserves,  and  thus  manifesting 
His  holiness,  justice,  and  benevolence.  In  the  next  place,  His  amazing  compassion 
and  mercy  and  patience  and  condescension  and  accessibleness  and  truth  are  brought 
to  light;  His  power,  too,  in  subduing  the  carnal  heart,  in  restraining,  bounding, 
and  defeating  all  the  machinations  of  Satan.  But  the  wisdom  elicited  is  that  on 
which  I  wish  chiefly  to  dwell.  This  wonderful  plan  of  the  Incarnation  was  the 
forming  of  a  connecting  link  between  finite  and  infinite  natures,  and  tilling  up  the 
whole  chasm  between  God  and  us.  He  confounded  the  wisdom  of  men  by  the 
triumphs  of  that  very  weakness  which  provoked  their  contempt,  and  by  making,  in 
various  ways,  the  most  unpromising  means  lead  to  the  most  splendid  success.  He 
so  shaped  the  gospel,  that,  in  every  part,  it  should  be  at  war  with  pride,  and  touch 
it  in  every  tender  spot,  and  call  into  the  field  every  arm  of  that  foe,  and  exhibit  it 
before  heaven  and  earth  in  the  hideous  attitude  of  warring  against  all  the  love  and 
authority  of  the  gospel.  He  pressed  into  the  service  of  His  .-ause  all  the  agents  in 
the  wicked  world  ;  the  policy  of  kings,  the  pride  of  philosophers,  the  craft  of 
priests,  and  the  very  ferocity  of  bloody  persecution.  He  defeated  all  the  stratagems 
of  Satan  and  effectually  bruised  the  serpent's  head.  Elect  man  is  a  gainer  by  his 
own  ruin.  His  sin  is  made  the  occasion  of  higher  advances  in  holiness ;  for  to 
whom  much  is  forgiven  the  same  loveth  much.     His  misery  is  made  the  occasion 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  ii. 

of  his  greater  blessedness.  And  finally,  the  wisdom  of  God  appears  in  that  capital 
measure  to  vindicate  His  own  impartiality,  the  appointment  of  the  Friend  and 
Brother  of  man  to  be  his  Judge.  "  The  Father  hath  given  Him  authority  to 
execute  judgment  also  because  He  is  the  Son  of  man."  Why  should  you  think 
that  this  grandest  of  all  the  exhibitions  of  God  will  be  shut  up  in  the  nut-shell  of  a 
single  world?     {E.  D.  Griffin,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER    II. 

Vet^s.  1-5.  And  I,  brethren,  .  .  .  came  .  .  .  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of 
wisdom. — The  spirit  or  tone  in  wliich  St.  Paul  preached : — It  was  in — I.  A  decisive 
TONE  OF  PERSONAL  CONVICTION.  It  was  "the  testimony  of  God,"  not  an  opinion. 
He  does  not  say,  "  I  think  so,"  but  "  God  says  so."  So  in  Gal.  i.  11,  12.  St.  Paul 
was  no  hired,  official  expounder  of  a  system.  He  felt  that  his  words  were  eternal 
truth  :  hence  their  power.  Hence,  too,  arises  the  possibility  of  discarding  rules  of 
oratory.  For  it  is  half-way  towards  making  us  believe  when  a  man  believes  him- 
self. Faith  produces  faith.  II.  A  spirit  of  self-abnec;ation  (ver.  2).  There 
were  no  side  glances  at  his  own  prospects,  reputation,  success.  And  this  sincerity 
and  self-forgetfulness  was  a  source  of  power.  It  was  so  with  the  Baptist,  who 
declared  of  Christ :  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease."  In  any  work  which 
is  to  live,  or  be  really  beautiful,  there  must  be  the  spirit  of  the  Cross.  That  which 
is  to  be  a  temple  to  God  must  never  have  the  marble  polluted  with  the  name  of 
the  architect  or  builder.  III.  A  spirit  of  personal  lowliness  (ver.  3).  Partly 
this  refers  to  his  infirmities  and  disadvantages  ;  but  partly,  too,  it  means  deep 
humility.  Now,  remember  who  it  was  who  said  this — the  daring  St.  Paul,  whose 
soul  was  all  of  flame,  whose  every  word  was  a  half-battle,  who  stood  alone  on  Mars' 
Hill,  and  preached  to  the  scoffing  Athenians  "  Jesus  and  the  Piesurrection."  How 
little  they  who  heard  his  pomlerous  sentences  could  have  conceived  that  "weak- 
ness, and  fear,  and  much  trembling  "  of  the  invisible  spirit !  But  again  :  see  how 
this  tells  on  the  tone  of  his  ministry.  St.  Paul  did  not  begin  with  asserting  his 
prelatical  dignity  and  apostolic  authority.  He  began  with  declaring  truth,  and 
that  in  "trembling."  Then,  when  men  dis23uted  his  right  to  teach,  he  vindicated 
his  authority,  but  not  till  then.  And  this  is  a  lesson  for  modern  times.  Each 
minister  must  prove  his  apostolical  succession  by  apostolic  truthfulness,  sincerity, 
and  courage — as  St.  Paul  proved  his — and  by  his  charity,  and  by  his  Christ-like 
meekness.     [F.    W.   Rohertson,  M.A.)  Paul   a   model  jireacher  : — Look  at — I. 

His  matter. — 1.  He  excludes  all  that  is  foreign  to  his  purpose.  2.  Knows  nothing 
but  Christ.  II.  His  manner.  1.  He  is  modest  in  the  consciousness  of  his  own 
weakness.  2.  Plain  in  the  conviction  of  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Spirit. 
IH.  The  effect.  1.  Faith  not  in  the  man.  2.  But  in  the  power  of  God.  (-7. 
Lyth,  D.D.)  A  faithful  p)icture  of  a  true  gospel  preacher  : — The  grand  subject 
of  his  ministry — I.  Is  the  crucified  Christ,  because — 1.  He  is  the  highest 
revelation  of  God's  love  for  men.  2.  He  is  the  most  thrilling  demonstration  of  the 
wickedness  of  humanity.  3.  He  is  the  grandest  display  of  loyalty  to  moral  recti- 
tude. II.  SoDL-ABSORBiNG  (ver.  3).  The  man  who  has  some  paramount  sentiment 
looks  at  the  universe,  through  it,  and  values  it  so  far  as  it  reflects  and  honours 
that  sentiment.  Hence  to  Paul  Christ  was  "  all  in  all."  All  other  subjects — 
political  and  philosophical  —  dwindled  into  insigniflcance  in  its  presence ;  it 
swallowed  up  his  great  soul.  III.  Makes  him  indifferent  to  all  rhetorical 
considerations  (ver.  1).  The  theme  was  infinitely  too  great  for  it.  Does  the 
splendid  apple-tree  in  full  blossom  require  to  be  decorated  with  gaudy  ribbons  ? 
Christ  crucified  is  mighty  eloquence.  IV.  Subdues  in  him  all  self-conscious- 
ness (ver.  3).  V.  Invests  him  with  Divine  power  over  man  (vers.  4,  5).  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  Cliristian  j^reacher :—I.  His  message.  1.  The  testimony 
of  God.  2.  Concerning  Christ.  3.  Divine,  therefore  true.  II.  His  method  of 
delivering  it,  1.  Not  artificial  in  style,  matter,  or  manner.  2.  But  plain, 
simple,   pointed.      {J.    Lytlt,    D.D.)  Gospel   preaching: — Note — 1.    That  the 

13roper  method  to  convert  men  in  any  community,  Christian  or  Pagan,  is  to  preach 
or  set  forth  the  truth  concerning  the  person  and  work  of  Christ.  2.  The  proper 
state  of  mind  in  which  to  preach  the  gospel  is  the  opposite  of  self-confidence  or 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  119 

carelessness.  The  gospel  should  be  preached  with  a  sense  of  weakness  and  with 
great  anxiety  and  solicitude.  3.  The  success  of  the  gosj'el  does  not  depend  on  the 
skill  of  the  preacher,  but  on  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit.  4.  The  foundation 
of  saving  faith  is  not  reason,  i.e.,  not  arguments  addressed  to  the  understanding, 
but  the  power  of  God  as  exerted  with  and  by  the  truth  upon  the  heart.  (C.Hodge.) 
Preaching — fruit  and  flowers  : — At  Hampton  Court  Palace  every  one  regards  with 
wonder  the  enormous  vine  loaded  with  so  vast  a  multitude  of  luge  clusters  :  just 
outside  the  vine-house  is  as  fine  a  specimen  of  the  wistaria,  and  when  it  is  in  full 
bloom,  the  cluster-like  masses  of  bloom  cause  you  to  think  it  a  flower-bearing 
vine,  as  the  other  is  a  fruit-bearing  vine.  Fit  emblems  these  two  famous  trees  of 
two  ministries,  both  admired,  but  not  equally  to  be  prized— the  ministry  of 
oratory,  luxuriant  in  metaphor  and  poetry,  and  the  ministry  of  grace,  abounding 
in  sound  teaching  and  soul- saving  energy.  Gay  as  are  the  flower-clusters  of  the 
wistaria,  no  one  mistakes  them  for  the  luscious  bunches  of  the  grape ;  yet  there 
are  many  simpletons  in  spiritual  things  who  mistake  sound  for  sense,  and  seem  to 
satisfy  their  hunger  not  on  solid  meat,  but  on  the  jingle  of  a  musical  dinner-bell. 
[C.H.  Spurgeon.)  Conditions  of  mccei-gful  preacJiing  : — If  a  preacher  wishes  to 
be  successful  he  must — 1.  Deny  himself  (ver.  1)  and  exalt  Christ  (ver.  2).  2.  Feel 
himself  weak  (ver.  3),  yet  strong  (ver.  4).  3.  Ignore  the  human  and  magnify  the 
Divine  (ver.  5).  [J.  Lylh.)  Brilliant,  hut  not  saving,  sermons  : — Sir  Astley  Cooper, 
on  visiting  Paris,  was  asked  by  the  surgeon  en  chef  of  the  empire  how  many  times 
he  had  performed  a  certain  wonderful  feat  of  surgery.  He  replied  that  he  had  per- 
formed the  operation  thirteen  times.  "  Ah,  but,  monsieur,  I  have  done  him  one 
hundred  and  sixty  times.  How  many  times  did  you  save  his  life?"  continued 
the  curious  Frenchmen,  after  he  had  looked  into  the  blank  amazement  of  Sir 
Astley's  face.  "  I,"  said  the  Englishman,  "  saved  eleven  out  of  the  thirteen,  flow 
many  did  you  save  out  of  one  hundred  and  sixty  ?  "  "  Ah,  monsieur,  I  lose  dem 
all ;  but  de  operation  was  very  brilliant.'"  Of  how  many  popular  ministries  might 
the  same  verdict  be  given  !  Souls  are  not  saved,  but  the  preaching  is  very 
brilliant.  Thousands  are  attracted  and  operated  on  by  the  rhetorician's  art,  but 
what  if  he  should  have  to  say  of  his  admirers,  "  I  lose  them  all,  but  the  sermons 
were  very  brilliant!  "  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  messenger  like  the  message:—!.  As 
the  gospel  is  the  foolish  thing  of  God,  so  the  apostle  had  no  wisdom  or  utterance 
of  his  own  (vers.  1,  2).  2.  As  the  gospel  is  the  weak  thing  of  God,  so  the  apostle 
came  to  Corinth  in  weakness,  fear,  and  trembling  (ver.  3).  But  as  Christ  is  the 
power  and  wisdom  of  the  gospel,  so  the  Spirit  is  the  power  and  wisdom  of  the 
ministry  (ver.  4).  3.  As  the  gospel  is  the  mystery  of  God,  and  therefore  a  Divine 
power,  so  the  ministry  is  a  Divine  power,  and  therefore  the  manifestation  of  Divine 
wisdom.  (Principal  Edwards.)  The  Dirine  testimony,  and  the  apostle's  responsi- 
hilitii  in  relation  to  it : — Consider — I.  The  theme.  "  The  testimony  of  God," 
which  has  to  do  with  "  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified  "  (ver.  2).  The  "  declara- 
tion "  of  this  theme,  in  all  its  manifold  relations  and  aspects,  is  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel.  The  gospel  is  characterised  by — 1.  Wisdom  (ver.  6).  Perfection  of 
moral  character  is  seen  only  in  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  "  Hidden 
wisdom."  3.  Ancient  wisdom.  "  Ordained  before  the  world."  4.  Glorifying 
wisdom.  "Ordained  unto  our  glory."  II.  The  declaration  (ver*.  1)  was — 1. 
Simple  in  its  chnracter.  "Not  with  excellency  of  speech" — "not  with  enticing 
words  of  man's  wisdom."  2.  Convincing  in  its  arguments.  It  was  "in  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit."  3.  Powerful  in  its  effects  (ver.  5).  4.  Of  exclusive 
importance  (ver.  2).  [The  Study.)  Faith,  not  intellect: — A  friend  said  to 
Archbishop  "Whately  on  his  death-bed  :  '•  The  Lord  has  heard  your  prayers  and 
preserved  your  intellect  unimpaired."  He  replied  :  "It  is  not  intellect  which  can 
avail  me  now,  but  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  Rhetorical  pireaching  : — In  ascending 
the  lofty  peaks  of  the  Jungfrau  and  Monte  Eosa,  the  guides,  I  have  read,  not 
unfrequently  resort  to  the  innocent  artifice  of  endeavouring  to  interest  the  traveller 
in  the  beauty  of  the  flowers  in  onier  to  distract  his  attention  from  the  fearful 
abysses  which  the  giddy  path  overhangs.  What  the  Alpine  guides  thus  innocently 
do,  we  preachers  are  often  tempted  to  do  not  so  innocently.  We  are  prone  so  to 
occupy  our  hearers  with  the  graces  of  composition  and  the  flowers  of  rhetoric  that 
they  are  in  danger  of  altogether  forgetting  that  there  is  a  dread  abyss  beside  them, 
and  that  there  is  but  a  step  between  them  and  death.     (J.  Halsey.)  The  spirit 

of  successful  preaching  :■ — The  Piev.  Dr.  McAll,  founder  and  superintendent  of  the 
remarkable  mission  in  Paris  and  other  parts  of  France  which  bears  his  name,  was 
the  son  of  the  celebrated  Eobert  S.  McAll,  LL.D.,  of  Manchester,  some  of  whose 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

sermons  are  justly  ranked  amongst  the  noblest  productions  of  pulpit  literature. 
His  ministry  was  powerfully  influenced  by  what  he  considered  to  be  the  failure  of 
his  father's  ministry.  He  tells  how  "he  had  repeatedly  seen  his  father  weep 
because,  while  so  much  run  after  and  admir<-d  on  account  of  his  eloquence,  so 
little  spiritual  pood  seemed  to  be  done,  and  there  were  scarcely  any  conversions." 
Warned  by  this  example,  "he  determined,"  he  says,  "to  throw  overboard 
'  excellency  of  speech  and  of  wisdom '  and  to  strike  direct  for  the  heart  and 
conscience  of  the  unconverted,  in  the  hope  of  saving  many."  llif.  right  kind  of 
preaching  : — Mr.  Spurgeon  uttered  words  in  one  of  his  prayer-meeting  addresses 
which  speak  volumes  as  to  the  secret  of  his  successful  ministry:  "I  think  I  can 
honestly  say  that  when  I  have  had  something  come  to  me  rather  flue — a  nice,  rare 
oratorical  bit,  and  I  think  I  could  do  it — I  think  if  I  tried  I  might  say  something 
very  fine— I  have  pulled  it  out  of  my  mouth  and  flung  it  away  that  I  might  not 
take  away  the  attention  of  any  hearer  from  Christ  crucified.  '  Here  is  a  sword.' 
'But,'  says  one,  'it  has  not  a  handsome  scabbard.'  No;  we  pull  that  off.  We 
throw  that  to  some  old  rag  and  bone  dealer.  We  use  nothing  but  the  blessed 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  When  that  does  not  save  men,  men  shall  be  lost.  We 
know  nothing  equal  to  it  for  the  keenness  of  its  edge  ;  for  the  force  with  which  it 
slays.     It  is  a  strange  sword.     With  its  edge  it  kills,  and  with  its  back  it  heals." 

Ver.  2.  I  determined  not  to  know  anything  among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and 
Him  crucified.— PawZ's  theme  : — I.  Paul's  theme.  1.  Christ.  2.  Him  crucified. 
II.  His  determination.  1.  To  know  nothing  else.  2.  Spite  of  ridicule  and 
reproach.     III.  His  motive.     This   was — 1.  His   duty.      2.  His   delight.      3.  His 

-»  glory.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  PauVs  one  theme:- — Paul  was  emphatically  a  man  of 
one  idea.  He  went  forth  not  to  baptize  (1  Cor.  i.  17)  ;  not  to  preach  self  (2  Cor. 
iv.  5) ;  not  to  teach  philosophy  (1  Cor.  i.  23) ;  not  to  practise  tricks  of  rhetoric 
(1  Cor.  ii.  4) ;  but  everywhere  in  synagogues,  market-places,  judgment  halls, 
prison,  crowded  cities,  his  one  theme  was  "  Christ  and  Him  crucified."  In  the 
synagogues  at  Antioch  and  Thessalonica,  what  does  he  preach  ? — Acts  xiii.  38 ; 
xvii.  3.  On  Mars  Hill,  what  ? — Acts  xvii.  31.  Before  Felix  and  Agrippa,  what? — 
Acts  xxiv.^  25 ;  xxvi.  23.     In  the  prison  at  Rome,  what  ? — Acts  xxviii.  31.     And  j 

l_now  in  writing  to  the  Corinthian  Church,  what  ?  Why  does  Paul  give  such 
prominence  to  this  theme?  Because — I.  It  is  the  most  important  theme. 
Philosophy  would  have  reached  only  the  cultured.  A  plea  for  the  oppressed  would 
;  have  reached  only  the  patriotic,  but  the  Cross  commands  universal  attention,  for 
'  it  touches  a  universal  want.  It  means — 1.  Remission  of  sins.  Sin  is  the  source 
of  all  ills.  Christ  is  "the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world." 
2.  An  immortality  of  glory.  II.  It  is  the  geandest  theme.  1.  Grand  is  the 
starry  world  above,  but  grander  is  the  Cross.  2.  It  gives  grandeur  to  the  life.  If 
it  be  grand  to  die  for  one's  country,  grander  is  it  to  die  for  the  salvation  of  men. 
If  it  be  grand  to  minister  to  a  mind  diseased,  grander  is  it  to  minister  to  a  soul 
diseased.  The  Cross  made  Paul's  life  grand,  and  Luther's,  Whitfield's,  and 
Wesley's.  III.  Of  the  central  position  of  the  theme  in  the  gospel.  [J.  C. 
Williamson.)  The  great  subject  of  evangelical  preaching  : — I.  The  determina- 
tion OF  the  apostle.  1.  "Jesus"  signifies  a  Saviour.  The  kind  errand  upon 
which  He  comes  is  included  in  this  name — to  save  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  by 
imputing  the  merit  of  His  sacrifice,  and  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  by  imparting 
His  Spirit.  2.  Christ  signifies  the  Anointed  One  (Psa.  xlv.  7).  As  kings  and  priests 
and  prophets  were  anointed,  so  He  was  especially  anointed  of  God  as  the  King, 
the  Priest,  and  the  Prophet  of  His  Church.  3.  A  special  emphasis  must  be  laid 
upon  the  words,  Him  crucified.  "  Jesus  Christ  "  they  know  in  heaven  ;  "  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified,"  sinners  are  to  be  acquainted  with  upon  the  CHrth.  4. 
Paul  determines  to  "  know  "  this.  To  know  sometimes  meant — (1)  Respect  and 
love.  "  I  beseech  you  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you  in  the  Lord."  (2) 
To  make  it  known  to  others.  And  this  the  apostle  did.  (3)  The  word  here 
signifies  especially  tliat  he  so  resolved  to  preach  among  them  "  Christ  crucified," 
as  if  he  knew  nothing  so  much  as — nothing  in  comparison  with — "  Christ,  and 
Him  crucified."  And  read  his  sermons  and  epistles,  and  see  how  he  carried  out 
this  blessed  determination.  II.  Some  reasons  for  this  determination.  1.  It 
was  a  subject  which  God  approved.  He  calls  it  "  the  testimony  of  God,"  because 
to  His  crucified  Son  God  has  given  wonderful  testimony  in  the  Scriptures.  2.  It 
was  the  subject  calculated  to  convert  sinners.  And  why?  Because  the  Spirit,  as 
the  glorifier  of  Christ,  will  not  apply  any  other  subject  but  this.     3.  It  was  fitted 


CHAP,  n.]  I,   CORINTHIANS.  121 

to  comfort  the  soiTowful.  We  have  in  it  everythiiif?  adequate  to  our  present  and 
eternal  necessities.  4.  It  was  adapted  to  promote  holiness.  If  I  wish  30U  to 
manifest  His  obedience  in  all  your  conduct,  how  is  it  to  be  obtained?  "  The  love 
of  Christ  constraineth  us."  If  I  want  to  press  upon  your  attention  holy  love  to 
Christ,  it  jproceeds  from  the  same  source.  If  I  want  to  excite  you  to  holy 
liberality,  where  can  I  point  you  but  here  ?  "  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  that,  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  He  became  poor,"  &c. 
5.  It  agrees  with  the  theme  of  heaven.  (J.  Shervian.)  Tlie  vian  of  one  subject  : — 
Paul  was  a  very  determined  man,  and  whatever  he  undertook  he  carried  out  with 
all  his  heart.  "  This  one  thing  I  do"  was  always  his  motto.  He  had  once  been 
a  great  opposer  of  Christ ;  it  was  not  therefore  to  be  wondered  at  that  he  should 
now  bring  all  his  faculties  to  bear  upon  the  preaching  of  Christ  crucilied.  I.  What 
WAS  THIS  SUBJECT  TO  WHICH  Padl  detekmined  TO  SHUT  HIMSELF  UP  wliile  preach- 
ing to  the  Church  at  Corinth?  1.  He  first  preached — (1)  His  great  Master's 
person^.Jesus  Christ,  (a)  He  held  Him  up  as  a  real  man,  no  phantom,  but  one 
who  was  ciucified,  &c.  (b)  He  had  no  hesitation  about  His  Godhead.  He  preached 
Jesus  as  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God.  (2)  His  work,  especially  His  death. 
"Horrible!  "  said  the  .Jew;  "Folly!  "  said  the  Greek.  But  Paul  did  not,  there- 
fore, put  these  things  into  the  background  and  begin  with  the  life  of  Christ  and 
the  excellency  of  His  exnniple,  and  thus  tempt  them  onward  to  His  divinity  and 
atonement.  2.  Very  impolitic  this  must  have  seemed.  (1)  Wise  men  would  have 
remarked  upon  the  liopefulness  of  the  Israelites,  if  handled  with  discretion,  and 
their  advice  would  have  been,  "  We  do  not  say,  renounce  your  sentiments,  Paul, 
but  disguise  them  for  a  little  while."  The  apostle  yielded  to  no  such  policy,  he 
would  not  win  either  Jew  or  Gentile  by  keeping  hack  the  truth,  for  he  knew  that 
such  converts  are  worthless.  (2)  Another  would  say,  "  But  if  you  do  this  you 
will  arouse  opposition.  Do  not  provoke  the  contempt  of  all  thinking  men. 
Argue  with  them,  and  show  tliem  that  you  too  are  a  philosopher.  Be  all  things 
to  all  men.  By  these  means  you  will  make  many  friends,  and  by  degrees  bring 
them  to  accept  the  gospel."  But  the  apostle  puts  down  his  foot  with,  "  I  have 
determined."*'  3.  He  resolved  that  his  subject  should  so  engross  attention  that  he 
would  not  even  speak  it  with  excellency  of  speech  or  man's  wisdom.  He  would  hide 
the  Cross  neither  with  flowers  of  rhetoric  nor  with  clouds  of  pbilosoiAj'.  Some~' 
preach  Cln-ist  as  the  painter  who,  in  depicting  a  sea  fight,  showed  nothing  but 
smoke.  II.  Although  Paul  thus  coxcENTRATEn  his  energies  upon  one  point,  it  J 
WAS  quite  sufficient  for  his  purpose.  If  the  apostle  had  aimed  at  pleasing  an 
intelligent  audience,  or  had  designed  to  set  himself  up  as  a  profound  teacher,  he 
would  naturally  have  looked  out  for  something  a  little  more  new  and  dazzling.  A 
select  Church  of  culture  would  have  assured  him  that  such  preaching  would  only 
attract  the  servants  and  the  old  women  ;  but  Paul  would  not  have  been  discon- 
certed by  such  observations,  for  he  loved  the  souls  of  the  poorest  and  feeblest  : 
and,  besides,  he  knew  that  what  had  exercised  power  over  his  own  educated  mind 
was  likely  to  have  jDower  over  other  intelligent  people.  1.  Paul  desired  to  arouse 
sinners  to  a  sense  of  sin,  and  what  has  ever  accomplished  this  so  perfectly  as  the 
doctrine  that  sin  was  laid  upon  Christ  and  caused  His  death  ?  2.  But  he  wanted 
also  to  awaken  the  hope  that  forgiveness  might  be  given  consistently  with  justice. 
Need  a  sinner  ever  doubt  when  he  lias  once  seen  Jesus  crucified?  3.  He  longed 
to  lead  men  to  actual  faith  in  Christ.  Now,  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  but  the 
hearing  must  be  upon  the  subject  concerning  which  the  faith  is  to  deal.  4.  He 
wanted  men  to  forsake  their  sins,  and  what  should  lead  them  to  hate  evil  so  much 
as  seeing  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  on  account  of  it  ?  5.  He  longed  to  train  up  a 
Chtirch  of  consecrated  men,  zealous  for  good  works  ;  and  what  more  is  necessary  to 
promote  sanctificafcion  than  Christ,  who  hath  redeemed  us  and  so  made  us  for 
ever  His  servants?  I  say  that  Paul  had  in  Christ  crucified  a  subj^ct  equal  to  his 
object;  a  subject  that  would  meet  the  case  of  every  man;  a  subject  for  to-day, 
to-morrow,  and  for  ever.  III.  The  apostle's  confining  himself  to  this  subject 
COULD  NOT  possibly  DO  HARM.  A  man  of  one  thought  only  is  generally  described 
as  riding  a  hobby :  well  this  was  Paul's  hobby,  but  it  was  a  sort  of  hobby  which  a 
man  may  ride  without  any  injury  to  himself  or  his  neighbour.  1.  But  Christ 
crucified  is  the  only  subject  of  which  this  can  be  said.  (1)  A  class  of  ministers 
preach  doctrine  only,  the  effect  of  which  is  generally  to  breed  narrowness, 
exclusiveness,  and  bigotry.  (2)  Others  preach  experience  only,  (a)  Some  of  them 
take  the  lower  scale  of  experience,  and  say  that  nobody  can  be  a  child  of  God 
except  he  groans  daily,  being  burdened.     This  teaching  brings  up  a  race  of  men 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

•who  show  their  humiUty  by  sitting  in  judgment  upon  all  who  cannot  groan  as 
dee^Dly  as  them-elves.  (b)  Another  class  preach  experience  always  upon  the  high 
key.  For  tht-m  there  are  no  nights  ;  they  sing  through  perpetual  summer  days. 
They  have  conquered  siu,  and  they  have  ignored  themselves.  So  they  say,  or  we 
might  have  fancied  that  they  had  a  very  vivid  idea  of  themselves  and  their  attain-  , 
ments.  Certainly  their  conventions  and  preachings  largely  consist  of  very 
wonderful  declarations  of  their  own  admirable  condition.  (3)  Another  class  preach 
the  precepts  and  little  else,  and  the  teaching  becomes  very  legal ;  and  after  a 
while  the  true  gospel  which  has  the  power  to  make  us  keep  the  precept  gets  flung 
into  the  background,  and  the  precept  is  not  kept  after  all.  Do,  do,  do,  generally 
ends  in  nothing  being  done.  (4)  Others  make  the  second  advent  the  end-all  and 
be-all  of  their  ministry,  and  in  many  cases  sheer  fanaticism  has  been  the  result. 
2.  But  keeping  to  this  doctrine  cannot  do  hurt,  because — (1)  It  contains  all  that 
is  vital  within  itself.  Within  its  limit,  you  have  all  the  essentials  for  this 
life  and  for  the  life  to  come ;  you  have  the  root  out  of  which  may  grow  branch, 
flower,  and  fruit  of  holy  thought,  word,  and  deed.  This  is  a  subject  which  does 
not  arouse  one  part  of  the  man  and  send  the  other  part  to  sleep  ;  it  does  not  kindle 
his  imagination  and  leave  his  judgment  uninstructed,  nor  feed  his  intellect  and 
starve  his  heart.  As  in  milk  there  are  all  the  ingredients  necessary  for  sustaining 
life,  so  in  Christ  crucified  there  is  everything  that  is  wanted  to  nurture  the  soul. 
(2)  It  will  never  produce  animosities,  as  those  nice  points  do  which  some  are  so 
fond  of  dealing  with.  "  I  am  of  Paul,  I  am  of  Apollos,  I  am  of  Christ,"  comes 
from  not  keeping  to  Jesus  crucified ;  but  was  there  ever  yet  a  sect  created  by  the 
preaching    of   Christ   crucified?      IV.    Because   of  all   ihis   we  should  all   of 

us    MAKE    this    THE     MAIN     SUBJECT    OF     OUE      THOUGHTS,     PREACHING,     AND    EFFOF.TS. 

(C.    H.   Sjiitrfieoii.)  PaiiVs    determination: — Nothing    but    Christ — 1.    Could 

satisfy  the  ijreacher.  2.  Save  the  hearer.  3.  Please  God.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
Method  of  preaching  : — Paul  had  been  trained  up  in  all  the  learning  that  was 
common  among  the  -Jews,  and  it  would  seem  from  some  casual  expressions  in  his 
writings,  in  much  also  that  was  common  among  the  Greeks ;  he  might,  therefore, 
have  taken  his  hearers  upon  their  own  favourite  grounds  ;  he  might  have  treated 
them  in  a  way  suited  to  the  prevailing  taste,  he  might  have  touched  lightly  upon 
those  parts  of  the  Christian  system  against  which  their  prejudices  were  most 
powerfully  directed,  and  thus  hr.ve  escaped  not  only  the  contempt  of  his  auditors, 
bnt  secured  their  admiration.  I.  This  determination  was  plainly  founded  on  a 
deep  and  heartfelt  conviction  that  Christ  Jesus,  in  that  which  He  has  done  and 
suEFERED,  IS  THE  ONLY  GROUND  OF  THE  sinner's  HOPE.  The  apostle  kncw  that, 
though  the  case  of  the  sinner  was  dreadful,  it  was  not  hopeless,  and  bearing  in 
mind  that  the  eternal  safety  of  the  soul  is  a  matter  compared  with  which  every- 
thing else  must  sink  into  insignificance,  we  cannot  understand  how  he  could  form 
any  other  resolution  than  that  which  he  here  expresses,  when  he  says,  "I  deter- 
mined to  know  nothing  among  you  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."  II. 
But  the  apostle's  determination  to  know  nothing  but  Christ,  and  Him  crucified, 
rested  not  merely  on  the  fact  that,  by  the  atoning  death  of  Christ,  it  was  rendered 
possible  for  God  to  extend  His  pardoning  mercy  to  rebellious  man,  but  upon  the 
other  fact,  that  by  the  same  means,  the  sinner  is  rendered  a  fit  subject  for 

PARDON,    and    endowed    WITH    CAPACITY   FOR   ENJOYING    THE    BLESSINGS    WHICH    PARDON 

SUPPOSES  IMPARTED.  Mail  is  iiot  oiily  guilty,  but  polluted ;  he  is  not  only  subjected 
to  the  wrath  of  God,  here  and  hereafter,  because  he  has  broken  His  law  and 
incurred  its  penalty,  but  he  is  excluded  from  His  fellowship  here,  and  from  the 
enjoyment  of  Him  hereafter,  because,  by  the  depravity  of  his  tastes,  his  feelings, 
his  desires,  his  afl'et-tions,  he  is  incapable  of  holding  that  fellowship,  and  enjoying 
that  felicity.  It  is  the  tendency  of  the  j)reaching  of  Christ  crucified  to  remedy 
this  evil,  to  reduce  the  rebellious  sinner  to  throw  aside  the  weapons  of  his  rebellion, 
to  enkindle  within  his  bosom  the  flame  of  love,  and  to  adorn  his  soul  with  all  the 
virtues  which  adorn  the  Saviour,  and  to  change  him  into  the  same  image  from 
glory  to  gloiy.  And  in  illnstration  of  this  tendency  of  the  preaching  of  Christ 
crucified  to  produce  these  effects,  we  remark,  that  the  strongest  possible  assurance 
is  thereby  afforded  to  men  of  God's  willingness  to  be  reconciled  to  them.  Nothing 
surely  can  tend  more  to  dispel  the  feais  and  strengthen  the  confidence  of  his 
creatures,  to  soften  their  hearts,  and  to  win  them  over  to  His  service,  than  the  view 
in  which  the  gospel  represents  God  as  willing  to  be  reconciled  ;  as  not  only  willing, 
but  earnest  that  such  a  reconciliation  should  be  ffected,  as  even  sending  His  Son 
to  suffer  and  die,  that  this  end  might  be  effected,  and  delegating  men  as  heralds  to 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  .123 

offer  terras  to  the  Rniltiest  and  most  unworthy.  Bat,  again,  by  the  preaching  of 
Christ  crucified,  there  is  such  a  demonstration  of  love  afforded,  as  tends  most 
directly  to  ensure  a  return  of  the  same  affection.  Po  we  think  of  a  departed 
parent's  tenderness,  her  days  of  toil  and  nights  of  watching,  that  she  might  bring 
us  (under  the  blessing  of  God),  through  the  weakness  and  dangers  of  infancy,  with- 
out wishing  her  alive,  that  we  might  afford  her,  during  her  declining  years,  a 
practical  proof  of  our  gratitude?  Can  the  helpless  orphan  think  of  the  beneficence 
of  the  philanthropist,  whose  hand  Inis  rescued  him  from  want  and  ignominy  and 
death,  and  raised  him  to  affluence,  without  bedewing  his  grave  as  he  stooj)s  over  it 
■with  the  tears  of  sensibility  and  tender  recolle-tion  ?  Can  we  think  of  the  love  of 
God,  not  only  in  saving  us,  but  in  giving  up  His  Son  to  the  death  for  us  all,  in  order 
to  save  not  His  friends  but  His  enemies,  without  having  our  hearts  warmed  with  a 
kindred  love,  and  constrained  by  an  irresistible  influence,  to  live  no  longer  to  our- 
selves, but  to  Him  who  hath  died  for  us  and  risen  again?  And  does  not  the  con- 
templation of  the  chnracter  of  Christ,  as  exhibited  in  His  life  of  suffering  and 
death  and  agony,  tend  to  beget  in  us  a  conformity  to  His  image  ?  You  behold  the 
Son  of  God  leaving  a  palace,  and  becoming  the  tenant  of  a  prison  ;  and  who  can 
indulge  in  pride  that  contemplntes  such  an  overpowering  exhibition  of  humility  ? 
You  behold  the  Lord  of  all  worlds  wandering  to  and  fro  upon  this  earth  without  a 
bouse  to  afford  Him  shelter,  yet  not  repining;  and  who,  having  food  and  raiment, 
should  not  therewith  be  content  ?  You  behold  Him  rejected  by  the  nation  He  was 
sent  to  save,  yet  lamenting  its  infatuation,  and  weeping  in  the  foresight  of  its 
doom  ;  and  who  would  not  pity  the  miserable  man  who  does  not  forgive  the  injuri- 
ous ?  You  see  the  crucified  Jesus  laid  in  the  grave  ;  and  who  would  not  repose  in 
the  bed  He  has  hallowed  ?  You  see  Him  rising  in  glory  ;  and  who  would  not  exult 
in  the  hope  of  immortality  ?  Had  Christ  not  been  crucified,  this  Spirit  had  never 
been  sent  to  earth,  to  move,  to  arrange  the  disordered  elements  of  our  moral 
nature,  to  convert  the  desert  into  the  fruitful  field,  and  tlie  bleak  and  barren  wilder- 
ness into  the  paradise  of  God.  What,  then,  we  ask,  should  the  apostle  have 
determined  to  know,  in  comparison  with  the  great  subject  upon  which  he  dwelt? 
What  is  more  suiteii  to  the  hungry  than  bread — what  more  consonant  to  the  state 
of  the  weary  traveller  than  rest — what  more  cheering  to  the  guilty  than  pardon  ; 
and  what  could  the  apostle,  in  his  regard  to  the  honour  of  his  Master,  and  to  the 
interests  of  his  fellows  of  the  city  of  Corinth,  guilty  and  polluted  sinners,  preach 
more  adapted  to  their  situation,  than  that  Jesus,  by  whose  blood  they  might  be 
forgiven,  by  wlmse  Cross  and  Spirit  they  might  be  sanctified,  and  thus  be 
prepared,  both  V)y  title  and  qualification  of  nature,  for  a  place  in  that 
heavenly  family,  in  reference  to  which  they  were  now  foreigners  and  stiangers. 
{J.  Clason.)  Christ   crucified:    the  theme  of  St.  PauVs    preaching: — I.  W^hat 

IT  IS  TO  MAKE  KNOWN  Jesus  Christ.  By  Separating  the  idea  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  Jesus  Christ  crucified,  the  apostle  means  by  the  first  to  specify  the  peisou 
of  Christ.  To  make  known  the  person  of  Christ  is  to  proclaim  Him — 1. 
The  incarnate  God.  Such  he  declai'es  Him  to  be  in  many  passages,  "  Who,  being 
in  the  form  of  God,"  &c.  " He  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever."  "He  is  the 
true  God  and  eternal  life."  2.  The  great  Prophet  of  man.  As  such  He  was  spoken 
of  by  the  prophets  (Isa.  Ixi.  1).  Hence  they,  by  predicting  His  advent,  applied  to 
Him  the  epithet,  the  Messiah,  or  the  Anointed.  3.  Jesus  Christ  the  example. 
"  Leaving  us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow  His  step^*."  Men  are  prone  to 
imitation,  it  is  one  of  the  principles  that  come  earliest  into. action,  by  it  the  child 
acquires  the  art  of  speech.  Of  this  great  principle  Jesus  Christ  availed  Hiiuself  in 
effecting  His  benevolent  purposes  on  the  moral  condition  of  men  ;  He  commanded 
them  to  be  i^erfect,  as  their  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect ;  and,  lest  their  hearts 
sink  within  them,  and  they  should  turn  away  from  the  effort  in  de>pair,  He  hath 
Himself  obeyed  His  own  commandments.  In  the  example  He  has  set  they  may 
confide  :  it  is  perfect  in  the  embodying  and  personifying  His  law.  II.  What  it  is 
TO  MAKE  KNOWN  Jesus  Cheist  CRUCIFIED.  1.  For  pardon — "  Whom  God  hath  set 
forth  to  be  a  propitiation,  through  faith  in  His  blood."  2.  Ciirist  crucified  for 
purification — for  if  He  died  a  propitiation  for  men,  to  save  them  from  their  sins,  His 
work  must  be  either  complete  or  completely  ineffectual :  ineffectual  it  would  be  to 
save  them  from  the  punishment  of  sin  if  they  were  still  left  under  its  ruling 
power.  By  that  death  Christ  having  received  of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  sheds  Him  abroad  on  the  hearts  of  His  people,  destroying  the  tyranny 
of  passion,  weakening  the  power  of  habit,  correcting  the  taste,  implanting  new 
principles,  regenerating  the  affections.     3.   Christ  crucified  for  protection — for  the 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

protection  of  those  whom  He  died  to  save  (Phil.  ii.  8-10;  Eph.  i.  22.)  He  is  the 
ruler  of  providence,  and  subordinates  all  its  events  to  promote  the  object  for  which 
He  was  crucified,  even  the  salvation  of  men.  They  are  exposed  to  danger  from 
temptation,  the  sin  that  remains  within  them  would  precipitate  them  into  guilt, 
His  grace  restrains  ;  the  world  would  seduce,  He  discloses  the  vanity  of  its  fascina- 
tions ;  in  the  hour  of  death,  when  trial  assails  every  weakness  of  humanity.  He 
illumines  and  supports.  4.  For  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4,  12,  13).  5.  For 
eternal  glory — this  is  the  consummation  of  it  (John  xvii.  24).  Of  His  glory,  "it 
hath  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  "  ;  but  elsewhere  it  is  said,  that 
His  followers  shall  be  like  Him,  and  tbat  as  they  have  borne  the  image  of  the 
earthly,  so  also  shall  they  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly,  and  that  image  shall 
never  be  defaced.  III.  What  is  the  import  of  the  phease  "not  to  make 
KNOWN  anything"?  1.  Anything  at  variance  with,  or  opposed  to,  these  doctrines. 
These  doctrines  were  novel  ;  novelty  of  opinion  implies  opinions  previously  exist- 
ing, which  are  for  the  most  part  not  only  distinct,  but  opposite;  for  truth  is  one, 
and  opinions  respecting  it  are  either  consistent  with  it  or  are  inconsistent. 
Novelty  of  oijinion,  therefore,  implies  opposition.  The  opposition  in  the  present 
case  was  extensive  ;  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  contrasted  themselves  with  every 
department,  throughout  the  whole  sphere  of  religious  thinking,  at  Corinth.  The 
sufficiency  of  reason  to  instruct  and  to  regulate  was  tacitly  assumed  by  them ;  of 
the  necessity  of  Divine  instruction  they  had  no  general  idea.  Naturally  allied  to 
this  was  the  sufficiency  of  human  merit  to  command  acceptance.  The  moral 
character  of  their  gods  was  so  low  that  few  men,  however  bad,  could  despair  of 
reconciling  themselves  to  one  or  other  deity  :  the  thief,  the  murderer,  the  adulterer, 
could  all  tind  examples  of  their  own  vice  in  the  superior  beings  they  feared.  A 
degradation  of  the  standard  of  virtue  necessarily  followed,  accomijanied  with  cal- 
lousness of  moral  disapprobation.  Even  in  those  religious  rights  where  human 
inability  appeared  more  unambiguously  acknowledged  in  the  sacrifices  by  which 
they  depreccited  the  wrath  of  offended  Deity,  it  is  easy  to  descry  the  spirit  striving 
by  such  means  to  establish  a  claim  on  the  Divine  equity  for  protection  and  bless- 
ing, rather  than  the  mere  mercy  of  God.  And  again,  allied  to  this,  and  forming 
but  a  new  aspect,  was  the  assumption  of  the  sufficiency  of  human  effort  to  originate 
and  carry  on  to  perfection  excellences  of  character.  I  mention  further  their 
notions  of  the  relative  value  of  the  virtues :  pride  was  with  them  elevation  of 
spirit ;  brute  courage,  designated  by  way  of  eminence,  virtue  ;  a  spirit  of  revenge 
was  esteemed  honour,  and  the  constituted  favourite  topic  of  their  most  lauded 
poets.  Throughout  the  whole  sphere  there  was  a  lamentable  destitution  of  spiritu- 
ality in  their  modes  of  thinking  and  feeling.  Now,  as  these  were  the  opinions 
that  obtained  at  Corinth,  and  as  all  these  are  directly  at  variance  with  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  with  the  Christianity  which  the  apostle  had  to  make 
known,  it  is  obvious  that  in  the  text  he  referred  specifically  to  these  opinions,  and 
that  he  considered  them  as  what  was  not  to  be  made  known  by  one  to  whom  was 
committed  the  ministration  of  the  gospel ;  and  condemning  them  thus  specifically, 
he  condemned  them  by  their  principles,  and  so  he  condemned  all  the  consequences 
of  such  principles  whenever  they  should  in  after  years,  under  any  other  forms, 
appear.  2.  Not  anything  exclusive  of  these  doctrines.  At  first  sight  it  appears 
impossible  that  any  one,  pretending  to  make  known  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified, 
should  be  able  to  do  it  in  a  way  exclusive  of  the  doctrines  we  have  explained  :  they 
seem  so  essential  to  Christianity.  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  and  Christi- 
anity, are  convertible  terms,  they  signify  the  same  thing.  But  as  what  appears  to 
man  to  be  impossible  is  often  possible  with  God,  so  what  appears  to  man  to  be 
impossible  is  often  possible  with  the  great  enemy  of  God  and  His  Son :  the  arch 
enemy  of  the  doctrines  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  has  devised  the  means 
of  doing  what  is  apparently  imijossible  :  these  means  vary  with  circumstances  ;  but 
one  of  the  most  common  is  to  originate  controversy  respecting  the  minor  matters 
of  the  law  and  the  subordinate  or  less  essential  parts  of  religion.  By  giving  to 
these  a  temporary  and  unmerited  importance,  the  attention  of  thuse  appointed  to 
make  known  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  is  concentiated  and  engrossed, 
weightier  matters  are  in  i^roportion  neglected,  and  the  duty  of  promulgating  Chris- 
tianity is  performed  in  a  way  more  or  less  exclusive  of  its  characteristic  doctrines. 
3.  Not  anything  so  habitually  as  those  doctrines.  There  is  no  virtue,  no  excellence, 
that  in  practice  may  not  be  carried  to  an  extreme  ;  and  every  extreme  is  bad.  On  this 
subject,  of  making  known  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  men  having  indulged  in 
the  utmost  extravagances  ;  have,  under  the  best  and  most  pious  feelings,  conceived 


CHAP.  II.]  1.   CORINTHIANS.  125 

that  in  the  worus  of  the  apo>^tle  they  are  enjoined  so  to  make  known  the  distinguish- 
ing doctrines  of  the  gospel,  as  to  exclude  everything  else  ;  have  tacitly  denied  any 
importance  to  th'*  minor  parts  of  the  system,  and  have  deemed  the  explication  of 
them  unworthy  U-  ir  attention.  By  thus  failing  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the 
demands  of  the  system,  and  the  mixed  character  of  those  who  hear  the  gospel,  they 
have  given  offence  to  the  sensible,  disgusted  the  almost  Christian,  and  by  hmiting 
their  range  of  topics,  have  introduced  into  their  illustrations  and  enforcements  a 
monotony  of  thinking,  destructive,  in  no  small  degree,  of  ministerial  usefulness. 
Such  persons  seem  to  act  under  the  mistake  that  they  have  to  make  Jesus  Christ 
known  only  to  the  unconverted.  IV.  What  is  expressed  by  the  resolution,  "  I 
determined  not  to  know  anything,"  etc.  1.  His  conviction  of  the  truth  of  these 
doctrines.  2.  His  sense  of  their  importance.  "  Why  am  I  invested,"  he  would 
naturally  ask  himself,  "  by  the  Creator,  the  Ruler  of  men,  with  extraordinary  and 
supernatural  power  to  propagate  among  them  these  tenets,  unless  they  are  of  more 
than  worldly  importance  to  them  ?  ij.  His  determination  to  act  worthily  of  his 
convictions.  How  jDeculiar  and  how  sublime  was  the  attitude  in  which  he  now 
stood  !  He  saw  the  mightiest  purposes  of  benevolence  identified  with  his  efforts, 
he  saw  the  cause  of  truth  dependent  on  his  success,  he  heard  the  voice  of  gratituiie 
for  his  own  preservation  summoning  him  to  the  sacred  enterprise.  (IF.  Moodic,  ,  , 
D.D.)  Preaching  Chrht : — "Don't  you    know,    young  man,"    said    an    aged) 

minister,  in  giving  advice  to  a  younger  brother,  "that  from  every  town,  and  every  ) 
village,  and  every  hamlet  in  England,  there  is  a  road  to  London  ?  "  "  Yes,"  was  ( 
the  reply.  "  So,"  continued  the  venerable  man,  "  from  every  text  in  Scripture  \ 
there  is  a  road  to  the  metropolis  of  Scripture— that  is,  Christ.  And  your  business,  I 
when  you  get  a  text,  is  to  say,  now  what  is  the  road  to  Christ,  and  then  preach  a  1 
sermon,  running  along  the  road  towards  the  great  metropolis,  Christ."  In  con-  J 
sidering  what  is  implied  in  preaching  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  we  remark —  ' 
I.  That  it  implies  the  preaching  of  Christ's  Divinity.  II.  To  preach  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  implies  the  preaching  of  the  attractiveness  of 
f  Christ's  character.  "  The  Lord  Jesus,  it  has  been  remarked,  is  the  subject  of  all 
j  prophecy,  the  substance  of  all  types,  the  end  of  the  law,  the  jewel  that  lies  in  the 
;  casket  of  every  promise,  the  sun  in  whom  all  the  rays  of  heavenly  truth  centre, 
I  and  from  whom  they  radiate,  filling  the  minds  of  all  redeemed  men,  and  of  ail  holy 
'  angels,  with  their  light  and  glory."  III.  Preaching  Christ  implies  preaching  Him 
IN  ALL  His  OFFICES  AS  Prophet,  Priest  AND  KiNG.  IV.  Preaching  Christ,  and 
Him  crucified,  implies  the  setting  forth  in  all  its  fulness  and  freeness 
Christ's  atoning  sacrifice,  and  commending  Him  and  it  for  the  acceptance  of  all 
hearers.  Now,  whilst  the  substitutionary  work  of  Christ  must  ever  be  the  theme  of 
true  gospel  preaching,  preachers  should  be  careful  to  be  fervent  in  spirit  whilst 
commending  Christ  and  His  salvation  to  men.  No  doubt  God  may  bless  clear  and 
cold  pi'eaching.  For  illustration,  when  Dr.  Kane  was  in  the  Arctic  regions  he  cut 
a  piece  of  ice  clear  as  crystal,  in  the  form  of  a  convex  lens,  held  it  up  to  the  sun's 
rays,  and  to  the  surprise  of  the  natives  set  in  a  blaze  some  dry  wood  which  had 
been  gathered.  So  an  unconverted  preacher  may  be  the  medium  by  which  the 
truth  may  be  brought  to  other  hearts  and  kindle  them  with  the  holy  flame  of 
Divine  love.  Still,  that  is  not  usual,  and  it  is  well  it  is  not.  True  preaching 
should  be  earnest ;  and,  indeed,  all  the  most  eminent  soul-winners  may  be  said  to 
have  had  their  hearts  in  their  mouths,  so  fervent  were  they  in  spirit.  Thus, 
Eichard  Sheridan  used  to  say,  "I  often  go  to  hear  Eowland  Hill  because  his  ideas 
come  red-hot  from  the  heart."  Dr.  Mason,  when  asked  what  he  thought  was  the 
strong  point  of  Dr.  Chalmers,  replied,  "  His  blood-earnestness."  And  a  Chinese 
convert  once  remarked  in  conversation  with  a  missionary,  "  We  want  men  with  hot 
hearts  to  tell  us  of  the  love  of  Christ,"  Such  is  the  manner  in  which  Christ,  and 
Him  crucified,  should  be  preached.  (D.  Scott,  D.D.)  St.  Paul's  determination  : 
—And  was  the  apostle  wrong  in  his  determination?  He  speaks  as  if  the  doctrine  i 
of  the  Cross  were  ample  enough,  comprehensive  enough,  for  all  his  powers.  Does 
this  at  all  indicate  that  he  was  of  a  narrow  and  contracted  mind,  which  could 
apply  itself  to  only  one  topic,  whilst  a  hundred  others,  perhaps  nobler  and  loftier, 
lay  beyond  its  grasp  ?  Nay,  not  so  ;  the  tone  of  the  apostle  is  not  that  of  a  man 
who  is  apologising  for  the  limited  character  of  his  preaching,  or  its  humiliating 
tendency ;  it  is  rather  that  of  one  who  felt  that  the  Corinthians  had  nothing  to 
complain  of,  seeing  that  he  had  taught  them  the  most  precious,  the  most  diffusive, 
the  most  ennobling  of  truths.  Here,  then,  is  our  subject  of  discourse — the  apostle 
determined  to  know  nothing  save  the  Cross  ;  but  the  Cross  is  the  noblest  study  for 


V 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  intellectual  man,  as  it  is  the  only  refuge  for  the  immortal.     How  cliiifereut  was 
the  plan   of  the  apostle  from  that  pursued  by  many  who  have  undertaken  the 
propagation  of  Christianity.     The  missionary  might  keep  back  all  mention  of  the 
Cross,  because  fearful  of   exciting  dislike  and  contempt.     But,  all  the  while,   he 
would  be  withholding  that  which  gives  its  majesty  to  the  system,   and  striving  to 
apologise  for  its  noblest  distinction.     Now,  we  need  hardly  observe  to  you  that,  so 
far  as  Christ  Jesus  Himself  was  concerned,  it  is  not  possible  to  compute  what  may 
be  called  the  humiliation  or  shame  of  the  Cross.     It  is  altogether  beyond  our 
power  to  form   any  aiJequate  conception   of  the   degree   in  which    the    Mediator 
humbled  Himself  when  born  of  a  woman,  and  taking  jDart  of  flesh  and  blood.     But 
when  the  Redeemer,  though  He  had  done  no  sin,  consented  to  place  Himself  in  the 
position  of  sinners,  then  was  it  that  He  marvellously  and  mysteriously  descended. 
"  He  humlded  Himself  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross." 
Here  it  is  that  the  word  "  shame  "  may  justly  be  used;  for  in  this  it  was  that 
Christ  Jesus  became  "  a  curse  for  us."     We  read  nothing  of  the  shame  of  His 
becoming  a  man,  but  we  do  read  of  the  shame  of  His  dying  as  a  malefactor.     And 
if  we  allow  that  it  was  a  shameful  thing,  that  it  involved  a  humiliation  which  no 
thought  can  measure,  with  what  other  emotions,  you  may  ask,  but  those  of  sorrow 
and  self-reproach,  should  we  contemplate  the  Cross  ?     Shall  we  exult  in  the  Cross  ? 
The  awful  transactions  of  wliich  Calvary  was  the  scene  should  never  be  contem- 
plated by  us  without  a  deep  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  the  guilt  which  required 
such  an  expiation,  and  great  self-abhorrence  at  having  added  to  the  burden  which 
weighed  down  the  innocent  sufferer.     But  tbough  of  all  men,  perhaps,  St.  Paul  was 
the  least  likely  to  underrate  the  causes  of  sorrow  presented  by  the  Cross,  this  great 
apostle,  in  determining  to  know  nothing  but  the  Cross,  could  adopt  a  tone  which 
implied  that  he  gloried  in  the  Cross.     And  why,  think  you,  was  this  ?     Or  why,  if 
there  be  so  much  of  shame  ahout  the  Cross,  was  the  apostle  wise,  when  addressing 
himself  to  a  refined  people,  in  determining  to  "  know  nothing  but  Jesus  Christ,  and 
Him  crucified  " '?     Indeed,  there  is  no  dilHculty  in  finding  answers  to  these  ques- 
tions ;  the  only^difficulty  is  in  the  selecting  those   which  are  the  more  pertinent 
and  striking,   i^l.':  We  may  first  observe  tbat  the  great  truth  which  the  ajjostle  had 
to  impress  on  tlie  Corinthians  was  that,  in  spiteof  their  sinfulness  and  alienation, 
they  were  still  beloved  by  the  one  true  God.     And  how  could  he  better  do  this  than 
by  displaying  the  Cross  ?     The  greater  the  humiliation  to  which  the  Son  of  God 
/  submitted,  the  greater  was  the  amount  of  the  Divine  love  towards  man.     We  know 
'   not  whether  it  be  lawful  to  speak  of  the  possibility  of  our  having  been  saved 
through  any  other  arrangement.     We  may  not  be  able  to  prove,  and  perhaps  it 
hardly  becomes  us  to  investigate,  what  may  be  called  the  necessity  for  Christ's 
death,  so  that,  unless  Jesus  had  consented  to  die,  it  would  not  have  been  in  God's 
power  to  open  to  us  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     But  we  cannot  be  passing  the  bounds 
of  legitimate   supposition   if  we   imagine  for  a   moment  that    some    less    costly 
process    had    sufficed,    and   that    justice    had    been    satisfied,    without  exacting 
from  our  Surety  penalties   so   tremendous   as   were    actually    paid.      And   is  it 
not   too   evideut    to    ask    any   proof,    that  in  the  very  proportion    in   which    you 
diminish  the    sufferings   of    the    Mediator,    you    diminish    also    the    exhibition 
of  His  love,  and  leave  it  a  thing  to   be   questioned  ?     It   is,   then,   to    "  Christ 
Jesus,  and  Him  crucified  "  that  we  make  our  appeal  when  we  would  furnish  such 
evidence  of  Divine  love  as  must  overbear  all  unbelief.     We  do  not  rest  our  proof  on 
the  fact  that  we  have  been  redeemed,  but  on  the  fact  that  we  have  been  redeemed 
through   the   bitter  passion  and  the  ignominious  death   of   God's  only  and  well- 
beloved  Son.     It  is  here  that  the  proof  is  absolutely  irrefragable.     Notwithstand- 
ing all  which  man  hath  done  to  iJi'ovoke  Divine  wrath  and  make  condemnation 
inevitable,  he  is  regarded  with  unspeakable  tenderness  by  the  Almighty.     Teach  me 
this,  and  you  teach  me  everything.     And  this  I  learn  from  Christ  crucified.     I 
learn  it,  indeed,  in  a  measure  from  the  sun,  as  he  walks  the  firmament  and  warms 
the   earth   into   fertility.     I   learn   it   from   the   moon,  as  she  gathers  the  stars 
into    her    train    and    throws    over    creation    her    robe    of    soft    light.      But   if 
I    am    taught   by   these,   the    teaching   after   all   is   but   imperfect   and  partial. 
But    when    I    behold    Christ    crucified,    I    cannot    doubt    the    Divine    love.      I 
cannot    doubt    of    this    love,   that    it   may  justly   be   called   inexhaustible,   and 
that,  if  1  will  only  allow  myself  to  be  its  object,  there  is  no  amount  of  guiltiness 
which  can  exclude  me  from  its  embrace.     2.  We  proceed  to  observe  that,  although 
to  the  eye  of  sense  there  be  nothing  but  shame  about  the  Cross,  yet  a  spiritual  dis- 
cernment perceives  it  to  be  hung  with  the  very  richest  of  trophies.     It  is  necessarily 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   CORIXTIIIANS.  127 

to  be  admitted  that,  in  one  point  of  view,  tliere  was  sbame,  degradation,  ignominy, 
in  Christ's  dying  on  the  Cross  ;  but  it  is  equally  certain  that  in  another  there  was 
honour,  victory,  trianipli.  There  are  impaled  those  principalities  and  powers,  the 
originators  and  propagators  of  evil ;  there  is  fastened  Death  itself,  that  great  tyrant 
and  destroyer  of  human  kind ;  there  our  sins  are  transfixed,  having  been  condemned 
in  the  tlesh,  because  borne  in  Christ's  body  on  the  tree.  And  am  I,  then,  to  be 
ashamed  of  the  Cross?  It  is  to  be  ashamed  of  the  battle-field  on  which  has  been 
won  the  noblest  of  victories,  of  the  engine  by  which  has  been  vanquished  the 
fiercest  of  enemies.  It  is  to  be  ashamed  of  conquest,  ashamed  of  triumph,  ashamed 
of  deliverance.  And  therefoi'e  was  His  death  glorious,  aye,  unspeakably  more 
glorious  than  life,  array  it  how  you  will  with  circumstances  of  honour.  This  turns 
the  crown  of  thorns  into  a  diadem  of  splendour.  This  converts  the  sepulchre  of 
Jesus  into  the  avenue  of  immortality.  3.  But  we  have  hitherto  scarcely  carried  our 
argument  to  the  full  extent  of  the  apostle's  assertion.  Not  only  was  he  determined 
to  know  amongst  the  Corinthians  "  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,"  but  he  was 
determined  to  know  nothing  else.  And  if  vou  consider  for  a  moment  what  reason 
we  have  to  believe  that  every  blessing  which  we  enjoy  may  be  traced  to  the  Cross, 
you  will  readilv  acknowledge  tbat  St.  Paul  went  no  further  than  he  was  bound  to 
go  as  a  faithful  messenger  of  Cljrist.  I  can  say  to  the  man  of  science,  tbine 
intellect  was  saved  for  thee  by  the  Cross.  I  can  say  to  the  father  of  a  family, 
the  endearments  of  home  were  rescued  by  the  cross.  I  can  say  to  the  admirer  of 
nature,  the  glorious  things  in  the  migbty  panorama  retained  their  places  through 
the  erection  of  the  Cross.  I  can  say  to  the  ruler  of  an  emjjire,  the  subordination 
of  different  classes,  the  working  of  society,  the  energies  of  government,  are  all 
owing  to  the  Cross.  And  when  the  mind  passes  to  the  consideration  of  spiritual 
benefits,  where  can  you  find  one  not  connected  with  "  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him 
crucified  ''  ?  But  we  have  yet  anotber  remark  to  offer.  St.  Paul  must  have  desired 
to  teach  that  doo-triue  which  was  best  adapted  to  the  bringing  the  Corinthians  to 
"live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  the  world."  If,  therefore,  he  confined  him- 
self to  an}'  one  doctrine,  we  may  be  sure  that  he  considered  it  the  most  likely  to  be 
influential  on  the  practice,  on  the  turning  sinners  from  the  error  of  their  ways,  and 
making  them  obedient  to  God's  law.  And  what  doctrine  is  this  if  not  that  of  ^ 
"Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified"?      (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  hnoicledae  of 

Jesus  Christ  the  best  knowledge : — I.  I  am  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  "  not 
KNOWING  anythixo,  SAVE  Jesus  Chkist,  AND  HiM  CRUCIFIED."  By  Jesus  Christ 
we  are  to  understand  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  By  this  word  "  know,"  we  are  not 
to  understand  a  bare  historical  knowledge.  It  implies  an  experimental  knowledge 
of  His  crucifixion  so  as  to  feel  the  power  of  it.  II.  I  pass  on  to  give  some  reasons 
WHY  every  Christian  should,  with  the  apostle,  determine  "  not  to  know  any- 
thing save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."  1.  Without  this  our  persons  will 
not  be  accepted  in  the  siglit  of  God.  Some  may  please  themselves  in  knowing  the 
world,  othei  s  boast  themselves  in  the  knowledge  of  a  multitude  of  languages.  The 
meanest  Christian,  if  he  know  but  this,  though  he  know  nothing  else,  will  be 
accepted  ;  so  tbe  greatest  master  in  Israel,  the  most  letter-learned  teacher,  without 
this,  will  be  rejected.  2.  Without  tbis  knowledge,  our  performances,  as  well  as 
persons,  will  not  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  Two  persons  may  go  up  to  the 
temple  and  pray;  but  h^'  only  will  return  home  justified,  who,  in  the  language  of 
our  Collects,  sincerely  offers  up  his  prayers  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Farther : 
As  our  devotions  to  God  will  not,  so  neither,  without  this  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ,  will  our  acts  of  charity  to  men  be  accepted  by  Him.  As  neither  our  acts  of 
piety  nor  charity,  so  neitber  will  our  civil  nor  moral  actions  be  acceptable  to  God, 
without  this  experimental  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  death  of  Jesus  Christ 
has  turned  our  whole  lives  into  one  continued  sacrifice.  III.  Exhort  you  to  put 
the  apostle's  resolution  in  practice,  and  beseech  you,  with  him,  to  determine 
"  not  to  know  anything  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."  (G.  Whitfield,  31.  A.) 
The  hnowledfje  of  Christ  crucified : — 1.  Let  us  be  thankful  to  God  for  a  crucified 
Eedeemer.  There  is  nothing  in  heaven  and  earth  such  an  amazing  wonder  as 
this,  nothing  can  vie  with  it  for  excellence.  2.  Let  us  delight  in  the  knowledge  of 
Christ  crucified,  and  be  often  in  the  thoughts  and  study  of  Him.  Study  Christ, 
not  only  as  living,  but  dying.  (1)  This  will  keep  up  life  in  our  repentance.  We 
cannot  look  upon  Christ  crucified  for  us  for  our  guilt,  but  the  meditation  of  this 
must  melt  us  into  sorrow.  (2)  It  will  spirit  our  faith,  vmen  we  shall  see  His  blood 
confirming  an  everlasting  covenant  wherein  God  promises  to  be  gracious.  (3) 
This  will  animate  us  in  our  approaches  to  God.     Not  only  a  bare  coming,  but 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuxv.  ii. 

a  boldness  and  confidence  in  coming  to  God  was  purchased  by  a  crucified  Christ 
(Heb.  X.  19).  (4)  This  will  be  a  means  to  further  us  in  a  progress  in  holiness. 
An  affection  to  sin,  which  cost  the  Eedeemer  of  the  world  so  dpar,  would  be 
inconsistent  with  a  sound  knowledge  and  serious  study  of  a  crucified  Saviour. 
(5)  This  will  be  the  foundation  of  all  comfort.  What  comfort  can  be  wanting 
when  we  can  look  uiDon  Christ  crucified  as  our  Surety,  and  look  upon  ourselves 
as  crucified  in  Him  ;  when  we  consider  our  sins  as  iDunished  in  Him,  and  ourselves 
accepted  by  virtue   of  His  Cross.       (Bp.  Hacket.)  The    demonstratinn   of  the 

Spirit : — If  the  wisdom  of  men  had  been  to  advise  about  the  most  eftectual  means 
to  promote  Christianity  in  the  world,  they  would  presently  liave  considered  what 
those  things  are  which  are  most  likely  to  prevail  on  mankind,  and,  according 
to  their  several  inclinations,  would  have  made  choice  of  one  or  the  other  of  them. 
Some  would  have  been  for  the  way  of  external  greatness  and  power  a'*  most  apt 
to  oversway  the  generality  of  mankind.  Others  would  have  thouglit  this  an 
improper  way  of  promoting  religion  by  the  power  of  the  sword,  because  that  is 
more  apt  to  affright  than  convince  men,  and  the  embracing  religion  supposes  the 
satisfaction  of  men's  minds  about  it,  and  all  power  doth  not  carry  demonstration 
along  with  it ;  therefore  such  would  have  proposed  the  choosing  out  of  men  of  the 
finest  i^arts  and  best  accomplishments,  who,  dispersing  themselves  into  several 
countries,  should,  by  their  eloquence  and  reason,  prevail  on  the  more  ingenious  and 
capable  sort  of  men,  who  by  degrees  would  draw  all  the  rest  after  them.  Thus  the 
wisdom  of  men  would  have  judged  ;  but  the  wisdom  of  God  made  choice  of  ways 
directly  contrary  to  these.  He  would  not  suffer  His  truth  to  be  so  much  beholden 
for  its  reception  either  to  the  power  or  the  wit  of  men.     I.  Why  St.  Paul  doth  so 

UTTERLY    KENOUNCE    THE     ENTICING    WOEDS    OF    MAn's    WISDOM  ?       FoT    We    are     not    to 

imagine  it  was  any  natural  incapacity  or  want  of  education  which  made  him 
forbear  them.  The  apostle  implies  an  unsuitableness  in  tliese  enticing  ways  of 
man's  wisdom  to  the  design  of  promoting  the  Christian  religion ;  what  that  was 
I  shall  now  more  particularly  search  into.  1.  As  to  the  enticing  words  of 
persuasion.  2.  As  to  the  way  and  method  of  reasoning,  or  man's  wisdom.  1. 
As  to  the  way  of  eloquence  then  in  so  much  vogue  and  esteem,  called  by  St.  Paul 
(ver.  1)  the  excellency  of  speech.  And  what  harm  was  there  in  that  that  it  could 
not  be  permitted  to  serve  the  design  of  the  gospel  ?  Is  not  the  excellency  of  speech 
a  gift  of  God  as  well  as  knowledge  and  memory  ?  What  are  all  the  instructions  of 
orators  intended  for  but  to  enable  men  to  speak  clearly  and  fitly  and  with  all  those 
graces  and  ornaments  of  speech  which  are  most  apt  to  move  and  persuade  the 
hearers  ?  And  what  is  there  in  all  this  disag'eeable  to  the  design  of  the  doctrine 
of  Christ?  Are  not  the  greatest  and  most  weiglity  concernments  of  mankind  fit  to 
be  represented  in  the  most  proper  and  clear  expressions,  and  in  the  most  moving 
and  alfectionate  manner?  Why,  then,  should  St.  Paul  be  so  scrupulous  about 
using  the  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom  ?  To  clear  this  matter  we  are  to 
consider  a  twofold  eloquence.  (1)  A  gaudy,  sophistical  eloquence  is  wholly 
renounced  by  him,  of  which  the  apostle  seems  particularly  to  speak,  mentioning 
it  under  the  name  of  man's  wisdom,  which  was  in  mighty  esteem  among  the 
Greeks,  but  suspected  and  cried  down  by  wiser  men  as  that  which  did  only  beguile 
injudicious  people.  And  the  great  orator  himself  confesses  the  chief  end  of  their 
popular  eloquence  was  so  to  move  their  auditors  as  to  make  them  judge  rather 
according  to  passion  than  to  reason.  This  being  the  common  design  of  the 
enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom  in  the  apostle's  age,  had  they  not  the  greatest 
reason  to  renounce  the  methods  of  those  whose  great  end  was  to  deceive  their 
hearers  by  fair  speeches  and  plausible  insinuations?  (2)  The  apostle  is  not  to 
be  understood  as  if  he  utterly  renounced  all  sober  and  manly  eloquence ;  for  that 
were  to  renounce  the  best  use  of  speech  as  to  the  convmcing  and  persuading 
mankind.  And  what  is  true  eloquence  but  speaking  to  the  best  advantage,  with 
the  most  lively  expressions,  the  most  convincing  arguments,  and  the  most  moving 
figures  ?  What  is  there  novir  in  this  which  is  disagreeable  to  the  most  Divine 
truths  ?  Is  it  not  fit  they  should  be  represented  to  our  minds  in  a  way  most  apt 
to  aS'ect  them  ?  2.  As  to  the  way  and  method  of  reasoning.  So  some  think  these 
words  are  chiefly  to  be  understood  of  the  subtilty  of  disputing  because  the  apostle 
brings  in  demonstration  as  a  thing  above  it.  But  this  again  seems  very  hard  that 
the  use  of  reasoning  should  be  excluded  from  the  way  of  propa<?ating  Christian 
religion.  But  that  which  St.  Paul  rejects  as  to  this  was — 1.  The  way  of  wrangling 
and  perpetual  disputing,  by  the  help  of  some  tei'ms  and  rules  of  logic,  so  that  they 
stuck   out  at  nothing,  but  had  something  to  say  for  or  against  anything.     No 


CHAP.  II.]  J.   COEINTHIANS.  129 

man  that  uuderstauds  the  laws  of  reasoning  can  find  fault  with  the  methodisinj^ 
our  conception  of  things  by  bringing  them  under  their  due  ranks  and  heads  ;  nor 
with  understanding  the  difference  of  causes,  the  truth  and  falsehood  of  propositions, 
and  the  way  of  discerning  true  and  fake  reasonings  from  each  other.  But  men 
were  fallen  into  such  a  humour  of  disputing  that  nothing  would  pass  for  truth 
among  them.  And  therefore  it  was  not  fitting  for  the  apostles  of  Christ  to  make 
use  of  these  baffled  methods  of  reasoning  to  confirm  the  truth  of  what  they  delivered 
upon  the  credit  of  Divine  revelation.  2.  The  way  of  mere  human  reasoning  as  it 
excludes  Divine  revelation.  The  apostle  proves  the  necessity  of  God  revealing 
these  things  by  His  Spirit  (vers.  10-12).     II.  To  inquire  into  the  force  of  that 

DEMONSTRATION  OF  THE  SpIRIT  AND  OF  POWER  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  MENTIONS  AS 
SUFFICIENT     TO     SATISFY     THE      MINDS     OF     MEN     WITHOUT     THE     ADDITIONAL     HELP     OF 

HUMAN  WISDOM ;  wherein  are  two  things  to  be  spoken  of.  I.  What  is  meant  by  the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power?  1.  It  must  be  something  by  way 
of  proof  of  another  thing,  otherwise  it  could  not  bear  the  name  of  demonstra- 
tion. If  the  apostle's  words  were  understood  of  the  conviction  of  men's  consciences 
by  the  power  of  preaching,  his  argument  could  reach  no  farther  than  to  those 
who  were  actually  convinced,  but  others  might  say,  We  feel  nothing  of  this  powerful 
demonstration  upon  us.  Since,  therefore,  St.  Paul  speaks  for  the  conviction  of 
others,  and  of  such  a  ground  whereon  their  faith  was  to  stand  (ver.  5),  it  is  most 
reasonable  to  understand  these  words  of  some  external  evidence  which  they  gave 
of  the  truth  of  what  they  delivered.  2.  That  evidence  is  described  by  a  double 
character — it  was  of  a  Spiritual  nature  and  very  powerful.  And  such  a  demonstra- 
tion was  then  seen  among  them  in  the  miraculous  gifts  and  works  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  3.  Why  this  was  not  as  liable  to  suspicidn  as  the  way  of  eloquence  and 
logic,  since  those  had  been  only  corrupted  and  abused  by  men,  but  the  power  of 
miracles  had  been  pretended  to  by  evil  .spirits.  Why,  then,  did  God  reject  the  most 
rea'-onable  ways  of  dealing  with  men  in  the  way  of  eluquence  and  demonstration, 
which  were  more  natural  and  accommodate  to  the  capacities  and  education  of  the 
most  ingenious  minds,  and  make  choice  of  a  way  which  the  world  had  been  so 
much  abused  in  by  the  imposture  of  evil  spirits  ?  1.  Because  the  method  God 
chose  did  prove  it  was  not  the  invention  of  men,  which  would  have  been  always 
suspected  if  mere  human  arts  had  been  used  to  promote  it.  Whereas  if  the  way 
of  promoting  this  religion  had  been  ordinary  with  the  usual  methods  of  persuasion, 
men  would  have  imputed  all  the  ellicacy  of  it  only  to  the  wisdom  of  men.  For  God 
knows  very  well  the  vanity  and  folly  of  mankind,  how  apt  they  are  to  macjnify  the 
effects  of  their  own  wit  and  reason.  2.  God  gave  sulticient  evidence  that  these 
extraordinary  gifts  could  never  be  the  effects  of  any  evil  spirits.  (1)  The  public- 
ness  of  the  trial  of  it,  when  it  first  fell  upon  them  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  (2) 
The  usefulness  of  this  gift  to  the  apostles,  for  considering  the  manner  of  their 
education  and  the  extent  of  their  commission  to  prench  to  all  nations ;  no  gift 
could  be  supposed  more  necessary.  (3)  The  manner  of  conferring  these  miraculous 
gifts  upon  others  show  that  theie  was  somewhat  in  them  above  all  the  power  of 
imagination  or  the  effects  of  evil  spirits.  II.  The  power  of  miracles,  or  of  doing 
extraordinary  things,  as  well  as  of  speaking  after  an  extraordinary  manner. 
This  seems  the  hardest  to  give  an  account  of,  why  God  should  make  choice  of  this 
way  of  miracles  above  all  others  to  convince  the  world  of  the  truth  of  the  Oiiristian 
doctrine,  upon  these  considerations :  (1)  The  great  delusions  that  bad  been  in  the 
world  so  long  before  under  the  pretence  of  miracles.  (2)  The  great  difficulty  there 
is  in  putting  a  difference  between  true  and  false  miracles.  1.  How  we  may  know 
when  anything  doth  exceed  the  power  of  mere  nature  as  that  is  opposed  to  any 
spiritual  beings ;  for  some  have  looked  on  all  thiugs  of  this  kind  as  impostures 
of  men.  2.  We  must  therefore  inquire  further,  whether  such  things  be  the  effects 
of  magic  or  Divine  power.  For  which  end  these  two  things  are  considerable.  1. 
That  Christ  and  His  apostles  did  dir'clare  the  greatest  enmity  to  all  evil  spirits, 
profes?ing  in  their  design  to  destroy  the  devil's  kingdom  and  power  in  the  world. 
2.  The  devil  was  not  wanting  in  fit  instruments  and  means  to  support  his  kingdom  ; 
and  God  was  pleased,  in  His  infinite  wisdom,  to  permit  him  to  show  his  skill  and 
IJower,  by  which  means  there  was  a  more  eminent  and  consj)icuous  trial  on  which 
side  the  greatest  strength  did  lie.  Thus  the  matter  is  brought  to  a  plain  contest 
of  two  oi^posite  powers,  which  is  greater  than  the  other,  and  which  shows  itself  to 
be  the  Divine  power.  To  which  purpose  we  may  consider  these  two  things.  That 
the  pretended  miracles  of  the  opposers  of  Christianity  did  ditJer  from  the  miracles 
wrought  by  the  apostles  in  several  weighty  circumstances.  1.  In  the  design  and 
VOL.    I.  9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  ii. 

tendeucy  of  them.  Most  of  the  wonderful  things  whereof  the  enemies  of  Chris- 
tianity did  boast  were  wrought  either — (1)  To  raise  astonishment  ami  admiration 
in  the  beholders.  (2)  To  gratify  the  curiosity  of  mankind.  (3)  To  encourage 
idolatry.  (4)  To  take  men  off  from  the  necessity  of  a  holy  life.  2.  In  the  variety, 
openness,  usefulness,  and  frequency  of  them.  The  greatest  magical  powers  were 
limited  and  confined  ;  and  the  spirits  which  ruled  in  the  children  of  disobedience 
were  sensible  of  their  own  chains.  I  shall  only  add  one  circumstance  more,  wherein 
the  miracles  wrought  to  confirm  tlie  Clnistian  religion  exceed  all  others,  and  that 
is — 3.  In  the  satisfaction  they  have  given  to  the  most  inquisitive  part  of  mankind, 
i.e.,  either  to  convince  them  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  confirmed  by  them,  or,  at 
least,  to  bring  them  to  this  acknowledgement  that,  if  the  matters  of  fact  were  true, 
they  are  a  sufficient  proof  of  a  Divine  power.     (Bj^.  Stillinf} fleet .)  The   deter- 

mination of  Paul: — I.  Its  I.mport.     1.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  "Christ, 
and    Him   crucified"?      This  theme  is  distinguished   by — (1)    Great    simplicity. 
Other  teachers  engaged  the  mind  with  speculations  on  subjects  of  various  degrees 
of  interest,  but  this  teacher  had  for  his  theme  a  Person  and  a  fact.     Leaving  the 
philosophers  to  their  "  wisdom  "  he  held  uj)  a  Man,  and  that  Man  hanging  on  a 
Cross.    Other  instructors  spoke  with  great  respect  of  eminent  men,  whose  opinions 
th<^y  were  anxious  to  advance ;  but  it  was  never  known  before  that  a  person  and 
his  sufferings  wei"e  to  be  the  foundation  and  the  superstructure  of  every  discourse. 
(2)  Vast  comprehensiveness.     It  was  not  Paul's  prMctice  to  indulge  in  an  endless 
repetition  of  the  name  of  Christ,  or  in  a  mere  detail  of  His  history,  but  to  exiiibit 
His  life  and  death  as  the  basis  of  a  grand  system  of  truth.     He  "  i)reached  Christ, 
and  Him  crucified,"  as  the  brightest  and  best  revelation  of  the  Divine  character, 
and  the  grand  announcement  of  mercy  to  man.      In  His  incarnation  and  death  we 
see  the  l)ivine  love,  for  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  ;  the  Divine  wisdom,  for 
"  Christ  is  the  wisdom  of  God"  ;  the  Divine  power,  "for  the  gospel  is  the  power 
of  God  unto  salvation  "  ;  the  Divine  justice,  for  the  Saviour  lived  and  suffered  that 
the  righteousness  of  God  might  be  revealed  ;  the  Divine  truth,  for  Christ  came  to 
"  confirm  the  promisees  made  of  God  unto  the  fathers."     2.  In  what  sense  we  are 
to  understand  the  apostle's  determination.      He  determined — (1)  To  exclude  every 
I     subject  that  would  deprive  the  gospel  of  its  power.     The  gospel  is  a  sharp,  two-edged 
1  \  sword,  but  if  we  lower  its  etheieal  temper  by  forging  it  anew  on  our  own  anvil,  it 
I  /  will  wound  no  conscience  and  slay  no  sin.     It  is  a  fire  able  to  melt  the  hardest 
i  \  heart,  but  if  we  damp  its  flame  by  earthly  additions,  the  heart  of  stone  defies  its 
power.     It  is  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word ;  but  the  admixture  of  human  fancies 
■;   and  dogmas  will  destroy  its  power  to  sustain.     It  is  a  mirror,  in  which  the  sinner 
,  Ij    is  to  see  the  correct  reflection  of  his  own  image ;  but  beclouded  by  the  mists  of 
;  I    error,  the  natural  man  cannot  be  exi^ected  to  behold  his  face  in  this  glass.     And 
j  I    therefore  would  we  humbly  cherish  the  apostle's  holy  jealousy  for  the  unadulte- 
\J     rated  gosj)el,  and  "know  nothing  but  .lesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified."     (2)  To 
exclude  everything  that  might  tend  to  dt-prive  the  gospel  of  its  glory.     His  anxiety 
on  this  subject  is  clearly  expressed  in  vers.  1,  4,  5.    He  knew  the  effects  assigned  by 
the  Greeks  to  human  wii-dom,  the  i^ower  ascribed  to  persuasive  words,  and  how 
ready  they  would   be,  supposing  great   moral   changes  to  follow,  to  give  to   his 
reasoning  and  eloquence  the  glory  of  bringing  those  changes  about,  and  therefore 
was  he  most  careful  to  prevent  this  evil.     II.  Its  reasons.     1,  His  anxiety  to  be 
found  faithful.     A  sacred  trust  had  been  reposed  in  him.     How,  then,  could  he 
most  effectually  shield  himself  from  the  woe  threatened  against  unfaithfulness, 
and  give  up  his  account  with  joy  and  not  with  grief?     It  was  simply  by  having  his 
mind  so  engrossed  with  the  grand  theme  of  the  gospel  as  to  shut  out  every  other. 
2.  His   desire  to  promote   the  highest   interests  of  man.     He   was   eminently   a 
philanthropist,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  how  such  a  true  lover  of  mankind  would  seize 
with  avidity  this  remedy  for  universal  suffering,  and  be  ready  to  employ  the  real 
means  for  "  promoting  the  greatest  good  of  the  greatest  number."     In  the  great 
announcements  of  mercy  connected  with  "  Christ,  and  Him  crucified,"  he  had  the 
panacea  for  the  spiritual  woes  under  which  men  were  suffering.     3.  His  grand  aim 
to  give  the  greatest  glory  to  God.     When  the  Eedeemer  was  within  a  few  days  of 
His  crucifixion  He  said  in  His  prayer,  "  Father,  save  Me,"  &c.  (John  xii.  27,  28). 
From  this  prayer,  arrd  its  supernatural  answer,  we  learn,  first,  that  the  i^revailing 
desire  of  every  holy  mind  is  the  glory  of  God  ;  and,  secondly,  that  that  glory  was 
displayed  in  the  death  of  Christ  and  its  great  results.     The  prayer  of  Christ  is  that 
of  every  child  of  God,  "  Father,  glorify  Thy  name."     It  was  so  in  a  remarkable 
degree  in  Paul.     And  it  was  by  the  faithful  exhibition  of  "  Christ,  and  Him  cruci- 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  131 

fied,"  that  he  could  most  effectually  secure  the  high  end  he  had  thus  constHiitly  in 
view.  All  the  Divine  perfections  are  displayed  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  And  the 
effects  of  this  great  theme  on  the  minds  that  receive  it  are  of  such  a  nature  as  to 
bring  the  hight^st  honour  to  the  Divine  name.  The  case  of  the  apostle  is  a 
striking  illustration.  When  he  became  a  preacher  of  the  faith  he  had  once  at- 
tempted to  destroy,  men  "glorified  God  in  him."  The  character  of  the  Divine 
artist  could  be  seen  in  the  work  of  His  hands.  What  power,  in  turning  the  stub- 
born will,  and  causing  it  to  move  in  the  true  way  !  What  love,  in  receiving  into 
the  Divine  friendship  a  bitter  enemy  !  What  wisdom,  which  when  it  was  revealed 
caused  the  disciple  of  Gamaliel  to  count  all  his  learned  notions  as  dross,  for  the 
excellent  knowledge  to  which  it  was  now  supplanted !  And  all  who  believe  the 
gospel,  become  in  like  manner  the  living  epistles  of  God,  known  and  read  by  all 
men,  and  furnishing  to  the  whole  intelligent  universe  the  best  and  the  brightest 
disjilays  of  the  character  of  God.  (IF.  Otcen.)  The  dctermiiKition  of  Paul: — Let 
us — I.  Explain  it.  He  determined — 1.  To  preach  Christ  eruciiied,  as  the  ground 
of  hope,  and  the  motive  to  obedience.  2.  To  exclude  everything  else.  II.  Vindicate 
IT.  This  was — (1)  All  he  was  commissioned  to  preach.  (2)  All  it  was  necessary 
to  preach,  (3)  Everything  else  but  weakens  the  efScacy  of  the  truth.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  The  preacldiifj  of  Cliriat  crucified: — I.  The  apostle  pitEACHED  Chki.st,  and 
Hui  crucified.  1.  Preaching  Christ  means  making  known  the  truth  respecting  Him, 
i.e.,  the  great  facts  concerning  His  birth,  His  life.  His  death,  His  rcsuirection  ;  the 
ends  for  which  He  did  and  suffered  all  this,  and  the  benefits  procured  by  it.  2. 
Preaching  Christ  and  Him  crucified  is  stating  the  fact  of  His  ignominious  death,  and 
making  known  all  the  blessings  connected  with  it.  II.  He  preached  nothing  but 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified,  i.e. — 1.  He  made  Christ  known  on  every  occasion  on 
which  he  addressed  them.  2.  He  rejected  from  his  preaching  whatever  was  not 
intimately  connected  with  this  all-important  theme.  3.  He  made  known  no 
doctrine,  precept,  promise,  but  in  connection  with  Christ  and  Him  crucified.  III. 
He  determined  to  preach  nothing  else.  It  was  not  a  hasty  resolution,  but  his 
deliberate  settled  purpose.  Let  us  consider  what  were  the  reasons  which  induced 
him,  and  which  should  induce  every  minister  of  Christ  to  adopt  the  same  deter- 
mination. 1.  He  saw  the  glory  and  excellency  of  this  subject.  Others  might 
consider  it  foolishness,  but  the  light  of  its  glory  had  shone  into  his  mind.  When  \J 
a  man  has  his  mind  taken  up  with  a  subject  in  which  he  is  delighted,  he  is  quite  ' 
out  of  his  element  if  you  lead  him  from  it,  and  whatever  subject  he  is  engaged 
U23on  he  will  make  it  turn  on  his  favourite  theme.  2.  The  suitableness  of  this  subject 
to  answer  the  great  ends  of  the  Christian  ministry.  It  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth.  Paul  knew  that  this  was  the  only  doctrine 
which  could  reach  the  hardened  heart,  bring  peace  to  the  conscience,  inspire  a  hope 
of  pardon,  make  men  love  God,  and  cultivate  all  the  beauties  of  holiness.  3.  His 
Lord's  command.  The  question  with  him  was,  not  what  message  will  be  agree- 
able, but  what  have  I  been  commanded  to  deliver.  He  was  commanded  to  preach  the 
gospel,  therefore  necessity  was  laid  upon  him,  and  the  Saviour  has  made  the  dis- 
charge of  this  duty  a  test  of  love  to  Him.  Lovest  thou  Me?  Feed  My  sheep.  (W.  R. 
Taylor,  A.M.)  PauVs  rewlve : — I.  The  meaning  of  the  phrase.  Those  who  believe 
in  the  atonement  interpret  it  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  consider  faith  in  it  necessary 
to  salvation.  Others  understand  it  as  a  bare  fact,  or  as  martyrdom  for  truth.  The 
apostle,  however,  gives  his  own  explanation  (chap.  i.  23,  24).  II.  The  proposition 
that  this  is  the  only  doctrine  which  is  saving  !  1.  W'hat  is  our  condition  ? 
(1)  We  are  corrupted  !  (2)  Guilty — actually  criminal,  and  this  is  the  cause  «f  eternal 
death.  2.  This  very  condition  it  is  which  adapts  the  gospel  to  us.  Try  every 
other  doctrine  and  see  if  it  will  do.  (1)  True,  it  reveals  the  glory  of  God,  but 
■what  avails  all  our  knowledge  of  God  if  no  sacrifice  ?  The  gospel  discovers  His 
goodness  in  glowing  characters,  but  while  this  rises  on  the  scene  it  is  shaded  by  His 
justice.  (2)  But  you  say,  the  gospel  is  a  beautiful  moral  law  for  our  guide.  True;  1 
but  what  comfort  is  this  to  guilty  man  ?  Take  the  statute-book  to  the  victim  con- 
demned to  die  ;  expatiate  on  the  law  he  has  violated  ;  alas !  he  wants  pardon,  not_j 
law.  3.  You  say,  there  is  the  example  of  Jesus.  Granted.  We  cannot  study  it 
too  much  ;  yet  example  is  only  law  in  action,  and  the  former  answer  applies  to  it; 
if  the  law  is  unwelcome,  so  is  its  exhibition.  And  what  is  the  fact?  See  the 
Jews.  Was  it  not  the  excellence  of  the  example  which  made  them  hate  it  ?  4. 
You  say,  there  are  many  promises  in  the  gospel  without  that  of  Christ,  or  salvation 
by  Christ.  True ;  but  hope  cannot  rest  on  them.  The  piomise  of  a  common 
providence,  food,  raiment,  &c.,  is  made  ;  but  we  are  guilty — and  what  are  these  if 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

hell  is  to  be  our  portion?  And  again,  tlie  promises  are  all  to  His  people.  5.  There 
is  nothing,  then,  in  the  gospel  on  which  to  rest  but  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ. 
Here,  "what  the  law  could  not  do,"  &e.  Application:  1.  The  Cross  is  of  no  use 
to  us  if  we  do  not  confess  our  corruptions,  inability,  and  danger.  2.  We  see  the 
certainty  of  pardon — all  is  hope  in  the  gospel,  and  all  certainty  too.  Say  not  that 
you  are  unworthy — all  your  unworthiness  is  assumed  in  the  gospel — it  justifies  in 
the  character  of  ungodly.  3.  We  see  what  is  meant  by  living  a  life  of  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God,  all  flows  from  Him,  all  your  petitions  are  presented  by  Him,  the  blood 
of  Christ  and  faith  in  that  blood  are  all  that  stand  between  you  and  God.  4.  Pray 
that  a  ministry  may  ever  be  among  you  to  preserve  this  doctrine.  (-/.  Summerfield,' 
A.M.)  The  knowledge  of  Oirist  crucified: — I.  The  knowledge  heee  mentioned. 
1.  Its  subject.  (1)  Christ's  person.  Jesus  j)oints  out  divinity :  the  signification  being 
Jehovah,  the  S^tviour.  It  was  given  Him  in  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  which 
declared  that  He  should  be  called  Immanuel,  or  God  with  us.  (2)  His  offices. 
Christ  or  Mes-iah  means  "  anointed,"  as  were  prophets,  priests,  and  kings — all 
types  of  Cbrist.  {<i)  He  is  the  prophet  of  His  Church  (Deut.  xviii.  18,  19).  He 
reveals  to  us  the  will  of  God,  and  accompanies  it  with  the  illuminating  influences 
of  the  Spirit,  [b)  He  is  High  Priest  who,  having  offered  sacrifice  for  sin,  arose  to 
make  intercession,  (c)  He  is  King;  He  restrains,  and  finally  destroys  His  enemies  ; 
He  makes  His  people  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power,  governs  them  by  His  holy 
laws,  and  defends  them.  2.  His  work.  "Him  crucified."  The  atonement  thus 
made  is  explicitly  inculcated  in  every  part  of  the  scriptures.  In  the  prophets 
(Isa.  liii.  5;  Dan.  ix.  24,  26,  &e.).  By  our  Lord  (Matt.  xx.  28;  John  vi.  51); 
Matt.  xxvi.  28).  By  the  apostle  (Rom.  v.  C,  10;  Col.  i.  14).  It  was  pointed 
out  by  all  the  sacrifices,  and  in  heaven  the  Eedeemer  appears  as  "  a  Lamb 
as  it  had  been  slxin  "  (Rev.  v.  6,  9,  11,  12).  3.  The  kind  of  knowledge  which  we 
should  have  of  this  subject.  There  are  two  kinds  of  knowledge  of  Christ — specu- 
lative and  practical.  The  former  remains  in  the  head,  the  latter  in  the  heart. 
The  former  is  obtained  by  exercise  of  oi;r  own  faculties  ;  the  latter  only  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  latter  is  intended  in  the  text.  This  knowledge  leads  us  to  receive 
Jesus  as  our  Divine  Saviour  ;  which  prompts  us  to  rely  on  Christ  in  reference  to 
every  one  of  His  offices.  Intellectual  knovvleilge,  however,  is  not  to  be  neglected, 
because  we  cannot  be  affected  by  truths  of  which  we  are  ignorant.  II.  Its 
supREJiE  iMPOKTANCE.  1.  Absolutely  it  gives  important  benefits.  (1)  Acquaintance 
with  the  real  character  of  God.  The  Cross  of  Christ  impresses  us  with  a  sense 
of— (a)  His  holiness  and  justice,  {h)  His  mercy  and  love,  (r)  His  wisdom.  (2) 
Peace  to  the  wounded  conscience.  (3)  The  foundation  of  all  Christian  graces, 
tempers,  and  obedience.  It  is  the  view  of  Him  whom  our  sins  pierced  which 
leads  us  to  mourn  for  them.  It  strengthens  faith — "He  that  spai'ed  not 
His  own  Son,  .  .  .  shall  He  not  freely  give  us  all  things  ? "  It  furthers 
progress  in  holiness.  We  abhor  that  sin  which  heaped  such  suffering  on  the 
Eecleemer.  2.  Eel  itively — (1)  It  is  more  useful  than  any  other  kind  of  knowledge. 
Human  learning  has  its  important  use,  but  the  interests  of  eternity  are  pre- 
ferable to  those  of  time.  (2)  It  is  more  easily  acquired.  It  is  true,  indeed, 
that  where  a  right  disposition  be  wanting,  you  shall  find  things  hid  from 
the  wise  and  prudent.  It  is  true  that  persevering  diligence  is  requisite.  It  is  true 
that  there  are  depths  attending  this  knowledge  which  the  utmost  powers  of  intel- 
lect cannot  fathom.  {J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Preaching  Chriiit  and  Him  cruci- 
fied :—l.  The  great  men  of  the  world  are  tho-e  who  discover  or  apply  great  truths 
to  the  times  in  which  they  live,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  work  effectual  reformations 
of  society.  A  man  is  great,  not  by  the  measure  of  his  faculty,  but  by  the  results 
which  he  produces  in  life.  Paul  was,  then,  one  of  the  greatest.  2.  It  is  more  than 
a  matter  of  curiosity,  when  a  man  has  been  raised  up  of  God  to  do  great  things,  to 
have  him  give  a  view  of  his  own  life,  its  aims  and  metliods.  Paul  here  sounds  the 
keynote  of  his  life  and  cunrse.  You  will  take  notice,  in  all  the  preceding  chapter 
and  in  this,  that  it  is  not  Christ,  but  Christ  crucifird,  Christ  with  His  Cross,  that 
was  the  essential  qualifying  particular.  Paul  did  not  mean,  then,  to  be  a 
skirmislier,  nor  an  elegant  trifler.  He  did  not  propose  to  be  a  rontinist,  either 
through  ceremonies  or  dialectics.  For  it  was  bis  business  to  work  a  thorough 
change  of  character  in  the  men  that  came  under  his  influence,  and  so  to  lay  the 
foundation  for  the  renovation  of  society  itself.  What  could  be  greater  than  this 
work?  3.  Many  things  were  going  on  for  the  renovation,  or  rather  the  restraint, 
of  men's  passions?  But  it  was  a  work  imperfectly  understood,  and  not  done. 
Paul  declared  what  was  the  power  by  which  it  might  be  achieved.     He  did  not 


CHAP.  11.]     ■  7.    CORISriIIAXS.  133 

declare  that  he  meant  to  exclude  everything  else.  The  declaration  is  only  a 
comprehensive  renunciation  of  secular  interests  and  influences  as  working  powers. 
When  a  man  goes  into  a  community  to  work,  he  instinctively  says,  "How  shall 
I  reach  these  men?  Wliat  things  shnll  I  employ  for  their  renovation?"  The 
apostle  says,  "  After  looking  over  the  whole  field,  I  made  up  my  mind  not  to  rely 
on  my  power  to  discourse  eloquently,  nor  upon  my  intellectual  forces.  This  had 
been  done  by  many  a  man  with  great  cogency.  But  Paul,  looking  at  such  men  as 
Soci-ates  and  Plato,  said,  "  I  determined  that  I  would  rely  upon  the  presentation  of 
God's  nature  and  government  as  manifested  particularly  through  the  Christ  as  a 
sacrifice  for  sinners.  By  these  I  meant  to  get  a  hold  upon  men's  conscience, 
affections,  and  life."  A  warrior  prepaiing  for  battle  walking  through  his  mugazine 
passes  by  bows  and  arrows,  and  old-fashioned  armour,  and  says,  "  They  were  good 
iu  their  time  and  way,  but  I  do  not  intend  to  rely  upon  t'*sm."  But  when  he 
comes  to  the  best  instruments  of  modern  warfare,  he  says,  "  Here  are  the  things 
that  I  mean  to  depend  upon."  Therefore,  when  the  apostle  said,  "  I  determined 
not  to  know,"  Ac,  he  avowed  his  faith  that  in  that  there  is  more  moral  jiower  upon 
the  heart  and  the  conscience  than  in  any  other  thing,  and  his  determination  to 
draw  influences  from  that  source  in  all  his  work.  In  view  of  this  I  remark — I. 
The  personal  influence  of  Chkist  upon  the  heart  is  the  first  requisite  for  I 
A  Christian  preacher.  We  may  preach  much  (ihont  Christ,  but  no  man  will\ 
I)reach  Christ  except  so  far  as  Christ  is  in  him.  There  are  many  men  that  by  natin-al 
gifts  are  qualified  to  stand  pre-eminent  above  their  fellows,  who  exert  but  little  I 
religious  influence  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  of  small  endoVmcnt  ! 
whose  life  is  like  a  rushing,  mighty  wind  in  the  influence  whicli  it  exerts.  The 
presence  of  Christ  in  them  is  the  secret  of  their  power.  II.  A  man's  success  in 
preaching  will  depend  upon  his  power  of  presenting  Christ.  There  is  a  great 
deal  of  useful  didactic  matter  that  every  minister  must  give  to  his  congregation. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  doctrine,  fact,  hi-tory,  and  of  description  that  belongs  to  the 
ministerial  desk.  The  Bible  is  full  of  material  for  these  things,  and  ethics  should 
occupy  an  important  place.  But  high  above  all  these  is  the  fountain  of  influence, 
Christ  who  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  sinners,  and  now  ever  lives  to  make  inter- 
cession for  them.  Though  one  preaches  every  other  truth,  if  he  leaves  this  one 
out,  or  abbreviates  it,  he  will  come  short  of  the  essential  work  of  the  gospel.  Put 
this  in,  and  you  have  all,  as  it  were,  in  brief.     III.  There  can  be  no  sound  and 

EFFKCTIVE     METHOD     OF     PREACHING     ETHICS,     EVEN,     WHICH     DOES     NOT     DERIVE     ITS 

authority  froji  THE  LoRD  Christ.  The  motives  derivable  from  the  secular  and 
human  side  of  ethics  are  relatively  feeble.  Whatever  method  is  pursued,  the 
indispensable  connection  between  the  spiritual  element  and  the  practical  develop- 
ment should  be  maintained.  Morality  witliout  spirituality  is  a  plant  without  root, 
and  spirituality  without  morality  is  a  root  without  stem  and  leaves.  I  have  a  right 
to  introduce  into  my  sermons  all  secular  tr.pics  as  far  as  they  are  connected  with 
man's  moral  character  and  his  hopes  of  immortality.  If  I  discuss  them  in  a 
merely  secular  way,  I  desecrate  the  x)ulpit ;  but  if  I  discuss  them  in  the  spirit  of 
Christ,  and  for  Christ's  sake,  that  1  may  draw  men  out  of  their  peculiar  dangers, 
and  lead  them  into  a  course  of  right  living,  then  I  give  dignity  to  the  pulpit. 
IV.  All  reformations  of  evil  in  society  should  spring  from  this  vital  centre. 
It  is  a  very  dangerous  thing  to  preach  Christ  so  that  yoiu*  preaching  shall  not  be  a 
constant  rebuke  to  all  the  evil  in  the  community.  That  man  who  so  j^reaches 
Christ,  doctrinally  or  historically,  that  no  one  tremliles,  is  not  a  faithful  preacher 
of  Christ.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  for  a  man  to  attack  evil  in 
the  spirit  of  only  hatred.  The  sublime  wisdom  of  the  New,  Testament  is  this : 
"  Overcome  evil  with  good."  Was  Christ  not  a  reformer?  Did  He  not  come  to 
save  the  world?  And  did  He  not  hate  evil?  And  yet  with  what  sweetness  of  love 
did  He  dwell  in  the  midst  of  these  things,  so  that  the  publicans  and  the  sinners  took 
heart,  became  inspired  with  hope,  and  drew  near  to  Him.  Christ  reformed  men 
by  inspiring  the  love  of  goodness  as  well  as  by  hatred  of  evil,  and  He  drew  men  from 
their  sin  as  well  as  drove  them  from  it.  V.  Hence  all  philanthropies  are 
paeti.u:.  and  imperfect  that  do  not  grow  out  of  this  same  root.  When 
philanthropy  springs  from  this  centre,  and  is  inspired  by  this  influence,  it  becomes, 
not  a  mere  sentimentalism,  but  a  vivid  and  veritable  power  in  human  s^ociety. 
Philanthropy  without  religion  becomes  meagre.  It  is  the  love  of  man  uninspired 
by  the  love  of  God  !  YI.  All  public  questuins  of  justice,  of  liberty,  of  equity, 
OF  purity,  of  intelligence,  should  be  vitalised  by  the  power  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus.     There  are  other  motives  that  may  press  men  forward  in  a  little  way,  but 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

there  is  nothing  that  has  such  controlling  power  as  the  personal  influence  of  Christ. 
p  {H.  W.  Beecher.)         Preaching  Christ  and  Him  crucified: — I.  This  is  the  geeat 

DOCTEINE  SflTAP.LE  FOB  MAN,  VIEWED  AS  A  BEING  GUILTY  IN    THE  SIGHT  OF    GoD.       This 

state  of  guilt  we  bring  into  the  world  with  us;  we  augment  it  by  actual  ti'ansgression, 
and  we  cannot  remove  it  by  any  service  or  obedience  of  our  own.  In  these  circum- 
stances the  duty  of  the  ambassadors  of  Christ  is  not  to  gain  the  applause  of  their 
perishing  fellow-creatures,  by  displaying  from  week  to  week  the  depth  of  their  own 
learning ;  but  to  offer  simply  this  one  remedy  for  men's  guilt.     II.  This  is  the 

ONLY    doctrine    SUITABLE    FOK    MAN,  VIEWED    AS    A    BEING    WHO    HAS    TO    BE    RAISED    TO 

holiness.  Describe  holiness  as  you  will ;  speak  of  its  beauty  and  its  dignity ; 
invest  it  with  all  the  charms  which  fancy  can  devise  or  language  utter — and  to  the 
human  heart  alienated  from  Christ,  your  efforts  will  be  as  unavailing  as  if  you  were 
to  exhibit  the  finest  combination  of  colours  to  the  blind,  for  "  the  natural  man 
receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  Or  point  to  God,  as  the  highest 
type  of  holiness — you  only  plunge  the  sinner  into  utter  wretchedness.  But  the 
preaching  of  "  Christ  crucified  "  exhibits  a  new  aspect  of  the  Divine  character, 
which  he  can  look  upon  without  fear ;  he  now  strives  to  keep  God's  holiness 
constantly  before  him  ;  and  his  language  is  not  "  Dei^art  from  me,"  but  "  My  soul 
thirsteth  for  God."     III.  This  is   the   only  subject    suitable    for    making    an 

IMPRESSION  UPON  MAN  IN  THE  WAY  OF  LEADING  HIM  TO  THE  DISCHARGE    OF    ACTIVE  DUTY. 

The  growth  of  holiness  in  the  heart  is  indicated  by  the  fruits  of  righteousness  in  the 
life.  Now,  when  the  sinner  is  once  convinced  that  God  loves  him,  and  when  fear, 
and  doubt,  and  suspicion  have  thus  given  place  to  hope,  and  joy,  and  confidence — 
theu  does  he  begin  to  ask  what  he  can  do  to  manifest  his  gratitude  to  his  merciful 
4- Redeemer.  [A.  D.  Davidson.)  The  centre  of  the  gospel: — 1.  The  teaching  of 
Paul  is  remarkable  for  comprehensiveness.  In  Romans  he  traverses  the  whole 
range  of  doctrines  bearing  on  sin  and  salvation ;  in  Ephesians,  from  another 
standpoint,  he  goes  still  further  into  thoughts  of  grace,  love,  glory  ;  in  Corinthians, 
Timothy,  Titus,  he  discourses  of  human  life,  the  world,  congregational  and 
individual  difficulties;  in  Thessalonians,  of  prophecy  and  the  future.  Moreover, 
he  impresses  on  all  Christians  to  go  on  unto  perfection,  and  not  rest  content  with 
the  elements  of  truth.  Therefore,  to  "  know  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified  "  is 
not  to  him  the  minimum,  but  the  maximum  of  knowledge— the  culmination  of  all 
doctrines,  the  starting-point  of  all  duties.  2.  Paul  knew  not  Jesus  in  His  earthly 
life  ;  he  saw  Him  only  in  His  glory ;  yet  the  deepest  imj^ression  left  on  the  heart  of 
Paul  was  the  sweet  name  "  Jesus"  ;  the  indelible  image  burnt  into  his  soul  was 
"  Jesus  Christ  crucified."  3.  Paul,  more  than  any  other,  knew  the  fellowship  of 
Christ's  sufferings.  His  own  weakness  made  him  take  hold  of  the  inexhaustible 
power  of  God,  as  the  crucifixion  leads  to  resurrection-life  and  victory.  As  when  he 
is  weak  then  is  he  strong,  so  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  power  of  God.  {A.  Saphir, 
D.D.)  Nothing  hut  ChriM  : — I.  Christ  the  subject.  II.  Christ  the  motive — 
■we  believe,  therefore  speak.  III.  Christ  the  end — to  Him  be  all  the  glory. 
[J.  Lgth,  D.D.)  The  Christian  ininistry  : — I.  Is  A  ministry  of  one  text  only. 
"  Save  Jesus  Christ."  As  such — 1.  It  is  most  adapted  to  the  intellectual  condition 
of  the  world.  2.  It  is  m'lst  adequate  to  reveal  God.  "In  Him  dwells  the  fulness 
of  the  God-head  bodily,"  A'c.  3.  It  is  most  complete.  Christ  is  the  Alpha  and 
Omega  of  its  tidings.  Everything  in  Him  and  through  Him.  II.  As  a  ministry 
OF  one  text  is  a  ministry  of  the  one  best  text.  "  Save  Jesus  Christ  and  Him 
crucified."  It  is  the  best  because — 1.  Jesus  is  its  sum  and  substance.  "Save  Jesus 
Christ."  2.  It  reveals  the  Saviour  inthe  most  pleasing  asj^ects  of  His  love.  "  Him 
crucified."  3.  It  brings  the  Saviour  within  the  reach  of  all.  "  Among  you." 
(IF.  ilaurice.)  Are  Clirisiians  narrow  ? — 1.  Paul  preached  to  the  Corinthians 

all  that  had  done  him  any  good,  and  all  he  knew  that  would  do  them  good  :  that 
was,  the  crucified  Jesus  Christ.  2.  At  the  first  this  seems  a  narrow  basis  on  which 
to  erect  a  private  character  and  a  public  life.  But  Paul  deliberately  adopted  it. 
In  his  case  it  succeeded,  and  he  believed  it  must  succeed  in  every  case.  To 
a  Greek,  occupied  with  his  philosophies,  to  a  Roman,  taken  up  with  his  politics, 
this  must  have  seemed  absurd.  Even  now  superficial  scientists  and  engrossed 
materialists  regard  the  whole  system  of  Christianity  as  a  narrow  theory,  standing  in 
contrast  with  "  the  liberal  arts."  3.  Does  the  history  of  the  mental  development 
and  practical  life  of  Paul,  or  any  other  Christian,  confirm  that  view  ?  Let  us 
remind  ourselves  of  certain  things  taught  by  the  history  of  mind.  Men  have 
attempted  to  liberalise  tliemselvts  by  dipping  into  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  and 
have  thereby  become  most  pleasant  society  men,  and  have  made  some  figure  while 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


they  lasted.  But  how  long  did  they  last?  Compare  them  with  the  men  who  have 
eacli  taken  some  great  held  of  intellectual  labour  and  devoted  their  lives  to  it,  and 
how  small  they  seem.  Compare,  e./y.,  the  Admirable  Criehton  with  Copernicus! 
What  has  Criehton  done  for  the  world  ?  His  life  perished  like  a  splendid  rainbow, 
while  that  of  the  one-ideaed  Copernfcus  fell  on  all  fields  like  fructifying  showers. 
Then  Paul  may  have  been  right  in  selecting  one  single  topic  lor  study  and 
preaching.  And  he  was  ;  for  the  knowledge  of  "  Christ  crucified  " — I.  Raised  Paul 
TO  BE  AT  THE  HEAD  OF  ALL  THE  PHILOSOPHERS.  The  study  of  Jcsus  led  Paul — and 
Avill  lead  us — into  the  i^erception  that  the  material  is  only  an  expression  of  the  ideal, 
that  there  is  a  soul  to  the  universe.  It  is  in  seeking  to  explain  the  existence  of 
such  a  being  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  such  a  life  as  His,  that  we  come  to  the 
underlying  basis  of  the  spiritual  world.  Matter  could  not  do  it  at  all.  Now  it  is  so 
that  all  questions  of  bodily  and  mental  health  and  disease,  of  the  moral  forces  of 
the  universe,  of  the  social  questions  of  human  life,  of  development  and  progress, 
are  concerned  with  Jesus  more  than  with  any  other  one  person  or  subject  known  to 
men.  For  what  was  all  this  universe  of  worlds  and  men  created?  "  For  Him," 
said  Paul,  speaking  of  Jesus.  We  have  not  yet  found  the  centre  of  the  physical 
universe ;  but  we  have  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  centre  to  every  system,  and 
that^  there  is  one  last,  supreme,  uumovable  point,  around  which  all  worlds  revolve. 
The  man  who  shall  determine  that  exact  spot  shall  wear  the  grandest  starry  crown 
among  the  princes  in  the  Court  of  Astronomy.  But  to  know  Christ,  in  all  He  was 
and  did,  would  be  to  know  the  whole  material  universe.  Science  has  no  otlier 
basis  so  broad,  philosophy  has  no  other  element  so  simplifying  and  unifying  all  the 
works  of  God.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,"  but  that  glory  "  shines  in 
the  face  of  Jesus."  For  all  that  work  which  found  its  consummation  on  the  Cross 
of  Christ  all  the  other  works  of  God  were  wrought.  Believing  this,  Paul  became 
the  philosopher  who  lifted  a  light  which  is  now  the  central  si^lendour  of  all  human 
intellectual  efforts  and  results.  II.  Enlarged  Paul  into  a  broad,  intellige\t 
HUiiANiTARiAN.  Eecollect  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  and  the  nation  from  whom  he 
sprung.  It  was  not  an  age  of  humanity  ;  indeed  our  x'ace  had  no  right  views  of  the 
value  of  humanity  till  Christ  came.  Now  there  is  no  view  of  humanity  which  so 
makes  every  man  precious  to  every  other  man,  as  the  doctrine  that  the  God 
became  flesh,  and  tliat  love  found  its  greatest  expression  in  a  sacrifice,  in  which 
every  man  had  an  interest,  and  which  should  bring  good  to  every  man.  It  takes 
in  all  there  is  of  God  and  all  there  is  of  man.  It  is  to  the  heart  of  man  what  the 
doctrine  of  universal  gravitation  is  to  his  intellect.  All  the  atoms  of  tli»i  whole 
material  world  rush  toward  one  another,  because  they  rush  towards  the  centre.  All 
the  individual  hearts  of  our  whole  humanity  rush  toward  one  another,  just  as  all 
feel  the  attraction  of  the  loving  crucified  One.  Paul  was  lifted  to  his  broad  love 
for  man,  bj'  refusing  to  know  among  his  brethren  anything  except  their  relation  to 
Him  wlto  had  loved  them  and  given  Himself  for  them,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to 
bring  them  to  God.  The  more  he  knew  of  that  love  the  more  humanitarian  he 
became,  until  the  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  &c.,  lost  itself  in  the  great 
fact  that  man  was  the  object  of  the  love  of  the  Heavenly  Father,  as  taught  by  the 
dying  Eedeemer.  III.  Made  Paul  a  most  practical  business  man.  A  good 
practical  business  man  is  one  who  in  the  beginning  sets  before  himself  distinctly  an 
end  worth  the  devotion  of  his  life ;  who  uses  the  methods  reasonably  adapted  to 
the  gaining  of  that  end  ;  who  pushes  his  work  by  sustained  efforts  to  its  legitimate 
conclusion,  and  who  promotes  the  general  weal  in  gaining  his  own  ends.  Now 
such  a  man  was  Paul,  and  he  learned  to  become  such  at  the  Cross  of  Christ.  Full 
of  business,  never  idle,  never  hurried,  "  the  care  of  all  the  Churches  "  on  him,  study 
and  trouble  and  work  always  pressing,  he  succeeded  in  organising  Christian 
societies  whose  influence  will  go  on  for  ever.  So  those  men  who  make  a 
business  of  their  religion  and  a  religion  of  their  business,  these  men,  by  the 
knowledge  of  the  crucified  Jesus,  become  the  greatest,  the  best,  the  most  practical 
business  men.  This  text  is  as  good  a  motto  for  the  merchants  as  for  the  preachers. 
IV.  Made  Paul  a  tender,  happy  man,  loving  and  beloved  in  his  generation.  Paul 
does  not  seem  to  have  been  an  amiable  man  naturally.  But  from  being  the  hard, 
ambitious  student  of  Gamaliel  and  instrument  of  the  Sanhedrin,  how  tender  he 
became !  The  Cross  had  softened  him  and  his  love  begat  love.  Piead  the 
salutations  in  his  letters.  See  what  friends  he  made.  Conclusion  :  Now,  consider 
this  case.  Here  was  a  man  born  in  a  province,  tau<:ht  in  a  sectarian  school,  reared 
under  every  political  and  eccle-iastical  influence  cnlculated  to  cramp  and  embitter 
him,  driven  from  his  ov.m  people  at  last,  and  killed  by  their  conquerors  after  years 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


of  persecution.  This  man  became  a  profound  philosopher,  a  wide  and  consistent 
philanthropist,  a  man  of  great  practical  business  capabilities,  and  a  tender,  noble 
gentleman,  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  No  other  culture  ever  made 
such  results.  Will  you  now  dare  tell  me  that  Christianity  is  not  liberal,  that 
Christians  are  narrow,  that  the  religion  we  preach  to  you  is  in  the  way  of  human 
progress  or  individual  advancement?     (C.  F.  Deems,  D.I).)         The  right  subject  in 

r-  preaching  ;— "  Preach  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,"  said  Bishop  Eeynolds  two  hundred 
years  ago.  "  Determine  to  know  nothing  among  your  people  but  Christ  crucified. 
Let  Hi's  naixie  and  grace,  His  spirit  and  love,  triumph  in  the  midst  of  your 
sermons.  Let  your  great  end  be  to  glorify  Him  in  the  heart,  to  render  Him 
amiable  and  precious  in  the  eyes  of  His  people,  to  lead  them  to  Him  as  a  sanctuary 
to  protect  them,  a  propitiation  to  reconcile  them,  a  treasure  to  enrich  them,  a 
physician  to  heal  them,  an  advocate  to  present  them  and  their  services  to  God,  as 
wisdom  to  counsel  them,  as  righteousness  to  justify,  as  sanctification  to  renew,  as 
redemption  to  save.     Let  Christ  be  the  diamond  to  shine  in  the  bosom  of  all  your 

^  sermons."  Those  who  most  closely  follow  such  advice  are  most  likely  to  stay  the 
plague  of  modern  superstition  and  infidelity,  as  well  as  build  up  the  waste  places  of 
our°Church  and  restore  the  foundations  of  many  generations.  One  great  idea : 
—It  is  said  that  Luther  was  a  man  of  one  idea,  and  that  idea— Jesus.  But  it  does 
not  mean,  I  suppose,  that  he  had  no  other  ideas  in  his  mind.  This  would  be  false 
to  fact.  It  means,  I  conceive,  that  Jesus  was  the  one  idea  of  his  mind  from  which 
all  others  emanated ;  the  same  as  the  trunk  of  a  tree  is  one,  but  gives  life  and 
growth  to  scores  of  branches,  hundreds  and  thousands  of  buds  and  leaves ;  just  as 
a  great  tradesman  has  one  idea,  his  trade,  but  that  divides  and  works  out  into 
a  thousand  ideas  of  ways  and  means  of  promoting  his  trade.  In  this  sense  Paul, 
Wesley,  Howard,  Whitefield,  Wellington,  &c.,  were  men  of  one  idea.  He  who 
wishes  to  fulfil  his  mission  in  this  world  must  be  a  man  of  one  idea.     {John  Bate.) 

Vers.  3-5.  And  I  was  witli  you  in  weakness  and  in  fear. — The  npostWs  discourage- 
ments:—^t.  Paul  was  laden  with  a  message  that  would  seem  homely  and  jejune 
beside  a  fine-spun  rhetoric.  Come  from  Athens,  where  he  had  partly  failed,  to 
make  at  Corinth  a  fresh  attempt  to  confront  the  grandeur  of  Greek  philosophy 
with  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  was  enough  to  make  him  timid.  Of  this  contrast 
he  was  daily  conscious,  and  the  weakness  here  described  was  ethical,  not  physical. 
He  was  naturally  anxious,  lest  in  poising  the  plain  argument  of  the  Cross  against 
the  colossal  fabric  of  a  seated  philosophy,  he  might  fail :  was  a  David  armed  with 
such  a  pebble  to  prevail  against  a  Goliath  in  such  a  panoply?  But  in  his  "fear 
and  trembling  "  the  apostle  was  encouraged  by  a  vision  of  God's  presence  and  his 
own  duty  (Acts  xviii.  9).  (Canon  Evans.)  The  feelings  of  a  faithful  minister  : 
—I.  Their  character— often— 1.  Intense.  2.  Painful.  II.  The  occasion  of 
THEM — a  sense  of— 1.  The  importance  of  his  work.  2.  His  own  insufliciency. 
3.  His  responsibility.  4.  The  tremendous  issues.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  And  my 
,  .  .  preacMn?  was  not  witli  enticing  words,  .  .  .  but  in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  of  -power.— Enticing  ivorcls  .-—It  is  related  of  Dr.  Manton  that,  having 
to  preach  before  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  London,  he  chose  a  subject  in 
which  he  had  an  opportunity  of  displaying  his  learning  and  judgment.  He  was 
heard  with  admiration  and  applause  by  the  intelligent  part  of  his  audience ;  but  as 
lie  was  returning  from  dinner  with  the  Lord  Mayor,  a  poor  man,  following  him, 
pulled  him  by  the  sleeve  of  his  gown,  and  asked  him  if  he  was  the  gentleman  that 
preached  before  the  Loid  Mayor.  He  replied  he  was.  "  Sir,"  said  he,  "I  came 
with  the  hopes  of  getting  some  good  to  my  soul,  but  I  was  greatly  disappointed,  for 
I  could  not  understand  a  great  deal  of  what  you  said  ;  you  were  quite  above  my 
comprehension."  "  Friend,"  said  the  doctor,  "  if  I  have  not  given  you  a  sermon, 
you  have  given  me  one :  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  not  play  the  fuol  in  such  a 
manner  again."  Some  displeased  and  one  converted  : — The  Rev.  John  Cotton  was 
an  eminent  minister  of  the  seventeenth  century,  who  laboured  for  many  years  at 
Boston,  in  Lincolnshire.  When  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  he  was  remark- 
able for  learning  and  eloquence ;  and  being  called  upon  to  preach  at  St.  Mary's 
church  in  that  town,  high  exjjectations  were  raised  as  to  the  character  of  the 
sermon.  After  many  struggles  in  his  own  mind,  arising  from  the  temptation  to 
display  his  talent  and  If^arning,  and  from  a  powerful  impression  of  the  importance 
of  preaching  the  gospel  with  all  simplicity,  he  at  length  wisely  deteruiined  on  the 
latter  course.  The  vice-chancellor  and  st'. dents  were  not  pleased,  though  a  fe\v  of 
the  professors  commended  his  styb  ;  but  his  sermon  was  blessed  to  the  conversion 


CHAP.  11.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  137 

of  Dr.  Preston,  who  liecame  one  of  the  most  eminent  ministers  of  his  day. 
Effective  2J''<'<'»/"'".'/  •" — I-  Needs  ko  display.  1.  This  does  not  exchide  the  use  of 
knowledge  or  talent.  2.  But  the  ostentatious  exliibition  of  it.  3.  Which  helps 
nothing.  4.  But  damages  much.  II.  Depends  on  Divine  power.  1.  The  con- 
vincing energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  saving  power  of  the  truth.  III. 
Kequires  the  communication  of  the  Spirit.  1.  To  the  preacher.  2.  To  the 
hearer.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Floivenj  ■preaching  : — Hall  was  once  asked  what  he 

thought  of  a  sermon  which  he  had  just  heard  delivered,  and  which  had  appeared 
to  produce  a  great  sensation  among  the  congregation.  His  reply  may  suggest  an 
important  hint  to  some  Christian  ministers — "  Very  fine,  sir;  but  a  man  cannot 
live  upon  flowers."  Force  the  main  consideration  in  2>reacJiing  : — I  had  tried  to 
drive  certain  long  brass-headed  nails- into  a  wall,  but  had  never  succeeded,  excejit 
in  turning  up  their  points,  and  rendering  them  useless.  When  a  tradesman  came 
who  understood  his  work,  I  noticed  that  he  filed  off  all  the  points  of  the  nails,  the 
very  points  upon  whose  sharpness  I  had  relied  ;  and  when  he  had  quite  blunted 
them,  he  drove  them  in  as  far  as  he  pleased.  W'ith  some  consciences  our  fine 
points  in  preaching  are  worse  than  useless.  Our  keen  distinctions  and  nice 
discriminations  are  thrown  away  on  many ;  they  need  to  be  encountered  with 
sheer  force  and  blunt  honesty.  The  truth  must  be  hammered  into  them  by  main 
strength,  and  we  know  from  whom  to  seek  the  needed  power.  {C.  H.  Sjnnuieo)!.) 
Poindar  and  apostolical  preachinij  : — I.  Popular.  1.  Is  distinguished  by  display, 
attractiveness,  novelty.     2.  Aims  at  pleasing  and  sensational  effect.    II.  Apostolic. 

1.  Plain.  2.  Unvarnished.  3.  Accompanied  by  the  convictions  of  the  Spirit  and 
the  saving  jjower  of  God.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Paurs  preaching  and  the  blessing 
that  attended  it : — I.  "  The  speech  and  pkeacuing  "  of  the  apostle.  1.  His 
great  subject  was  the  gospel.  He  was  a  great  preacher  of  the  law  ;  for  no  man 
preaches  the  gospel  who  does  not  preach  the  law,  and  our  appreciation  of  the 
gospel  is  always  in  direct  proportion  to  our  real  perception  of  God's  holy  law.  But 
that  which  Paul  delighted  in  was  the  gospel.  He  preached  in  all  His  fulness  a  full 
Christ;  he  exhibited  Him  in  the  glory  of  His  person,  in  all  the  perfection  of  His 
atonement,  in  all  the  freeness  of  His  free-grace  salvation.  And  he  preached  it 
largely,  and  wherever  he  went.  He  preached  it  holily  too ;  he  set  it  forth  in  all  its 
holy  tendencies,  and  he  exhibited  it  in  its  holy  effects  in  his  own  life  (1  Thess.  i.  5). 

2.  His  manner  was  "  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom."  His  subject  was 
grand,  awful,  sublime,  wondrous;  but  his  speech  was  plain,  simple,  unadorned, 
and  homely.  No  glare  and  glitter  were  his,  no  traps  for  human  applause,  no 
desire  to  be  thought  a  man  of  great  talent ;  the  gifted  apostle  was  above  it.  How 
does  this  show  to  us  what  sort  of  preachers  we  want !  We  do  not  mean  that  the 
apostle  did  not  suit  his  speech  to  those  to  whom  he  spake,  for  he  became  all  tilings 
to  all  men,  &c.  II.  The  blessing  that  attended  it.  "  In  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit  and  of  power."  1.  Many  understand  by  this  the  miraculous  gifts  that  Paul 
was  able  to  exhibit,  as  proof  that  he  was  an  apostle  of  Cbrist.  That  he  wrought 
miracles,  is  quite  clear ;  and  that  they  were  great  seals  to  his  ministry  is  also 
quite  clear  (Eoni.  xv.  18).  But  the  Word  of  God  tells  us  that  signs  and  wonders 
may  be  the  means  of  hardening  those  who  work  them.  Besides,  a  continuous 
miracle  would  cease  to  be  a  miracle;  and  the  mightiest  could  never  of  itself  convert 
one  single  soul.  2.  More  marvellous  things  than  those  that  wrought  in  the  triumph 
of  God  over  matter  are  wrought  when  He  triumphs  over  mind.  The  apostle  set 
forth  the  truth  to  men's  understanding,  but  the  Huly  Ghost  conveyed  the  light  into 
their  minds  ;  he  spake  to  men's  consciences,  but  the  Spirit  conveyed  the  tender- 
ness of  heart,  and  made  the  word  effectual.  Here  is  no  violence,  no  new  faculty, 
no  new  truth ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  put  forth  His  power,  and  brought  in  demon- 
stration (Col.  i.  5-6  ;  1  Thess.  i.  5,  ii.  13).  3.  The  power  of  the  gospel  is  demon- 
strated— (1)  In  the  conversion  of  the  sinner.  (2)  In  the  comfort  of  the  mourner. 
(3)  In  the  sanctification  of  the  believer,  (4)  In  the  hour  of  death.  (J.  II.  Erans, 
M.J..)  Powerless  sermons  : — Many  a  powerful  sermon  so  called  is  a  powerless 
sermon,  because  of  the  absence  from  it  of  what  is  invisible.  The  go- pel  preached 
without  power  is  like  a  cloud.without  ram  ;  there  is  a  i^romise  of  rain,  but  there  is 
no  water  of  life,  and  no  springing  up  of  the  seed  the  result.  The  gospel  preached 
without  iDower  is  like  a  well  with  all  its  arrangements  for  drawing  perfect — but 
without  water.  (G.Pentecost.)  True  poicer  lies  in  the  gospel  itself: — Hipponicus, 
intending  to  dedicate  a  costly  statue,  was  advised  by  a  friend  to  employ  Policletus, 
a  famous  workman,  in  the  making  of  it;  but  he,  being  anxious  that  his  great 
expense  should  be  the  admiration  of  all  men,  said  that  "  he  woul.1  not  make  use 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ij. 

of  a  workman  whose  art  would  be  more  regarded  than  his  own  cost."     When,  in 
preaching  the  great  truths  of  gospel  salvation,  the  enticing  words  which  man's 
wisdom   teacheth   are  so  much  sought  out  that  the  art   of   the   orator  is  more 
regarded  by  the  hearers  than  the  value  of  the  truth  spoken,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
the  Lord  refuses  to  grant  His  blessing.     He  will  have  it  seen  that  the  excellency  of 
the  power  lies  not  in  our  speech,  but  in  His  gospel.         That  your  faith  should  not 
stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God. — Faith ;— 1.  Upon  what 
does   your  faith  stand?     2.  Where  ought  it  to  stand?     3.  Why  should  it  stand 
there  ?     (J.  Li/th,  D.D.)         True  faith  .-—I.  Cannot  be  pkoduced  by  the  wisdom 
OF  MAN.     1.  He  may  convince  by  the  force  of  argument  or  persuasion.     2.  But 
such  a  faith  is— (1)  Impure.     (2)  Unsettled.     (.3)  Inoperative.     II.  Depends  upon 
THE  power  of  God.     1.  Through  the  operation  of  the  Spirit.     2.  This — (1)  Heals 
the  conscience.     (2)  Converts  the  soul.     (3)  Sanctifies  the  life.     III.   Should  be 
THE  END  OF  ALL  pPvEACHiNG.     1.  The   preacher   should  aim  at  it.     2.  The  people 
should  desire  it.     (Ibid.)         The  domain  of  faith:— I.  The  domain  of  faith  is  to 
BE  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  THAT  OF  HUMAN  WISDOM.      1.  Men   are   ever   confounding 
the   two.     Faith,  they  think,  is   simply  the   intellect   in   its   ordinary   processes 
dealing  with  religious  things.     The  man  who  rejects  Christianity  does  it  on  this 
ground.     "  I  cannot,"  he  says,  "  reason  out  a  demonstrative  proof  of  Christianity  ; 
therefore  I  refuse  to  believe  it  true."     Because  faith  cannot  stand  in  the  wisdom  of 
man,  it  cannot,  he  thinks,  staud  at  all.     Now,   according  to  the  apostle,  faith 
stands  in  "the  power  of  God."     What  is  the  difference?     2.  How  do  we  know 
things  ?     (1)  By  sensible  proof.     If  I  put  my  finger  into  the  fire  it  burns  me  ;  if  I 
hear  music  it  delights  me.     This  is  the  proof  which  my  body  furnishes  concerning 
things  that  appeal  to  it.     I  do  not  reason  about  them ;  no  spiritual   or  moral 
sympathies  are  called  into  exercise.     I  prove  them  exactly  as  a  brute  does.     (2)  By 
rational  proof.     If  a  man  tells  me  that  two  and  two  make  four,  that  a  whole  is 
greater  than  its  part,  my  senses,  my  religious  feeling  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
proof — it  is  a  process  of  pure  reason.     A  brute  could  not  prove  anything  in  this 
way.     A  rational  man  must  believe  on  such  evidence.     (3)  Moral  proof.     When  I 
see  moral  qualities  in  a  man,  I  instinctively  receive  impressions  concerning  him. 
I  say  he  is  a  kind  man,  a  true  man,  a  reverential  man.     If  he  be  a  hypocrite,  he 
may  deceive  me  ;  but  that  does  not  aifect  the  validity  of  this  method  of  proof. 
Life  would  be  impossible  if  we  could  not  trust  men  until  we  had  collected  evidence 
about  them.     We  are  always  trusting  men  whom  we  know  nothing  about,  because 
of   the  moral  judgment   of   them  which  we   form.     3.  Now,   this   distinction   of 
different  kinds  of  proof  will  carry  us  a  long  way  in  understanding  the  domain  of 
faith   as   distinguished   from   that  of  intellectual   wisdom.      AVhen   God   speaks 
religious  things  to  me.  He  does  not  appeal  to  my  physical  senses.     He  does  not 
appeal  to  my  reason,  as  the  multiplication  table  does,  as  a  proof  iu  logic  does ;  He 
appeals  directly  to  my  religious  sense.     Is  not  this  religiously  true,  pure,  suitable? 
And  my  religious  sense  responds,  as  the  eye  responds  to  light,  understanding  to 
intellectual  truth,  the  heart  to  love.     Men  who  are  "of  the  truth"  respond  to 
moral  truth  when  they  see  it.     4.  Now,  the  strong  tendency  is  to  interchange 
these  methods  of  proof.     "lean  believe  nothing,"  says  the  materialist,  "that  I 
cannot  prove."     Quite  true  ;  neither  ought  you.     "  Aye,  but  I  mean  that  I  cannot 
prove  by  processes  of  reason,"  which  is  quite  another  thing.     Suppose  the  brute 
should  say,  "  I  will  believe  nothing  which  I  cannot  prove  by  the  senses.    I  will  not 
believe  in  your  mathematical  astronomy,  your  subtle  chemistry."     And  is  he  not 
as  much  justified  in  denying  your  rational  proof  as  you  are  in  denying  my  spiritual 
proof  ?     Your  rational  proof   belongs  to  a  higher  nature  than  his ;  my  spiritual 
proof  belongs  to  a  higher  nature  than  mere  reason.     What  can  reason  do  wdth 
moral  qualities?     You  cannot  reason  out  right  and  wrong;  you  cannot  by  reason 
prove  love,  or  purity,  or  goodness ;  you  can  only  feel  them.     Y"ou  tell  me  that  you 
have  explored  nature,  but  cannot  find  God  ;  as  well  may  the  surgeon  conducting  a 
post-mortem  examination  tell  us  that  he  cannot  find  the  pure  patriot,  the  loving 
father.     How  can  he  detect  moral  qualities  by  physical  tests  ?     5.  We  are  always 
trying  to  get  above  the  domain  of  mere  matter  into  that  of  reason.     How  the 
painter  and  the  poet  idealise  nature  ;  change  actual  colour  and  form  into  glorious 
ideals  !     How  the  philosopher  uses  them  for  the  creation  of  a  science  !     How  the 
economist  uses  them  for  an  economy  of  social  life !     And  so  we  are  always  trying 
to  get  above  the  domain  of  reason  into  the  domain  of  faith.     It  is  the  necessity  of 
our  nature  to  think  about  good  and  evil,  to  form  moral  judgments  about  things. 
There  is  another  tendency  which  is  always  diagging  the  spiritual  down  to  the 


CHAP.  II.]  J.   CORINTIIIA.SS.  139 


sensual ;  but  all  men  agree  to  call  this  wrong  moral  feeling  ;  Christianity  calls  it 
sin.  6.  Faith,  then,  is  that  quality  of  our  spiritual  nature  which,  when  it  hears 
God's  truth,  sees  God's  purity,  feels  God's  love,  simply  and  im|ilicitly  believes  it. 
It  does  not  wait  for  processes  of  reason  to  prove  it,  anymore  tluDi  the  eye  waits  for 
processes  of  reason  to  prove  light,  or  the  heart  for  processes  of  reason  to  prove  love. 
But,  it  may  be  said,  does  not  this  make  faith  irrational?  Certainly  not.  It 
simply  goes  farther  than  reason  can  go,  sees  things  that  reason  cannot  see,  feels 
things  that  reason  cannot  feel.  AVhen  a  truth  of  God  is  spoken  to  me — first,  my 
senses  are  exercised  ;  next,  my  reason — it  judges  the  meaning  of  the  words,  of  the 
thought,  then  it  delivers  the  sentiment  to  my  spiritual  faculty.  Is  it  religiously 
true,  suitable,  and  precious?  Simple  reason  could  not  pronounce  upon  this;  but 
my  religious  heart  does.  I  am  told  of  the  existence  of  a  God ;  my  senses  cannot 
recognise  Him,  my  reason  cannot  demonstrate  Him,  but  my  spiritual  nature  con- 
fesses His  existence,  just  as  the  heart  confesses  love.  I  am  told  of  the  Incarna- 
tion;  neither  sense  nor  reason  can  prove  it;  but  my  religious  consciousness 
testifies  that  it  is  precisely  what  my  condition  needed.  So  with  the  atonement — 
the  regeneration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  resurrection  of  Christ;  and  the  immortal 
life  that  He  gives.  II.  How  did  Paul  set  fouth  Christ?  (ver.  1).  Not  as  a 
rhetorician,  or  a  moral  philosopher.  Why  not?  Theie  is  no  merit  in  abjuring 
reason,  when  it  is  a  process  of  reasoning  that  has  to  be  conducted.  But  it  \vas_not_  ~"~~jr 
an^jirj^ument  that  Paul  had  to  conduct  ;  it  was  a  testimony  of  God  that  he  had  to 

.bear.  It  was  hoE'a  scieiice  of  religion  that  he  had  to  construct;  it  was  a  simple 
fact  that  he  had  to  declare.  Men  knew  all  about  sin  ;  he  did  not  need  to  iii'ove 
that  they  were  sinful.  Men  earnestly  craved  to  know  "  what  they  must  do  to  be 
saved."  He  did  not  need  to  reason  about  that.  Andjie_siinj3ly  declared  the  great 
fact  thaj;_"  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners";  that  was  all  he 
said,  but  that  was  enough.  Thus,  receiving  his  testimony  to  the  Divine  fact,  the 
faith  of  these  men  "stood  not  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God." 
Christ,  then,  is  to  be  preached,  and  His  atonement  set  forth  by  bearing  testimony. 
It  is  the  cry  of  a  herald  rather  than  a  philosophical  argument.  The  physician 
does  not  need  to  prove  to  the  sick  that  they  need  healing ;  he  needs  only  say, 
"  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  "   J'reaching  Christ  is  simply  setting  Him  forth  as 

_the__great  g^ift  of  the  Father's  love.  They  who  hear  the  testimony  have  only  to 
trust  in  the  crucified  Christ  for  forgiveness  and  life.  And  when  so  believing  God's 
testimony  we  receive  Cbrist,  and  have  experience  of  His  redeeming  grace,  our 
"faith  stands  in  the  power  of  God."  "We  have  the  witness  in  ourselves" — a 
certainty  and  strength  of  belief  which  is  like  the  consciousness  of  life  ;  argument 
cannot  disturb  it.  Christ  is  "  formed  in  us";  we  "know  whom  we  have  believed."  .^ 
(H.  Allon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-8.  Howbeit  we  speak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect,  yet  not  the 
wisdom  of  this  world. — Tlw  tvisdom  of  God,  ns  preached  by  the  apotftles  of  ChrUt : — I. 
Explain  the  character  here  mentioned  as  necessary  to  discern  true  wisdom.  1.  The 
apostle  means  by  "  them  that  are  perfect,"  such  as  have  attained  that  measure  of 
understanding  which  is  necessary  to  comprehend  the  wise  design  of  the  whole,  and 
perfect  consistency  of  the  several  doctrines  of  Christianity.  2.  "Perfect  men  "  conveys 
the  idea  of  minds  unpi'ejudiced,  and  free  from  the  bias  of  irregular  passions  and  affec- 
tions ;  and  this  is  indeed  necessary  to  a  just  understanding  of  things  :  for  truth  can 
never  appear  as  it  is  through  a  gross  and  fallacious  medium.  3.  A  sincere  and 
upright  heart  is  another  character  essential  to  the  perfect  man.  Wisdom  flies  the 
grasp  of  a  dishonest  mind  ;  and,  though  it  were  possible  he  could  find  it,  he  would 
soon  let  it  go  ;  for  the  double-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways.     II.  Show 

THE    WISDOM    OF    GoD    MANIFESTED    IN    THE    REDEMPTION     OF    MAN    BY   JeSI'S    ChRIST, 

according  to  the  DOCTRINE  OF  His  APOSTLES.  1.  We  read  clear  characters  of 
Divine  wisdom  in  the  discovery  that  the  gospel  has  given  man  of  his  true  state. 
2.  The  wisdom  of  God,  by  the  gospel,  is  visible  in  the  glorious  end  it  purposes  and 
publishes  to  the  world,  that  is,  the  salvation  of  sinners.  3.  Our  thoughts  might 
trace  with  pleasure  a  vast  variety  of  topics  to  illustrate  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the 
means  He  hath  chosen  to  accomplish  the  mighty  design  of  His  mercy  to  mankind. 
To  reconcile  sinners  to  Himself,  He  hath  chosen  the  fittest  Mediator  that  could 
possibly  be.  His  only  begotten  and  well-beloved  Son:  the  only  one  who  could 
approach  God  without  terror,  and  converse  with  men  without  pollution  ;  who  alone 
could  make  up  the  peace  by  laying  His  hand  upon  both.  But  another  thought, 
which  I  cannot  pass,  to  magnify  the  wisdom  if  God  in  the  redemption  of  man 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

discovered  by  the  gospel,  and  that  is  to  observe  how  it  draws  the  greatest  good  from 
the  greatest  evil,  taking  occasion  from  sin  to  honour  God,  by  raising  man  to  a 
more  exalted  state.  4.  The  wisdom  of  God  discovers  itself  in  the  honourable  terms 
of  mercy  which  the  gospel  hath  establishf  d.  (1)  Faith,  or  a  firm  persuasion  of  all 
that  God  hath  recorded  in  His  Word:  the  most  plain  and  speedy  way  to  truth, 
particularly  in  those  matters  which  the  bulk  of  mankind  have  not  time  or  capacity 
to  trace  ;  and  the  only  way  in  matters  which  the  reason  of  man  could  not  discover 
or  comj^rehend.  (2)  Kepentance,  or  amendment  of  life,  is  another  term  of  salvation 
wisely  fixed,  because  without  it  the  guilty  can  never  be  fit  objects  of  mercy,  or 
capable  of  happiness.  5.  As  it  exceeds  the  power  of  man  to  work  such  a  change 
of  heart  and  life  in  himself,  the  wisdom  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  direction  and 
assistance  He  hath  provided  to  bring  His  mighty  purpose  to  effect.  (1)  For  his 
direction,  He  hath  given  him  such  a  system  of  precepts,  such  an  assemblage  of 
illustrious  examj)les,  as  the  wisdom  of  man  could  never  devise,  as  the  history  of 
mankind  could  never  furnish.  (2)  That  men,  seriously  concerned  to  be  saved, 
might  not  fall  thoit  of  the  end  of  their  faith,  the  gospel  hath  done  what  no  other 
law  or  doctrine  so  much  as  pretends.  It  hath  assured  us  of  sufficient  help  and 
ability  to  i^ractise  the  duties  it  teacheth.  And  we  may  come  boldly  to  the  throne 
of  grace,  not  only  to  obtain  mercy,  but  to  find  grace  to  help  in  the  time  of  need. 
Conclusion  :  1.  The  folly  of  infidels,  who  spend  all  their  wit  and  learning  to  oppose 
the  gospel  of  Christ,  the  plan  of  Divine  wisdom,  a  system  so  friendly  to  virtue, 
which  they  pretend  to  patronise  ;  a  scheme  so  directly  calculated  to  purify  the 
hearts  and  refine  the  manners  of  mankind.  2.  Since  the  gospel  of  Christ  reveals 
the  Vv-ise  counsels  of  God  for  the  salvation  of  men,  it  must  be  our  duty,  who  preach 
it,  to  understand  more  and  more  of  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  that  we  may 
speak  to  others  with  greater  success  and  better  hope.  3.  To  the  hearers  of  the  gospel 
let  me  only  say  (James  i.  21).  {Wm.  Beat.)  The  contrast  between  the  icisdom  of  tins 
%vorld  and  the  wisdom  of  God: — I.  That  is — 1.  Changeable.  2.  Presumptuous.  3. 
Fallible.  H.  Tmsis— l.'Divine.  2.Eternah  3.  Enjoyed  by  the  perfect.  {J.Lyth,D.D.) 
l]'hdom,  human  and  Divine  : — A  blind  tortoise  lived  in  a  well.  Another  tortoise,  a 
native  of  the  ocean,  in  its  inland  travels  happened  to  tumble  into  this  well.  The 
blind  one  asked  of  his  new  comrade  whence  he  came.  "  From  the  sea."  Hearing 
of  the  sea,  he  of  the  well  swam  round  a  little  circle,  and  asked,  "  Is  the  water  of 
the  ocean  as  large  as  this  ?  "  "  Larger,"  replied  he  of  the  sea.  The  well  tortoise 
then  swam  round  two-thirds  of  the  well,  and  afked  if  the  sea  was  as  big  as  that. 
"Much  larger  than  that,"  said  the  sea  toitoise.  "  Well,  then,"  asked  the  blind 
tortoise,  "  is  the  sea  as  large  as  this  whole  well  ?  "  "  Larger,"  said  the  sea  tortoise. 
"If  that  is  so,"  said  the  other,  "how  big,  then,  is  the  sea?"  The  sea  tortoise 
replied,  "  You  having  never  seen  any  other  water  than  that  of  your  well,  your 
capability  of  understanding  is  small.  As  to  the  ocean,  though  you  spent  many 
years  in  it,  you  would  never  be  able  to  exj)lore  the  half  of  it,  nor  to  reach  the  limit, 
and  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  compare  it  with  this  well  of  yours."  The  tortoise 
replied,  "  It  is  impossible  that  there  can  be  a  Inrger  water  th-tu  this  well ;  you  are 
simj)ly  praising  up  your  native  place  in  vain  words."  {J.  Oilmour,  M.A.)  The 
hidden  ivisdom : — I.  Is  glorious  in  its  natuke.  1.  Apprehensible  only  by  the 
perfect.  2.  Not  of  this  world.  3.  Divine  in  its  origin.  4.  Adapted  to  secure 
eternal  happiness.  II.  Is  cndiscoverable  by  human  reason  (ver.  8).  1.  Proved 
by  the  ignorance  and  conduct  of  the  princes  of  this  world.  2.  Ey  the  unsearch- 
ableness  of  the  Divine  purpose.  III.  Is  reveai-ed  by  the  Spirit  of  God  (ver.  10). 
1.  He  searcheth  the  deep  things  of  God.  2.  Communicates  them  to  man.  IV. 
Can  only  be  communicated  by  the  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (vers.  13).  1.  We 
must  use  the  words  of  the  Spirit.  2.  He  must  create  spiritnal  discernment.  V.  Is 
realised  and  enjoyed  by  those  who  are  spiritually  enlightened  (vers.  15,  16). 
Who — 1.  Judge  all  things.  2.  Are  understood  by  none.  3.  For  God  is  unsearch- 
able. 4.  Have  the  mind  of  Christ.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  FauVs  view  of  s'2^iritnal 
loisdmn : — It  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  "wisdom"  with  which  the 
apostle  was  conU-onted  was  not  the  vigorous  and  lofty  aspirations  of  Aristotle  and 
Plato,  but  the  hollow  and  worn-out  sophistries  of  the  last  days  of  the  Greek 
rhetoricians.  Still,  although  a  different  turn  would  doubtless  have  been  given  to 
the  whole  argument  if  the  living  power  of  the  gospel  had  been  met  not  by  a  dead 
form,  but  by  a  power  which,  tliough  of  lower  oiigin,  and  moving  in  a  different 
sphere,  was  still  living  like  itself,  the  general  truth  here  urged  remains  the  same. 
It  is  not  by  intellectual,  but  by  moral  and  spiritual  excellence,  that  the  victories  of 
the  gi'spel  have  been  achieved.     Ileligion  is  not  philosophy.     But  although  the  two 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  141 

spheres  of  intellect  and  Christianity  are  thus  distinct,  the  apostle  also  wishes  to 
show  that  there  is  in  Christianity  an  element  analogous  to  that  by  which 
intellectual  wants  are  gratified ;  as  though  he  had  said,  "  Although  the  Christian 
lives  in  a  world  of  his  own,  yet  in  that  world  he  is  independent  of  all  besides  (what 
the  philosophers  would  have  called  aiVapK-r/r),  and  the  more  fully  his  Christian 
stature  is  developed,  he  will  find  evei'y  craving  of  his  nature  the  more  completely 
satisfied."  This  element  he  here  introduces  under  the  names  of  "  wisdom,"  "the 
Spirit,"  and  "  solid  food  "  as  distinct  from  "milk."  Talcing  into  comparison  the 
other  passages  (John  iii.  12,  xvi.  12;  Heb.  vi.  1),  where  a  similar  contrast  is 
drawn  between  the  higher  and  lower  stages  of  Christian  progress,  the  reference 
seems  not  to  be  to  any  exhibition  of  new  doctrines,  but  to  the  deep  spiritual 
intuitions  which  have  always  been  regarded  as  the  highest  privilege  of  advanced 
Christian  goodness.  Thomas  a  Kempis  says  that  "a  pure  heart  penetrates  the 
secrets  of  heaven  and  hell  " ;  the  "  beatific  vision  "  has  always  been  regarded  as 
the  consummation  of  our  intellectual  and  moral  perfection  ;  and  the  analogy  which 
is  here  drawn  between  the  perceptions  of  the  human  intellect  and  those  of  the 
enlightened  spirit  might  be  illustrated  abundantly  from  the  biographies  and 
devotions  of  good  men  in  all  ages.  What  tliis  was  in  its  highest  or  most  extra- 
ordinary form  may  be  seen  in  the  account  of  St.  Paul's  rapture  (2  Cor.  xii.  1,  4)  or 
of  St.  John's  (Eev.  i.  10,  iv.  2).  What  it  was  in  its  more  ordinary  form  may  be 
seen  in  the  whole  atmosphere  of  St.  John's  first  Epistle,  especially  in  the  connection 
between  love  and  knowledge  which  pervades  it,  and  which  is  illustrated  in  chap, 
xiii.  8,  12  of  this  Epistle.  See  also  Horn.  xi.  S3,  34 ;  Eph,  i.  8,  17,  18.  This  use 
of  the  passage — I.  Accords  with  the  words  employed.  "  Wisdom,"  although 
suggested  in  the  first  instance  by  the  contemporary  philosophy,  derives  its  religious 
sense  chiefiy  from  its  use  in  Proverbs  and  Ecclesiasticus,  where  it  is  applied  not  to 
the  gaining  of  new  truths,  theological  or  natural,  but  to  a  deeper  practical  insight 
into  moral  truth.  This  general  sense  is  furth-r  limited  in  this  passage  by  the 
indication  of  its  subject,  viz.,  the  "glory"  or  blessedness  of  Christians,  which  in 
vers.  8,  10  assumes  such  a  prominence  as  to  be  almost  identified  with  the  "  wisdom" 
itself  that  seeks  it.  And  the  faculty  by  which  this  wisdom  is  obtained  is  described 
emphatically  as  "  spiritual  " — "  the  Spirit."  The  word  is  chosen  partly  from  the 
frequent  use  of  the  phrase  both  in  Greek  and  Hebrew,  to  express  the  intellect — ■ 
chiefiy  as  expressive  of  a  direct  connection  with  God.  It  is  the  "  inspiration " 
which  in  Scripture  is  ascribed  to  every  mental  gift  (Exod.  sxxi.  3;  Job  xxxii.  8,  &c.), 
but  which  is  specially  applicable  to  the  frame  of  mind  (to  use  the  modern  form  of 
speech  founded  on  the  same  metaphor)  "  breathes  the  atmosphere  "  of  heaven.  The 
same  sense  also — II.  Agrees  with  the  general  context  and  occasion.  When  the 
apostle  says,  "But  to  vs  God  revealed  it  by  His  Spirit,"  the  use  of  the  first  person, 
here  as  elsewhere,  indicates  that,  though  speaking  of  believers  generally,  he 
especially  refers  to  his  own  experience.  The  consciousness  of  his  spiritual  gifts, 
especially  of  his  spiritual  insight  into  things  invisible,  was  always  present  with  him, 
and  never  more  so  than  at  the  period  of  these  two  Epistles  (chap.  xiv.  18  ;  2  Cor.  xii. 
1, 4).  And  this  tendency  to  dwell  on  the  inward,  as  distinct  from  the  outward  blessing.=! 
of  the  gospel — on  the  things  which  "  e\  ehath  not  seen  nor  ear  heard,"  as  distinguished 
from  the  things  which  the  eyes  of  the  first  apostles  had  seen  and  their  ears  had 
heard — was  a  peculiarity  of  St.  Paul's  teachiug.  III.  It  best  suits  the  circum- 
stances OF  the  Corinthian  Christians,  who  had  no  especial  need  of  new  intellectual 
truths,  nor,  if  they  had,  was  there  any  especial  impediment  to  their  reception.  But 
a  higher  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence ;  a  knowledge  deep  and  comprehensive, 
as  being  grounded  in  love  ;  an  insight  into  the  spiritual  world — were  gifts  which, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  apostle  might  well  long  to  give  them,  and  which  were  yet,  on 
the  other,  most  alien  to  their  state  of  faction  and  bitterness.  How  could  they,  who 
were  absorbed  in  their  contentions,  enter  into  the  atmospht^re  of  peace  which 
surrounds  the  throne  of  God?  Hiiw  could  they,  who  were  for  ever  insisting  on 
particular  names  and  party  watchwords,  enjoy  the  vision  where  all  else  is  lost  in 
the  sense  of  communion  with  Christ  ?  Controversy  and  party  spirit  may  sharpen 
the  natural  faculties  of  shrewdne-s  and  disputation,  but  few  sins  more  dim  the 
spiritual  faculty  by  which  alone  all  things  are  rightly  judged.  These  disputes  and 
rivalries  were  "of  the  flesh,"  no  less  than  the  sensual  passions  which  are  commonly 
so  classed;  and,  if  so,  they  have  no  place  in  heaven,  they  are  directly  opposed  to 
"the  Spirit."  {Dean  Stanley.)  Thi'  icisdotn  of  God  ax  displayed  in  the  riospel : — 
I.  In  relation  to  its  great  end.  The  gospel  is  glad  tidings  of  good.  This  good 
is — 1.  Most  suitable.    God,  who  well  knows  our  nature,  has  adapted  His  gifts  to  its 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

wants.  2.  Permanent.  God  has  formed  us  to  endure  for  ever;  and  the  good  which 
He  has  ]irepnred  for  us  is  enduring  also.  3.  Divine.  God  has  revealed  Himself  as 
the  chief,  the  only  satisfying  good.  He  only  can  fill  the  powers  of  the  soul — He 
only  subsists  through  every  changing  scene.  Let  us  admire  the  wisdom  of  God  ia 
proposing  such  a  good  to  us ;  and  let  us  recollect  that  such  a  good  as  is  proposed  to 
us  in  the  gospel  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else.  II.  In  rela.tion  to  the  medium 
THROUGH  WHICH  IT  IS  coMJiUN'iCATED.  1.  The  salvatioH  of  the  race  is  made  to  turn 
on  the  death  of  an  individual.  This  is  above  all  the  ideas  of  men  ;  it  never  could 
enter  the  human  mmd  that  one  man  could  be  saved  through  the  mediation  of 
many,  much  less  that  all  could  be  saved  through  the  mediation  of  one.  This  was 
"  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews,"  &c.  But  this  displays  the  highest  wisdom.  It  is 
not  an  individual  merely,  but  an  individual  fashioned  expressly  for  the  work.  In 
the  person  of  Christ  we  see  a  man  with  a  person  capable  of  suffering ;  and  a 
Divine  person,  to  make  His  sufferings  meritorious.  Had  Christ  been  mere  man, 
tbere  could  have  been  no  merit ;  had  He  not  been  man,  He  could  not  have  suffered. 
Had  the  question  been  asked,  "How  shall  man  be  just  with  God?  "  it  could  not 
have  been  answered  to  eternity;  but,  "in  the  fulness  of  time,  God  sent  forth  His 
Son,"  A'c.  The  way  to  reconcile  the  justice  and  the  mercy  of  God  could  never  have 
been  conceived  but  for  the  wisdom  of  God  in  fitting  this  God-man  and  sending  Him 
to  suffer  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  2.  The  wisdom  appears  in  Christ's  deleating 
Satan  by  the  very  weapons  which  he  employed  to  subvert  His  designs.  By  the 
Cross  of  Christ  God  has,  as  it  were,  reversed  the  order  of  things.  In  the  first 
Adam  man  fell  by  aspiring  to  be  as  God  ;  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  saves  by 
condescending  to  become  man.  Man  was  indebtt-d  for  his  ruin  to  an  evil  spirit ;  he 
owes  his  recovery  to  a  good  Spirit.  As  man  was  ensnared  by  deceit  and  vanity  and 
became  miserable,  he  is  liberated  by  truth  and  purity  and  becomes  happy.  The 
machinery  of  Satan  is  thus  turned  upon  himself.  III.  In  the  dispensation  of  the 
GOSPEL  the  wisdom  of  God  appears — 1.  In  the  manner  in  which  the  truths  of 
the  gospel  are  taught.  There  are  two  mo  les  of  communicating  instruction  :  the 
one  is  by  facts,  the  other  is  by  argument.  The  latter  mode  is  generally  considered 
the  most  efficient,  and  was  most  commonly  employed  by  the  ancients  in  their 
schools  of  learning.  But  many  subtleties  were  resorted  to  in  this  mode  of  teaching. 
Learning  was  clothed  in  such  a  garb  that  it  did  not  even  attract  the  attention  of 
the  common  people  ;  they  could  not  comprehend  it,  they  could  not  be  benefited  by 
it.  But  God  taught  by  facts.  "I  came  declaring  unto  you  the  testimony  of  God." 
Such  were  the  facts  the  apostles  asserted,  that  the  trutlis  they  taught  must  stand 
or  fall  by  those  facts.  And  these  facts  are  the  very  soul  of  the  gospel.  He  who 
believes  that  the  apostles  spake  truth,  that  Jesus  Christ  really  came,  and  died,  and 
rose  again,  and  ascended,  must  also  believe  that  He  died  for  the  salvation  of  sinners. 
And  he  who  considers  the  number  of  these  witnesses,  their  character,  the  harmony 
of  their  testimony,  their  miracles,  and  refuses  to  believe  their  testimony,  will  be 
found  turning  the  gospel  of  the  Saviour  against  himself.  In  all  this  the  wisdom  of 
God's  teachings  appears  above  the  teachings  of  the  philnsopbers.  They  retired 
from  the  crowd  ;  but  heavenly  wisdom  is  addressed  to  all,  and  is  founded  upon  facts 
that  all  may  understand.  2.  In  committing  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  to  men. 
They  can  enter  into  the  states  of  those  whom  they  address  ;  they  can  comfort  those 
that  mourn  by  the  same  consolations  with  which  they  have  been  comforted  ;  they 
can  have  access  to  them  at  all  times.  And  not  only  was  the  dispensation  of  the 
gospel  committed  to  men,  but  to  men  of  obscure  station  and  mean  talents  (chap.  i. 
26,  31).  Had  God  employed  the  great  and  the  wise  to  propagate  His  gospel, 
suspicions  might  have  been  raised  in  the  minds  of  men  that  its  success  was  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  elevated  talent  and  station  of  its  propagators.  But  the  greatest 
effects  have  been  jn'oduced  more  by  piety  than  by  talent.  God  will  not  divide  His 
success  with  any  human  being.  {R.  Hall,  ALA.)  The  u-isdom  of  the  gosi^el: — 
I.  The  wisdom  of  the  gospel  is — 1.  Divine.  2.  Transcendent.  3.  Spiritual.  4. 
Practical.  II.  Its  reserved  cojimunication.  1.  Among  the  perfect  who  believe, 
study,  practise  it.  2.  Because  they  only  can  understand,  appreciate,  and  profit  by 
it.     (J.   Lyth,  D.D.)         The  siiperlative  %insdom  of  the  gospel    is    demonstrated — 

1.  By  its  origin.     It  proceeds — 1.  Not  from  the  wise  and  mighty  of  this  world. 

2.  But  from  the  hidden  depttis  of  the  Godhead.  II.  By  its  purpose,  which  is — 
1.  Not  realised  in  time.  2.  But  in  eternal  glory.  III.  By  its  essential  mystery. 
1.  "Unknown  to  the  greatest  in  times  past.  2.  iUndiscoverable  by  reason  or  sense. 
IV.  By  the  mode  of  its  revelation.  1.  Through  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  To  the 
spirit  of  man.     (Ibid.)         The  gospel : — I.   Its  nature.     Wisdom.     The  wisdom 


I.   CORINTHIANS.  143 


of  a  system  may  be  determined — 1.  By  the  character  of  the  end  it  contemplates. 
A  system  which  aims  at  an  insignificant  or  unworthy  end  would  scarcely  be  con- 
sidered wise.  The  end  the  gospel  aimed  at  was  the  restoration  in  human  souls  of 
supreme  sympathy  with  God.  This  man  lost  in  the  Fall.  Its  absence  is  the  cHuse 
of  all  the  evils  that  curse  the  world  ;  its  restoration  is  the  soul's  salvation.  "When 
the  value  and  the  influence  of  one  soul  are  considered,  is  not  this  restoration,  even 
in  one  case,  a  grand  end  ?  But  the  gospel  aims  at  it  in  all  souls.  2.  By  the  fitness 
of  the  means  it  employs.  Though  a  system  contemplate  a  grand  end,  j-et  if  the 
means  are  uuadapted  it  could  scarcely  be  called  wise.  The  means  Christianity 
employs  to  generate  this  love  for  God  are — (1)  A  personal  manifestation  of  God. 
(2)  A  human  manifestation  of  God.  God  in  the  form  of  an  angel,  e.rj.,  would  not 
awaken  this  affection.  God  in  any  form  but  man's  would  rather  terrify  and  repel 
than  inspire  with  confidence  and  hope.  (3)  A  loving  manifestation  of  God.  A 
manifestation  of  coldness  or  anger  would  never  awaken  love.  Love  alone  begets 
love.  These  things  are  essential,  and  the  gospel  in  Christ  gives  us  a  personal, 
human,  loving  manifestation  of  God.  It  is,  therefore,  emphatically  the  "  wisdom 
of  God."  It  is  Divine  philosophy.  II  A  rule  for  its  pheachers.  "  AVe  speak 
wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect."  The  word  "perfect"  has,  some  think,  an 
allusion  to  the  heathen  mysteries.  These  mysteries  were  religious  observances  of 
a  secret  kind,  open  only  to  the  initiated.  The  apostle  clearly  means  by  the  word 
"perfect"  those  in  the  Christian  community  who  were  more  advanced  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ,  who  stood  most  in  contrast  with  those  who  are  but  "  babes  in 
Christ."  One  of  three  ideas  may  be  attached  to  the  language  of  the  apostle. 
Either  that  he  had  an  exoteric  and  esoteric  doctrine  for  men,  or  that  the  most 
advanced  Christian  alone  could  discern  the  wisdom  of  his  doctrine,  or  that  he 
adapted  his  teaching  to  the  capacity  of  his  hearers.  Which  of  these  ideas  are  we 
to  accept  ?  Net  the  first,  for  Paul  had  not  two  messages,  one  for  those  who  were 
without  tlie  Church,  and  one  for  those  within — one  for  those  who  had  high  capacity, 
and  one  for  those  who  had  weak.  His  message  to  all  was  one — God's  love  to  the 
world  through  Christ.  Not  the  second,  for  the  man  who  was  the  le-ist  advanced  in 
the  Christian  life  must  have  some  appreciation  of  the  gospel.  It  was  the  last, 
namely,  that  he  accommodated  his  teaching  to  the  capacity  of  his  hearers.  In 
another  place  he  tells  the  Christians  at  Corinth  that  he  had  hitherto  "  fed  them 
with  milk,  and  not  with  meat,  because  they  were  not  able  to  bear  it."  His  conduct 
I  take  as  a  rule  for  all  true  preachers.  The  great  saving  facts  of  the  gospel  are 
few  and  simple,  viz.,  that  Christ  died  and  rose  again.  But  the  doctrines  connected 
with  these  facts  and  tlieir  relation  to  man,  God,  the  universe,  and  i^hases  of  truth 
which  can  only  be  appreciated  by  those  who  have  attained  to  certain  stages  in 
Ciinstian  knowledge  and  experience.  The  Great  Teacher  has  said,  "  I  have  many 
things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now."  III.  An  obligation  upon 
ITS  HEARERS.  If  the  higher  aspects  of  gospel  religion  can  only  be  appreciated  by 
those  who  are  "perfect,"  those  who  have  attained  to  a  high  stage  of  Christian 
knowledge,  it  is  manifestly  tlieir  duty  to  endeavour  to  advance  beyond  the  "  first 
principles  of  the  oracles  of  God."  This  duty  liparers  owe — 1.  To  themselves. 
The  more  knowledge  man  has  of  the  wisdom  of  the  gospel,  the  more  power  he  has 
within  him  to  purify  his  affections,  exalt  his  character,  and  bless  his  being.  The 
ignorant  Christian  is  feeble,  fickle,  uninfluential.  2.  To  their  minister.  The  man 
who  has  to  minister  to  hearers  who  make  no  progress  in  Divine  truth  is  limited  in 
his  thoughts  to  the  mere  rudiinentals  of  the  gospel.  His  motives  for  pulpit  study 
weaken,  and  he  becomes  the  commonplace  utterer  of  platitudes,  3.  To  the  system 
of  Christ.  The  glorious  system  of  Christ,  which  is  "  the  wisdom  of  Goil,"  will  only 
grow  in  power,  influence,  and  extent  in  the  world  as  men's  knowledge  of  it  increases. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  gospel  and  the  intellect  : — 1.  It  must  not  be  thought 
that  the  gospel  despises  wisdom.  The  gospel  is  itself  wisdom,  only  it  is  God's 
wisdom  and  not  man's.  "  We  speak  wisdom  .  .  .  yet  a  wisdom  not  of  this  world." 
There  is  nothing  which  some  of  us  need  more  just  now  than  a  demonstration  of 
this  sort.  2.  It  is  constantly  assumed  that  the  progress  of  knowledge  has  exploded 
the  gospel ;  that  the  cultivated  intr-llect  leaves  faith  behind  ;  that  the  triumph  of 
reason  means  the  overthrow  of  religion.  3.  This  is  bad  enough,  but  what  is  worse 
is  that  some  Christian  people  countenance  such  a  view.  They  look  askance  at 
science,  believing  it  to  be  an  enemy  of  the  faith.  Huxley  and  Tyndal  are  very 
terrible  names  to  them.  They  are  uncomfortable  when  they  find  their  sons  are 
beginning  to  question  and  to  think.  Keason  has  an  unpleasing  sugijestion  of  "  The 
Age  of  Reason  "  and  the  French  Revolution.     Then  these  good  people  quote,  "  Not 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i^. 

many  wise  are  called,"  omitting  the  qualifying  "after  the  flesh."  4.  Does  Christ 
relinquish  His  claim  on  able  men  ?  No.  The  Christian  religion  is  distinguished 
from  all  other  religions  in  this,  that  it  is  an  appeal  to  the  reason,  it  calls  into  play 
all  its  powers  aud  welcomes  all  the  established  results  of  science.  It  asks  us  to 
believe  that  we  may  know  and  understand.  It  calls  for  faith,  but  only  that  faith 
which  reason  allows  or  requires.  And  as  the  religion  differs  from  other  religions, 
so  our  Scriptures  are  distinguished  by  their  constant  eulogy  of  wisdom.  The  Bible 
is  not  only  an  appeal  to  the  conscience  ;  it  is  also  an  appeal  to  the  brain.  It  is  so 
constructed  that  it  demands  diligent  study.   I.  Who  ake  the  natural  bien  nowadays 

WHO    COr.EESPOND    TO    THOSE  WHO,  IN  St.  PaDL's    TIME,  WERE    INCAPABLE    OF    RECEIVING 

THE  THINGS  OF  THE  Spibit  OF  GoD  ?  1.  Thoso  who  tell  US  that  matter  can  explain 
Spirit,  that  thought  is  a  mere  function  of  a  grey,  unthinking  substance  called  the 
brain.  Now  they  cannot  receive  the  wisdom  of  the  gospel — not  because  they  are 
wiser  than  every  one  else,  but  because  their  wisdom  is  after  the  flesh,  and  a  limited 
and  foolish  kind  of  wisdom.  So  far  from  being  really  wise,  they  do  not  even  com- 
prehend the  question  which  agitates  all  earnest  men,  viz.,  the  meaning  of  the 
spiritual  world  of  which  you  are  all  more  or  less  conscious.  They  say,  "  The 
spiritual  world  is  only  part  and  parcel  of  the  material  world  with  which  we  are 
familiar."  But  if  thought  comes  from  brain,  then  it  must  be  already  a  thinking 
brain  from  which  it  comes.  If  spirit  is  a  mere  outcome  of  matter,  then  it  must  be 
already  a  spiritual  matter  which  produces  it.  Materialism  cannot  apprehend  the 
wisdom  of  the  gospel,  for  it  has  juggled  away  the  very  meaning  of  its  terms — 
spiritual  and  material.  2.  Those  who  speak  as  if  the  understanding  could  answer 
all  the  questions  and  meet  all  the  needs  of  the  human  spirit.  The  understanding 
cannot  comprehend  God;  therefore,  say  they,  God  does  not  exist.  The  under- 
standing cannot  explain  the  freedom  of  the  will ;  therefore  the  will  is  not  free.  And 
not  admitting  the  existence  of  God  or  the  freedom  of  the  will,  moral  responsibility 
is  quickly  discredited.  On  the  same  showing  love  and  hope  and  self-sacrifice  ought 
to  be  dismissed  as  chimeras — and  perhaps  by  some  they  are.  Now,  such  people 
cannot  understand  the  wisdom  of  the  gospel ;  not  because  they  are  so  much 
cleverer  than  all  the  world,  only  because  they  have  made  a  rather  childish  mistake, 
they  have  not  noticed  the  limits  within  which  the  understanding  is  able  to  work  ; 
they  are  like  men  who  should  deny  that  the  atmosphere  exists  because  they  cannot 
walk  on  it  as  the  birds  of  the  air  can.  The  understanding  is  only  a  part  of  our 
being.  Every  man  is  more  than  understanding ;  he  is  also  heart,  conscience,  will. 
The  understanding  is  only  absolute  within  its  own  sphere.  II.  The  wisdom  which 
Paul  "speaks  among  the  perfect  "  is  nothing  less  than  the  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  the  spirit  of  the  Christian  man.  Just  as  consciousness  alone 
can  be  aware  of  our  own  inward  life,  so  God's  consciousness  alone  can  understand 
the  depths  of  God  ;  and  only  by  being  made  partakeis  of  God's  consciousness  can 
we  search  those  depths.  1.  Such  an  indwelling  Spirit  will  rescue  us  from  the  two 
errors  on  which  we  have  been  reflecting :  of  materialism  and  the  undue  exaltation 
of  the  powers  of  our  own  understanding.  This  indwelling  Spirit  forces  us  to 
recognise  that  the  world  and  life,  as  we  see  them,  stand  forth  out  of  an  encircling 
sea  of  mystei'y  in  which  their  origins  and  issues  are  hidden.  It  makes  us  glad  to 
learn  from  science  all  about  the  process  of  development,  but  it  clearly  teaclies  us 
that  in  the  last  resort  it  is  only  in  the  will  of  God  that  either  the  world  or  the  life 
upon  it  could  have  its  birth  and  find  its  issue.  2.  But  this  wisdom  of  the  gospel 
is  more  than  an  admission  of  mystery  and  of  our  own  limitations.  It  comes  to  us  as 
the  explanation  of  the  mystery  and  as  the  aid  of  our  limitations.  The  gospel  gives 
us  the  key  to  creation,  culminating  in  humanity,  the  Incarnate  God-Man — Christ 
Jesus ;  the  key  to  man's  great  dumb  longing  for  God  in  God's  great  uttered 
longing  for  man;  the  key  to  the  heavy  sorrow  which  oppresses  the  life  of  man, 
in  the  suffering  of  the  God-man ;  the  key  to  the  dead  weight  of  sin  in  the  com- 
plete and  voluntary  sacrifice  of  Christ.  3.  Nor  is  this  all :  in  the  mind  of  Christ, 
an  intellect  in  which  there  meets  the  fullest  understanding  of  God  with  the  most 
tender  sympathy  for  man,  is  really  hidden  a  treasure  of  wisdom,  a  solution  of  all 
the  questionings  of  our  imperfect  spirits.  "We  have  the  mind  of  Christ."  The 
humble  and  unlearned  believer  is  made  i^artaker  of  that  wonderful  mind,  is  allowed 
to  share  its  workings,  and  so  to  apprehend  the  answer  which  it  is  always  giving  to 
the  searchings  of  man.     III.  Thus,  as  we  refl»:ct  on  Paul's  pregnant  sentences, 

WE    BECOME   aware    THAT   THE  GOSPEL   DOES  NOT  SUPPRESS  WISD05I  ;  IT  IS  A  WISDOM  FAR 

surpassing  iHE  WISDOM  OF  THE  WORLD.  It  would  be  the  greatest  mistake  to  suppose 
that  by  the  "wisdom"  of  chap.  i.  20,  21,  20  Paul  means  the  reason,   or  the 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   COEINTIIIANS.  145 

exercise  or  products  of  reason.  Iiidoctl,  there  is  not  a  little  almost  unintentional 
irony  in  his  use  of  the  word,  and  his  comment  on  its  rarity  among  the  "called.'' 
He  speaks  rather  as  one  miglit  speak  to  a  number  of  miners  who  have  just  come 
out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earih  into  the  broad  light  of  day.  "  You  see  your  calling, 
my  friends  ;  not  many  torchbcaiers  among  you  ;  not  many  people  carry  safety- 
lamps."  No;  and,  indeed,  under  so  glorious  an  exjianse  of  sunlit  blue  there  is  not 
for  the  general  purposes  of  life  much  need  of  them.  We  hiive  had  among  us  in 
this  generation  many  brilliant  "  natural"  men,  highly  gifted  with  wisdom  after  the 
flesh.  There  was  the  late  Professor  Clifford ;  there  are  Haeckcl,  Maudsley  and 
Spencer,  Have  they  thrown  light  upon  the  universal  question  ?  Why  are  we — 
intelligent  spiritual  beings,  with  conscience,  will,  and  hearts — why  are  we  here  at 
all ;  whence  coming,  whither  going?  So  far  from  superseding  this  wisdom  of  which 
Paul  speaks,  they  fall  very  short  of  it.  For  the  most  part  they  modestly  confess 
they  have  no  answer  to  the  question.  But  Paul  has  an  explanation  ;  and  to 
spiritual  minds  reiison  is  satisfied.  (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.)  Clirhtiaidtii  a  syxtcm 
of  wisdom.  n)td  tin/aterij  : — I.  A  system  of  consum.«.\te  wisdom.  1.  Devised  by  God. 
ti.  Before  the  world  began.  3.  To  our  glory.  II.  A  system  of  mysteuy.  1.  Hidden 
from  the  world.  2.  Mysteriously  communicated.  3.  Among  the  perfect,  who 
believe  and  act  upon  it.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Mystery  revi'aled  : — I.  The  ekvelation 
OF  THIS  MYSTEKY  IS  MADE  — "  THEM  THAT  ARE  PERFECT,"  i.e.,  tliose  who  have  qualifica- 
tions for  receiving  the  wisdom.  1.  Of  course,  we  are  told  at  once  that  this  is  the 
ignorant  conceit  of  religious  people.  But  why  ignorant  conceit  ?  You  do  not 
speak  of  the  ignorant  conceit  of  the  physician,  or  of  the  engineer,  or  cf  the  chemist, 
or  of  the  artist,  or  of  the  poet.  Nay,  does  not  the  ignorant  conceit  belong  rather  to 
those  who  think  that  without  faculty,  without  study,  they  can  understand  as  well 
as  the  most  assiduous  and  learned?  A  spiritual  man  uiu-t  know  that  he  has  a 
faculty  of  spiritual  discernment,  just  as  a  poet  knows  that  he  has  a  faculty  of 
Ijoetic  discernment.  And  an  unspiritual  man  should  know  this  abo,  that  he  has 
Dot  the  spiiitual  faculty  which  the  other  man  has.  The  great  doctrine  of  the 
apostle  is  that  in  religious  things  right  feeling,  a  right  disposition,  is  the  condition 
of  all  knowledge-.  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,"  etc.  If  you  begin  with  an 
ignorant  or  unspiritual  man  by  simply  instructing  his  understanding  in  the  hope 
that  his  heart  will  be  affected,  you  have  this  difficulty — bis  hardened  spiritual 
feeling  will  hinder  understanding.  We  all  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  rr*ke  men 
understand  what  they  do  not  like.  All  the  training  of  a  university  will  not  make 
S(mie  men  mathematicians.  Again,  if  a  man  does  not  love  truth  and  honesty,  you 
cannot  make  him  true  and  honest  by  expoiindinj?  truth  or  honesty  ;  you  must 
begin  by  creating  within  him  a  feeling  of  truth  and  honesty ;  then  you  can  easily 
teach  him  what  things  are  true  and  honest.  Y'ou  must  have  a  moral  faculty  for 
discerning  moral  things.  2.  I  think,  therefore,  we  may  see  the  profound  wisdom  of 
the  gospel  method.  It  begins  by  setting  man's  feeling  right,  jiroducing  in  him  a 
desire  for  holiness  and  a  hatred  of  evil.  The  apo.^tle  tells  us  that  this  is  the 
working  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Take  the  little  faults  of  men  ;  you  cannot  reform  a 
habit  or  a  temper  by  merely  teaching  about  it — nay,  by  a  mere  resolution  of  the 
will.  The  root  of  the  thing  is  in  the  love  for  it,  and  you  must  begin  by  destroying 
this  and  cultivating  love  for  good,  or  you  will  never  succeed.  You  can  cure  a  bad 
passion  only  by  iiroducing  a  good  one ;  you  can  expel  an  evil  affection  only  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  3.  The  way  of  the  world  in  seeking  religious  truth  and  life  is  to 
investigate  evidence,  to  exercise  the  reasoning  faculties — just  as  you  would  investi- 
gate a  problem  of  history,  or  demonstrate  a  proposition  in  mathematics  or  logic. 
Hence  it  is  that  so  many  learned  i^hilosophers  and  theologians  never  attain  to 
Christianity;  to  them  it  is  simply  an  intellectual  study;  they  study  it  as  they 
would  study  Buddhism  or  Mohammedanism.  They  can  understand  theology  as  a 
science  of  God  ;  they  can  understand  religion  as  a  theoiy  and  a  morality  ;  but  they 
have  no  cimception  of  its  spiritual  character.  "  The  natural  man  discerneth  not 
the  things  of  the  Spirit "  ;  they  are  discerned  only  by  a  spiritual  faculty.     II.  Bdt 

THEN  IT  IS    WISDOM,  EVEN  TO  THE  PERFECT,  OF  A  MYSTERIOUS  KIND.       1.    A  man  Cannot 

reason  out  such  a  system  as  God's  salvation  by  Christ ;  it  is  discerned,  as  Paul 
says,  by  spiritual  recognition,  just  as  the  poetry  of  a  landscape  cannot  be  discerned 
by  a  mere  mathematician,  by  a  mere  engineer.  Christianity  is  a  revelation  of  facts, 
not  a  mere  notion  ;  Christ  tells  us  what  God  is,  that  He  is  "  our  Father  in  heaven  "  ; 
what  God  has  done,  that  God  "has  given  His  only  begotten  Stm,  because  He  so 
loved  the  world."  Now  these  facts  could  not  have  been  imagined,  could  not  have 
been  demonstrated  by  human  reasoning.  But  when  they  are  testified  by  God,  when 
VOL.    I.  10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

they  are  proved  by  evidence  to  be  facts,  then,  if  I  am  a  "  perfect,"  i.e.,  a  spiritual 
man,  I  at  once  feel  that  this  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  is  true ;  that  it  is  exactly 
suited  to  my  personal  need;  it  "commends  itself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the 
sight  of  God."  None  of  the  princes  of  this  world  in  thought  or  in  politics  have 
believed.  They  did  uot  see  the  principles  of  truth,  righteousness,  and  love  that 
were  manifested  by  Jesus  Christ.  Had  they  seen  these  as  the  man  of  spiritual 
feeling  sees  them,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  Pilate  had 
some  philosophical  knowledge ;  he  felt  even  an  interest  in  and  wanted  to  save 
Christ.  He  talked  with  Him  about  His  kingdom  and  about  the  truth  ;  but  Pilate's 
corrupt  selfishness,  his  political  interests,  permitted  him  to  sentence  a  man  to 
crucifixion — whom  he  knew  to  be  innocent.  There  was  the  moral  blindness  in 
close  conjunction  with  the  philosophical  intelligence.  2.  Every  teaching  about 
God  must  have  mystery  pertaining  to  it  that  can  never  be  revealed.  This  is  true, 
indeed,  of  everything  in  human  life.  Let  a  man  begin  to  think  about  God  and 
about  moral  being,  and  how  soon  he  comes  to  a  blank  wall  that  he  cannot  penetrate ! 
Well,  it  is  uot  that  God  purposely  conceals  things,  it  is  that  we  cannot  comprehend 
them.  Instead  of  adding  to  the  mystery  of  God,  we  understand  more  of  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  than  we  can  on  any  other  theory.  And  yet  how  much  remains 
that  is  impenetrable  !  We  are  compelled  to  exclaim,  "  Oh  !  the  depths,"  etc.  Who 
can  fathom  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation,  of  the  atonement,  of  the  quickening  of 
spiritual  life  in  men,  etc.  In  the  love  of  Christ,  in  the  love  of  God,  there  are 
heights  and  depths  that  pass  knowledge.  And  yet  observe — (1)  That  there  are  no 
mysterious  things  in  Christianity.  Christianity  has  no  sacred  rites,  inscrutable 
puzzles,  artificial  concealments.  (2)  That  Christian  mysteries  are  revealed  to  men 
so  far  as  they  are  qualified  to  discern  them.  Nothing  in  Christianity  is  purposely 
concealed.  The  religious  life  of  us  men  and  women  who  have  to  do  with  the 
business  of  this  great  city,  is  never  so  powerfu'ly  moved,  so  loftily  inspired,  so 
practically  directed,  as  when  we  simply  stand  before  the  great  Christian  doctrines. 
(3)  What  a  practical  temper  this  gives  to  the  religious  life  !  What  a  passionate 
desire  for  God,  for  the  study  of  God,  in  His  Word,  in  prayer,  in  worship !  (4)  The 
domain  of  the  knowable  is  sufficient  for  all  the  practical  needs  of  man.  It  is  so  in 
science.  We  eat  withoiit  knowing  the  chemistry  of  food ;  we  act  without  knowing 
the  philosophy  of  motion.  It  is  so  in  religion.  I  may,  however  ignorant  of  the 
higher  mysteries  of  being,  practically  realise  the  life  of  virtue  and  piety.  The  way 
of  life  through  Christ  is  plain.  (H.  Allon.  D.D.)  The  foundation  of  faith  : — 
In  the  verses  which  precede  the  text,  St.  Paul  reviews  the  motives  which 
actuated  him,  and  the  line  of  conduct  he  had  pursued  dming  his  ministry 
at  Corinth.  When  he  went  there,  two  courses  were  open  to  him.  He  might 
have  aimed  to  gain  personal  adherents,  merely  using  Christianity  as  a  means 
of  displaying  the  extraordinary  powers  of  mind.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  he  would 
have  been  successful.  The  other  course  was  for  him  to  gain  believers  in  the  gospel 
he  preached,  and  disciples  for  the  Master  whom  he  served.  Without  the  least 
hesitation,  he  chose  the  latter  as  his  aim.  Self  was  studiously  kept  in  the  back- 
ground. This  faithful  man  could  say,  with  perfect  sincerity,  "  We  preach  not  our- 
selves, but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  " ;  whilst  he  assigns  this  as  his  motive,  "That 
your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God."  Now 
the  steadfast  pursuance  of  this  plan,  by  St.  Paul  and  his  colleagues,  gave  a  marked 
feature  to  the  early  Churches.  I  refer  to  their  singular  and  rapidly  acquired 
independence  of  apostolic  care.  Scarcely  was  a  community  of  believers  gathered, 
although  it  might  be  in  the  midst  of  some  heathen  city,  before  the  little  flock  were  left 
to  themselves,  to  be  instructed  by  their  native  teachers,  and  to  preserve  their  fidelity 
by  mutual  oversight.  Indeed,  but  for  this,  the  progress  of  Christianity  could  not 
have  been  so  rapid  as  it  was.  Its  chief  original  agents  were  very  few,  and  if  they 
had  been  compelled  to  remaiu  long  in  one  place,  only  a  much  smaller  portion  of  the 
world  could  have  been  covered  by  their  labours.  Here,  iu  the  text,  we  have 
described  two  foundations  on  which  our  faith  may  rest — "the  wisdom  of  men,"  and 
"  the  power  of  God,"  and  we  have  to  make  our  election  betw-een  them.  I.  The 
HUMAN  FOUNDATION.  "  The  wisdoni  of  men."  1.  The  personal  influence  of  good 
and  wise  men  in  the  Christian  Church  is  an  ordinance  of  God,  and  when  kept 
within  proper  limits,  is  an  incalculable  blessing.  It  is  perfectly  right,  as  well  as 
perfectly  natural,  that  any  man  who  is  endowed  with  eminent  gifts,  added  to 
sincere  piety  and  fervent  earnestness,  should  wia  the  respect,  affection,  and  confi- 
dence of  brethren.  They  involuntarily  place  themselves  under  his  direction, 
taking  him   as  their  guide  and  teacher.     He  becomes  a  high  authority  iu  their 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  147 

estimation.  So  far  all  is  lawful ;  but  go  beyond  this,  and  the  most  serious  conse- 
quences follow.  If  any  man  was  ever  entitled  to  the  kind  of  authority  I  have 
described,  it  was  St.  Paul,  who  not  only  had  these  personal  excellences,  but 
possessed  supernatural  inspiration.  Yet  hear  how  he  limits  that  authority,  and 
indicates  a  point  where  it  would  fail  him—"  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven, 
preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than  that  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him  be 
accursed."  Again,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me  "  ;  but  observe,  he  adds  the  qualifica- 
tion, "  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ."  These  limits  to  human  influence,  however,  are 
commonly  disregarded.  There  are  human  teachers  who  are  not  only  allowed  to  be 
influential,  but  omnipotent ;  not  only  good,  but  perfect ;  not  only  wise,  but  infal- 
lible. Kespect  for  them  passes  into  blind  obedience ;  affection  into  something  very 
much  like  idolatry.  Their  utterances  are  regarded  as  above  criticism.  Whatever 
they  say  is  taken  as  gospel ;  not  because  of  its  intrinsic  truth  and  reasonableness, 
but  because  they  say  it.  This  is  clearly  a  form  of  the  evil  which  St.  Paul  so 
earnestly  deprecated  when  he  wrote,  "  that  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom 
of  men."  2.  This  undue  influence  of  men  in  matters  of  religion  is  not  only  exer- 
cised through  their  oral  teaching,  and  over  those  who  are  personally  acquainted 
with  them,  but  also  through  their  writings.  No  man  who  is  sincerely  anxious  about 
his  spiritual  culture,  and  is  glad  of  light,  from  any  quarter,  upon  the  most  impor- 
tant of  all  subjects,  can  aiford  to  neglect  the  stores  of  Christian  thought  which 
have  come  dow^n  to  us  as  precious  legacies  from  the  past,  or  which  are  still  issuing 
from  the  press.  And  yet  the  teachers,  however  wise  and  good,  who  speak  to  us 
through  their  books,  ought  to  be  listened  to  with  the  same  cautious  reserve  as  those 
who  address  us  in  an  audible  voice.  They  ought  to  be  treated  as  helps,  not  as  final 
authorities.  Is  it  not  a  very  common  thing  to  hear  the  inquiry,  not  "  What  saith 
the  Scriptures?"  but,  "What  say  the  fathers?  What  saith  St.  Chrysostom  ? 
What  saith  St.  Augustine  ?  "  And  the  answer  obtained  is  considered  as  final.  The 
opinions  of  commentators,  the  systems  of  theologians,  and  even  the  beautiful 
dreams  of  Christian  poets,  may  be  useful  to  us,  but  to  take  our  religion  from  them 
alone  is  to  let  our  faith  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men.  3.  A  faith  which  rests  on  such 
a  foundation  must  of  necessity  be  insecure.  If  men  have  given  us  our  fnith,  men 
can  take  it  away  from  us.  What  one  has  built  up,  another  can  destroy.  Are  there 
not  multitudes  continually  undergoing  such  changes  of  religious  belief  ?  They  are 
ever  passing  from  one  teacher  to  another  ;  the  last  and  newest  is  sure  to  have  them. 
No  anchorage,  no  stability  for  them  !  Staggered  by  each  new  scientific  theory, 
which  appears  hostile  to  religion,  or  captivated  by  the  last  vagary  of  superstition, 
they  are  "  children  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine, 
by  the  sleight  of  men."  But  insecurity  of  belief  is  not  the  only  evil  in  their  case. 
The  life  they  hve  is  as  unstable  as  the  faith  they  hold.  Character  degenerates,  and 
every  semblance  of  piety  disappears,  wh^n  the  influence  which  gave  birth  to  it  is 
withdrawn.  II.  The  IIivine  foundation.  "The  power  of  God."  We  recognise 
this  phrase  as  one  which  the  apostle  uses  elsewhere.  "I  am  not  ashamed  of 'the 
gospel  of  Christ:  for  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."  In  the  previous 
chapter  he  had  said — "We  preach  Christ  crucified  .  .  .  the  power  of  God."  When, 
therefore,  he  desires  that  faith  should  stand  in  the  power  of  God,  he  means  that  it 
should  rest  upon  the  gospel,  and  especially  upon  Christ,  who  is  the  gospel's  central 
Object.  This  grand  revelation  has  been  made  to  the  world  once  for  all.  It  is  open 
to  universal,  to  individual  inspection.  We  may  be  very  thankful  to  another  for 
telling  us  what  he  sees  in  Christ.  For  if  he  is  a  man  of  eminent  piety,  who  has 
looked  long  and  earnestly,  with  an  eye  whose  perceptions  love  has  quickened,  and 
holiness  has  purified,  he  may  point  out  to  us  some  features  which  would  otherwise 
have  escaped  our  dimmer  vision.  But  what  he  tells  us  should  rather  stimulate 
than  supersede  our  personal  observation.  All  such  helps  should  be  like  the  guide 
books  which  a  traveller  takes  with  him  when  he  ascends  a  mountain.  If  he  did  not 
consult  them  now  and  then,  he  might  miss  some  points  of  interest  in  the  panorania 
which  lies  around  him.  But  then  he  does  not  allow  them  to  prevent  him  from  using 
his  own  eyes.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  St.  Paul  meant  something  more  than 
the  contact  of  individual  minds  with  Divine  truth,  when  he  speaks  of  faith  standing 
in  the  power  of  God.  The  power  of  God  can  never  give  stability  to  faith  until  it 
actually  enters  the  soul  and  exerts  its  mighty  influence  there ;  until  Christianity 
ceases  to  be  a  mere  set  of  opinions,  and  becoiries  a  vital  experience.  It  may  seem 
very  satisfactory  to  say — "  my  religion  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  teaching  or 
writings  of  men,  it  is  contained  between  the  covers  of  the  Bible."  But  if  your 
religion  is  shut  up  there  it  is  a  worthless  thing.     It  is  not  the  perception,  but  the 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

entrance  of  God's  Word  that  giveth  light,  and  heat,  and  life,  to  our  dark,  cold,  dead 
nature.  It  is  when  the  power  of  God  brings  peace  to  our  conscience,  and  submission 
to  our  wayward  will,  and  purity  to  our  sinful  heart,  that  it  makes  our  faith  a  strong 
and  indestructible  thing.  {B.  Bird.)  Obedience  beriettinp  faith  : — According  to 
Scriptures  there  are  two  remedies  for  unbelief ;  one  the  way  of  argument,  the  other  the 
way  of  experiment.  In  these  two  ways  it  is  possible  to  establish  the  great  doctrines  of 
revelation.  A  careful  investigation  of  the  "  Evidences  of  Christianity  "  is  exceed- 
ingly helpful  to  some  persons.  Bat  it  is  well  to  remember  that  historical  know- 
ledge is  one  thing,  belief  another.  They  may  quicken  the  intellect ;  they  do  not 
necessarily  eniindle  devotion  in  the  soul.  Again,  Christ's  Church  has  had  a  noble 
history — one  with  which  we  do  well  to  acquaint  ourselves.  Still,  a  knowledge  of  its 
sufferings,  sorrows,  trials,  losses,  triumphs,  and  glories  does  not  necessarily  produce 
faith.  There  are  some,  not  a  few,  who  endeavour  by  a  pi'ocess  of  speculation  to 
strengthen  their  faith  in  God  and  in  His  revealed  will.  It  is  admitted  that  in 
matters  of  religious  faith  reason  should  be  satisfied.  Intelligent  service  is  what 
our  Heavenly  Father  demands.  Commending  most  heartily  the  application  of 
reason  to  the  solution  of  questions  connected  with  religion,  we  are  nevertheless 
justified  in  severely  condemning  the  spirit  of  rationalism.  Eationalistic  speculation 
has  accomplished  but  little  good  in  the  world.  Some  persons  are  disposed  to  view- 
truth  in  abstract  form.  They  endeavour  to  comprehend  what  is,  always  has  been, 
and  for  ever  must  remain  incomprehensible  to  finite  minds.  Argument,  it  is  true, 
has  its  place  in  the  defence  of  Scripture.  It  establishes  God's  people  in  the  truth. 
It  by  no  means  follows,  however,  that  arguments,  however  potent  they  may  be, 
will  convince  the  prejudiced.  Proof  is  not  conviction.  The  establishment  of  the 
facts  is  not  the  removal  of  antagonism  to  the  facts.  Moreover,  the  way  of  argument, 
when  exhaustive,  is  exceedingly  laborious.  We  would  find  it  quite  inconvenient  to 
believe  nothing  till  we  had  ehtablished  it  by  unanswerable  arguments.  May  I 
believe  nothing  in  astronomy,  nothing  in  geology,  nothing  in  chemistry  until  I  have 
possessed  myself  of  all  the  arguments  bearing  upon  the  subjects?  Must  I  analyse 
every  species  of  food  before  eating  anything  ?  Supposing  I  have  the  ability  to  do  so, 
will  I  ever  have  the  opportunity  of  examining  critically  all  the  arguments  bearing 
upon  Christianity?  There  assuredly  must  be  some  more  direct  method  of 
establishing  the  truth.  Yes,  says  Christ,  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall 
know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God  or  whether  I  sp^ak  of  Myself."  Yes, 
says  Paul,  "  Your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power 
of  God."  "  Stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men."  How  could  our  faith  rest  secure  on 
such  a  tottering  foundation  ?  Man's  wisdom  is  folly.  Look  at  the  seething  whirl- 
pool of  opinions,  philosophies  and  elaborate  systems,  all  driven  by  the  breath  of 
some  new  metaphysical  nondescript  into  the  gurgling  vortex  of  endless  oblivion. 
What  metaphysical  truth  has  been  so  firmly  established  that  no  defiant  caviller 
has  presumed  to  call  it  in  question  ?  Shall  we  found  our  faith  on  this  ever- 
heaving  ocean  ?  No.  Do  and  know.  Stand  in  the  i^ower  of  God  and  live.  There 
is  then  a  more  direct  way  of  securing;  faith  than  by  the  toilsome  process  of  argu- 
mentation. The  seeker  after  truth  may  experiment.  He  may  test  God.  He  may 
test  doctrine.  He  m;iy  test  religion.  He  may  test  prayer.  He  may  test  piety.  He 
may  do  and  know.  Does  he  lack  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  merit  ?  Let  him 
come  to  Christ.  They  who  have  cordially  accepted  the  Saviour  have  never  ques- 
tioned His  saving  ability.  Do  any  question  the  preciousness  of  Jesus'  love?  "  Oh 
taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  gr^c  ous."  God,  then,  has  seen  fit  to  allow  His  system 
of  faith  to  be  tested  by  actual  experiment.  He  invites  us,  commands  us  to  try  it 
in  our  own  experiences.  In  tliis  agn  the  inductive  method  of  philosophising  is 
universally  accepted.  Scientific  tiuths  are  established  by  a  carefully  conducted 
seiies  of  experiments,  not  by  a  priori  reasobing.  The  ancient  philosophers 
endeavoured  to  determine  the  facts  of  each  science  by  reasoning  from  first 
principles.  "  Cease  your  blind  reasoning,"  said  Bacon.  "  Sit  as  learners  at  the 
feet  of  Nature  and  listen  to  what  she  has  to  say.  Gather  up  tiie  facts.  Arrange 
them  logically.  Form  generalisations.  Interpret  nature."  As  a  result  of  the 
adoption  of  this  method,  the  physical  sciences  have  made  gigantic  strides  in  these 
last  days.  To  most  of  us,  therefore — for  we  insensibly  imbibe  the  spirit  of  the 
age — it  is  a  question  of  no  small  moment :  "  Are  the  doctrines  of  revealed  religion 
open  to  experiment?  "  We  answer,  Yes,  we  may  m^ke  a  scientific  investigation  of 
the  truths  we  are  asked  to  adopt.  In  adopting  this  method  of  establishing  truth, 
however,  it  should  he  borne  in  mind  that  we  have  no  right  to  make  our  own  selection 
of  the  tests.     I  have  no  right  to  say,  "  If  there  is  a  sovereign  ruler  of  the  universe, 


CHAP.  II.]  7.   CORINTHIAXS.  119 

let  Him  speak  to  me  in  an  audible  voice  from  heaven."  Are  we  justified  in  imitating 
the  cavillers  of  the  Saviour's  time  and  exclaiming,  "  We  would  see  a  sign  "  ?  "  To 
such  no  sign  shall  be  given."  Though  there  are  experiments  that  would  be 
irreverent,  there  are  others  that  are  entirely  proper.     (/.  S.  Van  Dtjhe,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  But  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery. —  The  wi adorn  of  God  in 
the  gospel  appears— I.  Ix  its  ohigin — the  Divine  purpose.  II.  In  tue  foism  op 
ITS  KEVELATioN — mystery.  III.  In  the  mode  of  its  communication — by  man. 
IV.    In    its   ULTIMATE   design — to   our  glory.      (-7.   Lyth,   D.D.)  The   goxpel- 

toisdom: — I.  It  is  God's  wisdom  (vers,  6-9).  II.  It  is  eevealed  inwardly  by 
THE  SriEiT  (vers.  10-13).  III.  It  is  understood  only  by  the  spiritual  man 
(ver.    14-iii.    4).        {Principal     Edwards.)  God's     wisdom    in    a    mysterii  : — 

Christianity  is — I.  "  The  wisdom  of  God."  Wisdom  is  knowledge  directed  to 
23ractical  ends  through  the  most  effectual  means.  The  moral  systems  of  Greece 
ill  deserved  that  appellation.  They  were  imaginative  ;  they  fed  the  appetite  for 
speculation,  but  fell  with  no  power  upon  conscience  or  conduct.  But  in  the  gospel 
"the  wisdom  of  God"  is  displayed  in  efficient  and  wondrous  arrangements  to 
enlighten  and  save  a  fallen  world.  1.  It  affords  infallible  instruction  in  all 
necessary  truth.  All  true  knowledge  pn^perly  comes  fiom  God.  Even  art  and 
science  were  probably  first  suggested  to  the  mind  by  God,  but  secretly  and  without 
any  mark  of  distinction.  It  is  conceivable  that  much  of  Bible  truth  might  have 
been  thus  secretly  suggested,  and  have  been  published  only  as  the  results  of  the 
human  investigation.  Beyond  their  own  rational  evidence  none  of  these  truths, 
however,  would  have  had,  in  this  case,  a  greater  than  human  authority.  They 
would  have  been  but  matttrs  of  opinion  still.  The  disadvantage  of  the  most 
enlightened  paganism  was,  that  what  of  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  it  was  not  known 
to  be  from  God.  When  they  met  with  truth  they  met  also  with  error ;  and  both 
appeared  to  rest  ujiou  equal  authority,  and  each  was  held  with  equal  unsteadfast- 
ness  and  doubt.  What  was  wanting  was?  truth  in  a  revealed  form.  "  The  wisdom 
of  God  "  has  supplied  that  desideratum.  Whilst  human  teachers  remained  in  the 
human  court  darkly  investigating  what  might  be  hidden  within  that  veil,  the 
"  Teacher  sent  from  God"  rent  that  veil,  and  He  who  dwelt  between  the  cherubim 
"shone  forth."  Whilst  they  were  gazing  upon  every  dark  form  of  error  wLich 
flitted  before  them  like  the  clouds  of  night,  He  came  forth,  and  cried,  "  I  am  the 
light  of  the  world;  he  that  foUoweth  Me,"  &c.;  and  the  credentials  He  bore  were 
equal  to  this  high  declaration.  2.  It  is  a  Divine  contrivance  to  adiniuister  pardon 
to  the  guilty.  This  is  peculiar  to  the  gospel.  The  question,  "  What  must  I  do  to 
be  saved?"  has  been  sighed  from  many  a  breast,  but  has  obtained  no  answer 
except  from  Christianity.  3.  It  is  an  efficient  scheme  for  promoting  personal  and 
universal  happiness.  Man  is  miserable,  and  cannot  be  otherwise.  Between  sin 
and  misery  there  is  a  necessary  connection.  Many  experiments  have  been  tried  to 
build  up  happy  and  i^eaceful  societies,  but  all  have  failed.  Christianity  would  not 
have  been  "  wisdom  "  had  it  not  pi  ovided  for  man"s  happiness;  and  it  could  only 
provide  for  it  by  effecting  his  regeneration.  When  this  takes  place  the  heart  is  at 
rest;  "the  fruits  of  the  Spirit"  spring  forth  from  the  renewed  soil;  then  man 
lives  to  help  and  bless  his  fellows.  II.  "  The  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery." 
The  apostle  here  probably  alludes  to  the  mysteries  of  Paganism.  The  priesthood 
in  many  places  in'etended  to  be  in  possession  of  a  higher  and  purer  doctrine  which 
they  kept  from  the  vulgar,  under  the  plea  that  they  were  too  base  and  impure  to  be 
entrusted  with  it.  It  was,  therefore,  "  hidden  wisdom."  But  it  was  occasionally 
communicated  to  distinguished  persons.  The  "initiated"  had,  however,  to  undergo 
severe  penances  ;  scenic  symbolic  representations  in  caverns,  and  in  the  night,  were 
the  means  adopted  for  unfolding  the  secret ;  and  these,  and  other  ceremonies,  were 
employed  to  inspire  greater  awe  and  to  enforce  secrecy.  Probably  this  secret 
doctrine  contained  some  of  the  ancient  and  purer  theology,  but  mingled  with  fables. 
The  apostle  supposes — 1.  Points  of  resemblance  ;  but  e^en  the  resemblances  are 
implied  contrasts  such  as  exist  between  the  sun  and  a  fire,  which  at  once  calls 
our  thoughts  from  what  is  common  to  both,  to  the  contrast  exhibited  between  a 
darkened  blaze  and  an  unsullied  light.  (1)  Christianity  was  connected  with 
symbolic  representations  running  through  the  previous  ages,  of  which  it  was  at 
once  the  accomplishment  and  the  exposition;  and  it  retained  some  figurative  rites 
of  its  own — e.g.,  Baptism,  the  Eucharist,  and  the  Sabbath.  (2)  It,  two,  is  hidden 
from  the  profane,  and  those  who  receive  it  must  be  pi-epared  by  a  previous 
discipline.      But  its   discipline   is   not  some  foolish   bodily  austerity  or  onerous 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

ceremonies,  it  is  the  discipline  of  humility  and  prayer.  For  "  the  secret  of  the 
Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him,"  and  to  them  "  He  shows  His  covenant."  (3)  It 
also  j)rodnces  deep  impressions  of  awe  and  reverence  upon  those  who  are  admitted 
to  it.  Keligion  has  an  awful  grandeur,  but  nowhere  is  it  displayed  so  impressively 
as  in  the  gospel.  2.  Points  of  direct  contrast.  (1)  The  mysteries  of  Paganism  were, 
for  the  most  part,  by  artifice  ;  those  of  Christianity  by  nature  and  necessity.  The 
bottom  of  this  ocean  is  not  discovered,  not  because  the  waters  are  mudrly,  but 
because  they  are  deep.  (2)  In  the  Pagan  mysteries  plain  truths  were  often  hidden 
in  doubtful  enigmas  ;  in  Cin-istianity  nothing  is  mysterious  but  what  is  so  by  the 
appointment  of  Him  who  hides  that  from  us  which  is  unfit  for  us  to  know,  or  from 
the  necessary  magnitu  ie  of  the  objects.  (3)  The  impression  produced  upon  the 
initiated  was  the  result  greatly  of  trick,  and  brought  the  spirit  of  man  into  bondage 
and  disquieting  superstition.  But  "  the  mysteries  of  godliness  "  at  once  humble 
and  exalt ;  and  whilst  they  inspire  fear,  elevate,  strengthen,  and  sanctify.  (4)  In 
the  mysteries  of  Paganism,  whatever  wisdom  was  "  hidden  "  was  for  the  few  ;  that 
of  Christianity,  for  all.  From  the  former  the  poor  were  systematically  excluded. 
The  poor  find  mercy  in  the  gospel,  but  nowhere  else.  III.  This  "  wisdom  of  God 
IN  A  mystery"  was  "ordained  BEFORE  THE  WORLD  TO  GLORY."  1.  Christianity 
was  ordained  "  before  the  world."  "We  hear  sometimes  of  its  invention  by  man. 
We  acknowledge  that  things  invented  have  been  added  by  human  authority.  But 
these  are  no  parts  of  the  system  itself ;  and  we  may  ask,  When  was  that  invented  ? 
And  what  human  mind  first  devised  its  leading  fundamental  principles? — that  man 
is  a  fallen  being  who  can  be  saved  only  through  the  merits  of  a  Divine  sacrifice. 
2.  It  was  ordained  as  a  perfect  and  efficient  plau  for  human  recovery.  (R.  Watson.) 
The  great  theme  of  cjonpel  prcachint] : — I.  The  wisdom  referred  to  in  the  text.  It 
is  called  the  wisdom  of  God  ;  by  which  we  are  to  understand,  not  that  attribute  of 
God's  nature,  but  tbat  attribute  in  its  display.  The  wisdom  of  God  has  been 
denominated  manifold — manifold,  not  simply  because  the  tbings  in  which  it  is 
displayed  are  many,  but  because,  as  displayed  in  each  of  those  things,  it  is  in  itself 
manifold ;  in  other  words,  ample,  full  in  its  display.  And  of  what  does  he  thus 
speak?  It  is  of  God's  wisdom  as  displayed  in  the  economy  of  human  salvation. 
What  is  wisdom  ?  What  but  that  which,  having  an  object  in  view,  chooses  a  plan, 
and  employs  means  for  the  attainment  of  its  object — not  indeed  any  plan,  but  that 
which  is  indisputably  the  best — nor  any  means,  but  those  which  are  indisputably 
the  most  suitable  ;  and  by  its  choice  of  the  one  and  its  employment  of  the  other, 
both  seeks  the  attainment  of  its  object,  and  makes  provision  for  the  removal  out  of 
the  way  of  what  would  otherwise  operate  to  make  its  attainment  impossible.  If 
this  be  what  wisdom  is,  does  it  not  furnish  an  explanation  of  what  the  wisdom  of 
God  is,  as  displayed  in  the  economy  of  human  salvation  ?  He  had  an  object  in 
view.  That  object  was  twofold — His  own  glory  and  man's  salvation.  Had  sinful 
man  been  left  to  perish,  without  any  regard  to  the  wish  of  mercy,  the  holiness,  and 
the  faithfulness,  and  the  justice  of  God  would  doubtless  have  been  seen  in  man's 
perdition.  Or  had  sinful  man  been  rescued  from  destruction,  without  any  regard  to 
the  demand  of  holiness,  and  faithfulness,  and  justice,  the  mercy  of  God  would 
doubtless  have  been  seen  in  man's  preservation  from  ruin.  But  where — in  either 
the  one  or  the  other  of  those  supposed  cases — where  would  have  been  God's  glory? 
For  His  glory  is  not  His  mercy,  or  His  justice,  or  His  faithfulness,  or  His  holiness, 
in  their  separate  form,  but  all  these  perfections  in  combination.  And  is  not  this 
the  appparance  which  these  perfections  of  God  present  to  view  in  His  mode  of  saving 
man  ?  II.  The  peculiar  descriptiox  which  the  aptstle  in  the  text  further  gives  of 
it.  1.  "The  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery."  By  this,  questionless,  the  apostle 
primarily  intended  to  intimate  that  in  speaking,  or  in  ministerially  publishing  the 
wisdom  of  God,  or  the  plan  of  human  salvation  in  the  mode  of  its  accomplishment, 
in  which  the  wisdom  of  God  has  its  highest  illustiation,  he  proclaimed  that  which, 
in  itself,  is  mysterious  or  incomprehensible.  And  is  it  not  so  ?  But  though  there 
is  here  that  which  is  mysterious,  that  which  is  incomprehensible,  there  is  nothing 
that  is  incredible.  To  refuse  the  plan  of  human  salvation  a  place  in  our  creed, 
because  the  mode  of  its  accomplishment  transcends  our  comprehension,  we  must, 
in  order  to  be  consistent,  disbelieve  whatever  we  cannot  fully  understand  or  explain. 
And  in  what  tremendous  and  hopeless  scepticism  would  this  involve  us  !  For  what 
is  there  that  is  not  to  us  replete  with  mystery?  2.  But  though  the  apostle  may 
have  referred  to  what  is  strictly  mysterious  in  the  plan  of  human  salvation  when 
he  said,  "  We  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,"  yet,  from  what  immediately 
follows,  it  would  appear  that  he  meant  to  be  understood  as  referring,  not  so  much 


CHAP,  n.]  I.   CORINrillAXS.  151 

to  the  essential  incomprehensibility  of  that  plan,  as  to  its  previous  secrecy.  The 
plan  of  huuiau  salvation  was  before  a  mystery,  a  i-ecret ;  but  in  consequence  of  the 
commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  it  is  now  made  known  :  hence,  "  We  speak  " — 
I  and  my  fellow-apostles  "  speak  " — publish,  proclaim,  the  once  "  hidden  wisdom." 
His  meaning  is,  that,  compared  with  the  revelation  of  it  now  made,  all  former 
revelations  of  it  were  imperfect.  Though  adapted  to  be  spiritually  and  morally 
useful,  yet  every  former  revelation  was  not  only  partial,  but  oftentimes  obscure.  In 
this  latter  revelation,  however,  there  was  no  darkness  ;  it  was  clear,  intelligible, 
satisfactory.  But  the  apostle  refers,  not  merely  to  the  complete  discovery  now 
made  of  the  plan  of  human  salvation  compared  with  the  former  partial  and 
defective  revelations  of  it,  but  also  to  its  benevolent,  its  philanthropic  character, 
when  he  says,  "  We  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  the  hidden 
wisdom."  The  plan  of  human  salvation  was  primarily  revealed  to  the  progenitor 
of  the  human  race  as  their  representative  ;  but  subsequently  this  revelation  was 
made  only  to  a  portion  of  his  descendants.  The  rest  of  mankind  needed  it,  as 
well  as  these  favoured  ones ;  but  from  all  without  the  pale  of  their  privileged 
community  it  was  withheld,  and  long  withheld — so  long,  that  to  this  latter  class 
it  seemed  its  revelation  was  never  to  be  made.  Until  the  commencement  of  this 
era  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  to  be  partakers  with  the  Jews  of  the  blessings  of 
salvation  was  a  "mystery,"  a  secret;  but  no  sooner  did  this  era  commence  than 
the  original  benevolent  and  philanthrojiic  character  of  the  plan  of  human  salvation 
was  made  manifest.  Widely  was  the  revelation  of  this  plan  spread  during  the 
apostolic  age  ;  widely  has  it  been  spread  since ;  but  still  it  is  far,  very  far  from  being 
universally  spread.     III.  The  sodkce  whence  it  originated,  the  antiquity  of  its 

DEVICE,    and    the    GRANDEUK    OF    THE    OBJECT    OF    ITS    REVELATION.       1.    ItS    SOUrce  WaS 

God.  "  We  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  "  ;  that  in  which  "  the  wisdom  of  God  "  whs 
illustriously  displayed  we  publish — even  the  plan  of  human  salvation  "  which  God 
ordained  "  ;  that  is,  which  God  decreed,  and  having  decreed,  revealed  as  His  own 
contrivance.  And  is  not  this  what  the  plan  of  human  salvation  is?  Could  it  have 
any  other  origin  than  that  to  which  it  is  here  traced  ?  Does  not  that  about  it 
which  exceeds  all  description  and  transcends  all  conception  prove  that  its  contri- 
vance not  only  was,  but  must  have  been  Divine  ?  2.  The  antiquity  of  its  device. 
"We  speak  the  wisdom  of  God" — the  lalau  of  human  salvation  "which  God 
ordained  before  the  world,  that  is,  before  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  and  it'  before 
the  creation  of  the  world,  before  the  beginning  of  time;  and  if  before  the  beginning 
of  time,  from  eternity.  And  is  not  the  plan  of  human  salvation  thus  ancient  ? 
"Known  unto  God,"  it  is  said,  "are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  "  ;  language  which,  whilst  it  undeniably  imports  antecedent  arrangement,  as 
undeniably  implies  that  that  arrangement  was,  on  the  part  of  God,  eternal.  And  if, 
in  reference  to  all  His  other  works,  the  date  of  God's  plans  must  be  fixed  in 
eternity,  what  other  date  can  be  reasonably  assigned  to  His  plan  of  human  salva- 
tion? What  admiration,  what  gratitude,  what  confidence  is  this  fitted  to  excite  in 
our  breast !  3.  The  grandeur  of  the  object  of  its  revelation.  "  We  speak  the 
wisdom  of  God,  which  God  ordained  before  the  world,  unto  our  glory."  In 
devising  the  plan  of  human  salvation,  God  sought  His  own  glory  ;  and  in  the 
accomplishment  of  that  plan  His  glory  has  been  secured.  But  though  in  devising 
that  plan  God  chiefly  sought  His  own  glory,  yet  Pie  sought  ours  also  ;  even  our 
spiritual,  moral,  and  eternal  benefit,  which  constitutes  our  glory.  Indeed,  the 
device  of  that  plan  would  have  failed  in  its  object  had  not  its  accomplishment 
combined,  in  this  sense,  our  glory  with  the  glory  of  God.  And  have  we  not  every 
reason  to  be  assured,  from  it  adaption  to  our  case,  of  its  fitness  to  promote  our 
glory,  by  promoting  our  spiritual,  moral,  and  eternal  benefit?  {A.  Jack,  D.D.) 
Tlie  wisdom  of  God  in  mystery  .-—Light  and  darkness  are  here  mingled  to- 
gether. It  is  wisdom,  but  wisdom  in  a  mystery.  We  may  know  from  it 
enough  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,  but  the  gospel  never  pro^joses  to  give 
answers  to  the  catechism  of  curiosity.  Consider — I.  The  mystery  which  lies  in 
THE  crucifixion  OF  CiiRisT.  It  is  entirely  a  mystery  to  us — 1.  How  it  could 
comport  with  the  justice  of  God  to  lay  the  punishment  of  our  sins  on  the  head 
of  an  innocent  Being.  He  has  done  it.  There  is  no  mystery  about  that.  But  we 
know  no  more.  2.  How^  justice  could  be  satisfied  through  such  an  infliction.  We 
cannot  tell.  All  we  know  is  that  Divine  justice  positively  did  receive  there  the 
very  last  item  of  her  demands.  3.  How  Christ  could  reuder  satisfaction  to  Divine 
justice,  while,  at  the  same  time,  He  was  the  Being  to  whom  satisfaction  was 
rendered,  and  the  very  Being  who  rendered  it.     4.  How  it  came  to  pass  that,  while 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  Divine  nature  is  utterly  unsusceptible  of  pain  and  death,  nevertheless  the 
sufferings  and  death  fof  Jesus  Clirist  have  all  their  value  and  efficacy  from  the 
Divine  nature  of  the  Victim.  We  know  it  is  so,  but  we  know  nothing  further.  5. 
How  there  could  be,  in  the  "  one  person"  of  Christ  upon  the  Cross,  such  a  wonderful 
union  of  grandeur  and  humiliation — of  complaining  and  omnipotence — of  immortal 
Deity  and  expiring  humanity  !  They  are  truths,  but  they  are  mysteries— Divine 
mysteries  of  Divine  truth.  6.  How  that  Son  on  the  Cross,  in  whom  tlie  Father 
was  well  pleased,  could  have  been  abandoned  at  such  a  moment,  and  left  to  wail, 
"  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ? ''  6.  How  the  love  of  God 
should  ever  have  brought  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Cross.     H.  The  demonstration  that 

ALL  this  MYSTEEIOUSNESS  IS  NO  GEEATEB  THAN  WE  OUCIIT  TO  EXPECT  ON  THE  SUBJECT- 
MATTER  BEFORE  US.  It  perfectly  accords  with  all  the  facts  and  all  the  other 
arrangements  of  the  plan  of  redemption.  In  this  accordance  beams  out  the 
wisdom  of  God.  1.  Sin  was  the  great  evil  which  brought  our  Saviour  into  the 
world  and  took  Him  to  the  Cross.  And  the  existence  of  sin  is  just  as  mysterious 
a  matter  to  us  as  its  expiation.  If  sin  is  a  mystery,  the  expiation  of  it  ouglit  to 
be  a  mystery  also.  And  so  it  is.  Great  is  the  mjstery  of  godliness,  etc.  2.  Why 
did  the  Son  of  God  select  this  world  as  the  theatre  of  His  redeeming  wonders  ? 
Spirits  as  precious  as  ours  had  fallen.  Why  did  God  pass  angels  by  when  He 
rescued  us?  No  answer  comes,  except,  "Even  so.  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good 
in  Thy  sight."  There  we  must  leave  it.  And  if  it  be  a  mystery  how  God  came  to 
select  this  apostate  world,  it  accords  with  God  that  that  work  itself  should  be  a 
mystery  also.  3.  There  is  an  entire  correspondence  between  the  do'-trines  of 
Christ's  expiation  of  sin  and  satisfaction  of  justice,  and  all  the  other  information 
we  have  about  the  Saviour  Himself.  The  incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ  is  just 
as  mysterious  to  us  as  His  atonement.  That  Jesus  Christ  should  be  able  to  give 
strength  to  the  poor  cripple's  bones,  and  yet  be  Himself  weary  and  wayworn — that 
He  should  feed  thousands  of  men,  and  yet  be  a  man  of  hunger^ — that  He  should 
please  the  Father,  and  yet  the  Father  be  pleased  to  bruise  Him,  these  are  things 
before  which  faith  and  love  may  wonder  and  adore,  but  which  reason  can  never 
explain !  4.  There  is  something  trulj'  amazing  in  the  mode  of  the  redemption 
of  sinners.  If  it  were  so,  that  Jesus  Christ  were  coming  into  this  world  to  ransom 
sinners,  we  should  naturally  have  expected  that  He  would  come  in  the  chaiiots  of 
His  omnipotence  !  But  He  was  a  poor  man,  and  at  the  end  of  His  work,  instead 
of  receiving  any  signals  of  triumph,  He  was  mocked  as  an  impostor  and  crucified 
as  a  malefactor.  This  is  the  mode  in  which  God  treated  His  Son  !  It  corresponds 
with  the  mysteries  of  its  design.  5.  Through  this  Christ  some  sinners  are  brought 
into  favour  with  God.  They  are  believers.  Tliey  are  adopted  into  God's  family, 
and  He  loves  them  with  an  unequalled  tenderness  and  strength.  But  how  does  He 
treat  them  ?  Th^  very  pathway  by  which  they  travel  to  heaven  corresponds  in 
wonders  with  all  the  rest  of  their  redemption  !     {I.  S.  Spencer,  B.I).)  Chru- 

tianitij  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystenj  : — I.  Mystery  primarily  signifies  a  secret, 
and  Christianity  is  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  because  of  its  having  been 
long  a  secret.  "It  was  ordained  before  the  fonmlation  of  the  world" — it  was 
a  Divine  plan  formed  in  the  mind  of  God,  but,  from  eternity  to  the  point  of  time 
when  it  was  needed,  it  remained  a  secret  there.  But  at  the  moment  of  man's  fall 
then  came  the  wisdom  of  God  out  of  this  long  mystery.  And  whilst  justice  shut 
the  gates  of  paradise,  mercy  opened  the  new  and  living  way  to  reconciliation  and 
friendship  with  God.  But  the  apostle  speaks  of  God's  purpose  to  call  the  Gentiles 
as  a  mystery.  The  wisdom  of  God  had  retired  beliind  the  imijenetrable  cloud  for 
ages  till  our  Saviour  gave  the  charter  of  salvation  to  all  nations — "  Go  ye  into  all 
the  world,"  &c.  II.  A  mystery  is  an  emblem,  and  Christianity  is  the  wisdom 
of  God  in  a  mystery,  because  it  has  delighted  in  all  ages  to  array  itself  in  emblem. 
The  parables  of  our  Lord  were  called  mysteries  for  this  reason,  and  "the  golden 
candlesticks"  and  "the  stars"  in  the  Book  of  the  Eevelation.  But  the  object 
of  a  mystery,  in  this  respect,  is  not  so  much  concealment  as  to  test  whether  men 
love  the  truth  sufficiently  to  investigate  the  figures  under  which  it  is  presented. 
The  wisdom  of  God  chose  the  ancient  types  fur  the  manifestation  of  itself.  All 
nature  is  made  use  of  in  this  respect.  The  sun  is  the  established  emblem  of  Christ, 
the  light  of  the  worM.  In  the  shadows  of  evening  the  voice  of  heaveoly  wisdom 
admonishes  us  that  the  night  cometh  in  which  no  man  can  work.  Dews  and  rains 
remind  us  of  the  great  promise  of  the  fertilising  and  life-giving  Spirit.  It  was  for 
this  very  reason  tbat  the  sacraments  were  anciently  called  mysteries.  Baptism 
teaches  us  the  washing  away  of  sin,  and  the  Lord's  Suj^per  that  we  live  by  His 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  1.j3 

death.  III.  A  mystery  is  a  deep  and  dauk  enigjia,  and  Christianity  is  the 
■wisdom  of  God  iu  a  mystery,  because  it  is  by  the  most  perplexing  circumstances 
that  it  has  often  accomphshed  its  designs.  Take — 1.  The  humiliation  of  our 
Lord.  The  great  pretensions  of  all  the  prophets  were  that  He  was  to  save  and 
redeem  and  reign.  Well,  this  Saviour  is  seen  in  the  form  of  an  infant — is  placed 
in  entii'e  obscurity  for  thirty  years.  He  was  despised  and  rejected  by  the  people  at 
large,  and  His  character  and  designs  often  perplexed  His  immediate  followers.  By 
and  by  we  see  this  universal  sovereign  and  Saviour  expiring  on  a  Cross,  and 
provoking  the  taunt,  "He  saved  others,  but  Himself  He  cannot  save."  Yet, 
however  deep  that  mystery,  there  was  wisdom  behind  it,  and  on  the  morning 
of  the  resurrection  the  wisdom  of  God  came  forth  from  the  mystery.  There  seems 
to  be  an  allusion  to  this  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul:  "Great,"  says  he,  "is  the 
mystery  of  godliness,"  &c.  2.  The  history  of  the  Church.  There  have  been  so 
many  manifestations  of  the  wisdom  of  God  in  the  mystery  that  certainly  there 
is  something  for  faith  to  rest  upon  with  respect  to  the  grMnd  result  as  to  the 
Church  ;  and  yet  how  deep  and  portentous  are  the  clouds  which  arise  before  the 
mind  of  him  who  contemplates  the  apostasies  of  tbe  Church,  &c.     IV.  A  mystery 

IS   A   PROCEEDING    WHICH     CONTRADICTS     THE     NOTIONS    WHICH     MEN     ORDINARILY    FORM 

OF  FITNEES ;  and  Christianity  is  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a.  mystery,  because  it 
employs,  for  the  accomplishment  of  its  purposes,  means  which  contradict  all 
the  notions  of  men.  1.  There  was  nothing  a^^reeable  to  human  wisdom  in  the 
agents  appointed  for  the  conversion  of  the  world;  but  Paul  tells  us  that  the 
wisdom  of  God  had  proved  stronger  than  the  wisdom  of  men,  and  that  God  had 
chosen  the  weak  things  to  confound  the  mightj%  etc.  The  mystery  was  to  the  men 
of  the  world  ;  the  wisdom  in  the  mystery  was  manifested  in  tlie  end.  2.  There 
is  the  soul  of  a  man  immersed  in  worldliuess  and  sin  to  be  made  sensible  of  its  sin 
and  danger — to  have  produced  within  it  a  new  train  of  emotions  wiiich  shall  lead 
to  God.  What  is  the  instrumentality  whicli  the  wisdom  of  God  employs  in 
producing  this  effect?  Is  it  the  work  of  an  angel?  Verily  it  were  worthy  of  such 
an  agency.  But  now  the  wisdom  of  God  veils  itself  in  mystery,  and  makes  use  of 
a  fellow-man,  and  by  the  secret  influence  which  God  gives,  the  work  is  done.  3. 
A  soul  reconciled  to  God  is  to  be  matured  in  grace  and  to  be  qualified  for  glory. 
How  often  does  the  wisdom  of  God,  in  accomplishing  this  great  end,  wrap  itself  in 
mystery!  One  object  is  to  cure  the  spirit  of  worldly  care,  and  a  load  of  additional 
care  is  laid  upon  it.  Another  object  is  to  teach  reflectiveness  of  spirit,  and  the 
subject  is  plunged  in  most  perplexing  circumstances.  Another  object  is  to  increase 
the  peace  of  the  soul ;  and  yet  the  soul  is  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  turbulent 
storm.  Another  object  is  to  excite  a  higher  love,  and  yet  the  heavier  stroke  of  the 
Lord  is  laid  upon  him.  Here  is  the  mystery;  but  we  know  the  wisdom  notwith- 
standing tbis,  "  for  tribulation  worketh  patience,"  &c.  4.  A  nation  sunk  iu 
ignorance  and  immorality  is  to  be  raised  into  a  better  state.  How  is  it  done  ? 
Never  by  means  whicli  are  at  all  taken  into  the  calculation  of  statesmen.  God 
raises  up  His  own  instruments — they  may  be  few  in  number — from  the  lower  class 
of  society,  and  the  work  goes  on,  principles  are  secretly  spreading,  and  the  scene 
changes.  It  is  amusing  to  read  the  theories  of  the  worldly  wise  on  these  changes, 
whereas  the  whole  proves  that  the  wisdom  of  God  lias  been  proceeding  in  a  mystery 
to  them.  5.  And  so  it  is  with  respect  to  foreign  missions.  V.  A  mystery  is 
AN  UNFATHOMABLE  SUBJECT,  and  Christianity  is  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery, 
because  the  subjects  with  which  it  is  conversant  are  of  this  kind.  There  are 
many  persons  who  object  to  our  religion  because  of  its  mysteriousness.  But 
what  would  a  religion  be  that  had  no  mysteries?  What  view  could  you  have 
of  God  if  you  could  comprehend  Him  ?  God  is  eternal — can  the  creat^ire  of  a 
day  take  in  the  idea  of  eternal  duration  ?  God's  plans  must  be  like  Himself ; 
must  they,  then,  not  be  incomprehensible  by  the  necessity  of  natuie  to  creatures 
like  ourselves  ?  The  subject  is  clear,  but  our  minds  are  clouded  by  reason  of 
darkness.  We  cannot  perceive  the  beauty  and  the  propoi-tions  of  an  extended 
landscape,  not  because  the  objects  in  themselves  are  indistinct,  but  because 
they  are  distant.  VI.  Christianity  is  a  mystery  of  love.  Great  has  been  the 
manifestation  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  His  people.  Chiist  has  come — the 
Holy  Spirit  has  been  poured  out — the  ordinances  of  Christianity  instituted  ; 
but  there  is  a  period  coming  of  still  greater  glnry  for  the  Church.  They  whom 
Christ  has  redeemed  are  to  be  with  Him  for  ever  and  see  His  glory.  (/*.  Jl'at.ioii.) 
The  inysterj/  of  the  ijoapel : — I.  In  its  principles.  It  reveals  reconciliation  with  God. 
1.  By  sacritjce.     2.  By  the  sacrifice  of  His  own  dear  Son.     II.  In  its  spirituality. 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

I.  It  is  revealed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  To  the  spirit  of  man.  3.  By  faith. 
III.  In  its  design.  1.  To  manifest  the  glory  of  God.  2.  Secure  the  glorification 
of  man.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  mystery  of  the  pospcl :— The  gos^iel — I.  May  well 
BE  MYSTERIOUS — for  it  is  the  wisdom  of  God.  II.  Must  be  acknowledged  to  be 
MYSTERIOUS.  For  its  doctrines — 1.  Transcend  human  thought.  2.  Are  spiritual  in 
their  nature.  3.  Are  in  opposition  to  our  common  modes  of  thinking.  HI.  Is 
WISELY  MYSTERIOUS.  1.  To  Command  our  reverence.  2.  Humble  our  pride.  3. 
Provoke  our  inquiry.  4.  Awaken  anticipation  of  a  brighter  revelation  in  another 
life.  (Ibid.)  Mystery  : — The  word  has  four  meanings  which  may  be  arranged 
almost  in  chronological  order.  I.  That  which  it  is  forbitiden  to  divulge  except 
TO  THE  initiated.  Such  wete  the  secrets  of  the  political  and  religious  festivals 
held  in  most  cities  of  Greece.  We  have  a  trace  of  this  meaning  in  Matt.  xiii.  2. 
In  2  Pet.  i.  16  it  is  said  that  the  apostles  did  not  follow  the  false  track  of  rational- 
ised myths,  but  were  eye-witnesses  by  initiation  of  Christ's  majesty  (Col.  ii.  3). 

II.  That  which  cannot  be  known  except  by  revelation  {cf.  Eom.  xvi.  25  ;  Eph.  iii. 
3, 4  ;  Col.  i.  26).  III.  Sacred  ceremonies  that  have  a  symbolical  or  spiritual 
significance  ;  sometimes  restricted  to  denote  the  Eucharist.  After  the  tuiie  of 
TertuUian  this  is  its  prevailing  signification,  and  its  Latin  ec[uivalent  is  sacramen- 
tum.  IV.  A  truth  that  transcends  the  human  intellect  to  comprehend,  and 
this  may  be  absolute  imiiossibility  or  impossible  till  the  Spirit  of  God  gives  an 
inward  revelation.  In  the  present  passage  the  word  includes  somewhat  of  all 
these  meanings  except  the  third.  "The  word  "perfect,"  while  it  signifies  "full- 
grown,"  contains  an  allusion  to  initiation  into  mysteries.  (Principal  Edicnrds.) 
Mystery  no  obstacle  to  faith  : — Each  human  being  at  his  birth  has  everything  to 
learn.  The  child  is  apt  to  imagine  that  those  who  are  older  than  himself,  and 
whom  he  has  fnund  able  to  answer  his  first  inquiries,  know  almost  everything,  and 
he  is  surprised  and  disaijpointed  when  he  finds,  in  many  instances,  that  no  suffi- 
cient exjplanatiou  of  his  difficulties  can  be  given,  and  he  is  inclined  to  disbelieve 
whatever  offers  itself  as  a  mystery  to  his  mind.  In  this  vulnerable  point,  scepti- 
cism in  reference  to  subjects  of  a  religious  nature  is  wont  to  assail  the  mind.  It 
would  have  it  believed  that  mystery  is  something  peculiar  to  religion,  and  then 
insists  that  what  is  so  incomprehensible  cannot  rationally  be  believed.  Butneithei 
is  true.  We  purjose  to  show  the  contrary.  I.  There  is  mystery  in  everything. 
1.  Of  nothing  can  we  feel  a  greater  certainty  than  of  our  own  being  and  personal 
identity.  But  what  am  I?  I  can  no  more  understand  the  essence  of  ray  conscious 
self,  than  I  can  that  of  God  the  Infinite  Spirit.  The  philosopher  here  is  no  wiser 
than  the  child.  2.  Turn  to  nature  in  any  of  her  various  departments.  Look,  e.g., 
at — (1)  The  facts  presented  in  the  animal  kingdom.  Explain  the  nature  of 
instinct.  Observe  that  spider,  which  has  spread  her  gossamer  across  your  window. 
How  did  she  learn  to  construct  tbat  octagon  as  ^Dcrfect  as  if  drawn  by  the  nicest 
geometrician?  Or  watch  the  robin  ;  that  nest  is  the  first  she  ever  built:  yet  see 
how  perfect — the  most  practised  of  her  kind  has  never  formed  a  better.  Where 
did  she  gain  her  skill  in  architecture?  (2)  Animal  life  and  the  functions  of  the 
vital  economy.  What  is  it  that  prevents  the  decomposition  of  the  flesh  of  animals 
so  long  as  the  vital  principle  is  there,  while  decay  commences  the  moment  it  is 
gone?  Tell  us  how  it  is  that  the  gross  substances  taken  in  the  form  of  food  are 
converted  into  the  beautiful  carnation  of  the  human  cheek,  and  the  gorgeous  and 
variegated  dyes  of  birds  and  insects.  Show  what  it  is  that  keeps  the  heart  for  ever 
throbbing,  and  the  lungs  perpetually  heaving,  without  any  effort  of  the  will.  (3) 
The  vegetable  world.  There  is  the  rose  blushing  crimson  by  your  window.  What 
elements  have  been  concerned  in  its  production?  Light,  heat,  moisture,  and  the 
common  earth.  But  by  what  means  have  the  petal,  the  odour,  and  the  hues  been 
elaborated  from  such  materials?  How  has  the  same  saj)  been  made  to  produce  the 
hard  stalk,  the  sharp  thorn,  the  green  leaf,  and  the  admirable  fiower  ?  There,  too, 
is  the  lily  by  its  side.  It  springs  from  the  same  soil,  is  warmed  by  the  same  sun, 
watered  by  the  same  showers,  yet  instead  of  having  the  same  colour  it  is  white  as 
the  virgin  snow.  Again,  there  is  the  grass  and  the  violet  that  both  spring  from  one 
common  mould,  and  yet,  one  is  a  soft  and  lively  green,  and  the  other  an  imperial 
purple.  (4)  Inorganic  matter.  You  have  here  the  laws  of  chemical  affinity  and 
repulsion.  You  find  that  certain  substances  when  reduced  to  a  fiuid  state  and  then 
placed  in  given  conditions,  return  to  solids  by  the  process  of  crystallisation ;  and 
that  in  doing  this  one  always  takes  the  cubic  form,  another  always  that  of  an 
octahedron,  another  always  that  of  a  parallelepiped,  and  so  on.  But  of  these,  and 
a  multitude  of  other  plain  and  unquestionable  facts,  you  cannot  by  the  nicest 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  CORFNTHIANS.  155 

observation  detect  the  cause,  or  the  mode  of  its  operation.  Nature  veils  it  in  deep 
mystery.  (5)  Those  subtle  yet  eflicient  agents  that  produce  the  more  general  and 
grand  phenomena  of  nature.  Put  an  end  to  the  conjectures  of  mankind,  by  telling 
us  what  light,  and  heat,  and  electricity,  and  magnetism  are.  That  mighty  uni- 
versal force,  to  which,  by  way  of  concealing  our  ignorance,  we  give  the  name  of 
gravity,  which  brings  the  pebble  to  the  earth,  and  chains  revolving  worlds  about 
their  centres ;  search  out  the  secret  and  instruct  us  in  relation  to  its  nature. 
Yuu  cannot  answer  our  inquiries.  You  see,  then,  that  mystery  is  written  all  over 
the  universe  of  God.  II.  That  the  tuuths  of  revealed  religion  are  confessedly 
MYSTERIOUS,  IS  A  CONFIRMATION  OF  ITS  DiviNiTY.  1.  A  System  of  religion  which 
professed  to  be  from  God,  and  yet  claimed  to  have  no  mysteries,  would  prove  it  to 
be  false.  For  such  a  system  would  be  anomalous,  and  we  should  justly  reason 
that  if  earthly  things  are  found  to  be  beyond  our  comprehension,  much  more 
ought  heavenly  things  to  be  expected  to  be  so.  To  the  Omniscient  only  are  there 
no  dark  and  hidden  things.  2.  There  may  be  many  other  reasons  besides  that  of 
our  want  of  capacity  to  comprehend  Him,  to  render  it  fit  that  God  should  withhold 
from  us  many  kinds  and  degi-ees  of  knowledge  which  might  without  ditBculty  be 
imparted.  It  might,  for  example,  only  jjerplex  us  to  have  our  minds  excited  to  yet 
higher  inquiry  by  further  disclosures  as  to  things  that  have  no  immediate  relation 
to  our  duty  or  our  happiness  for  the  present.  Life  is  so  short,  so  full  of  engrossing 
occupation,  that  very  little  time  is  allowed  us  for  merely  speculative  thought. 
Then,  further,  it  is  no  less  obvious  that  this  living  in  the  midst  of  mysteries  may 
prove  a  most  salutary  moral  discipline.  By  contact  with  the  as  yet  unopened 
secrets  of  the  universe  our  pride  receives  a  salutary  check.  Both  as  regards  the 
ends  of  practical  life  and  the  development  in  our  souls  of  sentiments  of  humility, 
of  veneration,  and  of  worship,  there  are  great  advantages  to  be  derived  from  the 
present  withholding  of  many  parts  of  Divine  knowledge  which  might  possibly  be 
revealed.  3.  Instead,  then,  of  suffering  ourselves  to  be  perplexed  because  we 
encounter  mysteries  in  the  Christian  revelation,  it  is  much  wiser,  as  well  as  more 
becoming,  that  we  cultivate  a  humble,  docile  spirit.  How  exceedingly  limited,  at 
best,  is  our  horizon !  What  an  infant,  in  a  sober  view,  does  the  wisest  man  on 
earth  appear  on  the  scale  of  universal  being !  4.  We  ought  likewise  to  consider, 
for  the  enkindling  of  a  heartfelt  gtatitude,  that  the  mysteries  of  our  being  had 
been  i»v  deeper  and  darker  than  they  are,  but  for  the  partinl  light  which  God  has 
afforded  in  His  Word.  By  the  help  of  this,  where  the  wisest  heathen,  in  all  ages, 
have  groped  their  way,  we  are  able  to  see  distinctly  ;  and  though  we  are  able  to 
know  so  little  comparatively,  yet  let  us  devotedly  praise  God  that  He  has  enabled 
us  to  know  enough  to  enable  us  to  discern  and  keep  the  path  of  duty  and  of  life. 
5.  For  the  rest  it  may  content  us  that  we  can  confidently  anticipate  the  future 
increase  of  our  knowledge.  (Hey  Palmer,  D.D.)  CJiristianitij  mysterious,  and 
the  2fisdom  of  God  in  viakiny  it  so: — The  reasons  of  this  may  be  stated  upon 
these  two  grounds.  I.  The  nature  and  quality  of  the  things  treated  of.  1. 
Their  surpassing  greatness  to  the  mind  of  man.  God  is  an  infinite  being,  a  world 
in  Himself,  too  high  for  our  speculations  and  too  great  for  our  descriptions. 
Heaven  enters  into  us,  as  we  must  into  it,  by  a  very  narrow  passage.  But  how 
shall  the  King  of  glory,  whom  the  heavens  themselves  cannot  contain,  enter  in  by 
these  doors  ?  How  shall  these  short  faculties  measure  the  lengths  of  His  eternity, 
the  breadths  of  His  immensity,  the  heights  of  His  prescience,  and  the  depths  of 
His  decrees  ?  and  those  mysteries  of  two  natures  united  into  one  person  and  of  one 
nature  diffused  into  a  triple  personality  ?  2.  Their  spirituality.  When  we  read 
that  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  that  angels  and  the  souls  of  men  are  spirits,  we  cannot 
frame  any  notion  or  resemblance  of  them.  We  can  fetch  in  no  information  from 
our  senses.  Imagine  a  man  born  blind,  able  upon  hearsay  to  conceive  all  the 
varieties  of  colour,  to  draw  a  map  of  France,  &c.  But  as  it  would  be  extremely 
irrational  for  a  blind  man  to  deny  that  there  are  such  things  as  colours,  &c., 
because  he  cannot  form  any  mental  perception  of  them,  so  would  it  be  superlatively 
more  unreasonable  for  us  to  deny  on  the  same  grounds  the  great  articles  of  our 
Christianity.  3.  Their  strangeness  and  unreducibleness  to  the  common  methods 
and  observations  of  nature.  Take,  e.g. — (1)  Christ's  satisfaction  for  sin.  That  He 
who  was  the  offended  person  should  provide  a  satisfaction  and  concern  Himself  to 
solicit  a  needless  reconciliation,  that  a  Father  should  deliver  up  an  innocent  and 
infinitely  beloved  Son  for  the  redemption  of  His  enemies,  are  transactions  such  as 
we  can  find  nothing  analogous  to  in  all  the  dealings  of  men.  (2)  Piegeueration, 
concerning  which  men  wonder  by  what  strange  power  it  should  come  to  pass  that 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

any  one  should  be  brought  to  conquer  inveterate  appetites  and  desires,  and  to  have 
new  ones  absokitely  contrary  planted  in  their  room.  So  that  when  our  Saviour  dis- 
coursed of  these  things  to  Nicodemus,  he  asked,  "  How  can  these  things  be?  "  (3) 
The  resurrection.  II.  Some  of  its  principal  ends  and  designs.  But  may  it  not 
be  objected  that  the  grand  design  of  religion  is  to  engage  men  in  the  practice  of 
its  commands,  and  that  the  way  to  obey  a  law  is  to  know  it,  and  the  way  to  know 
it  is  to  bave  it  plainly  propounded?  To  this  I  answer,  first,  that  it  is  as  much  the 
design  of  religion  to  oblige  men  to  believe  the  credenda  as  to  practise  the  agenda  of 
it  :  and  secondly,  that  there  is  as  clear  a  reason  for  the  belief  of  the  one  as  for  the 
practice  of  the  other.  They  exceed  indeed  the  human  reason  to  comprehend  them 
scientifically,  and  are  therefore  proposed,  not  to  our  knowledge,  but  to  our  belief ; 
but  since  God  has  revealed  them  we  may  with  the  highest  reason,  upon  His  bare 
word,  believe  tliem.  But  then,  as  for  those  things  that  concern  our  practice,  they 
indeed  are  of  that  clearness  that  being  once  proposed  to  us,  need  not  our  study, 
but  only  our  acceptance.  In  sum,  the  articles  of  our  faith  are  those  depths  in 
which  the  elt-phant  may  swim,  and  the  rules  of  our  practice  those  shallows  in 
which  the  lamb  may  wade.  But  as  both  light  and  darkness  make  but  one  natural 
day,  so  both  the  clearne.-s  of  the  agenda  and  the  mystery  of  the  credenda  of  the 
gospel  constitute  but  one  entire  religion.  I  come  now  to  show  that  the  mysterious- 
ness  of  the  credenda,  or  matters  of  our  faith,  is  most  subservient  to  the  great  ends 
of  religion.  1.  Because  religion  in  its  prime  institution  was  designed  to  make 
impressions  of  awe  and  reverential  fear  upon  men's  minds.  God,  who  designed 
man  to  a  supernatural  end,  thought  fit  also  to  engage  him  to  a  way  of  living  above 
the  bare  course  of  nature,  and  for  that  purpose  to  oblige  him  to  a  control  of  his 
mere  natural  desires.  And  this  can  never  be  done  but  by  imprinting  such  appre- 
hensions of  dread  as  may  stave  off  appetite  from  its  desired  satisfactions,  which 
the  infinite  wisdom  of  God  has  thought  fit  to  do,  by  nonplussing  the  world  with 
certain  new  and  unaccountalde  revelations.  To  protect  which  from  the  encroach- 
ments of  bold  minds,  He  has  hedged  it  in  with  a  sacred  obscurity  in  some  of  the 
principal  parts  of  it,  inasmuch  as  "familiarity  breeds  contempt."  2.  Because 
religion  is  deliveied  by  God  to  humble  the  pride  of  man's  reason.  Man  fell  by 
pride,  founded  upon  an  irregular  desire  of  knowledge,  and  therefore  Divine  wisdom 
contrived  man's  recovery  by  such  a  method  as  should  abase  him  in  that  very  per- 
fection, whereof  the  ambitious  improvement  iirst  cast  him  down  from  that  glorious 
condition.  3.  Because  He  would  engage  us  in  a  more  diligent  search  into  the 
articles  of  religion.  No  man  studies  things  plain  and  evident.  We  are  com- 
manded by  Christ  to  search  the  Scriptures,  and  whosoever  shall  apply  himself  to  a 
thorough  performance  of  this  high  command,  shall  find  difficulty  enough  in  the 
things  searched  into  to  perpetuate  his  search.  For  they  are  a  rich  mine  which  the 
greatest  wit  and  diligence  may  dig  in  for  ever  and  still  find  new  matter  to  entertain 
the  busiest  contemplation  with,  even  to  the  utmost  period  of  the  most  extended 
life.  Truth,  we  are  told,  dwells  low,  and  in  a'bottom  ;  and  the  most  valued  things 
of  the  creation  are  hidden  from  the  common  view,  so  that  violence  must  be  done  to 
nature,  before  she  will  produce  and  bring  them  forth.  4.  Because  the  full  know- 
ledge of  it  may  be  one  principal  part  of  our  blessedness  hereafter.  All  those 
heights  and  depths  which  confound  the  subtlest  apprehension  shall  then  be  made 
clear  to  us.     (R.  South,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  Which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world  knew  :  for  had  they  known 
it,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory. — Sjuriiuol  icjnorance,  evil, 
(jood  : — I.  The  cause  of  immense  evil.  These  princes  of  the  world,  through 
ignorance,  "  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory."  1.  A  greater  crime  than  this  was  never 
perpetrated.  It  involved— (1)  The  grossest  injustice.  He  was  embodied  virtue. 
His  enemies  and  judges  bore  testimony  to  His  innocence.  (2)  The  basest  ingrati- 
tude. He  not  only  did  no  evil,  but  "  went  about  doing  good."  (3)  Most  heartless 
cruelty.  They  put  Him  to  a  death  the  most  ignominious  and  excruciating  that 
infernal  malignity  could  desire.  (4)  Most  daring  impiety.  Whom  did  they  thus 
treat  ?  "  The  Lord  of  glory  "  (Psa.  xxiv.  8).  It  is  impious  to  trifle  with  His  laws 
and  rebel  against  His  throne,  but  how  much  more  so  to  crucify  the  universal  Law- 
giver and  King !  2.  That  this  ignorance  was  the  cause  of  this  immense  evil  is 
evident.  (1)  IJecause  it  is  itself  an  evil,  and  like  will  produce  like.  There  are  two 
things  necessary  to  knowledge^mind  and  means.  When  either  of  these  is  absent, 
ignorance  is  a  calamity,  but  when  they  are  present  it  is  a  crime.  These  princes 
had  both — they  were  Hot  idiots,  and  they  had  means  by  which  they  could  know 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  157 

Christ ;  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  John  the  Baptist,  Christ  Himself.  They 
need  not  have  been  ignorant.  Their  ignorance  was  a  sin,  and  sin,  like  virtue,  is 
propagated.  (2)  Had  it  not  existed,  such  an  evil  could  never  have  been  per- 
petrated. II.  The  occasion  of  immense  good.  This  ciucifixiou  introduced  things 
that  "eye  had  never  seen,"  &c.,  viz.,  God's  love  to  the  world  and  His  method  of 
saving  it;  Divine  pardon,  spiritual  purity,  immortal  hopes.  Conclusion  :  From  this 
subject  learn — 1.  That  the  sinner  is  always  engaged  in  accomplishing  that  which 
he  never  intended.  These  "princes" — (1)  Euined  themselves.  It  brought  upon 
them  and  their  country  in  this  world  tremendous  judgments — and  what  in  the 
world  to  come  ?  Sinner,  what  are  you  doing  ?  You  are  ruining  yourself,  but  you 
do  not  intend  it;  but  you  are  nevertheless  doing  it  in  the  commission  of  every  sin. 
(2)  Executed  the  plan  of  the  great  God.  "  Him  being  delivered,"  etc.  God  over- 
rules for  good.  So  now,  we  have  not  to  determine  whether  we  shall  serve  God  or 
not ;  we  have  to  determine  how — by  our  will  or  against  it.  2.  Whatever  good  a 
man  may  accomplish  contrary  to  his  intention  is  destitute  of  ail  praiseworthiness. 
What  oceans  of  blessings  come  to  our  world  through  the  crucifixion  !  Yet  who  can 
ever  praise  the  crucifiers?  3.  That  no  man  should  act  without  an  intelligent  con- 
ception of  what  he  is  doing.  How  many  act  from  prejudice,  custom,  blind  impulse  ! 
How  few  have  a  right  conception  of  what  they  are  doing!  (D.  lliomas,  D.D.) 
Ignorance  of  the  truth  : — I.  Its  awful  prev.\lence.  1.  It  has  abounded  in  all 
time.  2.  Pervades  all  classes.  II.  Its  injurious  effects.  1.  It  occasions  the 
worst  crimes.  2.  It  led  to  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord.  III.  Its  fatal  issue — 
destruction  of  both  body  and  soul.  (./.  Lijt]!,  D.D.)  The  guilt  of  man  in  crucifijing 
the  Lord  of  glory.  Consider — I.  The  deep.  II.  Its  agghavation.  1.  He  was  the 
Lord  of  glory.  2.  Came  from  glory.  3.  Conducts  to  glory — dwells  in  glory.  III. 
Its  CNMiiiGATED  guilt,  a  sin  of  ignorance.  1.  Not  therefore  relieved,  because 
the  ignorance  was  wilful.  2.  Not  inevitable  through  the  purpose  of  God,  because 
had  they  known  tln^y  would  not  have  done  it.      (Ibid.)  ChriM  the   Lord  of 

glory : — I.  The  essential  glory  of  Christ,  which  He  hath  as  God  from  ever- 
lasting ;  which  is  unspeakable  and  inconceivable  glory  (Phil.  ii.  C).  He  has 
a  peerage  or  equality  with  His  Father  in  glory  (John  x.  30).  And  again,  "  All 
things  that  the  Father  hath  are  Mine"  (John  xvi.  15),  the  same  name,  the 
same  nature,  the  same  essential  properties,  the  same  will,  and  the  same  glory,  II. 
The  mediatori.U;  glory  of  Christ  is  exceeding  great.  This  is  proper  to  Ilim  as 
the  Head  of  the  Church,  which  He  hath  pmchased  with  His  own  blood  (Phil, 
ii.  9,  10).  1.  The  fulness  of  grace  inherent  in  Him.  The  humanity  of  Christ  is 
filled  with  grace,  as  the  sun  with  light  (John  i.  14),  excelling  all  the  saints  in 
spiritual  lustre  and  gracious  excellencies.  2.  The  digniliy  and  authority  i^ut  upon 
Him.  He  is  crowned  King  in  Sion  ;  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  is  given  unto 
Him  (Matt,  xxviii.  18),  He  is  a  Law-giver  to  the  Church  (James  iv.  12).  3.  Jesus 
Christ  shall  have  glory  and  honour  ascribed  to  Him  for  evermore  by  angels  and 
saints,  upon  the  account  of  His  mediatoiial  work  ;  this  some  divines  call  His  passive 
glory,  the  glory  which  He  is  said  to  receive  from  His  redeemed  ones  (Kev.  v.  8-10). 
Inferences  :  1  How  wonderful  was  the  love  of  Christ,  the  Lord  of  Glory,  to  be 
so  abased  and  humbled  as  He  was  for  us  vile  and  sinful  dust  !  2.  How  trans- 
cendently  glorious  is  the  advancement  of  believers  by  their  union  with  the  Lord  of 
Glory!  3.  Is  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord  of  Glory?  Then,  let  no  mnn  count  himself 
dishonoured  by  suffering  the  vilest  indignities  for  His  sake.  4.  Is  Christ  the  Lord 
of  Glory  ?  How  glorious  then  shall  the  saints  one  day  be,  when  they  shall  be  made 
like  this  glorious  Lord,  and  partake  of  His  glory  in  heaven  I  (John  xvii.  22.)  5. 
How  hath  the  devil  blindfolded  and  deluded  them  that  are  frightened  off  from 
Christ  by  the  fears  of  being  dishonoured  by  Him !  0.  If  Christ  be  the  Lord  of 
Glory,  how  careful  should  all  be  who  profess  Him  that  they  do  not  dishonour  Jesus 
Christ,  whose  name  is  called  upon  by  them !  7.  What  delight  should  Christians 
take  in  their  daily  converse  with  Jesus  Christ  in  the  way  of  duty  !  8.  If  Christ  be 
so  glorious,  how  should  believers  long  to  be  with  Him,  and  behold  him  in  His 
glory  above  !  {Jo!i7i  Flavel.)  Eye  hath  not  seen  .  .  .  the  things  which 
God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him. — Spiritual  blessings — I.  Lie  beyond 
the  keseakchi  s  of  the  unregenerate  mind.  They  are — 1.  Not  seen  by 
the  observation  of  nature,  providence,  grace.  2.  Not  heard  by  the  report 
of  the  preacher,  &c.  3.  Not  conceived  by  reason,  speculation,  inquiry.  II. 
Are  revealed  to  those  who  love  God.  1.  Much  depends  on  the  heart. 
2.  The  revelation  is  glorious.  3.  Is  effected  by  the  Spirit.  4.  Is  completed 
in  glory.      (J.   Lyth,   D.D.)         The   excellency   and   blessings   of  the  gospel: — I. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

The  supkelative  excellency  of  the  gospel.  1.  Its  discoveries  and  blessings  far 
exceed  all  human  knowledge  or  conception.  (1)  "  Ej-e  hath  not  seen."  And 
yet  by  the  eye  we  have  surveyed  many  of  the  works  of  God ;  and  if  we  look 
upon  ourselves,  we  discover  displays  of  infinite  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  All 
these  are  glorious  discoveries ;  but  they  say  not  how,  when,  or  why  they  were 
formed.  (2)  "  Ear  hath  not  heard."  When  sight  is  exhausted,  we  can  still  drink 
in  knowledge.     But  we  never  heard  how  the  spring  of  moral  conduct  might  be 

\y  purified,  life  and  heart  made  holy,  and  man  be  fitted  for  the  society  of  God.  We 
never  heard  of  such  powerful  motives  as  the  love  of  Christ,  or  such  rich 
blessings  as  the  beatitudes  on  the  mount.  (3)  "  Nor  hath  entered  the  heart  of  man," 
i.e.,  man  never  imagined.  Every  man  carries  about  with  him  an  ideal  world  of 
his  own.  How  often  have  we  attempted  to  paint  to  ourselves  a  character  just  such 
as  we  should  approve  !  But  it  never  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  of 
true  dignity  of  character,  or  of  the  sources  of  real  happiness  as  suited  to  the  nature 
■^  of   man.     2.  The  peculiar   excellency   of   this   gospel  will  appear  from — (1)  The 

sublime  and  interesting  truth  which  it  discovers.  Briefly,  the  design  of  the 
gospel  is  to  raise  man  from  the  ruin  of  the  fall — to  wash  him  from  sin — to  adorn 
him  with  righteousness — to  inspire  him  with  sublimity  of  thought  and  holiness  of 
affection — to  lead  him  in  all  the  paths  of  obedience,  and  finally  to  exalt  him  to 
the  society  of  angels  and  fellowship  with  God.  But  who  could  have  barely  thought 
of  such  a  purpose?  Who  could  have  admitted  the  possibility  of  the  fact?  The 
Divine  Being  was  under  no  obligations  to  redeem  man.  All  the  motive  is  re- 
vealed to  us  in  the  gospel,  and  is  to  be  found  in  His  own  unfathomable 
love.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  And  who  would  ever  have  conceived 
of  such  a  simple  plan  of  communicating  such  blessings!  "Believe  on  the 
Lord,"  &Q,.  (2)  The  pure  and  intense  happiness  it  imparts.  Even  the  specula- 
tive knowledge  of  these  truths  raises  man  in  the  scale  of  intelligence.  But  the 
gospel  does  more.  The  gospel  calms  the  tumult  of  passion,  reconciles  man 
to  God,  and  makes  him  to  be  at  peace  with  himself.  Now,  "eye  hath  not 
seen,"  etc.  Sume  have  had  every  advantage  and  opportunity  of  knowing  this 
subject,  but  they  are  still  natural  men.  They  cannot  conceive  how  a  man  can 
know  his  sins  forgiven,  nor  of  the  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  The  natural  man 
doth  not  comprehend  tht^se  things  ;  and  even  believers  do  not  form  conceptions 

*^  sufficiently  noble.  (3)  The  happy  and  glorious  prospects  which  it  unfolds. 
Philosophy  never  found  out  a  remedy  for  the  fear  of  death.  It  points  to  a  few 
instances  of  apparent  calmness  and  confidence.  But  it  never  fully  met  the  evil. 
Death,  to  it,  has  ever  been  dissembled.  But  Christianity  reveals  the  immediate 
consequences  of  death,  and  then  supplants  the  fear  of  death.  Wliere  will 
Ijhilosophy  show  anything  like  the  dciith  of  Stephen  ?  And  how  is  this  to  be 
explained  ?  (Acts  vii.  55.)  And  all  in  whom  is  the  spirit  of  Stejihen  have  the  like 
glorious  prospects.  But  what  are  they?  Nay,  "Eye  hath  not  seen,"  ttc.  The 
grandest  description  is,  that  it  is  beyond  all  description.  If  we  cannot  know  all 
that  God  has  prepired  for  us  here,  how  can  we  conceive  of  the  joys  of  heaven? 
(John  iii.  12.)  "  We  walk  by  faith,  »nA  not  by  siyht !  "  We  could  not  possibly 
imderstand  it ;  we  have  no  powers  of  perception  suited  to  such  knowledge.  Eye 
hath  not  seen  so  glorious  a  body  as  that  of  the  Transfiguration,  the  model  of  ours  ; 
or  so  glorious  a  city  as  "that  great  city,  the  holy  .Jerusalem,"  &c.  Ear  never 
heard  strains  so  melting  as  those  .John  heard — "  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with 
their  harps."  It  never  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  pure  and  unsullied  bliss 
of  the  redeemed  (Kev.  vii.  1.5-17).  II.  The  characters  for  whom  these  blessings 
ARE  prepared.  For  "  them  that  love  Him."  Consider  the  love  of  God  as — 1.  A 
necessary  princip'e.  Mere  admiration  will  not  suffice.  The  infidel  may  admire 
the  character  of  the  Creator  as  impressed  upon  His  works,  and  be  without  even  a 
desire  to  enjoy  these  blessings.  Nor  will  a  mere  transient  impression  of  the 
passions  be  sufficient,  sui-h  as  is  frequently  felt  whilst  contemplating  gospel 
truths,  even  as  a  matter  of  speculation.  A  consideration  of  the  love  of  God,  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  &c.,  produces  no  permanent  effect,  but  is  obliterated  by  the 
next  consideration.  Now  this  love  of  God  is  necessary.  "  Without  holiness  no 
man  shall  see  Him."  Holiness  is  the  image  of  God,  and  "  God  is  love."  These 
things  are  prepared  only  for  them  that  keep  His  commandments,  etc.  But  the 
whole  law  is  comprised  in  this,  "  Thou  shalt  love,"  Arc.  Hence,  "  this  is  the  love 
of  God,  that  we  keep  His  commandments."  It  is  only  the  love  of  God  that  give^ 
us  the  true  knowledge  of  Him.  "  He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God,  for  God 
is  love."     This  love  of  God  is  essential  to  our  enjoying  God.     No  man  can  enjoy 


CHAP.  11.]  I.   CORIXriIIAXS.  159 

what  he  hates.  2.  A  Divine  principle.  No  man  loves  God  by  nature.  Nothing 
less  than  Divine  love  can  conquer  this  enmity  of  the  human  heart.  A  mani- 
fested principle.  The  love  of  God  is  the  love  of  holiness,  for  God  is  holy.  And  if 
we  love  God  we  shall  keep  His  commandments.  This  love  cannot  possibly  exist 
without  influencing  the  practice,  and  thus  manifesting  itself.  (F.  A.  West.)  The 
gospel  a  revelation  : — The  "things  "  are  the  gospel  in  the  wealth  of  its  blessings,  not 
only  for  another  world,  but  also  for  this.  The  eye  has  seen  much,  the  ear  has 
heard  much  more  tlian  the  eye  has  seen,  the  heart  pictures  creations  more  wonder- 
ful still ;  but  such  truths  as  the  gospel  declares  belong  to  a  higher  world  ;  they  are 
the  fruit  of  God's  hidden  wisdom.  His  deepest  thought.  They  are  thus  of  necessity 
a  mystery  to  man.  It  never  entered  the  heart  of  man  that  these  things  would  come — 
I.  FitoM  THE  souKCE  THEY  DID — froiii  God.  Man's  ideas  of  God,  apart  from  revelation, 
sprang  rather  from  his  own  heart  than  from  the  teaching  of  nature,  and  therefore  to 
imagine  our  salvation  would  flow  from  the  source  it  did  was  impossible.  After  man 
sinned  he  changed  God  into  his  own  image  and  likeness.  The  gods  of  the  heathen 
consequently  were  perfectly  destitute  of  those  properties  from  which  the  gos^iel 
blessings  could  flow.  They  wei'e  destitute  of  holiness — heathenism  has  its  heroes, 
but  it  has  no  saints.  They  were  destitute  of  love,  and  were  notorious  for  their 
cruelty  and  their  lack  of  tenderness.  II.  In  the  way  they  did.  "As  the 
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,"  etc.  The  way  God  took  to  save  the  world — by 
the  incarnation  and  death  of  Immanuel — was  so  strange,  that  no  one  could  imagine 
or  dared  iningine  it  but  Himself.  Not  only  is  it  so  great  that  man  could  not  in  his 
own  strength  discover  it,  but  so  great  that,  after  being  revealed,  it  baffles  man  to 
comprehend  it.  The  gospel  is  so  Divine  a  conception  that  it  dazzles  the  wise  of 
this  world  into  blindness.  God's  smallest  thoughts,  His  thoughts  in  nature, 
perplex  man.  What  then  about  the  thought  He  conceived  in  the  silence 
and  solitude  of  eternity?  III.  To  the  degree  they  did.  Paul  considered 
the  fact  that  Christ  was  preached  to  the  Gentiles  a  sufficiently  great  mystery  to  be 
put  side  by  side  with  the  Incarnation.  Sin  makes  man  selfish.  Tue  Komans 
deemed  all  others  enemies,  to  be  vanquished  and  made  slaves;  and  once  made 
slaves,  they  were  of  less  value  in  their  eyes  than  the  beasts  which  perish.  The 
Greeks  judged  all  others  barbarians,  who  ought  to  be  robbed  and  slain.  The  Jews 
likewise  were  animated  l>y  the  spirit  of  exclusiveness — they  deemed  all  others 
unclean  and  worthless.  Though  our  advantages  are  numerous  and  important,  yet 
this  truth  is  not  properly  understood  by  many  in  our  day.  All  are  not  willing, 
even  in  this  age,  that  the  dew  of  God's  blessing  should  fall  outside  their  little 
garden.  The  old  objections  are  being  revived,  that  to  attempt  to  evangelise  the 
heathen  is  sheer  waste.  Such  blind  fatuity  !  The  man  who  would  try  to  stop  the 
clouds  to  rain  and  the  sun  to  shine  outside  the  fences  of  his  tiny  farm  would  be 
looked  upon  as  a  luuatie.  But  his  conduct  were  wisdom  itself  compared  with  that 
of  those  who  in  the  vanity  of  their  speculations  would  leave  certain  races  outside 
the  pale  of  civilisation  and  salvation.  God's  provision  for  the  world  is  worthy  of 
the  high  source  whence  it  emanated,  and  the  strange  instrumentality  whereby  it 
was  brought  about,  at  once  worthy  of  the  infinite  love  and  the  precious  sacritice. 
To  provide  for  only  one  nation  would  not  be  worthy  of  Him.  Indeed,  to  provide 
sparingly  for  even  the  whole  world  would  not  be  according  to  His  custom — 
plenteousuess  characterises  all  His  acts.  With  such  fulness  of  grace  in  store, 
no  one,  be  he  who  and  where  he  may,  need  be  lost.  (IT.  Morri^t.)  God's  recelation 
of  heaven  : — Note— I.  The  inability  of  the  lower  parts  of  human  nature — the 
natural  man — to  apprehend  the  higher  truths.  1.  Eternal  truth  is  not  per- 
ceived through  sensation  or  science.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen."  (1)  There  is  a  life  of 
mere  sensation,  (a)  The  highest  jDleasure  of  sensation  comes  through  the  eye. 
The  Corinthians  could  appreciate  this.  Theirs  was  the  land  of  beauty.  They  read 
the  apostle's  letter,  surrounded  by  the  purest  conceptions  of  Art.  Let  us  not 
depreciate  what  God  has  given.  There  is  a  joy  in  contemplating  the  manifold 
forms  in  which  the  All  Beautiful  has  concealed  His  essence.  It  is  a  pure  delight 
to  see.  (h)  But  the  eye  can  only  reach  the  finite  beautiful.  It  does  not  scan 
"the  King  in  His  beauty,  nor  the  land  that  is  very  far  off."  And  the  visible  is 
perishable  beauty — not  the  eternal  loveliness  for  which  our  spirits  pant.  There- 
fore Christ  came  not  in  the  glory  of  form ;  "  He  had  no  form  nor  comeliness,"  &c. ; 
'  there  was  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  Him."  The  eye  did  not  behold,  even 
in  Christ,  the  things  which  God  had  prepared,  (c)  This  is  an  eternal  truth.  This 
verse  is  quoted  as  if  "  the  things  prepared  "  meant  heaven.  But  the  world  of  which 
Paul  speaks  God  hath  revealed,  only  not  to  eye  nor  ear.     In  heaven  this  shall  be  as 


■160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

true  as  now.  The  pure  in  heart  will  see  God,  but  never  with  the  eje  ;  on]y  in  the 
same  way,  but  in  a  ditierent  degree,  that  they  see  Him  now.  (2)  Again,  no  scientific 
analysis  can  discover  the  truths  of  God.  Science  proceeds  upon  observation. 
Experiment  is  the  test  of  truth.  Now,  you  cannot,  by  searching,  find  out  the 
Almighty  to  perfection,  nor  a  single  one  of  the  blessed  truths  He  has  to  com- 
municate. 1.  It  is  in  vain  that  we  ransack  the  world  for  probable  evidences  of 
God,  and  idle  to  look  into  the  materialism  of  man  for  the  revelation  of  his 
immortality ;  or  to  examine  the  morbid  anatomy  of  the  body  to  find  the  lule  of 
right.  If  a  man  go  to  the  eternal  world  with  convictions  of  eternity,  the  resurrec- 
tion, God,  already  in  his  si^irit,  he  will  find  abundant  corroboiations  of  that  which 
he  already  believes.  But  if  God's  existence  be  not  thrilling  every  fibre  of  his  heart, 
if  the  immortal  be  not  already  in  him  as  the  proof  of  the  resurrection,  if  the  law  of 
duty  be  not  stamped  upon  his  soul  as  an  eternal  truth,  science  will  never  reveal 
these,  the  physician  comes  away  from  the  laboratory  an  infidel.  Eye  hath  not 
seen  the  truths  which  are  clear  enough  to  love  and  to  the  spirit.  2.  Eternal  truth 
is  not  reached  by  hearsay — "Ear  hath  not  heard."  (1)  No  revelation  can  be 
adequately  given  by  the  address  of  man  to  man.  For  all  such  revelation  must  be 
made  tlirouj^h  words,  the  mere  coins  of  intellectual  exchange.  There  is  as  little 
resemblance  between  the  coin  and  the  bread  it  purchases,  as  between  the  word  and 
the  thing  it  stands  for.  Looking  at  tbe  coin,  tlie  form  of  the  loaf  does  not  suggest 
itself.  Listening  to  the  word,  you  do  not  perceive  tiie  idea  for  which  it  stands, 
unless  you  are  already  in  possession  of  it.  Speak  of  ice  to  an  inhabitant  of  tbe 
torrid  zone,  the  word  does  not  give  him  an  idea,  or  if  it  does,  it  must  be  a  false 
one.  Talk  of  blueness  to  one  who  cannot  distinguish  colours,  what  can  your  most 
eloquent  description  present  to  him  resembling  the  truth  of  your  sensation  ? 
Similarly  in  matters  spiritual,  no  verbal  revelation  can  give  a  single  simple  idea. 
For  instance;  what  means  justice  to  the  unjust,  or  purity  to  the  licentious  ?  What 
does  infinitude  mean  to  a  being  who  has  never  stirred  beyond  a  cell  ?  Talk  of  God 
to  a  thousand  ears,  each  has  his  own  different  conception.  The  sensual  man  hears 
of  God,  and  understands  one  thing.  The  pure  man  hears  and  conceives  another 
thing.  (2)  See  what  a  hearsay  religion  is.  There  are  men  who  believe  on 
authority.  Their  minister  believes  all  this  Christianity  true  ;  therefore  so  do  they. 
He  calls  this  doctrine  essential ;  they  echo  it.  They  have  heard  with  the  hearing 
of  the  ear  that  God  is  love,  that  the  ways  of  holiness  are  ways  of  pleasantness. 
But  the  Corinthian  philosophers  heard  Paul ;  the  Pharisees  heard  Christ.  How 
much  did  the  ear  convey  ?  He  alone  believes  truth  who  feels  it.  He  alone  has  a 
religion  whose  soul  knows  by  experience  that  to  serve  God  and  know  Him  is  the 
richest  treasure.  3.  Truth  is  not  discoverable  by  the  heart — "neither  have  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man  "—the  power  of  imagining,  and  the  power  of  loving.  (1)  It 
is  a  grand  thing  when  thought  bursts  into  flame,  or  when  a  great  law  of  the 
universe  reveals  itself  to  the  mind  of  genius,  or  when  the  truths  of  human  nature 
shai^e  themselves  forth  in  the  creative  fancies  of  the  poet.  But  the  most  ethereal 
creations  of  fancy  were  shaped  by  a  mind  that  could  read  the  life  of  Christ,  and 
then  blaspheme  the  Adorable.  Some  of  the  truest  and  deepest  uttei'ances  ever 
spoken  came  from  one  whose  life  was  from  first  to  last  selfish.  The  highest 
astronomer  of  this  age  refused  to  recognise  the  Cause  of  causes.  The  mighty 
heart  of  genius  had  failed  to  reach  the  things  which  God  imparts  to  a  humble 
spirit.  (2)  The  heart  of  man  has  the  power  of  affection.  The  highest  moment 
known  on  earth  by  the  merely  natural,  is  that  in  which  the  mysterious  union  of 
heart  with  heart  is  felt.  Yet  this  attains  not  to  the  things  jjrepared  by  God. 
Human  love  is  but  the  faint  type  of  that  surjoassing  blessedness  which  belongs  to 
those  who  love  God.  II.  The  nattjEe  and  laws  of  eevelation.  1.  Eevelation  is 
made  by  a  Spirit  to  a  spirit.  Christ  is  the  voice  of  God  without  the  man — the 
Spirit  is  the  voice  of  God  within.  The  highest  revelation  is  not  made  by  Christ, 
for  He  said,  "The  Spirit  shall  take  of  Mine  and  shall  show  it  unto  you."  And 
therefore  it  is  written  here — "The  Spirit  searches  all  things,  yea.,  the  deep 
things  of  God."  Now  the  Spirit  of  God  lies  touching,  as  it  were,  the  soul  of  man. 
They  mingle.  The  spiritual  in  man,  by  which  he  might  become  a  recipient  of 
God,  miiy  be  dulled,  deadened,  by  a  life  of  sense,  but  in  this  world  never  lost.  All 
that  is  wanted  is  to  become  conscious  of  the  nearness  of  God.  God  has  placed  men 
here  to  feel  after  Him  if  haply  they  may  find  Him,  albeit  He  be  not  far  from  any 
one  of  them.  2.  The  condition  ui^on  which  this  revelation  is  made  to  men  is  love. 
These  things  are  "  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him,"  or  revealed  to  th'  ^se  who  have 
the  mind  of  Christ.     (1)  Love  to  man  may  mean  love  to  his  person,  or  it  may  mean 


CHAT,  ii.l  I.  CORINTHIANS.  161 

simply  pity.  Love  to  Goil  can  only  mean  love  to  His  character  :  e.g.,  God  is  purity. 
And  to  be  pure  in  thought  and  look  is  to  love  God.  God  is  love — and  to  love  men 
till  private  attachments  have  expanded  into  a  philanthropy  which  embraces  all,  is 
to  love  God.  God  is  truth.  To  be  true — to  hate  every  form  of  falsehood — to  live 
a  brave,  true,  real  life — that  is  to  love  God.  God  is  infinite — and  to  love  the 
boundless,  reachinf?  on  from  grace  to  grace,  and  rising  upwards  ever  to  see  the  ideal 
still  above  us,  aiming  insatiably  to  be  perfect  even  as  the  Father  is  perfect — that  is 
love  to  God.  (2)  This  love  is  manifested  in  obedience,  (a)  "He  that  hath  My 
commandments  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  Me,"  &c.  We  remember  the 
Koman  commander  who  forbade  an  engagement  with  the  enemy,  and  the  trans- 
gressor was  his  own  son.  He  accepted  the  challenge  of  the  leader  of  tbe  other  host, 
slew,  spoiled  him,  and  then  in  triumph  carried  the  spoils  to  his  father's  tent.  But 
the  Eoman  father  refused  to  recogmise  the  instinct  which  prompted  this  as 
deserving  of  the  name  of  love — disobedience  contradicted  it  and  deserved  death  : 
weak  sentiment,  what  was  it  worth  ?  So  with  God — strong  feelings,  warm  ex- 
pressions, varied  internal  experience  coexisting  with  disobedience,  God  counts  not  as 
love,  (b)  To  love,  adormg  and  obedient,  God  revcils  His  truth.  As  in  the  natural,  so 
in  tbe  spiritual  world.  By  compliance  with  the  laws  of  the  universe  we  put  ourselves 
in  possession  of  its  blessings.  Obey  the  laws  of  health  and  you  obtain  health.  Arm 
yourselves  with  the  laws  of  nature,  and  you  may  call  down  the  lightning  from  the  sky. 
In  the  same  way  there  are  laws  in  the  world  of  Spirit,  by  compliance  with  which 
Goil's  Spirit  comes  into  the  soul  with  all  its  revelations.  "  'Ihe  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  with  tliem  that  fe;ir  Him."  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  "  If  we  love 
one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us."  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know 
of  the  doctrine."  (c)  These  laws  are  universal  and  invariable.  There  is  no 
favourite  child  of  nature  who  may  hold  the  fire-ball  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand  and 
trifle  with  it  without  being  burnt ;  there  is  no  selected  child  of  grace  wlio  can  live 
an  ii\fegular  life  without  unrest ;  or  be  proud,  and  at  the  same  time  have  peace  ;  or 
indolent,  and  receive  fresh  inspiration ;  or  remain  unloving  and  cold,  and  yet  see 
and  hear  and  feel  the  things  that  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love 
Him.  And  if  obedience  were  entire  and  love  were  perfect,  then  would  the 
revelation  of  the  Spirit  to  the  soul  of  man  be  perfect  too.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  31. A.) 
Hearen : — Every  prophet  who  has  stood  upon  the  borders  of  a  new  dispensation 
might  have  uttered  these  words.  Abraham  might  have  looked  forward  to  the 
Mosaic  dispensation,  &c.,  ai.«l  have  turned  to  his  brethren  who  lived  in  the 
patriarchal  age,  and  said,  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  At  the  clo?e  of  the  Levitical 
dispensation  the  prophets  might  have  thus  spoken  of  the  coming  glories.  And 
now  we  stand  on  the  borders  of  a  new  era.  But  persons  are  curious  to  know  what 
kind  of  dispensation  the  millennial  one  is  to  be.  Will  the  temple  be  erected  in 
Jerusalem  ?  Will  the  Jews  be  positively  restored  to  their  own  land  ?  &c.  We 
cannot  answer.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  And  this  brings  us  to  make  the  appli- 
cation of  the  subject  to  heaven  itself.  I.  What  heaven  is  not.  1.  It  is  not  a 
heaven  of  the  senses.  (1)  "Eye  hath  not  seen  it."  What  glorious  things  the  eye 
hath  seen  !  Have  we  not  seen  the  gaudy  pageantry  of  pomp  crowding  the  gay 
streets  ?  We  hear  of  the  magnificence  of  the  old  Persian  princes,  of  palaces  covered 
with  gold  and  silver,  and  floors  inlaid  with  jewels  ;  but  we  cannot  thence  gather  a 
thouglit  of  heaven,  for  "  eye  hath  not  seen  "  it.  We  have  thought,  however,  when 
we  have  come  to  the  works  of  God,  surely  we  can  get  some  glimpse  of  what  heaven 
is  here.  By  night  we  have  turned  our  eye  up  to  the  stars,  and  we  have  said,  "If 
this  earth  has  such  a  glorious  covering,  what  must  that  of  heaven  be?"  At 
another  time  we  have  seen  some  glorious  landscape,  and  said,  "  Surely  these  gran- 
deurs must  be  something  like  heaven."  It  was  all  a  mistake — "Eye  hath  not 
seen  "  it.  (2)  "  The  ear  hath  not  beard  "  it.  Have  we  not  sometimes  heard  the 
sweet  voice  of  the  me-senger  of  God  when  he  has  by  the  Spirit  spoken  to  our 
souls  !  We  knew  something  of  heaven  then,  we  thought.  We  have  heard  music, 
whether  poured  from  the  lungs  of  man — that  noblest  instrument  in  the  world — or 
from  some  manufacture  of  harmony,  and  we  have  thought,  "  This  is  what  John 
meant  by  the  voice  like  many  waters,  and  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with  their 
harps."  But  we  made  a  mistake.  "Ear  hath  not  heard  "  it.  (.8)  Others  look 
upon  it  as  a  place  where  they  shall  be  free  from  bodily  pain,  and  where  they  will 
eat  to  the  full  and  be  satisfied.  What  a  mistake!  We  can  get  no  conceptions  of 
heaven  through  the  senses  ;  they  must  always  come  through  the  Spirit.  2.  It  is  not 
a  heaven  of  the  imagination.  Poets  let  their  imaginations  fly  with  loosened  wings, 
or  the  preacher  weaves  tbe  filigree  work  of  fancy,  and  you  say,  "  It  is  sweet  to  hear 
VOL.    I.  11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

that  man  speak  ;  be  made  me  think  I  was  there."  But  imagination,  when  it  is  most 
subHme,  and  freest  from  the  dust  of  earth,  and  kept  steady  by  the  most  extreme 
caution,  cannot  picture  heaven.  "  It  hath  not  entered  the  heart  of  man,"  &c. 
Your  imaginary  heaven  you  will  find  by  and  by  to  be  all  a  mistake.  3.  It  is  not  a 
heaven  of  tbe  intellect.  Men  describe  heaven  as  a  place  where  we  shall  know  all 
things,  and  their  grandest  idea  is  that  they  shall  discover  all  secrets  there.  But 
"  It  hath  not  entered  into  the  heart  of  man."  II.  "  He  hath  revealed  it  unto  us 
BY  His  Spirit."  This  means  that  it  was  revealed  unto  the  apostles  by  the  Spirit, 
so  that  they  wrote  something  of  it  in  the  Holy  Word.  We  think  also  that  it  means 
that  every  believer  has  glimpses  of  heaven  by  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  A  Chris- 
tian gets  a  gaze  of  what  heaven  is — 1.  When  in  the  midst  of  trials  and  troubles  he 
is  able  to  cast  all  his  care  upon  the  Lord,  because  He  careth  for  him.  Heaven  is 
something  like  that — a  place  of  ho'y  calm  and  trust.  2.  In  the  season  of  quiet 
contemplation,  for  the  joys  of  heaven  are  akin  to  the  joys  of  contemplation.  3.  At 
the  Lord's  table.  You  get  so  near  the  Cross  there  that  your  sight  becomes  cleai'er, 
and  the  air  brighter,  and  you  see  more  of  heaven  there  than  anywhere  else.  4. 
When  we  assemble  iu  our  meetings  for  prayer.  5.  In  extraordinary  closet  seasons, 
{C.  H.  Sintrpeon.)  Heaven: — The  city  of  Corinth  has  been  called  the  Paris  of 
antiquity.  Indeed,  for  splendour,  the  world  holds  no  such  wonder  to-day.  The 
commerce  of  all  nations  jjassed  through  her  j)orts  ;  the  miith  of  all  people  sported 
in  her  Isthmian  games,  and  the  beauty  of  all  lands  walked  her  jwrticos,  and  threw 
itself  on  the  altar  of  her  stupendous  dissipations.  Column  and  statue  and  temple 
bewildered  the  bf  holder.  And  the  best  music  from  the  best  instruments  in  the 
world  resounded  in  her  theatres.  It  was  not  to  rustics  who  had  never  seen  or  heard 
anything  grand  that  Paul  uttered  this  text,  and  it  was  a  bold  thing  for  him  to  stand 
there  amid  all  that  and  say,  "All  this  is  nothing;  eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  We 
can  iu  this  world  get  no  idea  of — I.  The  health  of  heavex.  When  you  were  a 
child  you  had  never  felt  sorrow  or  sickness.  Perhaps  later  you  felt  a  glow  in  your 
cheek,  and  a  spring  in  your  step,  and  an  exuberance  of  spirits,  and  a  clearness  of 
eye,  that  made  you  thank  God  you  were  permitted  to  live.  You  thought  that  you 
knew  what  it  was  to  be  well,  but  the  most  elastic  and  robust  health  of  earth,  com- 
pared with  that  of  heaven,  is  nothing  but  sickness  and  emaciation.  Look  at  that 
soul  standing  before  the  throne.  On  earth  she  was  a  life-long  invalid.  See  her 
step  now,  and  hear  her  voice  now.  Health  in  all  the  pulses  !  Health  of  vision  ; 
health  of  spiirits ;  immortal  health.  No  racking  cough,  no  consuming  fevers,  no 
exhausting  i^ains,  no  hospitals  of  wounded  men.  Tliat  child  that  died  in  the 
agonies  of  croup,  hear  her  voice  now  ringing  in  the  anthem.  That  old  man  that 
went  bowed  down  with  the  infirmities  of  age,  see  him  walk  now  with  the  step  of  an 
immortal  athlete — for  ever  young  again.  To  have  neither  ache,  nor  pain,  nor 
weakness,  nor  fatigue.  "Eye  bath  not  seen  it — ear  hath  not  heard  it."  II.  The 
SPLENDOUR  OF  HEAVEN.  Johu  tries  to  describe  it,  and  as  we  look  through  his  tele- 
scope we  see  a  blaze  of  jewellery,  a  mountain  of  light,  a  cataract  of  colour,  a  sea  of 
glass,  and  a  city  like  the  sun.  John  bids  us  look  again,  and  we  see  thrones; 
thrones  of  the  prophets,  patriarchs,  angels,  apostles,  martyrs,  throne  of  Jesus — 
throne  of  God.  John  bids  us  look  again,  and  we  see  the  great  procession  of  the 
redeemed  passing.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen  it,  ear  hath  not  heard  it."  Skim  from 
the  summer  waters  the  brightest  sparkles,  and  you  will  get  no  idea  of  the  sheen  of 
the  everlasting  sea.  Pile  up  the  splendours  of  earthly  cities  and  they  would  not 
make  a  stepping-stone  by  which  you  might  mount  to  the  city  of  God.  Every  house 
is  a  palace.  Every  step  a  triumph.  Every  meal  is  a  banquet.  Eveiy  day  is  a 
jubilee,  every  hour  a  rapture,  and  every  moment  an  ecstasy.  III.  The  re-unions 
OF  heaven.  If  you  have  ever  been  across  the  seas,  and  met  a  friend  in  some 
strange  city,  you  remember  how  your  blood  thrilled,  and  how  glad  you  were  to 
see  him.  What  then  will  be  our  joy  to  meet  in  the  bright  city|;of  the  sun  those 
from  whom  we  have  long  been  separated.  In  this  world  we  only  meet  to  part.  It 
is  good-bye,  good-bye.  But  not  so  in  heaven.  Welcomes  in  the  air,  at  the  gates, 
at  the  house  of  many  mansions — but  no  good-bye.  IV.  The  song  of  heaven. 
There  is  nothing  more  inspiriting  to  me  than  a  whole  congregation  lifted  up  on  the 
wave  of  holy  melody.  But,  my  friends,  if  music  on  earth  is  so  sweet  what  will  it 
be  in  heaven !  They  all  know  the  tune  there.  All  the  best  singers  of  all  the  ages 
will  join  it — choirs  of  white-robed  children  !  choirs  of  patriarchs  1  choirs  of 
apostles  !  Harpers  with  their  harps.  David  of  the  harp  will  be  there.  Gabriel  of 
the  trumpet  will  be  there.  (T.  De  Witt  Tahiage,  D.D.)  The  things  which  God 
has 'prepared : — I.  Their  nature.     1.  The  mysteries  of  the  gospel  salvation.     2. 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  163 

Extending  into  the  eternal  future.  II.  Their  traxscendent  value.  1.  Worthy 
of  God.  2.  Surpassing  all  human  comprehension.  III.  Their  participation — • 
depends  on  love  to  God.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  thiricjs  j)rL'pared  and  their  eiijo)j- 
vient : — I.  The  things  prepared.  Suggesting — 1.  Tlie  Divine  forethought,  and 
the  infinite  fulness  and  carefulness  of  God's  love  for  His  children.  Remember — 
(1)  How  the  world  was  prepared  before  man  came  upon  it.  (2)  How  God  prepared 
a  body  in  which  Christ  should  be  one  with  us,  die  to  be  our  Saviour,  and  ascend 
to  hold  the  sceptre  of  the  universe.  (3)  How  Christ  reminded  His  disciples  that 
the  dignities  of  the  kingdom  were  only  for  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  the 
Father.  (4)  How  He  went  to  prepare  a  place  for  us,  and  sent  the  Spirit  to  prepare 
us  for  the  place.  2.  The  Divine  treasury.  The  figure  suggests  a  vast  building 
over  whose  jjortals  we  read,  "  Ask  and  it  shall  be  given,"  &c. — a  building  divided 
into  so  many  stores  of  Divine  love.  Let  us  open  their  doors.  (1)  One  contains 
tlie  "purposes  "  of  tlie  Divine  love,  delivering  mercy,  sustaining  grace — purposes 
that  no  need  can  exhaust,  no  opposition  thwart,  no  eternity  unfold.  (2)  Another 
"promises"  Divinely — (a)  Simple,  little  children  can  understand  them,  (b)  Pro- 
found, angels  cannot  fathom  them,  (c)  Certain,  for  "  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,"  &c.  (d)  Sweet  and  rich,  "  sweeter  than  a  honeycomb,"  and  "  more  pre- 
cious than  gold."  (3)  Divine  "  provisions  " — the  mercy-seat  where  we  obtain  grace 
to  help  ;  the  Cross,  its  cleansing  fount,  infinite  random.  Divine  righteousness  ;  the 
Lord's  Table.  (4)  The  "fulness"  that  is  treasured  up  in  Christ — fulness  of  grace 
to  pardon,  of  merit  to  atone,  of  strength  to  sustain,  of  glory  to  reward.  (5)  Things 
prepared  in  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit — regenei'ation,  comfort,  sanctification. 
(6)  Glories  that  await  us  hereafter — the  "crown"  of  triumph,  the  "harp"  of 
praise,  the  "mansion"  of  repose  and  blessing,  the  "living  fountain"  of  joy.  II. 
The  revelation  of  the  Spirit  ix  which  these  things  are  made  manifest  to 
us.  1.  Striking  thought  !  God  takes  men  into  His  confidence  about  matters  that 
human  reason  could  never  fathom.  It  v.'as  so  with  Abraham."  "  Shall  I  hide," 
&c.  Amos  declares  that  the  Lord  will  hide  nothing,  but  will  reveal  His  secret 
unto  His  servants.  In  proportion  to  our  intimacy  with  God  the  Divine  purposes 
will  be  made  plain  to  us.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him." 
The  disciples  pleaded  with  John,  who  reclined  on  his  Master's  bosom,  to  ask  Him 
a  secret  which  they  did  not  venture  to  ask  themselves.  He  lived  so  much  nearer 
to  Christ,  and  therefore  had  more  of  His  secret.  We  deprive  ourselves  of  unspeak- 
able blessings  in  regard  to  God's  dealings  in  providence  from  our  failure  to  recog- 
nise God's  hand  in  every  gift.  And  God's  children  should  feel  that  in  regard  to 
the  mysteries  of  the  world  around  they  shall  have  light  resting  on  their  path,  and 
truth  revealed  liy  the  indwelling  Spirit  which  enables  them  to  trust  where  others 
cannot.  The  man  that  is  nearest  the  sun  will  have  most  of  liglit,  and  the  man 
who  lives  nearest  the  throne  will  have  deeper  draughts  of  the  water  of  life  that 
proceeds  therefrom.  2.  As  to  the  revelation  by  the  Spirit  of  Divine  things,  take 
the  case  of  Simeon,  unto  whom  it  had  been  revealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  he 
should  not  die  until  he  had  seen  the  Christ.  How  long  he  waited  for  the  consola- 
tion of  Isi'ael!  But  at  last  it  came.  So  God  may  have  revealed  to  you  in  His  Word 
and  by  His  Spirit  truths  tliat  have  yet  to  come  in  their  Divine  significance  and 
power.  Wait  patiently ;  God's  time  is  always  the  best.  Take  the  case  of  Peter 
who,  when  all  were  dumb  before  "  Whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  "  received  at  once  a 
revelation  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  &c.  You  may  say  "  We  are  not  Simeons  or 
Peters."  No;  but  remember  how  Christ  thanked  God  that  the  things  withheld 
from  the  wise  and  prudent  were  revealed  unto  babes,  i.e.,  babes  in  spiritual  expe- 
rience. But  even  to  your  children,  who  shall  say  at  how  early  an  age  God,  by  His 
Spirit,  shall  reveal  the  truth?  Piemember  Samuel.  III.  The  condition  essential 
TO  THE  RECEPTION  OF  THE  BLESSING.  "Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed  on  us  " — there  is  the  origin  of  all  Christian  love.  "  The  love  of 
God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Gbost"- — that  is  the  next  step. 
Then  we  are  the  children  of  God,  and  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  with  our  spirits, 
&c.  Then  the  circle  is  complete.  And  the  Divine  love  thus  enjoyed  must  manifest 
itself  in  self-sacrificing  love  to  men.  {J.  P.  Chmni.)  The  things  j)repared  for  a 
prepared  people  : — The  apostle  here  is  quoting  from  Isa.  Ixiv.  4,  and  only  intends 
to  give  the  general  sense  of  the  jDassage.  Both  passages  ai'e  generally  used  as 
referring  to  the  heavenly  state,  but  we  can  only  apply  them  thus  by  accommoda- 
tion. Yet  this  is  a  legitimate  application.  For  if  the  text  is  true  of  our  imperfect 
condition  of  privilege  in  this  life,  much  more  will  it  be  true  as  applied  to  that 
perfection  of  bliss  that  awaits  us  in  the  life  to  come.     You  cannot  judge  of  the  real 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

merits  of  a  story  till  you  see  how  it  ends.  You  cannot  decide  about  the  value  of  a 
casket  till  it  is  opened  and  you  see  the  jewels  which  it  enshrines.  You  cannot 
pronounce  ou  a  campaign  till  you  see  what  fruits  result  from  its  hard-fought  battle- 
fields. And  so,  in  estimating  the  real  worth  of  redemption,  we  can  only  form  an 
approximate  judgment  of  it  in  this  life.  There  are  three  points  of  view  from  which 
■we  maj'  contemi^late  our  portion  for  the  future,  as  set  before  us  in  the  text.  I. 
The  plain  and  positive  view.  "Things  prepared."  1.  "Things"  plural — not 
one  element  of  joy,  but  many.  It  is  a  caric^iture  of  heaven  when  psalm-singing  is 
represented  as  its  chief  occupation.  A  wonderful  variety  marks  the  imagery  of  the 
Bible  as  to  the  heavenly  state — "a  city  that  hath  foundations,"  "  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb,"  being  "  present  with  Christ,  and  beholding  His  glory,"  is 
being  made  "  like  Hini,"  &c.  These  varied  expressions  suggest  that  our  heaven 
will  be  a  condition  of  being  in  which  the  mind,  with  its  large  desires,  its  deathless 
cravings,  and  the  soul,  with  all  the  warmth  of  its  affections  and  sympathies,  will 
find  the  fullest  scope  for  their  development.  As  the  vine  puts  forth  its  tendrils, 
and  finds  something  to  cling  to  for  its  support  and  growth  ;  so,  doubtless,  will  all 
the  innocent  tastes  and  longings  of  our  renewed  nature  find  in  the  heavenly  state 
that  which  answers  to  their  wants,  "prepared,"  as  a  trellis,  to  which  they  may 
cling,  and  in  clinging  to  which  they  will  find  their  delight.  2.  And  these  are  not 
things  thrown  together  at  hap-hazard.  They  are  "  prepared  things."  How 
eloquent  all  nature  is  as  to  the  teachings  of  this  word  !  Note  the  wonderful  care 
with  which  God  has  "  prepared  "  for  the  wants  of  every  tree,  animal,  bird,  and 
fish  ;  yea,  for  every  worm  ;  just  that  which  will  best  meet  its  wants  and  minister 
to  its  comfort.  Then,  when  we  think  of  the  souls  God  has  redeemed  at  the  price 
of  His  Son's  death,  to  whom  His  love  has  fiowed  out  in  a  deeper  channel  than  to 
any  other  of  His  creatures,  whom  He  deigns  to  say  that  they  are  to  be  His  portion ; 
when  we  think  of  "the  things  prejiared  "  for  them  in  their  final  home,  what  shall 
we  say  ?  How  shall  we  put  limits  to  the  extent  to  which  His  power,  wisdom,  and 
goodness  will  go  in  seeking  to  promote  their  happiness  ?  II.  A  negative  or  com- 
parative VIEW.  Heaven's  hapjjiness  is  such  as  "  eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.,  or  to 
which  all  the  eve  hath  seen,  &c.,  beais  no  proportion.  1.  It  is  clearly  the  inferen- 
tial teaching  of  the  text,  that  "  the  things  prepared  "  exceed  in  glory  all  that  we 
are  familiar  with  in  this  outer  creation.  (1)  And  the  eye  sees  wondrous  beauty  as 
it  ranges  through  the  world  of  nature.  But  there  is  no  comparison  between  what 
the  eye  sees  here  and  "the  things  prepared"  for  God's  people  in  the  future.  (2) 
And  then  the  e<ar  ojjens  an  avenue  to  another  world  of  enjoyment  peculiarly  its 
own.  Yet  the  highest  rspture  of  the  most  gifted  musician  through  the  organ  of 
hearing  bears  no  comparison  to  the  joy  the  redeeined  will  experience  in  "  the 
things  which  God  has  prepared  for  them."  (3)  And  then  the  imagination  has  a 
wondrous  power  to  call  into  existence  worlds  of  beauty  and  loveliness  all  its  own. 
But  when  you  jiut  these  things  together — all  that  the  eye  can  see,  &c.,  of  that 
which  is  beautiful  or  grand — they  will  be  infinitely  surpassed  by  "  the  things  pre- 
pared "  by  God  as  the  future  poition  of  His  people.  2.  And  there  is  something 
very  sweet  in  the  thought  of  this  instituted  connection,  between  these  glories  spread 
over  the  face  of  nature  and  that  blessed  home  which  Jesus  is  preparing  for  us.  It 
shows  how  God  means  that  the  one  should  remind  us  of  the  other.  The  Jewish 
Kabbis  inform  us  "  that  when  Joseph  had  gathered  much  corn  in  Egypt  he  threw 
the  chaff  into  the  Nile,  that  so  flowing  down  to  the  neighbouring  cities,  and  nations 
more  remote,  it  might  bear  witness  to  them  of  the  store  of  good  things  garnered 
up  in  the  treasure  cities  of  Egypt."  And  so  God,  to  make  us  know  what  glory 
there  is  in  heaven,  has  thrown  some  husks  to  us  here,  that  we  might  draw  out  our 
inferencf  s.  If  we  find  so  much  of  g'ory  spread  over  earthly  things,  what  may  we 
expect  to  find  in  tliose  that  are  heavenly  ?  If  He  give  us  so  much  iu  the  land  of 
our  pilgrimage,  what  will  He  not  give  us  in  our  own  country?  If  He  can  lavish  so 
much  on  His  enemies  what  will  He  not  reserve  for  His  friends?  III.  The  per- 
sonal VIEW.  "  For  them  that  love  Him."  These  things  are  designed  for  a  "  pre- 
pared "  people.  The  preparation  on  the  one  side  is  just  as  necessary  as  that  on 
the  othi-r.  What  is  the  use  of  preparing  a  feast  unless  you  know  that,  the  guests 
those  who  are  to  be  admitted  to  it  can  see  ;  of  preparing  a  grand  concert  unless 
will  have  appetites  ;  of  arranging  the  paintings  of  a  splendid  gallery  unless 
the  audience  can  hear  ?  The  glorious  things  of  the  future  are  prepared  for  a  people 
who  love  God.  The  planting  of  this  love  in  the  heart  is  the  great  i^ersonal  prepa- 
ration for  heaven  that  we  need.  The  necessity  for  this  is  absolute.  "  Except  a 
man  be  born  again,  &c.,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  These  two  things — 
love  to  God,  and  a  new  birth — always  go  together.    (Richard  Newton,  D.D.)      Love 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   COEL\THIANS.  1(55 

is  the  eye  that  sees,  the  ear  that  hears,  the  heart  that  realises  the  things  of  God 
(cf.  chap.  xiii.  8,  12;  Eph.  iii.  18).     {rrincqiul  Edatir(l.<.) 

Ver.  10.  But  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  His  Spirit. — The  ilu'uijs  of  God 
revealed  by  the  Si>irit: — When  a  telescope  is  directed  towards  some  distant  land- 
scape, it  enables  us  to  see  what  we  could  not  otherwise  have  seen  ;  but  it  does  not 
enable  us  to  see  anything  which  has  not  a  real  existence  in  the  piospect  before  us. 
It  does  not  present  to  the  eye  illusive  imagery,  neither  is  that  a  fanciful  and 
factitious  scene  which  it  throws  open  to  our  contemplation.  The  natural  eye  saw 
nothing  but  blue  land  stretching  along  the  distant  horizon.  By  the  aid  of  the  glass 
there  bursts  upon  it  a  charming  variety  of  fields  and  woods,  and  spires  and  villages. 
Yet  who  would  say  that  tl>e  glass  added  one  feature  to  this  assemblage  ?  It  dis- 
covers nothing  to  us  which  is  not  there ;  nor,  out  of  that  portion  of  the  booii  of 
nature  which  we  are  employed  in  contemi)lating,  does  it  bring  into  view  a  single 
character  which  is  not  really  and  previously  inscribed  upon  it.  And  so  of  the 
Spirit.  He  does  not  add  a  single  truth  or  a  single  character  to  the  book  of 
revelation.  He  enables  the  spiritual  man  to  see  ;  but  the  spectacle  which  He  lays 
open  is  uniform  and  immutable.  (7'.  Chalmcnf,  D.D.)  The  revealed  communica- 
tions of  the  Spirit  are  : — I.  Tuanscexdent  in  cnARACTER.  1.  Tlie  deep  things  of 
God.  Reason  sulHccs  in  other  matters  ;  these  can  only  be  revealed  by  the  Spirit, 
who  teaches  us  to  cry  "  Abba,  Father."  II.  An  absolute  ground  of  certainty  and 
CONFIDENCE.  1.  He  kuow^s  all  things.  2.  Eeveals  that  God  is  love.  3.  This  truth 
is  as  unchangeable  as  God  Himself  and  becomes  the  immovable  ground  of  our 
happiness.  HI.  Sufficient  for  all  our  spiritual  necessities.  We  want  nothing 
more  when  this  love  is  revealed  in  us  because — 1.  His  gracious  purpose  is  disclosed. 
2.  All  the  miseries  of  our  nature  are  met  in  Christ.  3.  Christ  is  revealed  as  a  new 
source   of   life   and   happiness.       (J.   Lyth,   D.D.)  The   wisdom   of  God  : — I. 

The  relation  of  intellectual  knowlIcdge  to  'jhe  wisdom  op  God.  In  the 
apostle's  presentation  of  this  question  there  are  two  things  very  manifest,  viz., 
that  the  true  Wisdom  involves  a  very  lart;e  and  important  element  of  intellectual 
conception,  and  yet  that,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  radically  distinguished 
from  merely  intellectual  operations  and  discoveries.  The  former  of  these  two 
positions  is  clearly  seen  in  the  way  in  which  He  presents  the  wisdom  of  a  perfect 
Christianity  as  competing  with,  and  transcending,  the  philosophic  wisdom  of  the 
Greek.  This  side  of  the  apostle's  position  is  condemnatory  of  the  modern  craze  to 
recklessly  ignore  important  differences  in  the  intellectual  conceptions  of  truth  held 
by  Christian  people,  and  to  talk  at  random  about  oneness  of  spirit.  In  the  mature 
Christian  life  the  spirit  largely  determines,  and  is  largely  determined  by,  the  central  • 
conceptions  of  truth.  Essential  differences  in  the  "  wisdom  "  we  hold  must  be  a 
sign  of  serious  spiiitual  divergence,  though  it  may  be  difficult  to  detect  it  in  the 
moral  life.  To  take  an  extreme  case,  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  spiri- 
tual state  of  an  atheist  and  a  Christian  man,  even  though  the  moral  life  of  the 
former  may  be  unimpeachable.  But,  as  we  have  said,  the  apostle  also  maintains 
that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  far  more  than  a  system  of  thought,  so  much  so  that  it  is 
impossible  to  attain  it  by  the  mere  force  of  intellectual  power,  however  great  its 
sweep  and  however  large  its  results.  The  senses  cannot  discover  this  wisdom, 
nor  can  thought  evolve  it.  The  seat  of  the  highest  wisdom  is  not  intellect, 
but  spirit.  But  the  spiritual  consciousness  of  which  we  sjieak  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  more  superficial  element  of  emotion.  The  latter  sweeps 
over  the  surface  of  the  life,  the  former  is  fixed  deep  in  the  centre  of  it.  The  latter 
is  transient  and  uncertain,  the  former  is  set  in  the  heart  of  eternal  relations.  The 
latter  is  fickle  and  untrustworthy,  the  former  affords  the  most  trustworthy  testi- 
mony concerning  the  truths  to  which  it  testifies.  Clearly  enough,  then,  Paul 
excludes  from  participation  in  the  true  wisdom  all  that  have  not  entered  into  a 
spiritual  relation  of  life  and  love  with  God  ;  wnd,  more  explicitly  still,  all  that  fail 
to  apprehend  God  in  Christ.  A  love  of  scientific  investigation  and  an  apprehension 
of  spiritual  realities  do  not  necessarily  go  together ;  and  without  the  latter  even  the 
elements  of  true  wisdom  are  absent.  II.  What  is  the  relation  op  philosophic 
moral  and  religious  systems  to  the  Biblical  system?  Can  we  claim  for  the 
Christian  Scriptures  an  inspiration  which  cannot  be  claimed,  say,  for  the  moral 
systems  of  Greek  philosophy?  The  principle  laid  down  in  our  text  seems  to  me  to 
state  clearly  the  truth  of  the  matter.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  deny  that  the  Greek 
received  a  revelation  from  God,  for  I  believe  he  did  receive  p  Divine  revelation,  and 
that  a  revelation  of  considerable  range  and  grandeur.     Further  than  this,  I  affirm 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

that,  wherever  there  has  existed  any  degree  of  moral  and  spiritual  consciousness, 
God  has  necessarily  manifested  Himself  through  it.  "  Tlie  Word  is  the  light  that 
lighteth  every  man."  But  there  was  this  essential  difference  between  the  Jewish 
prophet  and  the  Greek  philosopher,  a  difference  that  revealed  itself  more  fully  as 
their  several  histories  developed :  the  apprehension  of  truth  by  the  former  was 
predominatingly  spiritual,  by  the  latter  intellectual.  The  Greek  reached  his  con- 
clusions by  elaborate  processes  of  thought ;  the  Hebrew  received  his  revelations  in 
the  SiJirit,  and  spoke  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  to  this  unique 
experience  that  we  give  the  name  of  "inspiration."  The  unique  revelation  which 
this  experience  involved  is  asserted  clearly  enough  in  the  prmciple  laid  down  in  the 
text ;  for  it  asserts  this,  that  the  revelation  received  through  the  Spirit  of  God 
transcends  every  other,  and  covers  a  sphere  into  which  no  other  can  enter.  III. 
The  relation  of  spiritual  development  to  the  wisdom  of  God.  The  apostle 
clearly  lays  down  the  princij^le  that  the  development  of  spiritual  apprehension 
accompanies  the  development  of  spiritual  life.  It  is  to  the  man  of  mature  spiritual 
life  that  the  apostle  reveals  the  higher  wisdom  of  the  gospel.  Spiritual  things  are 
revealed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  are  therefore  apprehended  in  the  proportion  that 
we  possess  this  Spirit.  But,  if  this  be  so,  if  a  clearer  vision  of  truth  must  be  ever 
coming  to  developing  spiritual  life,  does  it  not  follow  thnt  the  New  Testament 
Scriptures  may  be  superseded,  and  that  we  must  look  for  the  latest  revelation  of 
truth  to  the  spiritual  man  of  to-day?  When  Christ  came,  and  when,  in  the  full 
light  of  His  teaching,  the  central  facts  of  His  life  and  death,  and  the  central 
significance  of  these  facts,  had  been  recorded,  the  book  of  God's  revelation  closed. 
The  glorious  opportunities  for  the  conveyance  of  final  and  complete  truth  to  men 
were  such  as  could  not  recur.  If  we  cannot  find  the  certaintj'  of  truth  here,  then 
there  is  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  our  foot  for  ever.  But  we  must  distinguish  between 
the  finality  of  the  revelation  and  finality  in  the  comprehension  of  it.  I  see  no 
difficulty  at  all  in  admitting  that  even  the  apostles  were  wiser  than  they  knew,  that 
their  teaching  contained  vast  possibilities  of  unfolding  and  latent  grandeurs  which 
they  but  dimly  apj)reheni'ed.  The  truest  theology  is  that  which,  like  a  growing 
child,  maintains  its  identity,  not  through  stagnation,  but  through  development. 
God  help  us  to  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ !  But  the  most  deep-lying  development  in  the  Christian  life,  deeper  than 
thought-articulation  of  truth,  is  spirit-apprehension  of  it.  Underneath  the  grandest 
thought-apprehension  of  truth  there  is  a  still  grander  spiritual  consciousness  of  it. 
Truth  in  its  deepest  origin  is  life.  In  the  full  life  which  holds  in  its  bosom  the  full 
truth  consists  man's  highest  heaven.  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  Thee,  the  only 
true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast  sent.  (John  Thomas,  ]\LA.) 
True  religion  a  revelation  : — I.  Eeligion  is  the  fruit  of  a  revelation  from  God. 
There  are  those  who  tell  us  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  supernatural  light  to 
guide  man  through  the  maze  of  his  soul's  life.  The  little  sparrow  has  that  within 
itself  that,  like  a  Inininous  flame,  guides  it  in  all  that  pertains  to  its  existence.  In 
seeking  its  food  it  is  able  to  distinguish  between  that  which  will  nourish  and  that 
'■which  will  poii^on  ;  it  can  also  choose  its  own  home  :  "  Yea  the  sparrow  hath  found 
a  house  and  the  swallow  a  nest  for  herself,  whci'e  she  may  lay  her  young."  The 
sun  in  the  heavens  guides  man  in  all  this  lower  life.  Is  it  i^ossible  that  he  has 
been  left  without  a  light  to  illumine  his  mind  and  si^irit  ?  There  was  need  of  a 
revelation;  for  those  who  had  seen  the  greatness  and  glory  of  nature  had  failed  to 
see,  hear,  or  to  conceive  the  things  God  had  prepared  for  the  soul.  "  The  natural 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  :  for  they  ars  foolishness  unto 
him;  and  he  cannot  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually  judged. "  But  why 
be  content  with  merely  carnal  senpes?  Why  not  receive  the  light  and  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  that  you  may  by  spiritual  discernment  understand  the  things  of  God 
prepared  for  you  ?  II.  Religion  is  a  revelation  to  love.  We  must  not  forget  in 
our  study  of  these  words  that  they  speak  of  a  revelation  which  has  been  made ;  it 
is  not  something  we  are  to  look  forward  to.  "  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by 
His  Spirit."  The  state  of  mind  to  which  God  makes  known  tlie  things  which  He 
has  prepared  is  love.  God  is  love,  and  love  can  only  make  itself  known  to  love. 
The  subject  must  be  in  sympathy  with  the  object.  The  strange  conduct  of  the 
Jews  towards  Christ  can  only  be  explained  on  this  principle.  The  Saviour's  life  was 
in  the  truest  sense  really  beautiful,  as  it  is  admitted  by  the  most  pronounced  un- 
believers in  these  days.  And  yet  the  people  of  His  age  esteemed  Him  as  a  "  root 
out  of  a  dry  ground:  He  had  no  form  nor  comeliness";  when  they  saw  Him, 
"  there  was  no  beauty  that  they  should  desire  Him."     God  reveals  His  love  to  love. 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  167 

"  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  The  infinite  kindness  of  God  is  to  be 
seen  in  the  method  of  His  dealings  with  the  world.  If  His  method  of  saving  men 
were  mainly  intellectual,  few  comparatively  would  be  redeemed  ;  for  the  plan  would 
of  necessity  be  so  cold  and  formal,  that  only  the  few  gifted  minds  would  be  inte- 
rested by  it.  The  many  can  only  be  reached  by  a  direct  appeal  to  their  feelings, 
and  hence  the  religion  of  Christ  addresses  the  minds  of  men  through  their  hearts  ; 
and  the  apostles  laid  emphasis,  not  on  the  great  thoughts  of  God,  but  upon  His 
infinite  love  in  the  gift  of  His  Son.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  religion  of  heaven 
is  a  revelation  of  love  to  love.  God  cannot  reveal  Himself  to  any  other  temper. 
We  have  sometimes  gone  into  gardens,  and  observed  plants  that  should  be  in  full 
bloom  still  unopened.  The  green  bud  appeared  full,  almost  to  bursting;  it  was 
past  the  time  for  it  to  send  forth  its  fragrant  blossom,  and  still  it  was  completely 
inclosed  in  its  natural  shield  and  entirely  hidden  from  view.  The  reason  of  the 
delay  was  the  state  of  the  air  ;  it  was  cold  and  frosty,  and  they  could  only  reveal 
themselves  to  a  bright  sun  and  in  a  genial  atmosphere ;  were  they  to  open  in  the 
frosty  air  they  would  endanger  their  lives.  A  cold  critical  spirit  is  fatal  to  the 
revelations  of  love,  it  freezes  the  channels  to  the  heart ;  and  makes  it  impossible 
even  for  the  love  of  God  to  find  its  way  into  it.  But  where  a  loving  disposition 
exists,  the  love  of  God  is  sure  to  reveal  itself.  III.  Keligiom  is  the  fruit  of  a 
COMPLETE  REVELATION.  1.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  revealed  the  great  truth  that  "  God 
is  light."  God  is  the  light  of  the  soul,  it  is  from  Him  we  obtain  the  light  that 
enables  us  to  solve  spiritual  problems.  2.  Another  important  truth  has  been 
revealed  by  the  Spirit,  that  "  God  is  love."  This  is  done  in  a  most  effectual 
manner.  "Because  the  love  of  God  hath  been  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  was  given  unto  us."  S.  The  Spirit  lias  revealed  the  truth  that 
God  is  life:  "For  with  Thee  is  the  fountain  of  life."  He  in  the  first  instance 
breathed  the  breath  of  life  into  the  nostrils  of  man.  (D.  I\h>is  Jenkins.)  Divine 
revelation  : — I.  Its  indispensable  necessity  to  the  knowledge  of  God.    Because — 

I.  God  stands  alone,  and  is  known  only  to  Himself.  2.  He  is  infinitely  less  compre- 
hensible than  men  who  cannot,  though  of  the  same  nation,  comprehend  each  other. 

II.  Its  possiniLiTY  and  sufficiency.  The  Sinrit — 1.  Is  as  intimately  one  with  (lod  as 
the  spirit  of  man  is  one  with  Himself.  2.  Knows  all  things  perfectly.  .3.  What  He 
knows  He  can  reveal.  III.  Its  contents  and  operation.  1.  It  contains  a  revela- 
tion of  the  Divine  purpose,  of  Christ,  of  the  things  prepared  for  us  in  eternity.  2. 
He  who  teaches  these  things  awakens  desire,  produces  faith,  confirms  and  comforts 
the  heart  in  the  knowledge  of  them.  (R.  Watson.)  The  Spirit  as  a  Teacher  : — 
On  entering  a  cavern  you  inquire  for  a  guide  who  comes  with  his  lighted  flambeau. 
He  conducts  you  down  to  a  considerable  depth,  and  you  find  yourself  in  the  midst 
of  the  cave.  He  leads  you  through  different  chambers.  Here  he  points  yoa  to  a 
little  stream  rushing  from  amid  the  rocks,  and  indicates  its  rise  and  progress. 
There  he  points  to  some  peculiar  rock,  and  tells  you  its  name,  then  takes  you  into 
a  large,  natural  hall,  tells  you  how  many  persons  once  feasted  in  it,  and  so  on. 
Truth  is  a  grand  series  of  caverns.  It  is  our  glory  to  have  so  great  and  wise  a 
conductor  as  the  Holy  Spirit.  Imagine  that  we  are  coming  to  the  darkness  of  it. 
He  is  a  light  shining  in  the  midst  of  us  to  guide  us.  He  teaches  us  by  suggestion, 
direction,  and  illumination.  (C.  H.  Spnrgeon.)  Sjnritual  sight  restored  : — A 
little  boy  was  born  blind.  At  last  an  operation  was  performed — the  light  was  let 
in  slowly.  When  one  day  his  mother  led  him  out  of  doors  and  uncovered  his  eyes, 
and  for  the  first  time  he  saw  the  sky  and  the  earth,  "Oh,  mother!"  he  cried, 
"why  did  you  not  tell  me  it  was  so  beautiful?"  She  burst  into  tears,  and  said, 
"  I  tried  to  tell  you,  dear,  but  you  could  not  understand  me."  So  it  is  when  we 
try  to  tell  what  is  in  Christ.  Unless  the  spiritual  sight  is  opened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  we  cannot  understand.  Tlie  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — The  Eev.  E. 
Hopkins,  in  showing  the  importance  of  knowledge  to  the  Christian,  told  as  an 
illustration  what  had  happened  to  a  friend  of  his  in  Yorkshire,  who,  though 
practically  a  poor  man,  owued  an  estate  in  that  county.  One  day  a  geologist  told 
him  there  was  in  his  estate  an  abundance  of  iron  ore.  Believing  this  to  be  true  he 
felt  at  once  that  he  was  no  longer  poor  but  rich.  Even  so  it  is  the  office  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  reveal  to  us  the  boundless  riches  that  are  treasured  up  in  Christ. 
For  the  Spirit  searcbetli  all  things,  yea,  the  deep  things  of  God.— T/ie  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit: — I.  He  searcheth  the  deep  things  of  (ion.  1.  His  purposes  of 
grace.  2.  His  particular  dealings  with  individuals.  3.  The  glorious  issue  of  His 
dispensations.  II.  He  reveals  them  to  man.  1.  To  us  and  in  us.  2.  With 
saving  power.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)         The  deep  things  of  God: — We  walk  in  a  daily 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  ii. 


■wonder,  ourselves  the  strangest  of  mysteries.  Our  knowledge  is  only  the  glimmer 
of  light  upon  the  surface  of  the  ocean  of  existence.  Beneath  are  the  deep  things 
of  God.  We  need  not  go  far  to  stand  on  the  shore  of  the  deep  thmgs  of  God.  Our 
science  has  not  gone  to  the  root  yet  of  a  single  blade  of  grass.  I.  Consideb  some 
OF  THESE  MYSTEKiES.  1.  To  begin  with  the  lowest,  what  do  we  know  about  the 
nature  of  matter?  You  can  tell  me  as  easily  what  the  angels'  wings  are  as  tell  me 
the  ultimate  constitution  of  a  single  particle  of  matter.  Common  oxygen  and 
hydrogen,  and  all  elemental  principles,  belong  by  nature  to  the  deep  things  of  God. 
The  very  dust  of  the  earth  upon  which  we  tread  is  in  its  real  principle  as  unknown 
to  us  as  the  nature  of  God  Himself.  2.  But  if  the  common  earth  is  thus  the 
wonder  of  science,  much  more  is  thsit  dust  a  mystery  when,  by  unknown  forces,  it 
is  taken  up  and  woven  dexterously  after  a  predetemiiued  pattern  and  organised  into 
a  thing  of  life.  Sometimes  investigators,  pressing  hard  after  the  molecules  of 
matter,  have  thought  they  had  almost  won  the  secret  of  life  ;  but,  just  as  our 
science  seems  about  to  put  its  finger  upon  that  fugitive  thing,  life,  it  flies  from  its 
hand  and  we  are  no  wiser  than  before.  Life  is  one  of  the  deep  things  of  God,  whose 
origin  no  man  can  discover,  and  of  whose  future  what  we  call  d^ath  is  only  our 
ignorance.  Perhaps  to  see  the  spring  of  life  would  be  to  see  the  living  God  Himself. 
3.  But  if  the  life  which  colours  the  petal  of  the  flower,  and  finds  wings  in  the  bird, 
and  culminates  in  the  form  of  man,  is  a  mystery,  what  shall  we  say  of  that  life 
when  it  has  become  conscious  and  is  a  thinking,  willing  mind  ?  The  human  soul  is 
one  of  the  deepest  of  the  deep  things  of  God.  4.  What  then  shall  we  say  of  all  tbose 
further  problems  of  life  of  which  these  things  are,  as  it  were,  but  the  terms  or  elements? 
Our  thoughts  flutter  over  these  deep  things  of  God  as  the  seabirds  dip  their  wings 
in  the  ocean's  waves.  They  only  shake  from  their  feathers  the  spray  of  the  surface. 
Yet  we  cannot  help  thinking  of  the  deep  things  of  our  soul's  past,  of  the  deeper 
things  of  its  future.  Whence  came  the  evil  that  gives  the  good  a  bitter  taste?  How 
did  death  ever  gain  dominion  over  us?  How  did  this  hard,  poisonous  core  of  sin 
ever  grow  in  the  midst  of  this  fair  life  ?  And  who  thus  shall  hft  the  veil  for  us  from 
the  future?  We  can  see  signs  all  around  us  of  a  great  system  of  retribution.  There 
is  no  doubt  but  that  what  a  man  sows  that  shall  he  also  reap.  The  present 
retributive  tendencies  of  things  no  sane  man  can  deny.  And  they  extend  into  the 
future  ;  tbey  work  on  and  on.  We  can  follow  them  out  until  they  disappear  in  the 
unknown  depths  of  futurity.  H.  We  are  ready  now  to  draw  from  such  reflec- 
tions SOME  useful  and  PERTINENT  CONCLUSIONS,  1.  We  may  infer  that — (1)  There 
are  some  people  who  know  more  than  their  Creator  ever  intended  that  tbey  should 
know.  There  are  some,  e.g.,  who  know  that  the  Bible  is  false,  and  rehgiou  a 
superstition,  because,  in  this  cast-iron  world,  a  miracle  seems  impossible,  prayer 
folly.  Before  they  can  be  sure  of  that,  however,  they  should  know  vastly  more  of 
the  structure  of  this  material  universe  than  any  mortal  eye  has  as  yet  ever  seen. 
Possibly  this  may  not  be  a  "cast-iron"  universe;  possibly  it  maybe  something 
more  than  a  mere  museum-world  of  biological  specimens  ;  and  yet,  for  all  we  know 
to  the  contrary,  this  material  system  may  be  as  permeable  to  Divine  influences  as 
this  earth,  which  seems  a  globe  so  solid,  is  supposed  to  be  open  as  wicker-work  to 
all  movements  of  the  ethereal  waves.  "  There,"  said  Lacordaire,  as  he  overheard 
in  a  Paris  restaurant  St.  Beuve  saying,  "  I  cannot  believe  in  God,  because  I  believe 
only  in  ^^hat  I  understand" — "there  is  St.  Beuve,  who  does  not  believe  in  God 
because  he  does  not  understand  Him ;  nor  does  he  understand  why  the  same  fire 
melts  butter  and  hardens  eggs,  and  yet  he  eats  an  omelet."  2.  There  are  people 
who  know  there  can  be  no  such  place  as  hell,  because  God  is  good.  I  could  trust 
better  their  assurance  if  only  they  could  prove  that  there  never  could  be  such  a 
place  as  Sodom,  because  God  is  good.  Surely  it  is  the  part  of  a  wise  man  not  to 
dogmatise,  but  so  to  live  as  not  to  pitch  his  tent  toward  any  Sodom,  either  in  this 
world  or  in  the  world  to  come.  3.  There  are  persons  so  wondrous  wise  as  to  know 
that  God  cannot  exist  as  a  Trinity,  because  three  are  not  one.  We,  too,  ever  since 
we  learned  to  count  our  fingers,  have  known  that  three  are  more  than  one ;  but 
there  is  a  puzzle  of  arithmetic  which  we  have  not  solved  yet,  and  that  is,  how  I  can 
be  at  one  an.l  the  same  time  the  subject  and  the  object  of  my  own  thinking — these 
three  in  one.  When  I  cannot  as  yet  hardly  comprehend  my  own  imperfection,  I 
will,  at  least,  allow  God  to  exist  in  a  perfection  which  passes  my  knowledge;  and  if 
revelation  leads  me  to  worship  Him  as  a  unity,  complete  in  Himself,  and  not  as  a 
mere  lonely,  loveless  unit,  that  needs  something  else  to  make  it  blessed,  surely  it  is 
a  better  wisdom  to  believe  in,  though  we  can  but  dimly  comprehend,  the  unity  of 
three  eternal  distinctions  in  the  inelTable  society  of  one  blessed  God.     2.  But  my 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   COIilNTIIIANS.  1C9 

main  object  is  to  remind  yon,  by  these  questionings,  of  wliat  our  errand  in  tliis 
life  really  is.  (1)  It  is  very  evident  that  the  deep  tilings  of  God  are  intended  for 
finite  minds  to  search.  God  has  given  us  great  problems  for  our  mental  exercise, 
and  we  have  found  out  a  vast  deal.  Truth  opens  new  vistas  to  us  at  every  turn. 
(2)  But  it  is  just  as  clear  that  to  gain  knowledge  is  not  our  chief  errand  here.  This 
mortal  stage  is  arranged  for  scenes  of  probation  ;  it  is  fitted  out  for  the  fi)rmation  of 
character.  Our  object  is  salvation.  And  so  God  follows  through  all  man's  history 
this  supreme  moral  purpose,  and  to  this  end  everything  else  in  His  providence 
seems  to  have  been  subordinated.  This  apppars  clearly  enough  from  the  reflections 
■which  we  have  just  been  pursuing;  for  God  gratifies  our  love  for  knowledge  only 
in  so  far  as  it  seems  to  be  for  our  moral  good.  How  easy  it  would  have  been  for 
Him  to  have  gi'anted  us  revelations  of  some  of  these  mysteries !  Let  us  remember, 
however,  that  while  the  shadows  lie  over  many  a  field  of  knowledge,  the  light  does 
fall  directly  over  the  narrow  path  of  duty ;  and  though  we  may  not  see  far  into  the 
shadows  of  the  forest  on  eitlier  side,  yet,  if  we  will,  we  can  keep  with  resolute  feet 
the  narrow  path  of  duty,  and  that  is  the  path  which  leads  up  into  the  open  day. 
Conclusion  :  Let  us  remember,  then,  that  the  great  duties  of  life  are  the  illuminated 
texts  of  Scripture:  "  Ilepent,"  "Believe,"  "Be  converted,"  "Strive,"  "Pray," 
"  Have  the  Spirit  of  Christ,"  "  Set  your  affections  on  things  above."  These 
commandments  of  the  Lord  are  "plain,  enlightening  the  eyes"  of  whosoever 
■wishes  to  see.  There  are  many  thing's  whicli,  as  Jesus  said,  we  shall  know  here- 
after. {Neivman  Smi/th,  D.I).)  The  deep  things  of  God  are: — 1.  Unfathomable 
in  their  nature.  2.  Comprehended  only  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  Partially  revealed 
to  us.  (•/.  Lyth,  D.D)  The  goxpel  school : — Here  the  student  is — I.  Ixstrdcted 
IN  THE  suBLiMEST  KEALiTiEs.  "  Deep  things  of  God."  Tilings,  not  words,  not 
theories,  "  deep  things,"  deep  because  undiscoverable  by  human  reason,  and  deep 
because  they  come  from  the  fathomless  ocean  of  Divine  love.  They  are  the  primary 
elements  of  the  gospel,  and  the  necessary  condition  of  soul  restoration,  and  are — 1. 
The  free  gifts  of  heaven.  "Freely  given  to  us  of  God."  2.  Freely  given  to  be  com- 
municated. "  Which  things  also  we  speak,"  Ac.  He  who  gets  these  things  into  his  y 
mind  and  heart  is  bound  to  tell  tliem  to  others.  H.  Taught  by  the  Gkeatest 
Teacher.  "  The  Spirit  of  God."  This  teacher —  1.  Has  infinite  knowledge.  "The 
Spirit  searclieth  all  things."  "  The  things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit 
of  God."  He  knows  them  in  their  essence,  number,  issues,  bearings,  relations,  Ac. 
2.  Is  no  other  than  God  Himself  (ver.  11).  The  implication  is  that  this  Spirit  is 
as  truly  God  as  man's  mind  is  mind.  III.  MrsT  develop  his  higher  natoiie 
(ver.  14).  Man  has  a  threefold  nature — body,  soul  and  spirit.  The  first  is  the 
animal,  the  second  is  the  mental,  and  the  third,  the  moral  or  spiritual.  This  is 
the  conscience  with  its  intuitions  and  sympathies,  and  this  is  the  chief  part  of  man, 
nay,  the  man  himself.  Now  this  part  of  the  man  alone  can  receive  the  "  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God."  Set  these  things  before  the  "  natural  man,"  his  mere  body, 
they  are  no  more  to  him  than  Euclid  to  a  brute.  Set  them  before  the  mere 
psychical  or  intellectual  man,  and  they  are  "  foolishness  unto  him."  Sheer 
intellect  cannot  understand  love  nor  appreciate  right.  It  concerns  itself  with  the 
truth  or  falsehood  of  propositions,  and  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of 
conduct,  nothing  more.  Moral  love  only  can  interpret  and  feel  the  things  of 
moral  love,  the  "  deep  things  of  God."  Hence  this  spiritual  nature  must  be 
roused  from  its  dormancy,  and  become  the  ascendant  nature  before  the  "  things 
of  the  Spirit"  can  be  "discerned,"  and  then  the  man  shall  judge  all  spiritual 
things,  whilst  he  himself  will  not  be  judged  rightly  by  any  "  natural  man " 
(ver.  16).  Who  thus  uninstructed  can  ''know  the  mind  of  the  Lord""?  {D. 
Thomas,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  For  what  man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of 
man  which  is  in  him  ?  Z-^en  so  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit 
of  God. — The  narrow  limits  of  human  comprehension  in  siiiritual  matters  : — I.  With- 
out HEEP  man  kxows — 1.  Very  little  of  himself.  2.  Still  less  of  his  fellow-man.  3. 
Least  of  all  about  God.  II.  This  should  teach  him — 1.  Modesty  in  his  judgments. 
2.  Humility  in  his  inquiries.  3.  Confidence  in  the  Word  of  God,  for  the  Spirit 
knoweth  all  things.  {J. Lyth, D.D.)  The  imperfection  of  human  insight  and  sympathoj  : 
■ — 1.  There  is  an  outer  world  in  which  all  of  us  are  living :  and  so  far  as  regards 
that  world,  one  human  being  may  know  "  the  things  of  other."  Indeed,  in  a  quiet 
country  town  it  is  a  proverb  that  everybody  knows  the  things  of  everybody  else.  In 
such  a  place  it  is  all  but  impossible  for  any  one  to  keep  anything  about  himse'.f  a 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

secret.     2.  But  under  this  outward  living  another  and  a  deeper  being  lies.     Those 
around  you  may  know  just  as  well  as  you  do,  the  externalities  of  your  life,  and  yet 
be  profoundly  ignorant  about  all  that  concerns  your  real,  inward  life.     And  it  was 
of  this  inner  world  that  St.  Paul  was  thinking.     In  one  short  solitary  walk,  just 
think  how  many  thoughts  pass  through  your  minds  of  which  your  nearest  and 
dearest  can  never  know.     And  nothing  more  illustrates  the  truth  of  the  text  than 
to  think  how  differently  the  same  scene  may  affect  different  persons,  according  to 
the  associations  linked  with  it.     3.  This  great  ignorance  of  the  inner  life  of  those 
around  us — I.  Should  teach  us  to  be  charitable  in  our  judgments  and  estimates 
or  THOSE  AROUND  US.     You  Cannot  penetrate  into  the  soul  of  your  fellow-sinner,  and 
know  for  certain  what  is  jjassing  there.     Beware,  then,  how  you  think  or  say  con- 
cerning him  what  may  be  cruel  injustice.     Let  us  think  the  best  we  can  of  our 
brethren  in  sin  and  sorrow.     II.   Should  comfort  those  who  mourn  the  loss  of 
FRIENDS.     It  is  sometimes  a  cause  of  grief  and  anxiety  to  the  relatives   of  the 
dying,  that  they  will  not  be  brought  to  speak  of  their  religious  faith  and  feelings  in 
that   frank  way  which  some  would  wish.     Ah,  you   do  not  know  what  solemn 
thoughts  pass  in  the  unseen  world  within  your  departing  friend's  breast.     Where 
a  Christian  profession  gives  good  hope  of  a  Christian  end,  you  may  well  use  this 
text  as  it  weie  to  eke  out  the  humble  trust  of  the  happiness  of  one  departed  which 
you  may   fail  to   derive   from    Lis   own   brief  and   reserved  words.     III.  Should 
teach  us  our  great  NEED  TO  HAVE  Christ  FOR  OUR  Friend.     For  the  text  suggests 
to  us  the  very  awful  thought  that  each  one  of  us,  by  our  make  and  nature,  is  a 
solitary  being.     Even  in  the  case  of  those  who  know  us  best,  there  is  a  most 
imperfect  knowledge  day  by  day  of  our  most  real  life.     Our  awful  gift  of  personality 
parts  us  off  from  all  created  beings.     Our  spirits  live  each  in  its  own  sphere  :  and 
•we  cannot  explain   to  one  anotljer.     Do  you  want  a  friend,  who,  without  your 
needing  to  tell  him,  will  know  your  every  shade  of  thought,  of  anxiety,  of  weakness, 
of  sorrow,  and  who  will   discern  the  heaitiness  that  glows  through  your  every 
prayer,  your  every  act  of  faith  and  love,  the  sincerity  of  your  every  struggle  with 
temptation,  the  thousand  things  which  you  could  not  if  you  would  confide  to  those 
you  love  best,  and  which  if  you  could  you  would  not.     If  you  want  all  this — and 
every  Christian  does  want  all  this — then  come  to  Jesus.     [A.  H.  K.  Boyd,  D.D.) 
The  personaliUj  of  life  : — The  consciousness  of  another  is  impenetrable.  We  cannot 
reach  it ;  we  cannot  even  conceive  of  it.     But  in  our  own  is  our  existence ;  our 
existence  and  our  personality  are  the  same ;  and,  therefore,  we  shrink  from  the 
extinction  of  our  personality,  because  it  implies  the  extinction  of  our  existence. 
Christianity  teaches,  in  a  variety  of  ways,  the  doctrine  of  a  strict  spiritual  person- 
ality.    It  is  not  the  least  remarkable  characteristic  of  Christianity  that,  being  of  all 
religions  the  most  social,  it  is  likewise,  of  all  religions,  the  most  individualising. 
We  shall  look  at  this  Chiistian  doctrme,  concerning  the  personality  of  life,  in  a 
variety  of  aspects.     The  spirit  of  the  doctrine  we  take  from  tbe  gospel ;  illustrations 
of  it  we  shall  seek  everywhere.     If  we  look  into  life,  in  itself  as  each  of  us  finds  it 
circumscribed  in  his  individual  consciousness,  w'e  become  aware  of  a  principle  in 
our  being  by  which  we  are  separate  from  the  universe,  and  separate  from  one 
another.     We  become  aware  that,  by  the  power  of  this  principle,  we  draw  all  the 
influences  which  act  on  us  into  our  personality,  and  that,  only  as  thus  infused,  do 
they  constitute  any  portion  of  our  inward  life.     It  is  by  the  power  of  this  principle, 
which  is,  properly,  myself,  modifying  all  that  is  not  myself,  that  I  live,  and  that 
my  life  is  independently  my  own.     But  some  say  that  man  has  no  inherent  spiri- 
tuality, no  spontaneous  energy,  no  sovereign  capacity.     Such  say  that  man  is  never 
the  master,  but  always  tbe  creature  of  circumstances.     These  are  assertions  to 
which  no  logic  can  be  applied,  and  if  a  man,  on  consulting  his  own  soul,  is  not 
convinced  of  their  falsehood,  there  is  no  other  method  of  conviction.     No  matter 
what  may  appear  to  be  the  external  slavery,  we  still  feel  that  we  have  a  principle, 
an  individuality  of  life,  that  is  separate  from  our  circumstances  and  above  them. 
Take  this  feeling  once  away,  and  we  are  no  longer  rational,  and  we  are  no  longer 
persons.     We  do  not,  certainly,  deny  the  influence  of  circumstances.     In  a  great 
degree,  circumstances  are  the  materials  out  of  which  the  life  is  made  ;  and  the 
quality  of  the  materials  must,  of  course,  influence  more  or  less  the  character  of  the 
life.     But  the  influence  of  circumstances  on  life  does  not  loosen  the  inviolability  of 
its  interior  consciousness.     This  doctrine  of  circumstances  affords  no  aid  even  for 
the  interpretation   of  that  in  life  wbieh  may  be  interpreted  ;  because  for  a  true 
interpretation  you  should  know  all  the  circumstances  that  acted  on  the  life,  and 
you  should  know  in  what  manner  they  acted.     But  who  knows  this  of  any  one  ? 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  171 

Who  knows  it  of  one  with  whom  he  has  been  longest  and  nearest  ?  Who  can  know 
the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  a  man  which  is  in  him  ?  Race,  country,  era, 
creed,  iustitutions,  family,  education,  social  station,  employment,  friend,  com- 
panions, these  are  but  vague  data  when  a  soul  is  to  be  judged  ;  and,  be  it  only  a 
judgment  on  tbe  merest  externals  of  character,  such  data  afford,  even  for  this,  but 
uncertain  inference.  Perhaps  things  of  which  no  one  takes  heed  are  the  most 
important.  A  word  heard  iu  childhood,  a  kind  or  cruel  look  felt  in  youth,  a  tune,  a 
picture,  a  prospect,  a  short  visit,  an  accident,  a  casual  acquaintance,  these,  and  a 
thousand  like,  may  be  the  chief  constituents  of  many  an  impulse  that  begins  a 
destiny.  We  behold  the  streams  of  individual  life  as  they  bubble  out  upon  the 
surface,  but  we  do  not  see  the  fountains  whence  they  spring.  Every  life  has  com- 
binations of  experience,  of  which  another  has  not  an  idea,  or  the  means  of  forming 
an  idea.  Every  life  has  treasures  of  which  others  know  not,  out  of  which,  and 
often  when  least  expected,  it  can  bring  things  new  and  old.  How  is  it  that  events, 
incidents,  objects,  changes,  alike  in  outward  semblance,  enter  into  millions  of  minds, 
and  in  every  one  of  them  assimilate  with  a  diiierent  individuality.  How  one  man 
is  a  poet,  where  another  man  is  a  sot ;  how  one  man  is  in  raptures,  where  another 
is  asleep ;  how  one  man  is  improved,  where  another  is  corrupted.  Thus,  whatever 
the  visible  appearances,  within  them  there  is  a  central  self,  in  which  the  essence  of 
the  man  abides.  Your  life  is  yours,  it  is  not  mine.  My  life  is  mine  and  not 
another's.  Human  faculties  are  common,  but  that  which  converges  these  faculties 
into  my  identity,  separates  me  from  every  other  man.  That  other  man  cannot 
think  my  thoughts,  he  cannot  speak  my  words,  he  cannot  do  my  works.  He  can- 
not have  my  sins,  I  cannot  have  his  virtues.  Each  must  feel,  therefore,  that  his 
life  must  be  his  own.  1.  Life  is  first  unfolded  through  outward  nature.  In  that 
rudest  state  of  humanity,  w-hich  seems  almcst  instinctive,  we  might  imagine 
individuality  as  nearly  impossible,  but  so  it  is  not  ;  and  monotonous  as  the  ideas 
and  experience  may  appear,  tliey  become  incorporated  with  a  distinct  life,  in  the 
personality  of  each  soul.  But  does  not  outward  nature  afford  manifest  evidence 
that  it  is  intended  to  unfold  life  throu^-'h  higher  feelings  than  sensation  ?  Is  there 
no  other  purpose  for  sight  than  discernment  of  our  position  and  our  way  ?  Is 
there  no  other  purpose  for  hearing  than  the  simple  perception  of  sound  ?  Why 
are  there  flowers  in  t/ae  field?  Why  are  blossoms  on  the  trees?  Why  is  the  rain- 
bow painted  with  hues  so  inimitable  ?  Or,  why,  also,  do  the  waves  make  music 
with  the  shore  ?  These  are  not  necessary  to  feed,  or  lodge,  or  clothe  us  ;  they  are 
not  necessary  to  mere  labour  or  mere  intercourse.  They  afford  nutriment  to  the 
inherent  life  of  rational  creatures.  The  life  is  indeed  but  narrowly  unfolded  in 
which  the  sense  of  beauty  in  outward  nature  is  dull  or  wanting.  Not  to  mark  the 
seasons,  except  by  the  profit  or  the  loss  they  bring ;  to  think  of  days  and  nights  as 
mere  alternations  of  toil  and  sleep;  to  discern  in  the  river  only  its  adaptation  for 
factories ;  to  be  blind,  and  deaf,  and  callous,  to  all  but  the  hardest  uses  of  creation, 
is  to  leave  out  of  conscious  being  whatever  gives  the  universe  its  most  vital  reality. 
Such  a  life  may  be  called  a  prudent  life,  and,  for  its  object,  it  may  be  an  eminently 
successful  life  ;  but  its  object  is  paltry,  and  its  success  on  the  level  of  its  object. 
Not  tliat  men  are  expected  to  be  poets  or  artists,  or  to  have  the  peculiar  tempera- 
ments that  characterise  poets  or  artists.  Not  that  men  are  expected  to  talk  of  their 
experience  of  enjoyment  in  nature,  or  to  affect  it  if  they  have  it  not.  I  merely 
insist  that  the  sensil>ilities  be  open  to  every  influence  of  natural  beauty  ;  and  I  liold 
that  if  these  sensibilities  belong  not  to  the  individual  constitution,  there  is  a  deficit 
in  it.  If  the  world  has  deadened  them,  the  world  has  done  the  being  a  serious 
injury  ;  if  education  or  religious  culture  has  not  been  such  as  to  incite  them,  each 
has  failed  in  one  of  tbe  most  vital  offices  of  a  true  spiritual  culture.  Outward 
nature,  also,  unfolds  Hfe  by  exercising  thought ;  not  thought  which  is  busied  only 
about  wants,  but  thought  which  delights  to  seek  the  end  of  creation's  laws  and 
mysteries.  But  life  is  unfolded  in  its  loftiest  capacities  when  everywhere  in  out- 
ward nature  the  soul  is  conscious  of  Gods  pervading  presence  ;  when  it  sees  the 
goodness  of  God  in  all  that  is  lovely,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  in  all  that  is  true. 
Every  man,  whether  he  kmnvs  it  or  not,  is  an  incarnation  of  the  immortal ;  and 
through  his  immortality  all  things  that  connect  themselves  with  his  soul  are 
immortal.  In  every  loving  soul,  therefore,  according  to  the  measure  of  its  power, 
God  re-constructs  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  2.  The  individual  being  of  man  is 
also  unfolded  by  society.  It  is  born  into  society,  and  by  society  it  lives.  Existing 
at  first  in  passive  and  unconscious  instincts,  it  finds  protection  in  the  care  of 
intelligent   affections.      The   home,   therefore,   is  the    first   circle   within  which. 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 


personality  opens,  and  it  is  always  the  nearest.  Beyond  this,  the  individunl  is 
surrounded  with  circumstances  more  complex.  He  is  cast  among  persons  whose 
■wills  are  not  only  different  from  his  owu,  but  constantly  antagonistic  to  it.  And 
thus  in  society,  as  in  nature,  the  unfolding  of  his  being  will  be  by  resistance  as 
well  as  by  affinity.  The  most  self-complete  personality  can  have  no  development 
but  by  means  of  society.  Intellect  works  by  means  of  society.  Thinkers  the  most 
abstract  have  not  all  their  materials  of  reflection  in  themselves.  The  studies  that 
belong  purely  to  the  mind  as  well  as  those  that  belong  to  matter,  and  to  the  active 
relations  of  life,  require  observation,  comparison,  sagacity,  variety  of  acquisition, 
and  experience.  No  man  can  be  a  thinker  by  mere  self-contemplation.  He  might 
as  well  expect  to  become  a  physiognomist  by  always  gazing  in  a  mirror,  or  to 
become  a  geographer  by  measuring  the  dimensions  of  his  chamber.  A  man  is 
i-evealed  even  to  himself  by  the  action  on  him  of  external  things,  and  of  other  minds. 
Imagination  works  by  means  of  society.  For  society  it  builds  and  sculptures, 
paints,  forms  its  concords  of  sweet  sounds,  and  puts  its  dreams  into  melody  and 
measure.  But  for  society,  virtue  could  neither  have  existence  nor  a  name.  Society, 
by  its  occupations  and  injunctions,  by  the  contact  in  which  it  places  will  to  will,  by 
its  excitements  and  its  sympathies,  elicits  the  power  of  the  moral  nature:  society 
it  is  that  trains  this  power,  tries  it,  strengthens  it,  matures  it ;  is  the  arena  of  its 
contest,  is  the  field  of  its  victories.  But  if  in  society  the  moral  nature  has  its 
contests,  in  society  also  it  has  its  charities.  But  while  society,  whether  in  calm  or 
conflict,  unfolds  "life,  to  this  its  agency  should  be  bounded.  It  should  not  be 
allowed  to  absorb  the  individual  life,  or  to  crush  it.  With  the  strength,  the 
freedom,  the  integrity  of  thought  and  conscience ;  with  honest  and  unotfending 
idiosyncrasies,  it  has  no  claim  to  interfere.  Men  in  our  age  live  gregariously ;  and 
if  the  aggregation  were  for  exertion  and  for  work,  this  might  be  a  benefit ;  but  men 
think,  men  feel  conventionally,  and  this  is  an  evil.  It  enfeebles,  it  impoverishes 
the  life ;  it  depresses,  nay,  it  denounces  originality,  it  takes  away  all  stimulus  to 
meditation,  reflection,  or  any  strong  mental  effort.  I  do  not  impeach  the  value  of 
public  opinion,  but  I  do  not  bow  to  it  as  an  authority,  nor  accept  it  as  a  guide. 
Life  in  our  age  is  too  much  in  the  mass  for  any  thorough  spiritual  culture ;  and 
life  is  too  much  in  the  outward  for  any  intensity  of  individual  character.  If  those 
who  use  efforts  for  others,  and  use  them  seriously,  would  first  use  them  to  the 
utmost  on  their  own  spirits,  society  would  advance  more  quickly  towards  regenera- 
tion. There  is  a  mawkish  tendency  in  some  to  charge  their  failings  on  this  or  that 
cause  out  of  themselves.  They  were  tempted,  the  evil  was  placed  in  their  way,  and 
they  could  neither  pass  by  it  nor  bound  over  it.  This  is  a  cowardly  spirit  which, 
after  all,  absidves  not  from  the  transgression,  while  it  pulls  down  the  soul  into  the 
deepest  jjit  of  degradation.  It  is  just  as  far  from  genuine  repentance  and  humility 
as  it  is  from  honesty  and  heroism.  When  we  judge  others  we  must  make  every 
merciful  allowance  ;  but  we  must  not  teach  themselves  to  do  so ;  nor  must  we  do 
so  when  we  judge  ourselves.  I  have  said  that  we  should  hold  every  man's  person- 
ality sacred,  as  well  as  our  own,  and  I  repeat  it.  Wliy  should  I  wish  to  compel  any 
man,  if  such  were  possible,  to  live  my  life,  think  mj'  thoughts,  accept  my  opinions, 
believe  my  creed,  worship  at  my  altar.  If  such  desire  were  not  utterly  fooHsh, 
would  it  not  be  the  climax  of  presumption  ?  Some  one  may  object  that  the  person- 
ality which  I  defend  is  an  obstinate  egotism.  Not  at  all.  Nor  is  it  combative  or 
exacting,  but  charitable  and  liberal.  The  absence  of  a  true  individuality  produces 
many  of  the  gloomiest  evils  with  which  society  is  deformed.  Why  else  do  people 
consider  the  meat  as  more  than  the  life,  and  the  raiment  more  than  the  body  ? 
Wliy  else  do  they  so  esteem  that  which  is  not  their  being,  and  so  little  that  which 
is?  Why  else  do  people  ape  the  talents  of  others,  and  neglect  those  which  are 
their  own  ?  Why  do  they  so  abortively  attempt  the  work  they  cannot  do,  and  over- 
look the  work  they  can  ?  Let  a  man  be  satisfied  to  be  himself,  and  he  will  not  be 
dissatisfied  because  he  is  not  another.  He  will  not,  then,  be  hostile  to  that  other 
for  being  what  he  is  ;  nay,  he  will  rejoice  in  all  by  which  that  other  is  ennobled ; 
he  will  lament  for  all  by  which  he  is  degraded.  For  a  man,  therefore,  to  be  him- 
self, fully,  honestly,  completely,  does  not  circumscribe  his  communion,  it  makes  it 
wider.  But  a  man  should  not  be  content  to  be  only  roughly  himself.  A  man 
ought  to  labour  to  beautify  and  harmonise  in  his  interior  personality  ;  and  if  that 
be  done,  there  will  be  no  confusion  in  his  exterior  relationships.  And  what  a 
glorious  work  is  this  !  If  the  sculptor  spends  years  in  toil  to  shape  hard  marble 
into  grace,  and  then  dies  contented,  what  should  not  a  man  be  willing  to  bear  and 
do,  when  it  is  a  de.ithless  spirit  that  he  forms  to  immortal  loveliness?     After  all, 


CHAP.  II.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  173 

there  is  much  of  one's  life  that  is  not  unfolded  ;  much  that  remains  uncommuni- 
cated,  or  that  is  incommunicable.     Tbe  very  medium,  lantjuage,  by  which  spirit 
holds  converse  with  spirit,  is  inadequate  to  transmit  the  plainest  thougbt  as  it  is  in 
the  mind  of  the  speaker.    Language  is  not  representative,  but  suggestive,  and  no 
merely  spiritual  idea  is  exactly  tbe  same  in  any  two  minds.     How  much  of  life 
passes  within  us,  that  we  make  no  attempt  to  impart,  that  we  have  no  opportunity 
to  impart.     If  we  find  such  to  be  our  ordinary  experience  in  life,  what  sliall  we  say 
of  its  more  solemn  passages?     Can  any  man,  and  let  him  be  of  surpassing  elo- 
quence, communicate  an  absorbing  thought,  and  the  interest  with  which  it  fills 
him?     No  ;  we  try  in  vain  to  express  an  overflowing  joy;  as  vainly  do  we  attempt 
to  put  into  utterance  a  deeply-seated  grief.     Even  bodily  pain  we  cannot  make  the 
most  sympathising  understand.     And  tlien  death — death  always  in  slradow,  always 
in  silence,  always  absolute  in  isolation  !     Who,  then,  can  know  the  things  of  a  man 
save  the  spirit  of  a  man  which  is  in  him?     What  misgivings,  what  memories,  what 
darkening  fears,  what  dawning  hopes,  may  then  agitate  the  breast,  and  none  can 
know,  and  none  can  sliaie  them  !     We  shall  not  seek  to  pierce  the  mystery.     These 
solemn  isolations  we  ought  not  to  forget ;  they  must,  sooner  or  later,  come  to  us 
all,  and  it  is  but  comujon  prudence  to  gather  strength  to  meet  them.     The  view 
that  I  have  given  in  this  discourse  of  life,  some,  I  doubt  not,  will  consider  lonely. 
A  great  part  of  life  must  indeed  be  lonely.     In  a  pure  and  reflective  loneliness 
there  is  strength,  and  there  is  depth  in  it.     There  is  great  enrichment  in  it.     To 
get  at  the  meanings  and  mysteries  of  things  we  must  converse  with  them  alone. 
So  the  thinker  is  lonely  ;  the  poet  is  lonely ;  the  hero  is  louely ;  tlie  siiint  is  lonely ; 
the  martyr  is  lonely.     Social  affection  has,  indeed,  great  beauty ;  public  spirit  much 
worth  :  energetic  talents  have  abundant  utility  ;  but  it  is  by  habits  of  independent 
and  solitary  meditation  that  they  are  matured, deepened, and  consolidated.  {H.  Giles.) 
The  perfect  hiioidediie  of  Gud : — I.  How  it  is  PossinLE.     1.  Only  the  spirit  of  man 
knows  what  is  in  man.     2.  So  the  Spirit  of  God  only  knows  the  things  of  God. 
3.  Hence  the  things  of  God  can  only  be  known  by  him  who  has  the  Spirit.     II. 
How  IT  IS  OBTAINABLE.     1.  Not  by  him  who  has  the  spirit  of  the  world.     2.  But  by 
him  who  receives  the  Spirit  by  a  new  birth,  and  consequently  by  the  Spirit  under- 
stands the  things  that  God  has  freely  given  in  His  Word.     (.7.  Lyth,  D.D.)         The 
indwelliii(i  Spirit: — 1.  There  are  certain   instincts  in  our  common  humanity  by 
which  every  man  has  a  sympathy  with  his  fellow-man.     No  other  creature  but 
man  can  possess  it.     Mind  strangely  echoes  mind.     2.  Again  every  one  is  conscious 
of   secret  tlioughts  and  depths  in  his  own  soul  which  only  himself  can  fathom. 
He  has  feelinjis  within  feelings,  which  no  other  person  can  ever  thoroughly  under- 
stand, but  which,  to  his  own  consciousness,  make  his  individuality  and  his  whole 
being.     3.  Put  these  two  truths  together,  and  you  arrive  at  a  double  analogy.     As 
only  "man"  knows  "man,"  and  as  only  one's  self  knows  one's  self,  "even  so  the 
things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God."    I.  Only  God  knows  God. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  God.     Therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  "knows  God."     But  he  who 
IS  "  BOKX  OF  God"  has  the  Holy  Ghost  in  him,  and  he,  and  he  only,  can  "  enow 
God."     It  is  not  your  reading,  reasoning,  listening,  philosophy,  piety,  or  prayers 
that  will  enable  you  to  know  God,  but  only  the  Holy  Ghost  in  you.     We  live  in  the 
midst   of   two  worlds,  equally  real,  equally  dt^finite.     The  one  is  that  material 
universe  which  we  see,  and  feel,  and  touch.     The  other  is — 1.  A  veiled  world  till 
a  touch  of  Omnipotence  opens  it.     You  may  walk  in  the  midst  of  it  all  your  life, 
and  yet  never  know  that  it  is  there.     To  another — at  your  very  side — these  things 
are,  at  this  moment,  more  real  and  more  distinct  than  your  world  is  to  vou.     2.  A 
spiritual  world,  made  up  of  spiritual  pleasures,  pains,  contiicts,  tastes,  friendships, 
services.     It  is  here.     But  it  wants  a  new  faculty  to  see  it.     Suppose,  at  this 
moment,  another  bodily  sense  were  added  to  your  five  senses,  what  new  channels 
of  thought  and  enjoyment  that  sixth  sense  would  add  to  you!     And  this  unseen 
system  requires  a  new  sense  before  it  can  be  perceived.     3.  A  mucli  higher  world. 
The  natural  world  is  very  lovely  ;  but  it  is  only  the  shadow  of  that  spiritual  world. 
Wliat  if  you  should  fiud,  at  last,  that  all  along  you  have  been  contented  with  the 
shadow,  and  that  you  have  never  grasped  the  substance  of  life,  because  your  eyes 
were  never  opened  to  see  it?     II.  If,  then,  everything  in  spiritual  knowledge 

DEPENDS  on  the  INDWELLING  OF  THE  HoLY  GhOST,  THE  GREAT    QUESTION   IS,    HoW   CAN 

I  ENJOY  IT?  Only  by  union  with  Christ.  Only  the  grafted  branch  can  get  the  sap. 
Only  the  united  member  partakes  of  the  hfe's  blood.  The  first  act  of  uni(m  takes 
place  by  tlie  free  working  of  the  grace  of  God.  This  is  conversion ;  the  new  life. 
After  that,  many  things  will  promote  its  increase — specially  the  Word  of  God,  and 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

prayer,  and  good  works.  Then,  through  union,  comes  the  Holy  Ghost ;  through 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  knowledge  of  God  ;  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  iruage 
of  God  ;  through  the  iniHge  of  God,  God  ;  and  through  God,  heaven.  (./.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)  The  necessity  of  the  Spirit  to  the  nndi'rxtandinji  of  the  things  of  Gi.d  : — 

The  Scripture  cannot  be  perfectly  understood  except  by  the  guidance  of  tlie  ^ame 
mind  that  inspired  it.  It  is  an  outward  revelation,  and  we  need,  in  order  to  make 
it  plain,  an  inward  revelation  also.  It  resembles  a  sundial,  which  is  in  itself 
perfect,  but  the  indispensable  condition  of  whose  usefulness  is  light.  The  Scripture 
is  the  chart  to  glory,  on  which  everything  necessary  is  marked  with  unerring  accu- 
racy ;  but  the  one  indispensable  condition  of  its  answering  its  end  is  that  the  Spirit, 
while  we  read  it,  shall  be  shining  upon  it  (Psa.  xliii.  3).  Or  to  put  the  matter  in 
another  way  :  Without  some  kind  of  sympathy  with  the  mind  of  a  poet,  without 
the  poetical  turn,  it  would  be  impossible  to  appreciate  poetry.  And  each  distinct 
species  of  poetry  can  only  be  so  far  understood  as  the  reader  finds  in  himself  some 
taste  for  it.  The  literature  may  stimulate  the  taste,  but  there  must  be  the  tas-te  in 
the  first  instance.  So  then  it  would  not  be  consonant  even  with  reason  that  Holy 
Scripture  should  be  exempted  from  the  operation  of  a  law  which  applies  to  poetry, 
and  indeed  every  class  of  literature ;  that  it  should  be  feasible  to  enter  into  its 
significance,  without  having  inherited  their  spirit.  (Denn  Goidhurn.)  Now  we 
have  received,  not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God ;  that  we 
might  know  the  things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God. — The  spirit  of  tiie  world 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  : — The  Spirit  of  God  is — I.  A  Spirit  of  teutji.  By  witness- 
ing to  the  truth  He  condemns — 1.  The  errors  of  the  world.  2.  The  hypocrisies  of 
the  world.  3.  The  false  judgments  of  the  world.  II.  A  Spirit  of  lhve.  He 
inspires — 1.  Love  to  God.  Gratitude  takes  the  place  of  cold  thoughtlessness, 
sympathy  with  the  redeeming  work  of  Jesus  takes  the  place  of  selfish  isolation. 

2.  Love  to  our  neighbour.  One  great  form  in  which  the  world's  selfishness  finds 
expression  is  covetousness.  The  Spirit  of  God  destroys  it,  and  tills  the  heart  with 
its  opposite,  benevolence.  III.  A  Spirit  of  zeal.  His  descent  was  accompanied 
with  mighty  rushing  winds  and  cloven  tongues  of  fire.  These  manifested — 1.  The 
mystery  of  His  nature.  2.  The  efficacy  of  His  grace.  3.  The  majesty  of  His 
presence.  4.  The  facility  and  promptitude  of  His  operations.  5.  The  impression 
which  He  would  make  upon  the  apostles.  He  came  to  change  the  whole  aspect  of 
society.  The  world  was  absorbed  in  love  of  the  visible,  occupied  in  things  )iresent, 
was  indifferent  to  the  future.  The  darkness  of  superstition  and  infidelity  had 
again  covered  the  face  of  the  deep.  The  disciples,  timid,  feeble,  and  unlettered 
men,  when  inspired  of  God,  became  courageous,  powerful  aud  victorious.  The 
Spirit  of  God  inspires  us  with  zeal — (I)  To  confess  our  religion.  (2)  To  practise  it. 
{Bp.  Adam  Flechier.)  The  two  kinds  of  spirit : — The  spirit  of  anything  is  that  vital 
principle  which  sets  it  a-going  ;  which  keeps  it  in  motion ;  which  gives  it  its  form  and 
distinguishing  qualities.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  that  principle  w  hich  gives  a  deter- 
mination to  the  character,  and  a  form  to  the  life  of  the  m.an  of  the  earth  ;  the  spirit 
which  is  of  God  is  that  vital  princijile  which  gives  a  determination  to  the  character,  and 
a  form  to  the  life  of  the  citizen  of  heaven.  One  of  these  spirits  actuates  all  mankind. 
1.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  mean  and  grovelling  ;  the  spirit  which  is  of  God  is  noble 
and  elevated.  The  man  of  the  earth,  making  himself  the  object  of  all  his  actions, 
and  having  his  own  interest  perpetually  in  view,  conducts  his  life  by  maxims  of 
utility  alone.  The  citizen  of  heaven  scorns  the  vile  arts,  and  the  low  cunning, 
employed  by  the  man  of  the  earth.  He  condescends,  indeed,  to  every  gentle  office 
of  kindness  and  humanity.  But  there  is  a  difference  between  condescending  and 
descending  from  the  dignity  of  character.  From  that  he  never  descends.  2.  The 
spirit  of  the  world  is  a  spirit  of  falsehood,  dissimulation,  and  hypocrisy  :  the  spirit 
that  is  of  (iod  is  a  spirit  of  truth,  sincerity,  and  openness.  The  life  which  the  man 
of  the  earth  leads  is  a  scene  of  imposture  and  delusion.  Show  without  substance  ; 
appearance  without  reality ;  professions  of  friendship  which  signify  nothing  ;  and 
promises  which  are  never  meant  to  be  performed,  fill  up  a  life  which  is  all  outside. 
The  citizen  of  heaven  esteems  truth  as  sacred,  and  holds  sincerity  to  be  the  first 
of  the  virtues.  He  has  no  secret  doctrines  to  communicate.  He  needs  no  chosen 
confidents  to  whom  he  may  impart  his  favourite  notions.  What  he  avows  to  God, 
he  avows  to  man.     He  expresseth  with  his  tongue  what  he  thinketh  with  his  heart. 

3.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  a  timid  spirit ;  the  spirit  which  is  of  God  is  a  b.  dd  and 
manly  spirit.  Actuated  by  selfish  prmciples,  and  pursuing  his  own  interest,  the 
man  of  the  earth  is  afraid  to  offend.  He  accommodates  himself  to  the  manners 
that  prevail,  and  courts  the  favour  of  the  world  by  the  most  insinuating  of  all  kinds 


CHAT.  II.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  175 

of  flattery  by  following  its  example.  He  is  a  mere  creature  of  the  times  ;  a  mirror 
to  reflect  every  vice  of  the  vicious,  and  every  vanity  of  the  vain.  He  is  timid 
because  he  has  reason  to  be  so.  Wickedness,  condemned  by  its  own  vileuess,  is 
timorous,  and  forecasteth  grievous  things.  There  is  a  dignity  in  virtue  which  keeps 
him  at  a  distance  ;  he  feels  how  awful  goodness  is,  and  in  the  presence  of  a  virtuous 
man  he  shrinks  into  his  own  insigniticance.  On  the  other  liand,  the  righteous  is 
bold  as  a  lion.  With  God  for  his  protector,  and  with  innocence  for  his  shield, 
he  walks  through  the  world  with  a  face  that  looks  upwards.  He  despises  a  fool, 
though  he  were  possessed  of  all  the  gold  of  Ophir,  and  scorns  a  vile  man,  though  a 
minister  of  state.  4.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  an  interested  spirit ;  the  spirit 
which  is  of  God  is  a  generous  spirit.  The  man  of  the  earth  has  no  feeling  but  for 
himself.  That  generosity  of  sentiment  which  expands  the  soul ;  that  charming 
sensibility  of  heart  which  makes  us  glow  for  the  good  of  others  ;  that  diffusive 
benevolence,  reduced  to  a  principle  of  action,  which  makes  the  human  nature 
approach  to  the  Divine,  he  considers  as  the  dreams  of  a  visionary  head,  as  the  fig- 
ments of  a  romantic  mind  that  knows  not  the  world.  But  the  spirit  which  is  of 
God  is  as  generous  as  the  spirit  of  the  world  is  sordid.  One  of  tlie  chief  duties  in 
the  spiritual  life  is  to  deny  itself.  Christianity  is  founded  upon  the  most  astonish- 
ing instance  of  generosity  and  love  that  ever  was  exhibited  to  the  world  ;  and 
they  have  no  pretensions  to  the  Christian  character  who  feel  not  the  truth  of 
what  their  Master  said,  "  That  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  {J. 
Logan.)  Spiritual    qualification  for    the    reception    of    the    spiritual  : — There 

are  many  free  gifts  which  one  man  seeks  to  present  to  another,  which  the 
other  cannot  receive  without  spiritual  syiupathy  with  the  giver.  Sometimes  the 
recipient  has  no  spirit  to  understand  the  kindness  that  has  dictated  it,  or  to 
appreciate  the  gift  itself;  and  so  the  gift  is  thrown  away.  I.  Theue  are  many 
THINGS  FREELY  GivEX  TO  US  BY  GoD.  "The  great  things  of  His  law"  are  "  free 
gifts."  Pardon,  holiness,  "heaven  upon  earth,"  are  free  gifts.  Christ  is  "the 
unspeakable  gift,"  and  "  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."  II.  These  free  gifts  must  be  known  and  appreciated,  or  they  will  not 
BE  RECEIVED  BY  US.  Allowing  that  some  free  gifts  of  Providence  can  be  pli.\  sically 
received  by  the  thankless  and  fleshly  mind,  they  are  only  partially  received  by  such. 
If  I  do  not  understand,  or  api)reciate,  the  labour  of  the  artist,  he  may  have  given  me 
some  sheets  of  canvas  and  some  ounces  of  paint,  but  he  cannot  give  me  his  picture. 
The  musician  may  freely  give  me  the  treasures  that  have  enriched  his  soul,  and  yet 
my  inner  self,  through  my  lack  of  knowledge,  fail  to  receive  a  single  emotion  :  so, 
the  Divine  Harmonist  may  freely  give  the  harmony  of  heaven,  but  these  joys  are 
only  received  by  those  who  know  them.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  may  know 
Thee,"  &c.  "  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  III.  The  knowledge  of 
God's  free  gift  is  dependent  on  the  spirit  that  we  have  received.  It  depends 
on  the  s-pirit  of  a  man  what  is  the  truth  that  is  forced  upon  him.  Imagine  the 
truths  conveyed  to  a  group  of  men  before  any  given  scene.  There  are  the  scientific 
spirit,  the  spirit  of  tlie  historian,  of  the  politician,  of  the  artist,  of  the  soldier,  of 
the  philanthropist ;  each  receives  different  things,  because  perceiving  different 
objects.  The  same  thing  occurs  in  respect  of  spiritual  life.  If  our  spirit  is  haughty 
or  selfish,  how  can  we  know,  or  receive,  free  gifts  that  require  for  their  appreciation 
self-condemnation  and  selfforgetfulness  ?  If  our  spirit  is  false,  how  can  we 
receive,  or  know,  that  which  depends  on  the  faithfulness  and  truthfulness  of  God? 
"  The  natural  man  receiveth  not,"  &c.  If  there  is  no  spirit  of  self-dissatisfaction, 
how  can  we  appreciate  the  promise  of  pardon  and  life  ?  The  spirit  of  a  man  is  open 
to  influences  from  other  spirits.  One  man  may  pour  his  spirit  into  another's,  com- 
municate it  to  society,  enshrine  it  in  the  common  motives  and  aspirations  of  the 
race.  And,  just  as  every  man  has  a  spirit  of  his  own,  so  societies,  communities, 
nations,  the  world  itself,  may  have  a  spirit  which  reacts  upon  the  individual  spirits 
which  compose  them.  We  speak  correctly  of  the  spirit  of  the  age,  of  a  system,  of  a 
class,  and  of  the  world.  IV.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  utterly  insufficient  for 
the  purpose  here  indicated.  This  spirit  has  differed  at  different  times  in  the 
■world's  history.  Some  day  the  spirit  of  the  world  will  be  the  Spirit  of  God.  Igno- 
rance identifies  them  now,  and  philosophy  tries  to  prove  it.  The  apostle  was  not 
deluded  by  the  false  philosophy  of  Greece.  We  must  not  be  deceived  by  the  dicta 
of  either  France  or  Gt'rmany.  Note  some  characteristics  of  this  spirit  in  the  days 
of  Paul.  1.  Sensuality.  If  not  sensual  now,  still  it  is  sensuous  and  materialistic. 
But  the  things  given  by  God  are  spiritual  and  eternal,  "Therefore,"  &c.  2. 
Selfishness.    This  blinds  the  eye  to  God's  gifts.    We  suffer  as  much  from  the 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

selfishness  of  trade,  politics,  religion,  art,  and  even  philanthropy,  as  Paul  did, 
though  it  may  be  more  subtle  in  its  manifestations.  "  Therefore,"  &c.  3. 
Cruelty.  The  harsh  repression  of  natural  instincts^parental,  filial,  conjugal ;  e.g., 
the  amphitheatre,  modes  of  warfare,  court  intrigues.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is 
materially  changed  in  this  respect,  but  its  traces  are  still  to  be  seen,  and  they  war 
with  God's  free  gifts.  4.  The  love  and  lust  of  conquest.  5.  The  love  of  money. 
6.  Enterprise.  But  in  all  these  respects,  in  proportion  as  we  catch  and  embody  the 
spirit  of  the  world,  we  incapacitate  ourselves  for  knowing  or  receiving  the  things 
freely  given  to  us  of  God.     V.  The  reception  of  the  Spihit  op  God  will  strike  a 

RELATION  AT  ONCE  BETWEEN  ODE  UNDERSTANDING  AND  THE  TRUTH — between  OUr   hearts 

and  the  Divine  appeals  to  our  feelings — between  our  wills  and  the  calls  of  duty  and 
self-sacrifice.  "The  Spiiit  sf arches  all  things,  even  the  deep  things  of  God."  We 
may  have  this  Spirit  if  we  will ;  we  have  quenched  and  resisted  more  of  this  Spirit 
than  is  enough  to  do  for  us  all  we  wanit.  Receive  the  Spirit.  Pray  for  an  abun- 
dance of  it.  "  If  ye,  being  evil,"  &c.  {H.  R.  Rei/nolils,  D.I).)  The  jJeculiar 
spirit  of  Cliristicuis  : — I.  The  peculiar  spihit  which  God  has  given  to  Christians. 
He  has  not  given  it  to  the  world,  and  it  is  directly  opposite  to  the  spirit.  If  the 
latter  is  selfish,  then  the  former  must  be  benevolent.  And  according  to  the 
Scriptures,  the  spirit  which  God  gives  is  the  spirit  of  benevolence,  which  is  the 
moral  image  of  the  Deity.  "Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God."  And  the  reason  is,  "  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh  ; 
and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spiiit  is  spirit."  And  that  spirit  which  is  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love.  "  Love  is  of  God,  and  every  one  that  loveth 
is  born  of  God."  II.  This  peculiar  spirit  gives  Christians  a  peculiar  know- 
ledge OF  spiritual  and  Divine  things.  "  That  we  might  know  the  things  that  are 
freely  given  to  us  of  God."  1.  The  spirit  of  love  which  Christians  receive  from  God 
removes  that  ignorance  of  spiritual  and  Divine  things  which  is  peculiar  to  sinners. 
As  the  removal  of  scales  from  %  blind  man's  eyes  will  remove  all  the  blindness,  so 
love  must  certainly  remove  all  that  blindness  or  ignorance  which  arises  from 
selfishness  (vers.  14,  15  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4,  6,  iii.  14-18).  2.  The  way  in  which  God 
enlightens  the  minds  of  men  in  the  peculiar  knowledge  of  Himself  is  by  changing 
their  hearts,  or  giving  them  a  pure,  benevolent  spirit.  "  I  will  give  them  an  heart 
to  know  Me."  As  their  ignorance  of  God  arose  from  the  blindness  of  their  hearts, 
so  in  order  to  remove  that  kind  of  ignorance.  He  determined  to  give  them  a  wise 
and  understanding  heart,  or  a  spirit  of  true  benevolence.  3.  There  is  no  other 
possible  way  by  which  God  can  give  Christians  the  knowledge  of  Himself  and 
Divine  objects,  but  by  giving  to  thtm  His  own  Spirit,  or  shedding  abroad  His  love 
in  their  hearts.  He  cannot  convey  this  peculiar  spiritual  knowledge  by  mere 
inspiration.  He  inspiied  Saul,  Balaam,  Caiaphas,  but  this  did  not  remove  the 
blindness  of  their  hearts.  And  Paul  supposes  a  man  may  have  the  gift  of  prophecy, 
&c.,  and  yet  be  totally  destitute  of  the  true  love  and  knowledge  of  God.  iDsjjiration  has 
no  tendency  to  change  the  heart,  but  only  to  convey  knowledge  to  the  understand- 
ing. For  the  same  reason,  God  cannot  give  men  this  knowledge  of  Himself  by 
moral  suasion,  or  the  mere  exhibition  of  Divine  truth,  nor  by  mere  convictions  of 
guilt,  fears  of  punishment,  or  hopes  of  happiness  ;  the  only  way  in  whicli  He 
can  give  it  is  by  giving  them  a  benevolent  heart.  For — (1)  By  exercising  benevo- 
lence themselves,  they  know  how  all  benevolent  beings  feel — God,  Christ,  the  Holy 
Spirit,  angels,  &c.  So  the  apostle  argues  in  the  text  and  context.  As  one  man 
knows  what  his  rational  faculties  are,  or  what  his  own  selfish  feelings  are,  so  he 
knows  what  another  man's  are.  Just  so,  says  the  apostle,  we  who  have  received 
the  Spirit  which  is  God,  know  the  things  of  God.  (2)  The  peculiar  spirit  which 
they  have.  (3)  This  spirit  necessarily  gives  Christians  a  peculiar  knowledge  of  the 
distinguishing  truths  of  the  gospel.  The  whole  scheme  of  the  gospel  was  devised 
and  adopted  in,  is  carried  on,  and  will  be  completed  by  benevolence.  Benevolence, 
therefore,  prepares  Christians  to  understand  it  (Eph.  iii.  17-1'J).  Conclusion:  If  the 
peculiar  knowledge  which  Christians  have  of  God  and  of  Divine  things  arises  from 
benevolence,  then — 1.  There  is  nothing  mysterious  in  experimental  religion. 
Christians  have  experienced  no  other  change,  but  from  sin  to  holincf-s,  or  from 
selfishness  to  benevolence.  There  is  nothing  more  mysterious  in  loving  God  than 
in  hating  Him.  The  men  of  the  world  love  to  hear  experimental  religion  repre- 
sented as  mysterious,  because  they  are  ready  to  conclude  that  they  are  excusable 
for  not  understanding  it.  All  experimental  religion  consists  in  disinterested 
benevolence.  And  is  this  a  mystery  which  sinners  cannot  understand  ?  By  no 
means  ;  they  can  fully  understand  and  oppose  it.     2,  There  is  no  superstition  or 


CHAP.  II.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  177 

enthusiasm  in  vital  i^iety,  or  experimental  religion,  for  benevolence  leads  those  who 
possess  it  to  hate  and  oppose  all  superstition  and  enthusiasm.  3.  They  who  are 
real  Christians  may  know  that  they  are  such.  The  Spirit  which  they  have  received 
from  God,  bears  witness  with  their  spirit  that  they  are  the  children  of  God.  "  We 
know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  4. 
They  niay  always  be  able  to  give  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them,  though 
unable  to  exhibit  all  the  external  evidences  of  the  Divinity  of  the  gospel.  They 
know  the  gospel  is  Divine,  by  the  Divine  effects  it  has  produced  in  their  hearts. 
5.  Sinners  may  know  that  they  are  sinners,  by  the  spirit  of  the  world, 
which  reigns  within  them,  and  governs  all  their  conduct.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
Apostolic  int:2)iration : — I.  Not  the  inspiration  of  this  worlp.  1.  Learning.  2. 
Keason.  3.  Genius.  II.  Bdt  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  1.  Divinely 
communicated.  2.  Divinely  acting  upon  their  minds.  3.  And  thus  enabling  them 
to  know  the  things  freely  given  them  of  God.  {J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  PaitVg  2"''^f<'^i 
aftaiiist  7cr.rldli)ie.<:s  : — I.  The  cdrse  of  the  Church.  The  spirit  of  the  world. 
This  worldly  spirit  had  wrouL'ht  terrible  mischief  at  Corinth.  It  is— 1.  The  evil 
element  that  surrounds  the  Ciinrch.  2.  The  insinuating  guile  that  ensnares  it.  3, 
The  espionage  that  betrays  it;  like  Delilah,  it  ensnares  with  flattery  and  song:, 
deprives  C'f  the  secret  all  strength,  and  delights  in  the  discovered  weakness.  II, 
The  cuuh  of  the  Cnnucii.  The  Sjiirit  which  is  of  God.  1.  It  is  found  in  a  Divine 
gift.  Tte  Holy  Spirit  that  enlightens,  regenerates,  sanctifies,  comforts,  and 
strengthens,  is  received  as  a  supernatural  deposit  by  every  one  who  reiients  of  sin, 
believes  in  Christ,  and  practises  holiness.  2.  This  is  the  royal  amulet  of  the 
Church.  It  protects  the  Church  with  the  "  love  of  the  Spiiit."  It  conducts  the 
Church  by  "  the  Spirit  of  truth."  It  commends  the  Church  by  the  Spirit  of  purity. 
3.  It  is  the  intinite  resource  of  the  Church ;  obtained  by  the  intercession  of  Christ 
it  is  to  "  abide  with  us  for  ever."  III.  The  crown  of  the  Church.  The  highest  point 
of  Church  life — "  that  we  might  know  the  things,"  &c.  {J.  Odell.)  The  evident 
viinister: — I.  Whence  he  i>erives  his  knowledge.  1.  Not  from  worldly  sources. 
2.  But  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  Through  the  medium  of  the  Word  of  God.  II. 
How  he  imparts  it.  1.  Not  according  to  human  wisdom.  2.  But  in  dependence 
upon  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  Comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual.  (J.  Lyth, 
D.D.)  Spirilunl  knowle(hie  dtlained: — I.  The  things  to  which  it  refers.  These 
are  expressed  under  a  variety  of  names  (vers.  9, 10,  11,  li).  They  are — 1.  Spiritual 
in  their  nature  (vex*.  13).  They  relate  to  God.  who  is  a  Spirit;  to  the  soul  and  its 
spiritual  concerns  ;  to  heaven,  its  society,  employments,  and  pleasures,  which  are 
purely  spiritual.  2.  Divine  in  their  origin  :  "  given  to  us  of  God."  All  the  great 
and  good  things  of  the  gospel  are  in  Him  and  come  from  Him.  3.  Free  in  their 
communication  ;  clearly  made  known,  but  "  freely  given  to  us."  They  flow  to  men, 
irrespective  of  human  worthiness ;  communicated  "  without  money  and  without 
price."  II.  The  knowledge  op  these  things  is — 1.  Personal.  In  order  to  its 
answering  any  useful  end  we  must  have  it  for  ourselves.  2.  Scriptural.  Our 
acquaintance  with  "  the  things  freely  given  to  us  of  God  "  must  be  according  to 
the  truer  nature  of  these  things ;  it  must  agree  with  the  gospel.  3.  Accompanied 
with  faith.  Let  his  views  be  ever  so  Scriptural  and  correct,  they  are  of  no  saving 
worth  unless  he  give  credit  to  them  with  his  whole  soul.  4.  Productive  of  fruit.  Faith 
is  known  by  its  fruit,  and  the  value  of  knowledge  is  determined  by  its  influeuce  and 
effects.  III.  The  way  in  which  this  knowledge  is  attained.  "  We  have  received  not 
the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God."  1.  What  this  spirit  was  not. 
The  spirit  of  the  wise  of  the  world  was  not  friendly  to  the  gospel.  It  was  a  spirit  of 
pride,  of  self-sufficiency,  of  prejudice,  and  conceit.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is—  (1) 
"  The  spirit  of  error."  It  cannot  therefore  be  friendlv  to  our  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  (2)  "  The  spirit  that  lusteth  to  envy."  (3)  "  The  spirit  that  now  worketh 
in  the  children  of  disobedience. "  If  we  are  true  Christians  we  have  not  received  but 
have  renounced  this  spiiit.  It  is  "  from  beneath."  2.  Who  this  Spirit  was—"  the 
Spirit  which  is  of  God."  This  is  a  good  Spirit,  the  reverse  of  that  which  we  have 
noticed  and  producing  opposite  effects.  Observe — (1)  His  names:  The  Holy 
Spirit  and  Spirit  of  holiness  ;  the  Spirit  of  wisdom,  of  grace,  of  truth,  of  Christ. 
(2)  His  offices — to  teach,  guide,  enlighten,  enliven,  comfort,  purify.  The  text  sug- 
gests His  office  as  a  Teacher;  for  He  is  received  "  that  we  might  know  the  things 
which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God."  The  Father  teaches  by  the  Spirit;  and  His 
teaching  invariably  leads  to  faith  and  hope  and  rest  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  {.John 
xvi.  13,  14).  Conclusion:  What  is  the  knowledge  which  you  are  seeking?  Is  it, 
or  is  it  not,  the  knowledge  of  "  the  things  which  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God  "  ? 
VOL.    T.  12 


173  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  ii, 

Acquaintance  with  other  things  is  lawful  and  proper,  but  what  can  compensate  for 
ignorMnce  of  the  things  whicli  btlong  to  our  (leace?  The  season  of  youth  is  most 
fiieodly  to  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  ;  and  this  applies  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
gospel ;  but  how  rarelj-  are  young  persons  in  earnest  in  this  concern  !  2.  What  is 
the  proficiency  which  you  are  making?  This  question  particularly  concerns  aged 
professors.  You  have  long  been  planted  in  the  iiouse  of  the  Lord,  but  what  is  your 
growth?  Does  your  progress  keej)  pace  with  your  years?  3.  What  is  the  si^iril; 
which  you  have,  and  under  which  you  live  ?  Is  it  "  the  sjoirit  of  the  world  "  or 
"the  Spirit  which  is  of  God"?  (T.Kidd.)  IHvine  knoirledge  : — I.  Irs  sot'itCE, 
1.  The  Word  of  God — 2.  Wliieh  contains  a  revelation  of  Divine  truth.  3.  Freely 
given.  4.  Of  God.  II  Its  bieans.  1.  The  Scriptures  are  to  be  understood  not  by 
the  help  of  mere  learning  or  criticism — 2.  But  by  the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
— 3.  Which  we  receive  by  faith  and  pra>er.  {J.  Lytlt,  D.D.)  Divine  beitcjac- 
tioiis  : — I.  The  gifts.  "  Things."  1.  Ileal,  not  ideal ;  not  to  be  imagined,  admired, 
but  "known."  The  gospel  scheme  is  of  surpassing  beauty,  but  its  aim  is  not  to 
enchant  the  fiincy,  but  to  enrich  the  experience.  2.  Many  and  various  "  things  " 
not  single  or  stereotyped.  Our  Father  has  more  than  our  blessing  tor  His  children, 
and  those  blessings  differ  according  to  the  object  to  which,  or  tne  circumstances 
1  nder  which,  they  are  given.  3.  Practical,  not  speculative.  Tiue,  there  are  '•  things 
which  angels  desire  to  look  into  "  in  the  gospel ;  but  in  the  rrain  it  is  not  a  thing 
to  be  reasoned  about  b;  t  to  be  enjoj^ed  in  the  heart  and  exhibited  to  the  life.  4. 
Divine  not  human.  Man  never  saw,  heard,  or  imagined  them,  much  less  invented 
or  created  them.  II.  The  Giver — "  God."  1.  Inhnite  in  resources,  and  therefore 
"  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly."  "  Enou;.'h  for  all,  enough  for  each,"  cSrc.  2. 
Loving  in  disposition,  and  tlierefore  willing  and  ready  to  supply  all  our  need,  3. 
Wise  in  administration,  and  therefore  suiting  the  gift  exactly  according  to  the 
requirements  of  the  recipients,  and  so  augmenting  their  values.  IIL  The  manner. 
"  Freely."  1.  Without  restriction.  The  gifts  are  needed  by  all,  and  are  therefore 
given  without  resi^ect  to  nation,  cla^s,  rank,  &c.  2.  Without  cost.  Ihe  water  of 
life  is  ofi'ered  freely  because  none  could  purchase  it.  2.  Witliout  regard  to  merit, 
because  above  all  merit.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Spirititol  thinijs  : — I.  Their  reality. 
It  is  remarkable  how  often  the  word  "  things  "  occurs  in  this  chapter.  This  gives 
reality  and  something  like  sdape  and  tonchableness  to  the  spiritual  world.  Thing 
is  a  wide  word;  it  is  the  short  wsiy  of  saying  thinking;  thinkings  are  the  true 
things  ;  things  visible  are  valuable  only  as  they  express  thought.  Thus  the  universe 
is  the  thinking  (or  thing)  of  God  ;  every  star  is  an  expression  of  His  mind.  We  must 
indeed  stand  back,  nor  come  too  near.  When  I  was  a  child  I  thought  as  a  child, 
foolishly  supposing  that  he  who  gave  me  a  penny  gave  me  something  real,  and  that 
he  who  gave  me  a  thought  had  simply  given  me  nothing.  But  now  I  am  a  man  I  see 
that  to  think  is  to  have.  Had  I  known  it  properly  the  penny  actually  was  a  thought, 
a  thought  of  love  or  care.  The  picture  was  a  thought  before  it  was  a  mystery  of 
colour.  The  cathedral  was  a  thouglit  before  it  rose  to  heaven  in  tower  or  pinnacle 
or  swelling  dome.  The  book  was  a  thought  before  it  was  embodied  in  paper  or  ink 
and  binding.  Go  back  from  shapes  and  colours  and  find  your  way  into  things, 
thinkings — in  the  beginning  was  the  Word  !  When  you  are  told  that  this  is  practi- 
cal and  that  is  metaphysical  or  even  S'  ntimental,  what  is  meant  by  the  definition  ? 
It  is  equal  to  saying,  this  is  the  outside  and  that  is  the  inside — no  more  1  It  is 
unhapi)ily  quite  possible  for  a  man  to  be  satisfied  with  the  outside,  and,  indeed,  to 
contend  there  is  nothing  but  outside.  He  forgets  that  the  tabernacle  was  built  for 
the  ark  ;  that  the  outward  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  inward.  Suppose  a  child  so 
demented  as  to  be  satisfied  with  the  outside  of  his  father's  house,  to  say,  "  When  I  have 
discussed  every  mystery  connected  with  the  stone,  the  wood,  the  glass  which  I  do  see, 
it  will  be  time  enough  to  open  the  door  and  pry  into  the  unknown  and  the  unthink- 
able. They  tell  me  that  is  my  father's  face  at  the  window,  but  let  me  settle  the 
mystery  of  the  window  before  troubling  myself  with  the  mystery  of  the  face.  They 
say  he  wants  me  ;  when  I  have  settled  the  geology  of  the  doorstep,  I  may  pay  some 
attention  to  the  fnnatics  who  suppose  that  my  father  is  so  idling  away  his  time." 
We  should  see  the  lunacy  and  impiety  of  this,  and  it  is  possible  to  repeat  this 
substantially  in  the  concerns  which  lie  between  God  and  the  soul  of  man.  II. 
Their  freeness.  They  are  given  lavishly,  abimdantly,  and  without  price  or  tax, 
so  that  the  poorest  may  have  equal  chancts  with  the  rich.  Every  man  may  Hnd  a 
hundred  ways  leading  straight  into  the  King's  presence  ;  the  grassy  way,  open  to 
humblest  men;  the  starry  way,  trodden  by  loftier  minds;  the  providential  way, 
studied  by  the  patient  in  their  retirement  and  suffering,  so  that  neither  the  blind 


CHAP.  II.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  179 

nor  the  weak  shall  be  lost  for  want  of  an  open  road  to  heaven.  This  is  Godlike. 
"  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  etc.  "  Not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you." 
God  giveth  t  J  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not.  But  here  is  a  peculiar  temptation. 
The  very  largeness  of  the  inheritance  is  a  temptation  to  negleut  or  extravagance. 
Let  us  watch  ourselves,  or  we  may  turn  the  bounty  of  God  into  an  occasion  of  sin. 
in.  Their  revelation  (ver.  10).  Even  the  things  that  are  seen  require  to  be  made 
clear  by  revelation.  How  much  more  the  testimony  which  is  addressed  to  an 
understanding  perverted  and  a  heart  poisoned  by  sin?  The  Bible  is  revelation, 
but  the  revelatiou  itself  needs  to  be  revealed.  "  Open  Thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may 
behold  wondrous  things  out  of  Thy  law."  "  Then  opened  He  their  understandings 
that  they  might  understand  th3  scriptures."  The  inspiring  Spirit  must  make  plain 
the  book  He  hath  inspired  or  it  will  be  a  letter  hard,  cold,  friendless :  but  with  the 
Spirit  it  will  show  you  its  beauty,  its  unsearchable  riches.  Is  it  enough  to  snatch 
it  up  and  hastily  peruse  the  dead  print?  Not  so  did  the  saints  of  old  study  the 
lively  oracles.     "  O  how  I  love  Thy  law,  it  is  my  meditation  all  the  day."    IV.  The 

riSADVANTAGE  OF  HAVING  TO  PUT  THEM  INTO  HUMAN  WORDS  (ver.  18).     To  shoW  OUr  OWH 

rloveruess  in  the  use  of  words  has  been  at  once  the  temptation  and  the  curse  of 
Cliristeudi'm.  Fewer  words,  plainer  words,  the  better  ;  more  thought,  more  feeling, 
more  devotion,  that  is  what  we  want  (ver.  1).  All  the  Christian  preacliers  wh  ise 
fame  is  immortal  in  England  at  least  have  been,  from  a  scholastic  point  of  view, 
more  or  less  rude  in  expression,  so  that  in  their  case  it  was  ?iot  by  might  nor  by 
power,  but  by  God's  Spirit,  that  the  great  victories  for  Christ  were  won.  Worldly 
wisdom  is  tlie  curse  of  preaching.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Capacitij  of  regenerate 
me)i  to  vnderntand  the  Scriptures  : — In  regeneration  men  become  able  to 
understand  and  appreciate  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Of  course  this  proposition 
implies  that  unrenewed  men  are  incapable  of  a  true  knowledge  of  Divine 
truth.  The  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  beyond  the  reach  of  the  natural  man  ; 
he  cannot  know  them  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned.  The  history  of  the 
world,  using  both  terms  history  and  world  in  their  broadest  sense,  has  two  aspects. 
We  will  endeavour  to  discern  between  them,  and  to  point  out  their  true,  mutual 
relations.  That  view  of  the  world  which  is  almost  universally  taken  may  be  desig- 
nated as  the  natural  one,  in  opposition  to  the  spiritual  one.  The  world  is  contem- 
plated as  a  vast  system  of  causes  and  effects  curiously  linked  in  together,  and 
susceptible  of  analysis  into  distinct  series  and  orders,  emanating  perluips  in  the 
first  place  from  an  intelligent,  holy,  and  benevolent  first  cause,  and  pomting  to 
some  indefinable  harmony  and  concentration  far  off  in  the  future.  It  is  the  work 
of  science  to  perform  tiiis  analysis.  The  plain  matter-of-fact  man  sows  and  reaps, 
buys  and  sells,  manufactures  and  operates,  produces  and  consumes,  untroubleil  by 
matters  in  which  he  has  no  direct  concern.  The  shaking  of  kingdoms  affects  him 
only  as  it  affects  his  markets.  Or  if  he  is  aroused  to  a  momentary  excitement,  he 
never  forgets  the  main  chance.  If  his  plans  succeed  he  magnilies  his  own 
wisdom  and  skill,  and  rejoices  that  the  sun  shone,  and  the  rain  fell,  and  the  winds 
blew  all  in  their  season.  Or  if  his  plans  fail,  he  regrets  his  undertaking  and  laments 
over  the  occurrence  of  unfavourable  events.  Everything  is  material  and  according 
to  sense.  The  more  reflecting  and  philosophic  men  of  the  w-orld  entertain  essentially 
the  same  views,  only  refined,  and  generalised,  and  lifted  above  the  grossuess  of 
mere  appetite  and  calculation.  In  their  silent  retreats  or  their  dignitied  assemblies 
they  theorise,  and  speculate,  and  affect  to  decide  upon  the  past  and  prophesy  con- 
cerning the  future,  while  the  multitude,  with  little  reflection,  does  the  acting  that 
is  the  counterpart  and  occasion  of  their  thinking.  They  discover  and  announce 
the  laws  of  moral,  and  intellectual,  and  natural  science  as  they  are  gathered  from 
history,  and  observation,  and  consciousness.  But  after  all,  something  is  wanting 
of  which  science  gives  no  account.  What  she  has  told  us  is  of  the  enith  and  has 
an  earthly  savour.  It  may  be  true,  but  it  is  not  all  the  truth.  No  scientific  man 
however  skilful,  no  philosopher  however  profound,  ever  get  beyond  the  world  and 
above  it.  Their  views  are  sensuous ;  such  as  they  might  entertain  were  there 
no  Bible ;  such  as  they  do  entertain  with  the  Bible  but  without  the  e<  lightening 
Spirit  of  God.  Now  there  is  another  view  of  the  world  which  we  may  call  spiritual 
in  distinction  from  natural.  It  includes  the  natural,  the  whole  of  it.  It  discards 
no  genuine  science.  It  rejects  no  philosophy  that  is  not  falsely  so  called.  It  inter- 
feres with  no  personal,  domestic,  or  social  duties.  It  is  ready  to  investigate  ail  the 
processes  of  matter  and  of  mind.  It  will  dig  with  the  geoh>gist  into  the  bowels  of 
the  earth,  and  with  the  astronomer  scan,  through  the  telescope,  the  nebulae  that 
whitens  the  heavens.     It  will  discuss  the  law  of  nations  with  the  statesman,  and 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap,  il 

urge  the  inclividnal  and  the  community  to  personal  and  social  reform  as  boldly  and 
zealously  as  any  reformer  of  them  all.  It  is  a  view  of  the  world  as  a  whole  and  in 
all  its  iiarts  ;  omitting  nothing,  and  unjustly  condemning  nothing.  But  it  is  not  a 
view  of  tlie  world  alone  ;  as  if  the  object  of  its  creation,  and  the  assurance  of  its 
continuance  were  in  itself.  It  sees  something  before  the  world,  out  of  which  it 
came  ;  and  something  after  it  to  which  it  tends.  It  sees  a  harmony  between  this 
beginning  and  end,  that  is  unbroken  by  the  intermediate  time.  Nay,  it  sees  in  time 
but  the  confluence  of  the  eternities,  and  in  matter  and  sense  the  vesture  and  ener- 
getic workiiig  of  the  Infinite  Spirit.  It  sees  the  world  as  it  is.  And,  what  is  the 
world?  Why  was  it  made  ?  Why  is  it  continued  ?  What  is  the  motive  power  of 
all  this  vast  and  varied  machinery  ?  Whence  these  compensating  forces  that  keep 
the  solid  globe  and  its  sister  planets  balanced  and  moving  in  their  orbits  ?  What 
keeps  the  river  channels  full,  and  agitates  the  restless  sea,  and  stirs  the  viewless 
winds,  and  brings  out  from  the  unpromising  soil  the  tinted  flower,  and  the  leafy 
oak,  and  the  nutritious  grain  ?  What  is  the  meaning  of  history  ?  What  intend  all 
these  records  that  are  carved  on  the  mural  faces  of  mountains,  or  deposited  in  the 
strata  that  compose  the  earth's  crust,  and  scattered  everywhere  both  on  and 
beneath  the  earth's  surface?  What  may  we  learn  from  the  annals  of  our  race 
imperfectly  kept  though  they  have  been?  What  will  become  of  Europe?  What 
will  become  of  the  Jew,  and  what  of  the  Gentile  ?  How  will  the  connection  between 
them  result?  Such  questions  as  these  suggest  themselves  in  numbers  without 
numljer.  We  want  an  answer  disclosing  the  siDiritual  and  true  idea  of  the  world 
and  of  human  affairs.  And  thtre  is  an  answer  to  them.  The  mystery  of  life  has 
its  solution.  The  confused  and  jarring  course  of  events  has  its  order,  and  has  had 
from  the  beginning.  There  is  one  grand  idea,  one  primal  truth,  tliat  pervades  the 
entire  system  of  the  universe.  Every  thing,  every  event,  every  mode  of  existence, 
refer  directly  or  indirectly  to  it.  This  truth  is  the  truth  of  Christ.  Of  Him  and 
for  Him  are  all  things  ;  by  Him  they  were  created,  by  Him  they  stand,  and  to  the 
manifestation  of  His  glory  they  tend.  No  man  is  a  scholar  who  does  not  study 
Christ  as  the  essence  of  all  linowledpe,  and  the  embodiment  of  all  truth.  All  history 
is  the  revelation  of  Christ ;  and  all  histories  which  do  not  present  this  fact  are 
partial  and  inconsequent.  The  age  to  come  is  the  Christinn  age ;  and  whoever  puts 
a  sensuous  and  worldly  interpretation  on  prophecy,  or  ventures  with  uninspired  lips 
to  predict  a  state  of  society  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  era,  in  which  Christ  shall 
not  be  all  in  all,  will  find  hfs  prediction  falsified  and  his  interpretation  scattered 
like  chaff  before  the  wind.  It  is  in  Chris-t,  then,  that  we  find  all  the  strange  and 
complicate  phenomena  of  the  world  resolved.  There  is  no  other  light  than  that. 
The  light  of  nature,  the  light  of  science,  the  light  of  reason,  the  dim  light  of 
antiquity  and  the  glare  of  modern  times  are  illusory  and  vain,  mere  igiies  fatiii, 
will-o'-the-wisps  tlnit  lead  those  who  follow  them  ever  deeper  and  deeper  into  the 
mire.  This  Divine  light  shines  only  from  the  Word  of  God.  What  is  the  Bible  to 
an  unbeliever?  Perhaps  a  moral  treatise  ;  perhaps  a  story,  or  a  song,  or  the  rhap- 
sody of  an  enthusiast ;  perhaps  a  treasure-house  locked  up  and  barred,  in  which  he 
knows  there  is  tteasure,  but  to  which  he  has  no  key.  But  it  is  no  word  of  Christ, 
condemning,  convincing,  converting,  sanctifying,  saving.  It  is  not  the  truth,  living 
and  brilliant,  and  able  to  raii^e  the  dead.  In  his  unbelief  he  seeks  no  life  theie,  but 
hunts  for  it  in  the  weak  and  beggai'ly  eleuicnts  of  this  world.  What  is  the  Bible  to 
the  believer?  It  is  his  all.  It  is  light  in  darkness,  joy  in  sorrow,  life  in  death.  It 
is  the  communication,  the  embodying  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  proceeding  forth  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  It  is  the  touchstone  of  all  wisdom.  Tell  me,  does  not  regene- 
rntion  teach  men  that  Word  which  is  the  jjower  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God 
unto  salvation  ?  And  can  any  one  who  has  not  tasted  of  this  good  Word,  and  been 
enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  attain  this  knowledge?  Does  any  such  one  believe 
in  Christ  ?  Does  not  every  unregencrate  man  believe  in  the  world,  and  in  himself, 
and  in  his  pergonal  experience,  and  in  his  reason,  and  in  his  arithmetic,  and  his 
science,  and  his  philosophy,  and  refuse  to  believe  in  Christ  and  the  Scriptures 
which  testify  of  Christ?  And  in  conclusion,  let  me  ask  you,  do  you  sufficiently 
appreciate  your  privilege  of  knowing  the  Word  of  God  ?  Do  you  subordinate  all 
other  knowledge  to  this,  and  regulate  all  other  knowledge  by  this  ?  The  Bible  must 
be  everything  or  nothing.  It  is  the  chart  of  redemption,  and  evei'ything  in  creation 
and  providence  is  subser\ie>  t  to  redemption.  It  is  the  inspired  record  of  Christ ;  of 
what  He  was,  and  is,  and  will  be.  Let  it  dwell  in  your  hearts.  Let  it  control  your 
lives.  Let  it  animate  your  affections.  Let  it  stimulate  your  devotion.  {J.  King  Lord.) 
The  things  frcelij   given   ua  by    Gvd  : — I.  The   doctiunb   contained  in  the   ■words. 


CHAP.  II.]  I.    COniNTIIIAXS.  181 

"freely  iven  to  iis,"  and  "we  have  received."  Whatsoever  we  have  is  of  God's 
free  gift ;  and  as  in  the  department  of  nature  it  is  the  Lord  that  givetii  life,  and  all 
things,  so  in  the  department  of  grace  it  is  the  Lord  tbat  blesseth  us  with  every 
spiritual  blessing.  1.  Let  us  observe  the  simple  word  "  given,"  a  word  so  simple  that 
one  would  think  it  impossible  to  be  mistaken.  (1)  Let  it  stand  by  the  side  of  the 
word  "oiler."  For  there  are  some  that  say  God  merely  offers  grace  and  salvation  in 
the  gospel.  But  God  says  that  He  gives  grace  and  salvation.  The  offer  only  comes 
half  way,  and  there  stops,  but  the  gift  comes  home.  So  it  is  in  the  things  of  God. 
When  God  intends  grace  for  any  poor  soul.  He  does  not  stop  half  way  and  wait  for 
our  closing  with  His  offer,  but  He  comes  home  to  our  very  soul,  and  makes  a  suro 
lodgment  of  the  blessing.  (2)  Further,  if  to  give  means  to  offer,  it  certainly  me;ins 
much  more  than  to  sell  ;  for  there  be  some  who  tell  us  that  God  gives  upon  con- 
ditions, or,  in  other  words,  sells  grace;  into  which  error  they  have  been  drawn  by 
their  innbility  to  perceive  that  the  "ifs"  of  the  New  Testament  are  not  conditional, 
but  evidential.  I  know  of  no  other  condition  on  wl)i(;h  sinners  ai^e  saved  but  the 
death  of  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Lest  we  should  make  a  mistake  concerning  the  matter 
or  manner  of  God's  giving.  He  hath  added  another  word  here  to  clear  it  up  ;  we 
read  of  the  things  "  freely  "  given  to  us  of  God.  We  know  the  miserly  disposition 
of  some  men,  who  in  order  to  preserve  a  decent  appearance  in  the  world  lay  out 
some  of  their  money  in  charity,  yet  have  so  niggardly  a  way  of  doing  it,  and  such 
an  ungracious  manner  in  bestowing  it,  that  an  honest  man  would  rather  go  with- 
out than  accept  anything  at  their  hands.  Now,  God  would  have  us  know  that  He 
is  not  one  of  these  niggardly  people,  and  therefore  tells  us  that  what  He  gives,  He 
also  freely  gives.  But  in  order  to  constitute  it  a  free  gift  two  things  are  necessary ; 
it  must  be  dune  without  compulsion,  and  without  condition  ;  either  of  these  destroy 
the  freeness  here  spoken  of.  3.  Agnin,  let  us  I'emark  how  God's  free  giving  is 
further  illustrated  by  another  word  which  stands  contrasted  with  it  in  the 
sentence :  "  We  have  received.''  Now  this  expression  takes  away  all  idea  of  any 
merit,  power,  or  wisdom  in  the  favoured  objects  of  God's  bounty,  as  cnmpletely  as 
does  the  former  ;  and  when  both  are  viewed  together,  they  give  a  twofold  testimony 
to  the  truth  of  the  grace  of  God.  II.  The  things  themselves  which  are  fueelt 
GivEx  TO  us  OF  GoD.  What  is  there  which  God  hath  not  given  us?  for  the  apostle 
in  the  next  chapter  tells  the  believers  in  Jfsus,  "All  things  are  yours,"  c^c.  But 
sweet  as  this  description  is,  what  would  all  this  be,  what  wonkl  heaven  be  to  him 
that  loves  God  in  His  beloved  Son,  if  the  object  of  that  love  formed  no  part  of  the 
heavenly  enjoyment  ?  Therefore  also  God  hath  abundantly  i-evealed  it  to  us,  that 
of  these  "  all  things  "  we  speak  of.  He  hath  given  Himself  both  as  the  cause  and 
the  substance;  so  that  we  may  know  that  as  all  blessings  come  fmm  God,  so  all 
blessedness  is  centred  in  God.  Now  to  show  this  from  Scripture  that  God  give« 
Himself  to  us,  we  may  observe  that  single  sentence  more  than  ten  limes  repeated 
in  the  Bible,  "  I  will  be  their  God  !  "  There  is  a  twofold  meaning  in  these  words. 
First,  I  will  give  Myself  over  to  them  in  covenant  characters.  All  this  is  expressed 
in  those  words  of  Hosea  (chap.  ii.  19,  20).  Having  thus  made  Hi'iiself  over  to  us. 
He  becomes  bound  to  us  to  deal  with  us  in  lovingkindness  and  tender  mercies. 
But  there  is  another  meaning  of  it  which  comes  nearer  to  the  point.  God  gives  us 
Himself  most  truly  when  He  gives  us  His  Christ,  for  He  is  over  all  God  blessed  for 
ever.  Amen.  God  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  God,  shall  be  the  Sun  of  heaven ;  a  Sun 
that  shall  no  more  go  down.  If  God  thus  makes  over  Himself  for  our  eternal  con- 
solation and  blessedness,  how  can  we  doubt  whether  or  no  He  hath  also  given  all 
things  together  with  Him.  Having  given  the  greater,  how  could  He  withhold  the 
less?  (Rom.  viii.  39).  So,  then,  we  need  argue  that  matter  no  further;  but  of  the 
"  all  things  "  here  spoken  of  I  would  merely  select  one  as  being  most  important  to  be 
known,  which  is  our  complete  justification,  called  by  the  apostle  the  gift  of  right- 
eousness (Heb.  ix.  26).  Now  a  word  or  two  more  shall  be  added  to  show  that  wo 
are  really  righteous  before  God  by  the  presence  of  righteousness.  And,  first,  it  will 
appear  from  many  parts  of  Scripture,  that  where  there  is  an  absence  of  sin,  there 
is  and  must  be  the  presence  of  righteousness  ;  in  short,  that  one  cannot  be  without 
the  other.  This  is  shown  plainly  by  Dan.  ix.  24,  where  he  enumerates  the  bless- 
ings to  be  brought  upon  the  Church  by  the  advent  of  Messiah,  at  the  expiration  of 
the  seventy  weeks  ;  for  He  was  not  only  to  "  finish  transgresion,"  and  make  "  an 
end  of  sin,"  but  to  bring  in  "everlasting  righteousness."  Here  both  the  one  and 
the  other  are  attributed  to  the  same  event ;  and  then-fore  he  that  believeth  in  that 
Messiah  hath  not  only  his  sins  put  ott",  but  an  everlasting  ri'jhieousness  put  on. 
Again,  David  saith  (Psa.  xxxii.  1).  But  what  is  the  Holy  Ghost's  comnaent  on  those 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  ii, 

words  by  the  pen  of  Paul  ?  David,  says  he,  "  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the 
man  unto  whom  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  works  "  (Rom.  iv.  6) :  so,  then, 
what  can  be  clearer  than  this,  that  where  sin  is  not  imputed  righteousness  is 
imputed,  and  this  makes  the  believer  doubly  blessed.  Again,  this  truth  may  be 
made  to  appear  yet  more  clearly  by  comparison.  There  are  some  things  in  nature 
so  completelv  contrary  that  the  one  cannot  exist  where  the  other  is,  and  the  absence 
of  the  one  plainly  indicates  the  presence  of  the  other.  The  absence  of  sickness  is 
health  ;  the  absence  of  darkness  is  light ;  the  absence  of  filth  is  cleanliness.  So  in 
like  manner  the  absence  of  sin  is  righteousness.  Now  observe  how  it  is,  that  of 
sick,  filthy,  and  dark  sinners,  we  become  healthy,  and  clean,  and  saints  of  light.  1. 
"By  His  stripes  we  are  healed"  (Isa.  hii.  5).  Here  is  our  sickness  gone,  and 
health  established.  2.  "The  blood  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i. 
7).  Here  is  filthiness  abolished,  and  cleanliness  in  its  place.  3.  "  Ye  were  once 
darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord"  (Eph.  v.  8).  Here  "  the  darkness  is 
past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth."    III.  "  We  know  the  things  that  are  freely 

GIVEN  TO  us  OF  GoD,"  AND  THAT,  NOT  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE  WORLD,  BUT  BY  THE  SpIEIT 

OF  God.  Could  we  tell  the  world  no  more  than  what  we  have  already  considered 
we  should  have  told  them  great  things  ;  for  the  love  of  tlie  Father,  and  the  Son, 
eternal  and  unfathomable,  are  therein  revealed ;  but  we  have  some  of  the  Spirit's 
love  yet  to  declare,  who  giveth  us  the  most  comfortable  knowledge  of  these  things. 
We  grant,  indeed,  tbat  with  our  bodily  eyes  we  have  never  seen  Christ  Jesus  the 
Lord ;  but  the  Lord  giveth  to  His  children  an  eye  even  to  see  clearly  things  in  them- 
selves invisible.  But  if  it  be  asked.  How  do  we  arrive  at  this  most  excellent  and 
comfortHble  knowledge?  The  words  of  the  text  plainly  answers,  "We  have 
received  not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  we  might  know  the 
things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of  God."  By  the  spirit  of  the  world  is  here  pecu- 
liarly meant  worldly  wisdom,  which  in  the  preceding  chapter  he  has  shown  to  be 
utterly  unprofitable  in  order  to  teach  us  the  deep  things  of  God.  But  that  which 
maketh  us  wise  unto  salvation,  and  teacheth  us  that  we  are  sinners  saved  by 
Christ's  blood,  is  the  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above,  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  No  man  is  possessed  of  this  heavenly  wisdom  except  he  be  a  heavenly  man, 
that  is,  except  he  be'boru  from  above.     {II.  B.  Bultcel,  M.A.) 

Vers.  13-14.  Which  things  also  we  speak,  not  in  the  words  which  man's 
wisdom  teacheth. — Tlie  true  erangcUcal  preacher  speaks  : — L  Under  the  influ- 
ence OF  THE  Holy  Spirit.  1.  He  has  received  the  Spirit.  2.  Is  instructed  by  the 
Spirit.  3.  Speaks  with  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit.  II.  After  careful 
STUDY  OF  God's  Word.     Comparing,  selecting,  with  much  humility  and  prayer. 

III.    He    CANNOT,  THEREFORE,  ACCOMMODATE  HIMSELF   TO    THE  WISDOM  OF  THIS  WORLD — 

I.  Either  by  modifying  his  doctrine  to  please  worldly  men — 2.  Or  adopting  a  worldly- 
method  of  address.  (■/.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Tlie  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit : — To  teach, 
to  enlighten,  and  to  illuminate,  have  equivalent  meanings.  I.  Its  need.  The 
natnral  condition  of  the  mind  is  spiritual  darkness :  hence  illumination  is  necessary 
to  the  apprehension  of  spiritual  things  (Luke  xi.  36 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  9-14 ;  Eph.  i.  18). 

II.  Its  author.  It  is  ascribed  to  each  i^erson  of  the  Trinity.  1.  God  (2  Cor, 
iv.  6).     2.  The  Son  (John  i.  9 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  5).     3.  The  Holy  Spirit  (John  xiv.  26). 

III.  Its  instrument.  The  revealed  Word  of  God  (Psa.  cxix.  105).  IV.  Its 
AGENCY.  The  ministry  of  reconciliation.  Preaching  may  awake  men  to  their  need 
of  spiritual  illumination  (Eph.  iii.  9).  V.  How  obtained.  4.  By  the  careful 
reading  of  the  Word.  2.  By  j^rayer  (Psa.  cxix.  18).  {L.  0.  Tlioiiipson.)  The 
disjjensation  of  spiritual  truth : — I.  How  spiritual  things  are  to  be  dispensed. 
1.  Not  according  to  human  rules.  2.  Bat  under  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit.  3.  In 
conformity  with  the  Word  of  God.  II.  By  whom  they  are  to  be  dispensed.  1. 
Not  by  unconverted  men,  for  they  cannot  understand  them.  2.  But  by  those  who 
are  sjnritual,  who  are  indifferent  to  the  judgment  of  man,  and  have  the  mind  of 
Christ.  (.7.  Lytlt,  D.D.)  Comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual. — Various 
meanings  have  been  attached  to  this  expression.  I.  Adapting  spiritual  words  to 
spiritual  things,  and  not  language  incongruou'!,  as  we  should  be  doing  if  we  spoke 
the  things  of  God  in  words  taught  by  human  wisdom.  But  the  apostle  has  already 
said  this  in  effect,  and  according  to  this  view  there  is  a  play  on  the  word  "  spiri- 
tual "  which  is  not  in  his  manner  ;  for  "  spiritual  words  "  can  only  mean  words 
taught  by  the  Spirit  (Eph.  v.  19),  but  "spiritual  things"  must  mean  things  that 
reveal  God.  II.  Adapting  spiritual  things  to  spiritual  men.  But  this  is  the 
direct  opposite  of  what  Paul  declares,  that   spiritual   men   understand   spiritual 


CHAP.  II.]  J.   COEINTIIIANS.  ISS 

things,  so  that  no  aJaptation  of  them  to  their  capacity  is  needed.  III.  Interpre- 
ting SPIRITUAL  TiiiNfis  TO  SPIKITUAL,  MEN.  But  it  is  ooly  ill  refeieiice  to  dreams  and 
visions  that  the  word  atiyKpnuo  means  "  to  interpret,"  and  that  with  few  exceptiong 
in  the  LXX.  In  no  passage  are  the  things  of  God  represented  as  dreams  to  be 
interpreted,  or  allegories  of  which  the  apostles  have  the  key.  IV.  Intekpretino 
spiRiTDAL  things  BY  spiRiTPAL  WORDS  is  opcn  to  the  Same  objection.  V.  Proving 
THE  TRUTH  OF  SPIRITUAL  THINGS  (whether  Old  Testament  types  or  the  teaching  of  the 
Spirit)  BY  THE  DEMONSTRATION  OP  THE  Spirit.  But  the  word  does  not  elsewhere 
signify  "to  prove."  VI.  Comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual  is  satisfac- 
tory. Christianity  is  a  Divine  wisdom.  But  this  means  from  the  side  of  teacher 
and  of  learner  that  revealed  truths  are  combined  so  as  to  form  a  consistent  and 
well-proportioned  sy>tem  of  truth  in  their  correlation.  The  higher  Christian 
training  resembles  Plato's  criterion  of  dialectical  power,  the  faculty  to  see  the 
relation  of  the  sciences  to  one  another  and  to  true  being.  {Prhicijml  luhcards.) 
'The  Spirit's  wo7-k : — The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  source  and  standard  of  all  spiritual 
things.  Wherever  found,  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  in  time  or  eternity,  the.y  all  come 
first  from  the  Spirit  of  Life.  In  the  New  Testament  sense,  spiritual  things  are 
just  the  things  of  God  ;  does  that  convey  any  thought  to  you?  These  are  altogether 
different  things  from  those  we  have  been  bom  into,  live  in,  and  talce  to  so  naturally. 
This  is  our  misery,  that  we  are  antagonistic  to  the  things  of  the  spiritual  world. 
No  one  had  so  much  of  God's  Spirit  as  our  Lord ;  and  there  is  nothing  so  suited  to 
receive  the  Spirit  as  the  soul  of  man.  No  spirit  was  more  receptive  than  Christ's. 
His  heart  was  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  His  words  and  works  were  less  from 
Him  than  from  the  Spirit.  The  next  best  example  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  workman- 
ship is  the  Biljle.  All  parts  are  not  equally  full  of  Him  ;  Job  is  not  so  full  as  John, 
nor  Ruth  as  Pioinans  ;  but  he  who  is  most  spiritual  will  dwell  most  in  those  parts 
which  reveal  most  of  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Tlie  Old  Testament  is  pene- 
trated with  the  Spirit  even  in  its  most  secular  and  legal  parts ;  and  the  spiritual 
mind  can  find  spiritual  meaning  even  in  its  laws,  ordinances  and  ceremonies.  But 
as  Clirist  was  most  spirit-filled,  so  the  New  Testament  is  richer,  and  those  books 
are  most  to  be  prized  which  hold  most  to  New  Testament  doctrines.  A  preacher 
should  be  much  in  the  New  Testament,  and  if  he  is  led  int(?  the  Old  he  should 
always  take  the  New  back  with  him.  His  people  have  not  a  thousand  years  to 
spend  in  discovering  its  meaning,  and  it  is  not  fair  to  keep  them  always  in  the 
elements,  to  the  retariling  of  spiritual  growth.  Could  you  tell  why  you  are  a 
member  of  your  Church,  or  are  you  ashamed  to  tell  the  reason  ?  Did  spiritual 
reasons  take  you  there,  and  are  spiritual  results  coming  from  the  change?  There 
is  nothing  we  do  on  earth  so  spiritual  and  which  demands  so  much  spirituality  as 
prayer.  {A .  Wln/te,  D  D.)  But  the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  .  .  .  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned. — St.  I'dnl's  tricliutnini/  :—l'h\s 
may  be  roughly  compared  to  a  cathedral :  the  body  curresponds  to  the  nave,  the  spirit 
to  the  chancel,  the  soul,  which  divides  and  unites  the  body  and  the  spirit,  to  the  tran- 
sept, which  divides  and  unites  the  nave  and  the  chancel.  The  cathe  Iral  is  one  conse- 
crated building  with  three  main  compartments,  and  man  is  one  person  in  three 
natures,  all  consecrated  in  baptism  to  the  Triune  God.  Furthermore,  the  human 
spirit  is  the  highest  and  noblest  of  the  three  natures,  and  akin  to  the  Divine,  and 
therefore  that  which  is  immediately  controlled  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  through  it 
acts  upon  the  soul,  and  through  the  soul  upon  the  body.  In  like  manner  the  chancel 
is  the  highest  and  holiest  compartment  of  the  cathedral,  in  which  also  is  the  altar 
or  table  of  the  Divine  Presence.  This  illustration  must  not  be  pressed,  but  it  may 
serve  to  smooth  the  way  for  some  apprehension  of  the  difficult  question  of  man's 
trichotomy.  A  j^stychical  man,  the  mere  soul-man — animnlis  (Vulgate)  from  aiiinia, 
not  animO'<}is  "  full  of  spirit  "  from  rtM/mH;,- — is  one  in  whom  the  jjsijche,  or  lower 
principle  of  life  dominates.  He  moves  not  in  the  sphere  of  Divine  light  and  truth, 
but  in  the  world  of  sense.  If  he  is  intellectual,  he  delights  in  a  mental  activity 
purely  human,  and  exerted  on  objects  merely  mundane,  and  is  attracted  by  worldly 
philosophies  that  fail  utterly  to  lead  the  mind  up  to  the  high  truth  of  God.  The 
mental  side  of  the  psychic  man  comes  to  view  in  this  text;  the  intellectual  rather 
than  the  ethical,  not  to  the  exclusion  however  of  the  latter,  for  between  the  moral 
and  the  mental  there  is  a  mutual  relation  and  interaction.  In  this  Immn  animalis  the 
higher  principle  of  life,  the  human  spirit  illuminated  and  quickened  intellectually 
and  morally,  does  not  dominate,  has  no  activity,  is  dormant.  He  is  one,  as  St. 
Jude  says,  "  not  having  [in  his  own  consciousness]  spirit."  Such  a  one  does  not 
receive,  indeed  cannot  admit  into — that  which  he  has  not — a  prepared  spirit  any- 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

thing  that  is  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  is  psyeliic,  not  pneumatic :  how  can  he 
entertain  trutlis  that  are  purely  pneumatic  ?  They  are  an  absurdity  to  him.  His 
habits  of  mind,  modes  and  centres  of  thought,  aims  in  life,  lust  of  fame,  pride  of 
intellect,  are  all  soul-like  and  sensuous,  all  of  the  cosmos  and  to  the  cosmos. 
Thus  he  is  simply  incompetent  to  apprehend  what  is  extra  mundane  and  super- 
nal ;  indeed,  he  is  not  in  a  position  to  do  so,  for  there  must  always  be  a 
corrrelation  and  mutual  congruity  between  that  which  perceives  and  that  which 
is  perceived.  Wherefore  spiritual  truths  are  "  foolishness  unto  him,"  because  they 
are  spiritually  estimated,  i.e.,  are  tested  and  sifted  by  a  process  spiritual  in  the 
court  of  the  human  si)irit,  enlightened  by  tbe  Divine,  and  there  subjected  to  an 
anacrisis,  or  preliminary  scrutiny  ere  they  are  admitted.      {Canon  Fa-cuis.)  The 

natural  man: — I.  His    chakacteb  described.      Assumes   three  phases:    1.    The 
prejudiced,  who  oppose  the  truth.     2.  The  indifferent,  who  do  not  trouble  about  it. 
3.  The  unenlightened,  who  cannot  understand  it.    II.  His  sad  condition.    Naturally 
without — 1.  Knowledge.     2.  Concern.     3.  Hope.     (J.   Lyth,    D.D.)      The  natural 
man: — I.Here  are  two  objects  set  before  us.     1.  The  natural  man  in  contrast 
with  the  spiritual  man.     Note  Paul's  clas-ification.     (1)  The  carnal  man  "lives 
after  the  flesh."     His  whole  nature  is  the  servant  of  sin.     (2)  In  the  natural  man 
the  ethical  element  may  be  predominant.     He  may  be  a  man  of  culture,  sympathy, 
and  a  believer  in  the  objective  facts  and  formal  sanctities  of  religion  ;  and  yet  so 
long  as  he  is  only  all  that,  he  "cannot  discern  the  things  of  the  spirit."     (3)  The 
spiritual  man  is  such  by  virtue  of  a  new  creation.     He  has  "  put  off  the  old  man 
and  his  deeds."     2.  "  The  things   of  the  spirit."     (1)  They  are  spiiitnal  things. 
Religion  deals  with  supernatural  objects — God,  Christ,  the  Holy  Spirit,  &c.     These 
are  spiritually  discerned.     There  are  windows  in   the  soul  of  the  spiritual  man 
through   which   he  looks  into   the  mystery   of   invisible    worlds.      "  The   Spirit 
searched,"  *c.     "  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  His  Spirit."     (2)  They  are 
revealed  to  faith.     They  occupy  a  sphere  and  deal  with  realities  which  "eye  hath 
not  seen,"  etc.    They  are  emphasised  as  "  the  things  of  God,"  they  are  the  product 
and  expression  of  His  thought.     We  have  no  faculties   by  which  to  apprehend  a 
Being  whose  attributes  are  infinity  and  eternity.     But  what  cannot  be  discerned 
may  be  revealed.     That  is  what  has  taken  p'ace,  and  the  verifying  power  of  this 
revelation  is  a  spiritual  discernment,  a  faculty  of  faith,  inwrought  by  the  Spirit  in 
the  soul ;  and  "  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  being  enlightened,"  we  "  know  what 
is,"  &c.     (3)  They  become  real  in  the  consciousness  of  tiie  believing  man,  who  is 
translated  into  a  new  order  of  being,  is  born  again.     God  and  the  soul  touch.     II. 
Some  illustrations  of  the  apostle's  teachinc*.     1.  There  is  a  class  of  outward 
things  which  we  can  only  know  by  the  senses.     There  is  no  rainbow  to  the  blind 
man,  no  music  to  the  deaf.     So  it  is  with  the  things  of  the  spirit.     2.  The  senses 
bring  in  their  report  of  things,  but  they  know  nothing  of  the  science  or  philosophy 
of  things.     This  is  the  work  of  trained  intellect.     (1)  To  the  ordinary  man  nature 
looks  like  a  jumble  of  accidents;  to  the  scientific  there  is  a  place  for  everything 
and  everything  is  in  its  place,  from  the  atom  to  the  sun.     To  ninety  men  out  of  a 
hundred  the  pebble,  or  bit  of  coal  or  chalk,  is  merely  a  thing  for  use  ;  to  the 
trained  eye  it  is  a  revelation  of  cycles  of  duration,  in  which  now  vanished  dynas- 
ties of  animated  beings  sported.     Nature  is  a  book  of  hieroglyphics  which  only 
science  can  interpret — it  is  scientifically  discerned.     (2)  Look  at  the  Bible,  at  the 
seemingly  discordant  but  really  concatenated  departments  of  revealed  truth.     But 
the  Bible  as  a  harmonious  whole  only  yields  itself  up  to  tlie  discipline  and  culture 
of  the  student.     3.  Another  class  of  realities   we  can   know  only  as   they  come 
through  ex|)erience.     They  are,   in  the  strictest  sense,   "spiritual    things"  (ver. 
11).      (1)  The  things  of   a   man — his    joys,  hopes,  fears,  griefs,  itc. — what  man 
can  know  these,  save   the   spirit   of   a  man    that    is  in   him?     Language    is    a 
system  of  signs  for  the  expression  of  "unknown  things";  but  there  are  things 
of  which  it  can  be  neither  ttie  sign  nor  the  expression.     Thoughts  lie  deeper  than 
speech,  feelings  than  thoughts  :  consciousness  the  deepest  of  all,  is  the  only  witness 
of  what  passes  in  the  mysterious  world  of  mind.     Sin,  remorse,  d'c,  have  no  sign 
and  can  never  be  interpreted  but  by  the  reality  which  calls  them  forth.     (2)  So  the 
things  of  God  can  be  known  only  by  the  consciousness  created  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.     Coleridge  speaks  of  a  philosophical  consciousness  lying  behind  the  ordinary 
consciousness  before  he  can  be  a  philosopher.     To  know  what  the  reality  of  life  is, 
we  must  live,  not  dissect  it.     To  feel  the  bitterness  of  sin  we  must  repent,  not 
speculate  about  it.     To  taste  the  sweetness  and  power  of  Christ's  forgiveness  we 
must  believe  in  Christ,  not  just  catalogue  or  canonise  His  virtues.     These  things 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  CORIXrillANS.  ISS 

belong  to  the  "  new  name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth,"  etc.  (3)  Hence  the 
reason  why  so  ma-ny  unspiritual  though  gifted  minds  mi?s  the  entrance  to  the 
kingdom  of  God.  They  are  "  natural  men  "  and  "  cannot  discern,"  &c.  They  are 
as  bhnd  men  groping  in  the  dark.  Let  us  be  consistent.  I,  as  a  non-scieutific 
Christian,  am  warned  off  the  ground  of  scientific  induction  as  a  territory  on  which 
I  have  no  factor  of  investigation.  My  religion  is  not  the  organ  of  physical  dis- 
covery. Very  well :  the  scientist  is  warned  oii'  the  ground  of  spiritual  conscious- 
ness as  a  territory  on  which  he  is  equally  at  fault.  Conclusion  :  Note — 1.  The  limit 
which  these  considerations  set  to  the  possibilities  of  mental  cultui-e,  and  the 
rebuke  which  they  administer  to  the  audacity  and  irreverence  of  the  unsanctified 
intellect.  2.  The  need  of  regeneration.  3.  "If  any  man  will  do  God's  will  he 
shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  (J.  Bnrtnn.)  lite  natural  man: — I.  His  cha- 
racter. 1.  Earthly.  2.  Sensual.  3.  Devilish.  H.  His  spiritual  obliquity. 
1.  Moral.  "He  receiveth  not."  2.  Intellectual.  "He  cannot  know."  III.  His 
hopeless  condition  without  Divine  help.  The  things  of  God — 1.  Are  foolishness 
to  him.  2.  Must  be  spiritually  discerned.  (J.  J/ytli,  D.D.)  A  natunil  man's 
ignorance  of  sjnritital  things  : — I.  The  character  of  the  unrenewed  man. 
1.  He  follows  the  dictates  of  his  own  appetites.  2.  He  is  under  the  control 
of  his  passions.  3.  Being  chiefly  occupied  about  the  perishing  things  of  this 
world,  be  is  dead  to  a  future  state.  4.  Though  man  too  much  resembles  the 
animal  in  many  things,  yet  in  this  he  differs  widely  from  every  other  creature — 
he  will  be  responsible  for  his  conduct  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.  Whatever 
be  the  sinner's  moral  inability,  bis  natural  powers  qualify  him  to  serve  God  ;  and  it 
is  sin  only  that  prevents  him  from  using  those  natural  powers  in  a  manner  in  which 
he  would  please  God.  While  the  natural  powers  remain,  though  the  ii)clination  be 
absent,  his  accountability  is  continued.  "  We  say,  God  actually  treats  the  want  of 
disposition,  not  as  an  excuse,  but  as  a  sin  ;  and  we  take  it  for  granted  that  what 
God  does  is  right,  whether  we  can  comprehend  it  or  not.  Ilowbeit,  in  this  case,  it 
hapi^ens  that  with  the  testimonies  of  God  accord  those  of  conscience  and  common 
sense.  Every  man's  conscience  '  finds  fault'  with  him  for  the  evils  which  he  dmi- 
mits  willingly,  or  of  choice ;  and,  instead  of  making  any  allowance  for  auy  previous 
aversion,  nothing  more  is  necessary  to  rivet  the  charge.  And  with  respect  to  the 
common  sense  of  mankind  in  their  treatment  of  one  another,  what  judge,  or  what 
jury,  ever  took  into  consideration  the  previous  aversion  of  a  traitor  or  a  murderer, 
■with  a  view  to  the  diminishing  of  his  guilt  ?  "  II.  The  dispositions  of  the 
sinner's  mind  towards  God.  He  does  not  receive  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  1. 
What  the  Spirit  reveals.  These  things  are  found  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are 
the  "  lively  oracles  of  God."  If  the  Spirit  had  made  known  a  plan  of  salvation 
which  had  flattered  the  pride  of  the  human  heart,  his  testimony  would  have  been 
cheerfully  received.  2.  What  the  Spirit  imparts.  Man,  as  a  fallen  creature,  requires 
something  done  in  him  as  well  as  for  him.  How  much  soever  men  may  boast  of  their 
reason,  their  intellect,  and  their  discernment,  they  must  be  Divinely  illuminated 
before  they  can  rightly  understand  the  things  which  the  Sj^irit  either  reveals  or 
imparts.  The  natural  man  does  not  believe  this.  If  you  were  to  examine  the 
oj)inions  of  a  very  large  majority  of  those  who  are  called  Christians,  they  are 
either  careless  about  the  renovation  of  their  own  hearts,  or  they  reject  the  doctrine 
altogether  as  a  useless,  unmeaning  dogma.  They  fancy  themselves  virtuous  and 
good,  and  that  they  are  capable  of  making  some  amends  for  their  disobedience  of 
the  law  of  God  ;  they  think  that  they  will  at  some  future  time  do  some  good  thing  that 
they  may  inherit  eternal  life,  though  their  conscience  often  reproves  them,  after 
their  best  efforts,  till  they  are  ready  to  believe  themselves  but  unprofitable  servants. 
3.  What  the  Spirit  requires.  He  requires  of  all  men  "  to  turn  from  darkness  to 
light,  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan  unto  God."  The  animal  man  may  love  his 
sin  and  persist  in  committing  it,  but  this  he  cannot  do  with  impunity,  for  God 
will  bring  him  into  judgment !  There  is  a  method  by  which  that  sin  can  be  for- 
given, its  dominion  destroyed,  and  its  love  eradicated  from  the  soul ;  and  that  is  by 
the  atonement  of  Christ.  If  he  refuse  this  means  of  repentance  and  sanctitication 
he  must  die  in  his  sins ;  there  remains  no  other  sacrifice  for  sins.  1'he  Spirit 
requires  that  men  should  receive  Christ.  All  the  information  which  He  imparts  to 
the  mind  concerning  the  purity,  spirituality,  and  extent  of  the  holy  law  of  Gi>d  ; 
every  conception  which  He  enables  the  mind  to  form  of  the  holiness  of  God,  ex- 
hibited in  that  law  ;  and  all  the  humbling  convictions  wdiich  He  p/odnces  upon  the 
Boul  in  a  state  of  penitence,  are  intended  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  prepare  the  sinner 
for  the  reception  of  Christ  as  a  suitable  and  all-sufficient  Saviour.     The  natural 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

man  does  Eot  receive  these  "  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  He  does  not  believe 
them.  He  calls  them  the  words  of  God ;  but  it  is  the  language  of  the  lip,  not  of  the 
heart.  III.  The  reason  which  the  apostle  assigns.  "  They  are  foolishness  unto 
him."  What  dreadful  havoc  sin  has  made  of  the  human  soul!  What  haughty 
conduct  towards  God!  How  proud,  how  ignorant,  and  how  unfeeling  is  the  heait 
of  man !  This  revelation  was  given  to  him  for  his  instruction,  to  correct  his  errors 
and  to  remove  his  ignorance.  After  the  divinity  uf  this  revelation  had  been  fully 
and  rationally  ascertained,  it  was  the  duty  of  this  rational  bemg  to  submit  to  its 
teaching  and  decisions,  witliout  hesitation,  thankful  that  God  would  condescend  to 
instruct  the  undeserving  and  the  sinner.  The  Spirit  has  revealed  the  infinite  per- 
fections of  the  Deity,  so  far  as  that  revelation  was  connected  with  man's  duty  and 
happiness,  in  a  manner  likely  to  excite  him  to  fear,  venerate,  love,  aud  worship 
Him  as  the  ever-blessed  God.  What  the  Spirit  has  revealed  must  limit  his  inquiries 
and  check  his  presumption.  Let  him  regard  what  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  declares 
in  His  Word,  and  seek  an  experimeutal  knowledge  of  those  "heavenly  blessings" 
which  are  provided  in  the  new  covenant  for  the  penitent  and  believing.  He  does 
not  understand  them  because  they  are  "  spiritually  discerned."  But  the  Spirit  can 
and  will  restore  the  spiritual  faculty  if  he  will  ask  Him.  Let  him  not  call  them 
"foolishness";  for  the  prex)aration  of  them  was  the  highest  manifestation  of  the 
wisdom  and  love  of  God.  His  not  perceiving  them  is  not  to  be  considered  as  a 
reason  why  tliey  are  not  good  in  themselves  and  suited  to  relieve  his  miseiy.  This 
is  to  be  traced  to  his  want  of  si)iritual  vision,  "for  sin  has  blinded  his  mind!" 
(Win.  Jours.)  The    natural   man    bU)ul   to    the    tliinps    of  the  S2>irit  of  God: — 

tSet  a  man  down  on  one  of  the  jutting  crags  of  the  Andes,  and  with  the 
shadows  of  midnight  or  the  scarf  of  a  morning  mist  hanging  aiound  him  he 
sees  nothing  of  the  shaggy  fantastic  grandeur  with  which  he  is  environed.  He 
stands  ou  one  of  the  "  altar  thrones  "  of  creation,  with  the  sweep  of  the 
firm'iment  above  him,  and  the  jewelled  earth  beneath  him;  but  until  the 
sunshine  sifts  its  radiance  on  his  sightless  eyeballs,  darkness  confused  and 
confusing  shuts  him  in  on  every  side.  So  with  the  sjjirit  world  in  its  relation 
to  the  natural  man.  That  world  envelopes  him  like  an  atmosphere  or  sea  of  life, 
touching  him  at  every  avenue  of  soul  and  sense  with  its  glory  ;  but  the  perceptive 
faculty  is  wanting  and  he  cannot  behold  it.  The  flashing  skies  are  dark  to  his  closed 
eyes.  Neither  can  the  dark  mind  see  God.  (J.  Burton.)  The  ignorance  of  the 
■natural   man: — I.  Explain  the  tbuth  affirmed.      1.  Who  is  the  natuial  man? 

2.  What  are  the  things  he  cannot  receive  nor  know?  3.  Whence  his  incapacity? 
II.  CoNiiitM  IT.     1.  It  was  so  in  our  Lord's  day.     2.  In  the  times  of  the  apostles. 

3.  Is   so   now.      III.  Improve  it.      Learn — 1.  To   appreciate  Divine  knowledge. 

2.  How  to  seek  it.  3.  How  to  employ  it.  (J.  Lijtii,  D.D.)  Natural  or 
spiritual: — The  apostle  knows  of  only  two  classes  of  men — natural  and  spiritual. 
Under  "  natural,"'  he  includes  all  who  are  not  partakers  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  no 
matter  how  excellent  they  may  be.  On  the  other  hand,  all  into  whom  the  Spirit 
of  God  has  come  he  calls  spiritual  men.  I.  The  natural  man  rkceives  not  the 
THINGS  OF  THI3  Spirit  OF  GoD,  BUT  COUNTS  THEM  FOOLISH.  1.  Some  oppose  them 
violently,  and  do  tlieir  best  to  put  down  such  folly.  2.  A  greater  proportion 
secretly  despise  and  condemn.  They  dare  say  that  religion  is  a  good  thing  for  old 
women,  etc.,  but  utterly  repudiate  it  as  a  thing  worthy  the  attention  of  wise  men. 

3.  The  great  mass  are  indifferent.  "For  forms  of  faith  let  graceless  zealots 
fight,  he  can't  be  wrong  whose  life  is  in  the  right."  II.  There  is  nothing  what- 
ever in  the  things  themselves  to  JUSTIFY  SUCH  AN  ESTIMATION.  You  do  not  know 
what  you  say  when  you  declare  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  absurd.  It  is  generally 
pretty  safe  to  ask  a  man  who  rails  at  the  Bible,  "  Did  you  ever  read  it?  "  These 
learned  gentlem>-n  are  like  those  critics  who,  when  they  meet  with  a  new  volume, 
take  the  knife  and  cut  the  first  page,  smell  it,  and  then  condemn  or  praise.  The 
mightiest  intellects  confess  that  the  truths  of  this  book  are  above  their  highest 
flights.  Even  Newton  said  there  were  depths  here  which  no  mortal  could  fathom. 
As  these  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  wise  and  profound,  so  they  are  most  im- 
portant, and  if  not  received,  it  is  not  because  they  are  uncongenial  with  our  neces- 
sities. There  are  some  speculations  which  a  man  need  not  enter  upon,  but  the 
doctrines  of  God  teach  you  your  relationship  to  your  Maker  ;  your  conditiim  before 
Him  ;  how  He  can  be  just  to  man,  aud  yet  be  gracious;  how  you  can  approach 
Him,  and  become  His  child ;  how  you  may  be  conformed  to  His  image,  and  made 
a  i^artaker  of  His  glory.  III.  The  reason  for  the  rejection  of  the  gospel. 
1.  Want  of  taste.     You  have  sometimes  seen  an  artist  standing  before  a  splendid 


CHAP.  11.]  I.  COIIINTIIIANS.  18'J 

picture.  "  What  a  fine  conceiition  !  "  says  he,  "I  could  stand  a  week  and  admire 
that."  Some  bumpkin,  however,  says,  "  It  looks  to  me  to  be  an  old  decayed  piece  of 
canvas  that  wants  cleaning."  Then  leaving  the  gallery,  he  notices  on  the  wa,ll 
outside  a  picture  of  an  elephant  standing  on  his  head,  and  a  clown  performing  in 
some  circus,  and  he  says,  "  That's  more  to  my  taste."  Just  so  is  it  with  the 
natural  man.  Give  him  some  work  of  fiction — a  daub  upon  the  wall— and  he  is 
satisfied.  But  he  has  no  taste  for  the  things  of  God.  2.  Waut  of  organs.  Just 
as  a  blind  man  cannot  appreciate  a  landscape  nor  a  deaf  man  music  ;  so  the 
natural  man  lacking  the  eye  and  ear  of  faith  cannot  appreciate  the  beauties  and 
music  of  the  gospel.  3.  Want  of  nature.  The  brute  cannot  appreciate  the  studies 
of  the  astronomer  because  he  lacks  an  intellectual  nature ;  and  so  the  mere  man 
of  intellect  cannot  appreciate  the  things  of  the  Spirit  because  he  lacks  a  spiritual 
nature.  IV.  The  pnAcxicAL  truths  which  flow  irom  this  gkeat  thoigh  sorrow- 
ful FACT.  1.  The  absolute  necessity  for  regeneration,  or  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 
You  mny  educate  a  nature  up  to  its  highest  point,  but  you  cannot  educate  an  old 
nature  into  a  new  one.  You  may  educate  a  horse,  but  you  cannot  educate  it  into 
a  man.  You  may  by  your  own  efforts  make  yourselves  the  best  of  natural  men,  but 
still  at  your  very  best  there  is  a  division  wide  as  eternity  between  you  and  the  re- 
generate man.  And  no  man  can  help  us  out  of  such  a  nature  into  a  state  of  grace. 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  2.  If  any  of  us 
have  received  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  we  ought  to  look  upon  that  as  comfortable 
evidence  that  we  have  been  born  Hgain.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  3Ia>i's  moral  iiiabilitu  to 
nnderf:t(iiid  thr  thincis  of  the  !^pirit : — Note — I.  Some  of  those  sdblime  and  interest- 
ing TRUTHS  WHICH  THE  NATURAL  MAN  DOES  NOT  RECEFVE.  1.  The  equity  and  goodness 
of  the  law  of  God,  and  the  evil  and  desert  of  every  transgression  of  it.  2.  The 
suitableness  and  excellency  of  the  method  of  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The 
necessity  uf  union  to  Christ  by  faith  as  the  source  of  holiness  and  strength.  4.  The 
necessity  of  recomiliation  to  God  and  conformity  to  the  Divine  image  to  all  true 
happiness   both  here   and  hereafter.      II.  The  alarming  extent  to  which  this 

WANT    of    spiritual    DISCERNMENT    PREVAILS,    AND    THE    INADEQUACY    OF    THE    HIGHEST 

ADVANTAGES  TO  COMMUNICATE  IT.  1.  W'c  See  Pome  men  endowed  with  great  strength 
of  mind,  and  their  natural  powers  much  improved  by  a  liberal  education,  but  they 
do  not  receive  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  2,  We  observe  other  men  who 
have  great  discernment  and  assiduity  in  the  concerns  of  this  life,  and  who  discover 
a  particular  tact  in  the  management  of  business,  and  considerable  ability  in  im- 
proving the  advantages  afforded  them  of  amassing  wealth,  but  they  receive  not  the 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  We  see  other  persons  favoured  with  the  advantages 
of  a  religious  education,  but  they  have  not  received  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  4.  Some  men  have  an  undoubted  conviction  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  and 
their  passions  are  occasionally  moved  with  its  important  discoverips.  Still,  except 
a  Divine  change  takes  place  in  the  heart,  they  do  not  receive  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God.  IH.  The  import.^nt  reflection  which  the  subject  suggests. 
1.  That  the  disaffection  of  man  to  God  is  not  accidental,  or  the  result  of  some 
circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed,  but  is  an  evil  principle,  natural  to  the  whole 
species,  and  the  consequence  of  the  fall.  2.  The  great  gratitude  we  owe  to  God 
for  the  gospel  of  His  Son,  as  a  discovery  of  enlightening  and  renewing  grace,  as 
well  as  of  pardoning  mercy.  3.  The  indispensable  necessity  of  Divine  influence  in 
general,  and  in  respect  to  our  own  personal  experience  in  particular.  4.  The  im- 
portaiice  of  accompanying  the  means  of  grace  with  humble  and  earnest  prayer. 
(Essex  Confireciatloudl  Ilemembrancer.)  Spiritual  discerirmeut : — Not  only  have 
excellent  photographs  of  the  heavenly  bodies  been  obtained,  and  an_  absolutely 
accurate  picture  of  the  skies  obtained  for  permanent  examination,  but  it  has  been 
found  that  the  camera  reveals  stars  invisible  even  with  tlie  aid  of  the  most  power- 
ful telescope  in  existence.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  camera  is  able  by  con- 
tinued exposure  to  obtain  an  image  of  an  object  which  may  be  so  faint  that  a  shorter 
exposure  would  give  no  image.  This,  of  course,  is  a  power  the  eye  does  not  possess. 
It  is  equivalent  to  being  able  to  see  plainly  by  long  gazing  what  cannot  be  seen  at 
all  by  a  brief  inspection.  A  notable  instance  of  this  power  is  seen  in  photographs 
of  the  Pleiades,  the  group  of  stars  mentioned  in  Job  xxxvi.  31.  Here  a  nebula  is 
shown  in  the  photograph  which  the  eye  cannot  perceive  in  the  sky,  but  which  un- 
doubtedly exists.  Astronomers  believe  in  the  revelations  of  the  camera,  though  they 
are  not  confirmed  by  actual  observation.  Their  example  may  be  commended  to  men 
who  reject  the  inspired  levelation  of  the  Bible,  and  refuse  to  exercise  faith  when  they 
are  asked  to  accept  spiritual  truth  not  perceptible  to  the  senses.     (Neiv  York  Sun.] 


183  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Sinritnal  discernment : — I.  There  is  nothing  here  which  is  not  acknowledged 
AND  INSISTED  ON  IN  EVERY-DAY  LIFE.  There  are  things  that  are  only  instru- 
mentally  discerned.  1.  Here  is  a  large  brilliant  diamond,  and  you  pronounce  it  to 
be  without  fault ;  but  the  lapidary  gives  you  a  magnifying  glass  of  great  power,  and 
bids  you  look  at  the  centre  of  the  stone ;  and  there  sure  enough  you  see  a  black 
spot.  The  lapidary  says  the  naked  eye  can  neither  receive  it  nor  know  it  because  it 
is  microscopically  discerned.  And  nobody  arises  to  say,  "  Sir,  you  have  introduced 
a  painful  mystery  into  human  thought  and  inquiry."  People  are  rather  glad  that 
a  medium  has  been  supplied  by  which  the  hidden  truth  may  be  brought  to  light. 
2.  Yonder  are  two  shining  surfaces,  and  you  say  there  must  be  a  great  fire  there. 
The  scientist  who  overhears  you,  however,  says,  "  One  of  those  surfaces  has  no 
light  at  all."  "But  can't  I  believe  my  own  eyes  ?  "  "  No,"  he  says,  "just  look 
through  this  instrument  " — the  polariscope — and  now  you  see  that  the  one  surface 
was  primary  light  and  the  other  but  reflected.  The  naked  eye  can  neither  receive 
nor  know  it  because  it  is  polariscopically  discerned.  And  you  thank  him  for  the 
information.  3.  Yonder  are  two  men  who  have  undertaken  a  mineral  survey.  One 
is  a  mineralogist,  the  other  a  man  who  believes  that  if  he  cannot  find  things  out 
with  his  naked  eyes  and  fingers  that  nothing  can  or  shall  be  found  out.  The  former 
walks  slowly  over  the  ground  holding  in  his  hand  a  little  crystal  box,  watching  the 
instrument  within.  Presently  the  needle  dips,  and  he  says,  "  There  is  iron  here." 
Can  you  see  it,  touch  it?  No.  But  the  scientific  man  digs  for  iron  and  finds  it, 
and  then  turns  round  to  hear  what  the  other  has  to  say,  and  remarks,  "  The  senses 
cannot  receive  or  know  it,  for  it  is  magnetically  discerned,"  and  then  receives  the 
confidence  he  deserves.  4.  Look  at  this  ruddy-faced  boy.  You  cannot  walk  out 
with  him,  but  he  challenges  you  to  leap  a  five-barred  gate  ;  and  you  say,  "  What  a 
vigorous  lad  !  There  will  be  a  long  life  and  a  happy  one."  A  physician,  however, 
drops  in  on  your  return,  and  hearing  your  verdict,  applies  an  instrument  to  the  region 
of  the  boy's  heart,  and  then,  taking  you  aside,  says,  "  He  will  never  see  five-and- 
twenty.  He  has  had  rheumatic  fever  and  contracted  valvular  affection  of  the  heart." 
The  untrained  ear  can  neither  receive  it  nor  know  it  because  it  is  stethoscopically 
discerned.  Now  in  all  these  things  we  confess  our  need  of  instruments.  Suppose 
that  everything  were  taken  away  that  cannot  be  discovered  or  read  by  the  naked 
eye !  Shut  up  the  heavens,  for  astronomy  must  go  ;  cover  up  the  fields,  for  botany 
tells  little  to  the  naked  eye.  All  science  indeed  would  be  impoverished  and  degraded. 
Yet  the  man  who  cannot  read  his  own  mother's  letter  without  an  eyeglass  insists 
upon  reading  the  infinite  and  eternal  God  by  his  unassisted  powers.  5.  The  same 
principle  holds  good  in  spheres  where  instruments  are  not  required.  (1)  Here  are 
two  men  listening  to  the  same  piece  of  music.  The  one  is  inspired,  enraptured, 
and  says,  "  I  would  this  might  go  on  for  ever."  The  other  says,  "  I  wonder  when 
they  will  be  done."  The  best  ear  cannot  receive  these  things  or  know  them,  for 
they  are  musicall.y  discerned.  The  one  man  would  be  tormented  if  one  note  were 
the  thousandth  part  of  a  shade  wrong ;  but  all  the  notes  might  be  wrong  so  far  as 
the  other  man  knew.  (2)  Here  are  two  men  looking  at  the  same  picture.  The  one 
is  chained  to  the  spot ;  the  other,  with  a  tbick  shilling  catalogue,  does  not  see  much 
in  that,  and  ha'^tens  on  to  something  that  has  superficies,  no  matter  what  the 
superficies  maybe:  only  let  it  be  extensive  enough.  Paint  for  such  men  with  a 
broom.  II.  The  application  of  these  things  is  to  the  things  of  God  as  accessible 
TO  the  spirit  of  man.  There  are  blind  minds  as  well  as  blind  eyes.  "  Except  a 
mar.  be  born  again  he  cannot  see."  1.  As  ministers,  therefore,  we  are  not  to  be 
disconraged  because  some  people  cannot  understand  us.  There  will  always  be  men 
to  whom  the  best  preaching  will  be  foolishness,  because  they  have  not  die  spiritual 
faculty.  2.  Do  we  wish  for  this  discernment?  "If  ye  being  evil,"  &c.  "  If  any  man 
lack  wisdom,"  &c.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Sinritnal  insight  impossible  to  nnspiritual 
men  : — 1.  No  painter  was  ever  yet  so  unwise  as  to  submit  his  work  to  the  criticism 
of  a  committee  of  blind  men,  however  learned  such  men  might  have  been  in  history, 
logic,  or  law.  Nor  has  any  compmy  of  blind  men  a^^sumed  to  sit  in  judgment  upon 
Murillo,  Eaphael,  or  Titian  ;  still  less  that  they  have  fallen  to  raving  because  their 
censorship  in  art  had  not  been  accepted  as  final.  The  men  in  the  Patent  Office  ia 
Washington,  who  examine  the  thousand  models  that  yearly  come  to  them,  are  men 
who  have  an  eye  for  machmery.  Men  who  did  not  know  a  wheelbarrow  from  a 
spinning-wheel  could  scarcely  get  an  appointment  to  such  a  place.  In  general  it 
matters  not  how  much  a  man  may  know  nor  how  keen  his  power  of  discernment  in 
some  other  line  of  human  thought  or  knowledge,  men  give  little  heed  to  his  talk 
unless  he  has  capacity  and  culture  in  the  very  tilings  of  which  he  assumes  to  be  a 


CHAP,  n.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  IS^ 

critic  and  a  judge.  2,  The  elements  of  our  complex  nature  are  many  ;  and  a  man 
may  be  strong  in  some  things  and  weak  in  others.  Lord  Macaulay  was  almost  a 
blockhead  in  mathematics.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  bad  hardly  patience  enough  to  read 
the  "Paradise  Lost"  and  only  asked  contemptuous!}',  "What  does  it  prove?" 
Milton  might  very  likely  have  asked  the  same  of  the  "  Principia."  Many  a  great 
scientist  has  never  been  able  to  distinguish  between  the  highest  strains  of  music 
and  any  mere  jargon  of  discordant  sounds.  Eminent  lawyers  and  judges  have  been 
utterly  blind  to  the  beauties  of  the  most  perfect  machinery,  and  many  an  inventive 
genius  would  have  been  utterly  swamped  in  the  commentaries  of  Blackstone.  3. 
Why,  then,  should  it  be  thought  any  argument  against  the  reality  of  spiritual 
things  that  here  and  there  a  man — with  large  genius  for  invention  ;  for  oratory  ;  for 
science;  for  philosophy,  for  music  ;  for  art — has  no  appreciation  for  things  unseen 
and  eternal  ?  It  weighs  less  than  a  feather  to  him  who  revels  in  the  demonstrations 
of  geometry  to  know  that  hundreds  of  college  students  have  never  fully  compre- 
hended a  single  demonstration  !  "  Poor  fellows  I  "  is  all  he  can  say,  "  I  pity  their 
obtuseness  !  "  In  like  manner  it  weighs  less  than  a  milligramme  to  any  Christian 
believer,  whose  soul  has  been  illuminated  from  on  high,  that  Darwin  lived  anA  died 
blind  as  a  bat  to  all  the  glories  of  the  spiritual  universe.  But  unlike  many  another 
blind  man,  Darwin  did,  in  a  measure,  realise  his  condition.  He  recognised  the  fact 
that  his  spiritual  nature  had  died  out !  He  calls  it  "  atrophy."  In  his  boyhood  he 
had  a  consciously  religious  nature  ;  in  later  years  it  was  starved  to  death  !  He  fells 
us,  also,  that  in  early  life  he  had  a  poetical  nature.  That,  too,  had  been  famished. 
His  soul  had  died — "at  the  top  !  "  Alas  !  how  many  another  soul  has  died  in  the 
same  way  1  Shall  the  Christian  believer  find  his  faith  disturbed  because  of  these 
great  men  whose  souls  have  been  lopped  off?  No  !  He  still  knows  in  whom  he  has 
believed.  A  blind  man  may  tell  me  that  he  sees  nothing  in  the  glory  of  the  evening 
sunset,  or  in  Eaphael's  Transfiguration.  "Poor  man!  "  I  say,  with  deepest  pity; 
that's  all.  I  do  not  forthwith  put  out  my  own  eyes,  because  he  has  put  his  out ;  or, 
peradventure,  may  have  been  born  blind.  God  forbid !  I  only  cherish  my  eyesight 
with  the  more  thankfulness  and  care.  When  even  HumboUlt,  Darwin,  lugersoll, 
and  Eenan  tell  me  that  they  see  nothing  of  the  spiritual  and  Divine  in  this  revela- 
tion of  the  Divine  life  and  glory  of  the  Christ  of  God  among  the  sons  of  men — 
Abraham,  Moses,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  Paul,  John,  and  Luther,  Knox,  Wesley,  Bunyan, 
and  the  unnumbered  hosts  of  the  Lord  Almighty,  will  still  continue  to  enjoy  the 
seraphic  vision  and  know  whom  they  have  believed.  4.  A  legislator  may  wisely 
study  the  Bible  to  help  him  in  making  laws.  The  historian  may  ponder  its  incom- 
parable histories.  The  sociologist  may  turn  over  its  leaves  to  tind  the  profoundest 
teachings  known  to  the  world  in  his  department.  The  lover  of  sublime  and  beauti- 
ful poetry  may  discover  here  some  of  the  rarest  gems  tliat  can  be  gathered  from  all 
the  seas  and  from  all  the  lands.  But  only  the  spiritual  man  can  discern  within  these 
lids  their  choicest  treasures  of  spiritual  truth,  and  it  would  be  passing  strange  if  it 
were  otherwise.  What  would  your  five-year-old  boy  think  of  conic  sections,  or  your 
ten-months-old  baby  of  a  treatise  on  optics?  "  I  wonder  what  grandfather  can  find 
in  that  old  book  ! — it's  a  very  dull  book  to  me."  So  said  a  young  man  just  entering 
college  many  years  ago.  But  when  the  Spirit  of  God  had  opened  his  eyes,  the  young 
man  marvelled  no  more  at  the  absorption  of  his  grandsire  in  the  study  of  the  old 
book,  and  himself  lived  to  revel  in  its  pages  more  than  in  all  things  else.  Had  sin 
never  come,  our  vision  had  been  clear.  Oh,  that  every  soul  might  cry  out  as 
Bartimeus,  "  Lord,  that  I  may  receive  my  sight !  "  5.  "  What  is  the  Bible  ?  "  Only 
Christian  experience  can  fit  auy  person  to  answer  that  question.  I  see  a  cherub  of 
three  short  years  over  the  way,  and  I  ask,  "What  is  that  child?"  The  analytic 
chemist  will  tell  me  how  much  oxygen,  and  hydrogen,  and  nitrogen,  and  phos- 
phorus enter  into  the  forty  pounds  of  avoirdupois  of  that  beautiful  form.  The 
anatomist  will  tell  me  the  number  of  bones  and  muscles  and  the  names  of  them  all 
that  enter  into  her  perfect  body.  But  you  are  the  child's  mother.  And  I  ask  you 
to  tell  me  what  she  is.  Wlrile  I  speak  the  angel  of  death  has  come,  and  she  lies  by 
your  side  a  corp-e.  Her  sweet  face  has  a  heavenly  smile  upon  it,  for  she  has  had 
a  vision  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  hcis  taken  her  into  His  arms.  "What  is  that 
child  ?  "  You  need  the  gift  of  tongues  to  tell  me.  The  lips  cannot  utter  it ;  your 
tears  even  can  scarcely  suggpst  it.  The  love  of  father  and  mother  alone  can  con- 
ceive the  an- wer.  "What  is  the  Bible?"  Only  he  who  has  learned  to  love  the 
Christ  that  shines  through  it  can  answer  that  question.  And  then  his  answer  will 
grow  as  he  grows,  throu;;h  all  his  years.  He  will  find  more  in  it  as  his  experience 
deepens.     Ths  only  x^roper  test  of  the  g  sjjel  of  Christ  is  the  trial  of  it.     No  sou' 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii. 

was  ever  yet  made  worse  by  believing  it.  No  Christian  ever  yet,  as  he  came  near  to 
death,  regretted  his  faith  or  recanted  his  trust  in  Christ.  (-E.  B.  Fairfield,  D.D.) 
Vnsnnctlfind  vien  cannot  read  the  Bihle  to  2>rnfit : — If  }ou  bring  me  a  basket  full 
of  mineials  from  California,  and  I  take  them  and  look  at  them,  I  shall  know 
that  this  specimen  has  gold  in  it,  because  I  see  there  little  points  of  yellow  gold,  but 
I  shall  not  know  what  the  white  and  the  dark  points  are  that  I  see.  Lut  let  a 
metailuigist  look  at  it,  and  he  will  see  that  it  contains  not  onlygold,  butsilver,  and 
load,  and  iron,  and  he  will  single  them  out.  To  me  it  is  a  mere  stone,  with  only 
here  and  tliere  a  hint  of  gold,  but  to  him  it  is  a  combination  of  various  metals. 
Now  take  the  Word  of  God,  that  is  tilled  with  precious  stones  and  metals,  and  let 
one  instructed  in  spiritual  insight  go  through  it,  and  he  will  discover  all  these 
treasures;  while,  if  you  let  a  man  uniiistructed  in  spiritual  insight  go  through  it, 
he  will  discover  those  things  that  iire  outside  and  apparent,  but  those  things  that 
make  God  and  man  friends,  and  that  have  to  do  with  the  immortality  of  tlie  soul 
in  heaven,  escape  his  notice.  No  man  can  know  these  things  unless  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  tauglit  him  to  discern  them.  (//.  JV.  Beeclier.)  The  ignorance  of  the 
natural  man: — "  Suppose,"  says  an  old  divine,  "a  geometrician  should  be  drawing 
outlines  and  figures,  and  there  should  come  in  a  sdly,  ignorant  fellow,  who,  seeing 
him  thus  employed,  should  laugh  at  him  ;  would  the  artibt,  think  j'ou,  leave  off  his 
employment  because  of  his  derision?  Suiely  not ;  for  he  knows  that  his  laughter  is 
but  the  fruit  of  his  ignorance,  as  not  knowing  his  art,  and  the  ground  upon  which 
it  goes :  and  therefore  he  holds  on  drawing,  thouf,'h  the  fellow  should  hold  on 
laughing."  Tlie  natural  ?«flu's  view  : — One  may  be  a  diligent  student  of  science 
and  have  a  lirge  acquaintance  with  the  facts  and  forces,  processes  and  laws  of  the 
physical  universe,  and  yet  be  insensible  to  all  by  which  its  higher  meanings  are 
revealed.  The  man  of  this  spirit  may  cultivate  his  fields  with  judicious  husbandry, 
but  all  the  harvest  goes  into  the  barn,  or  to  market ;  none  is  for  the  soul.  He  may 
note  the  season's  circling  cour.-e,  but  finds  no  meaning  in  their  storied  succession, 
save  calls  to  a  vaiied  round  of  toil  Hud  use  ;  no  pulsings  of  a  life  Divine,  no  ebb  and 
riow  of  supernal  tides,  bearing  outward  the  flow  of  a  Divine  energy,  and  then  with 
refluent  flood  coursing  backward  to  the  infinite  deeps.  He  may  view  the  stars,  perhaps 
know  their  names,  orders,  distances,  and  seasons,  but  catches  no  glimpse  of  the 
Hand  that  moves  them,  nor  hears  the  resonances  of  their  silent  song.  He  may  climb 
the  mountains,  but  it  is  only  as  tourist,  or  engint  er,  not  as  worshipper,  or  to  find  the 
uplands  of  God.  (J.  W.  Karmhaw.)  Spiritual  discernment  impaired: — Darwin 
gives  an  accou't  of  two  blind  men  with  whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  conversing  for 
some  years.  They  both  told  him  that  "  they  never  remembered  having  dieamed  of 
visible  objects  after  they  became  totally  bl  ml."  So,  when  men  give  themselves  to 
lower  and  meaner  things,  the  higher  and  nobler  faculties  of  the  soul  come  in  to 
trouble  them  less  and  less.  By  and  by  ihe  spiritual  and  the  unseen  is  to  them  as 
though  it  were  not.  The  natural  versus  tlie  spiritual  man: — Different  persons 

shall  stand  before  that  Nature's  wonder  of  wonders,  the  mighty  cataract  of  Niagara, 
and  how  differently  they  will  regard  it  and  be  affected  by  it!  To  one  it  will  be 
simply  an  immense  volume  of  water  rushing  down  swift  rapids  and  leaping  a 
tremendous  precipice,  with  stunning  effect  to  the  observant  senses,  but  with  no 
glory  in  its  gliding,  gleaming,  plunging  mass,  and  no  music  or  meaning  in  its 
rhythmic  roar.  Another  will  bemiinly  impressed  with  the  probable  energy  of  the 
descending  mass,  and  occupied  with  the  pro  'lem  of  its  utilisation.  He  will  measure 
it  according  to  the  principles  of  hydro-d>  namic  science,  and  estimate  what  engines 
it  woul  I  move,  what  mactiinery  impel,  and  what  work  perform,  if  properly  \oked, 
or  what  cities  it  would  illumine,  if  converted  into  electricity,  but  find  in  it  no  power 
to  draw  the  soul  to  God.  Another,  brirnjing  to  it  a  more  festhetic  sensibility,  will 
be  impressed  with  its  beauty  and  gr  ndeur ;  but  the  beauty  will  be  soulless,  the 
grandeur  only  that  of  physical  magnificence.  But  another  shall  bring  to  it  a  true 
spiritual  sensibility,  and  to  him  it  will  open  all  its  meaning,  and  bei;omea  wondrous 
revelation  of  the  mighty  power,  grand  designs,  and  sovereign  laws  of  the  infinite 
Creator,  an  apocalypse,  th  ougli  Nature  Iran  figured  in  her  own  process,  of  Him 
who  is  Nature's  God  and  soul ;  and  awed  into  silence,  or  thrilled  with  adoring 
wonder,  he  will  stand  as  before  the  Holy  of  holies  of  Nature's  vast  and  solemn 
temple.  The  difference  of  impression  and  effect  appears  not  only  in  relation  to 
Nature's  more  majestic  scenes,  but  to  all,  from  the  greatest  and  rarest  to  the  lowliest 
and  most  common.  Dull  sensibility  pas-;es  unheeding,  but  to  a  Cowper,  a  Words- 
worth, a  Bryant,  or  a  Buskin,  the  very  heath  hath  a  voice,  and  the  desert  shrub 
becomes  aflame  with  God.     And  so,  too,  with  those  works  of  art  in  which  God 


CHAP,  ir.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  191 

speaks  to  us  as  it  were  liy  an  intcrpi-eter.  Different  persons  shall  vitw  some  master 
piece  of  painting.  To  one  it  will  be  but  a  representation  of  sensible  forms,  beautiful 
or  iinbeautiful  as  the  ease  may  be,  and  with  pleasant  or  gruesome  effect  according 
to  the  subject.  Another  shall  note  its  fidelity  to  nature  or  history,  and  feel  the 
charm,  life,  and  dramatic  movement  of  the  piece.  But  another  shall  catch  the 
very  meaning  and  spirit  of  the  work,  and  see  what  the  artist  has  not  painted  yet 
could  not  but  represent  ;  could  not  treat  his  subject  faithfully  and  not  bring  into 
view  the  great  white  throne.  And  s-o  with  a  p(jem,  apiece  of  music,  or  a  sermon. 
One  l^hall  catch  but  the  thunder  of  the  sound  and  sensuous  effect.  To  another  it 
shall  have  a  certain  articulate  coherence,  as  it  were  the  voice  of  an  angel,  sweet 
perhaps,  perhaps  sublime,  but  its  meaning  unresolved.  While  to  yet  another  it 
shall  penetrate  the  soul  as  a  voice  from  the  unseen,  holy,  touching  responsive 
chords  of  spiritual  sensibility,  and  quickening,  uplifting,  and  purifying  the  very 
iniuost  life  of  the  toul.     (J.  W.  Earnaliau-.) 

Vers.  15, 10.  But  he  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  aU  things,  yet  he  himself  is  judged 
of  no  man. — The  spiritual  iium  : — I.  His  cuAKACTKit.  1.  Enlightened.  2.  Born  of 
God.     '6.  Endued  with  the  Spirit.     II.  His  pkivii.eges.     1.  He  judges  all  things. 

2.  Is  exalted  abuve  the  judgment  of  others.  III.  The  source  and  security  of 
HIS  H.APPiNESS.  1.  Not  natural.  2.  But  Divine.  He  has  the  mind  of  Christ. 
(J.  Lytli  D.L.)  The  sjiiritiKil  man: — I.  His  conditiox.  "Spiritual."  II.  His 
DISCEKX.MENT.  1.  Wheicin  it  consists.  2.  To  what  it  extends.  III.  His  im- 
munity from  the  judgment  of  others;  because  natural  men — 1.  Cannot  appreciate 
Divine  things.  2.  Are  incomjjetent  to  form  a  corivct  judgment  upon  them.  {Ibid.) 
The  gj^iritiial  7iian  :^1.  His  power  to  judge — 1.  Arises  out  of  an  enlightened 
understanding.      2.   Extends   to   all   mattirs    affecting    his   religious  well-being. 

3.  And  if  not  infallible,  is  guarded  by  the  disposition  to  prove  all  things  and  hold 
fast  that  which  is  good.  4.  Hence  he  is  preserved  from  all  serious  error.  II.  His 
IMJIUNITY  FROM  JUDGMENT.  He  cau  desjiise  the  judgment  of  worldly  men  because 
they  have  no  spiritual  apprehension  and  their  decisions  are  worthless,  being  over- 
ruled l>y  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  within  him.  (Ibid.)  Authority  in  matters 
of  reliijiun  :■ — The  religious  or  spiritual  man,  then,  is  characterised  not  by 
taking  his  religion  from  other  men,  not  by  living  on  a  decision  formed  by 
others,  but  by  a  personal,  private  judgment  of  his  own.  Religious  truth,  like 
other  truth,  nay,  much  inoie  than  other  truth,  is  a  personal  conviction,  and  not 
merely  a  conviction,  but  a  judgment,  part  of  man's  own  rational  being — the  very 
life  of  his  rational  being  — that  in  which  he  looks  out  upon  and  judges  of  men  and 
things,  when  he  is  most  conscious  of  exercising  his  own  faculties.  Nay,  more  than 
this,  he  holds  this  truth,  not  merely  on  his  i^ersonal  private  judgment,  but  with  a 
certain  strenuous  insistence  upon  its  independence  in  the  face  of  other  men,  even 
within  the  Cliristian  society.  1.  What  is  the  antithesis  to  this  tenure  in  conscious, 
jjersonal,  and  rational  judgment  of  religious  truth?  It  cannot  be  what  is  impos- 
sible— that  we  should  bold  a  body  of  truth  on  the  external  authority  of  the  Church, 
while  it  does  not  commend  itself  to  our  own  deliberate  judgment.  We  cannot 
disbelieve  a  thing  in  our  own  mind  and  accept  it  on  an  authority  external  to  us. 
The  most  that  is  possible  is  that  a  man  should  tal<e  a  body  of  truth  as  summaiised 
in  Church  formulas,  and  without  letting  his  mind  work  upon  it  at  all,  simply 
passively  accept  it,  and  externally  laud  it  and  conform  to  it.  And  no  man  can  for  a 
moment  suppose  that  such  an  attitude  towards  religious  truth  is  the  attitude  of  the 
Christian.  No  religious  truth,  then,  is  held  rightly  "  as  a  spiritual  man  "  should 
hold  it,  which  is  held  as  a  mere  external  dogma  positively  accepted.  It  is  held  only 
then  in  a  way  worthy  of  our  personal  responsibility  when  it  is  held  with  active 
personal  apprtheusiun,  as  that  which  is  an  indelible  and  irrelutable  part  of  our 
own  deliberate  conviction,  in  the  light  of  all  the  facts  of  experience.  2.  But  it  is 
only  in  our  shallowest  moments  that  we  shall  suppose  this  repudiation  of  absolute 
and  unconditional  authority,  which  leaves  room  for  an  exercise  of  our  judgment,  to 
involve  in  any  sense  the  repudiation  of  authoiity  at  all,  or  the  denial  that  truth 
should  be  held  finally  on  mere  external  authority,  to  involve  the  rejection  of  external 
authority  from  its  proper  place  in  the  formation  of  our  mind.  Indeed,  those  por- 
tions of  the  truth  which  do  not  come  under  the  verification  of  our  own  faculties, 
must  permanently  be  held  on  external  authority,  but  the  authority  itself  must  then 
come  under  verification.  In  no  part  of  our  life  do  we  live  so  much  by  authority 
and  legitimately  in  its  own  sphere  as  in  scientific  matters.  I  accept,  for  example, 
with  no  hesitation,  a  body  of  truths  in  physics  which  are  considered  well  established, 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

the  evidence  for  which  I  not  only  could  not  produce  myself,  but  though  I  believe  it 
exists,  I  am,  through  want  of  sufficient  training  and  capacity  iu  mathematics, 
incapable  even  of  understanding  and  appreciating.  But  I  accept  the  results  because 
on  other  grounds  where  scientific  reliability  is  put  to  a  test  intelligible  to  the 
uninitiated,  I  am  able  to  verify  it.  The  verifications  general  and  particular  open 
to  ordinary  men  appear  to  be  quite  as  valid  of  their  kind  in  the  sphere  of  religion 
as  in  the  sphere  of  science.  But  in  religion,  as  in  science,  the  authority  verified  in 
general  must  cover  particulars  beyond  the  scope  of  our  personal  verification.  It  is, 
for  example,  only  reason  to  take  on  the  authority  of  Christ  truths  about  tlie  future 
which  cannot  come  under  our  present  cognisance,  if  we  have  reason  to  believe  that 
they  come  under  His.  But  the  true  relation  of  authority  and  private  judgment,  in 
matters  of  religion,  appears  more  clearly  on  a  more  cognate  subject,  the  subject  of 
morals.  In  morals  there  is  a  commonly  recognised  standard  from  which  a  man 
could  not  differ  without  being  looked  upon  with  almost  universal  suspicion — say,  on 
the  subject  of  personal  jDurity  and  truthfulness.  We  hold  up  before  each  genera- 
tion as  it  rises  this  authoritative  standard,  this  "norma"  of  moral  truth.  We  do 
not  tell  a  man  as  lie  grows  up  not  to  think  on  moral  subjects,  not  to  exercise  his 
own  private  judgment,  but  we  do  tell  him  that  if  he  exercises  it  in  every  way  aright  he 
will  arrive  at  an  agreement  with  the  authoritative  "  norma,"  though  the  norma  is  a 
very  old  one,  which  has  not  materially  varied  since  Christianity  first  illuminated  the 
moral  conscience  of  mankind,  andtliough  on  non-theological  ground,  the  basis  of  this 
moral  dogma  is  not  easily  formed  and  stated — and  if  a  man  comes  to  a  conclusion  on 
morals  counter  to  the  established  dogmas  of  purity  and  truth,  we  condemn  him,  not 
for  having  exercised  his  private  judgment,  but  for  having  exercised  it  wrongly,  con- 
formity to  the  highest  standard  of  mankind  on  a  particular  subject  being  taken  as  the 
test  of  right  thinking  on  that  subject.  Indeed,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  identify  self- 
will  with  the  exercise  of  will,  and  license  with  liberty,  and  eccentricity  with  strength  of 
character,  we  have  no  justification  at  all  for  putting  j)rivate  judgment  as  a  contradic- 
tion to  orthodoxy.  The  place  of  authority,  then,  is  primarily  and  mainly  in  helping 
us  to  form  our  own  judgment.  We  ought  to  bring  our  thoughts  and  feelings,  our 
desires,  into  the  light  of  the  established  and  recognised  authority,  which  may  pro- 
visionally, and  in  the  light  of  common  experience,  be  regarded  as  expressing  the  collec- 
tive wisdom,  and  setting  the  standard  on  the  subject,  whether  of  tHste,  knowledge,  or 
religion.  Our  judgment  ought  not  to  be  formed  in  an  isolated,  individualistic  manner. 
It  is  out  of  committing  ourselves  to  authority  that  right  reason  normally  and  naturally 
grows.  Behind  holy  teachers,  behind  our  mother's  influence,  there  should  be  the 
great  mother,  the  "  mother  of  us  all."  To  receive  in  the  Church  of  Christ  in  earliest 
years — in  education,  at  the  time  of  our  confirmation — a  body  of  truth,  a  system  of 
practice  emphasising  and  embodying  holiness  of  life,  to  receive  it  on  her  loving 
authority,  and  to  grow  up,  as  our  faculty  develops,  into  the  intellectual  recognition 
of  her  truths  and  practices  on  our  own  judgment — this  is  the  moral  growth  of  man. 
3.  The  general  principle  of  authority  admits  of  a  great  variety  of  aiiplications  in 
matters  of  religion.  Let  us  apply  it  to  one  particular  state  of  mind.  There  is  a 
very  widely  spread  fear  of  committing  oneself  in  matters  of  religion.  A  man  is 
often  deeply  impressed  with  the  need  of  religion.  He  has  little  doubt  that  the 
Christian  life  is  what  he  wants,  and  to  his  practical  judgment  it  appears  reasonably 
clear  that  the  Christian  life  is  indissolubly  bound  up  with  the  Christian  motives,  and 
that  Christian  motives  derive  their  only  force  from  positive  and  supernatural  facts. 
Why,  indeed,  should  anybody  deem  that  the  life  can  be  severed  from  the  truth 
which  has  moulded  the  life  ?  Christian  holiness  has  reigned  supreme  and  final  in 
the  world  of  morals  since  its  origin.  And  it  has  come  down  indissolubly  bound  uj) 
with  its  environment  of  doctrines,  sacraments,  ministries  in  the  Christian  society. 
Ju  the  strength,  more  or  less,  of  these  thoughts,  there  is  many  and  many  a  man  who 
fpels  the  attraction  of  the  Christian  Church  :  its  appeal.  It  seems  the  true  home  of 
what  is  best  in  him  and  those  about  him.  But  it  is  so  much  to  commit  oneself 
to — is  it  all  true  ? — Crede  ut  intelUgas  is  the  Church's  reply.  The  understanding  of 
spiritual  things  can  result  only  from  experience,  and  experience  involves  faith  as  its 
basis.  "  If  any  man  willeth  to  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  "  This 
is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent."  The  self- 
committal  of  faith  must  precede  and  be  the  basis  of  the  satisfaction  of  the  intellect. 
Well,  is  this  unreasonable  ?  Docs  it  not  appear  on  a  little  reflection  that  taking 
things  on  trust  does  in  every  department  of  life  precede  verification?  The  pure 
Pyrrhonist  who  professes  to  regard  certainty  about  anything  as  unreasonable  is  the 
only  person  in  theory  who  rejects  the  ultimate  basis  of  faith.  In  the  commonest  know- 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORISTHIANS.  193 

ledge  of  external  nature  is  involved  the  taking  on  trust  an  objective  reality  wLicb 
corresponds  to  tlie  imitation^;  of  sensation.     "It  was  pointed  out,"  Mr.  Spencer 
says,  "when  treating  of  the  data  of  philosophy,  that  we  cannot  take  even  a  first 
step  (in  knowledge)  without  making  assumptions,  and  that  the  only  course  is  to 
proceed  witli  them  as  provisional,  until  they  are  jiroved  true  hy  the  congruity  of  all 
the  results  reached.     Apply  this  principle  to  the  sphere  of  rel  gion,  where  its  appli- 
cation is  more  complete,  and  it  gives  just  what  we  want,  the  crede  ut  i'lteUigas.   And 
do  we  suppose  that  we  are  in  danger  of  really  dwarfing  our  capacities  for  originality, 
our  faculties  of  criticism,  by  such  temporary  suppression  of  them  ?    On  tlie  contrary, 
is  not  the  principle  which  Hegel  used  to  inculcate  in  regard  to  education  profoundly 
true — tiaat  we  empoveri.-h  and  reduce    our  faculties   by  a  premature  exercise   of 
criticism,  judgment,  originality?     Will,  not  intellect,  is  the  basis  of  life.     Self- 
conscious  intellect  belongs  to  the  second  stage,  not  the  first.    Faith  is  as  legitimate 
a  faculty  of  man  as  intelligence.     It  has  its    special  exercise  in  realising  man's 
moral  and  spiritual  being.     Why  should  we  be  ashamed  of  it  ?     Wliy  should  it  bg 
apologised  for?      Thou  sbalt  understand,  but  thou  must   first  believe.      4.    The 
scheme  of  Cliiistian  truth  coheres.     To  a  Christian  believer  who  has  advanced  to 
any  measure  of  understanding  the  whole  is  one  and  indissoluble.     He  recognises 
that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  pick  and  choose  ;  he  recognises  tlie  coherence  of 
the  same  sort  of  means  by  which  we  recognise  the  similar  connection,  far  beyond 
our  personal  knowledge,  in  the  department  of  science.     Thus  he  nbides  under  the 
shelter  of  the  whole  creed.    He  takes  it  on  trust  as  a  whole.    The  Christian  Church 
seems  to  his  spiritual  faculties  eminently  trustworthy.     He  waits  wliile  tlie  "  Spirit 
leads  him  into  all  the  truth."    That  is,  he  waits  while  in  tln^  growing  experience  of 
life,  in  tlie  vicissitu'les  of  failure  and  success,  of  joy  and  suffering,  of  growth  and 
manhood,  point  by  point,  the  truth  becomes  realised  to  bis  experience  and  his  under- 
standing.    What  was  obscure  is  cleared  up.     What  might  have  seemed  at  one  time 
unnecessary  is  seen  to  have  been  wanted.     If  anything  remains  yet  outside  the 
sphere  of  his  own  personal  verification,  the  processes  of  his  past  life  warrant  him 
in  believing  that  the  future  will  give  it  its  place.     There  comes   to  hand— at  this 
moment  in  a  recent  biography — a  beautiful  instance  of  the  way  in  which  one  who 
stood  wholly  outside  the  Christian  creed,  and,  as  far  as  can  be  judged,  by  little  or 
no  fault  of  her  own,  came  gradually  witliin  the  bosom  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  and 
knew  her  Lord.    Ellen  Watson  was  a  brilliant  mathematician.    When  at  the  age  of 
twenty  she  was  a  pupil  of  Professor  Clifford,  at  University  College,  in  London,  and 
loved  with  the  deepest  respect  and  affection  to  spea,k  of  him  as  "  the  Master,"  he 
in  his  turn   had   a   high   admiration  of  her  abilities,  "  believing,"  as  we  are  told, 
"  that  she  possessed  tlie  rare  faculty  for  doing  original  work  in  his  science  ;  indeed, 
he  even  looked  forward  to  her  becoming  known  some  day  as  a  discoverer  or  origi- 
nator in  mathematics."     Her  position  in  regard  to  religion  at  that  time  is  thus 
described  :  "  The  one  absorbing  passion  of  her  mind  was  the  love  of  positive  truth, 
and  this  love  was  guarded  by  an  almost  severe  morality  of  the  intellect,  which  made 
her  fear,  above  all  things,  every  kind  of  illusion  and  self-decej^tion.     She  dreaded, 
as  an  intellectual  sin,  the  giving  to  a  wish  or  a  hope  or  a  dream  of  the  imagination 
the  subject  and  infiuence  of  a  conviction.     Mathematics,  by  its  strictly  logical  con- 
clusions, and  natural  science,  by  its  severe  experimental  tests,  commeDded  them- 
selves to  her  high  intellectual  integrity  as  the  greatest  and  best  of  all  teaching, 
while  at  the  same  time  they  best  satisfied  the  craving  for  positive  truth  which  fillpd 
her  soul,  so  that  she  delighted  in  resting  on  their  conclusions  as  on  an  immova,ble 
basis.     '  I  do  not  need  religion,'  she  often  said  at  that  time  ;   'science  thoroughly 
satisfies  me.'      For,  judged   only  as  to  the  satisfaction  afforded  to   the   reason, 
religion  appeared,  by  tbe  side  of  positive  science,  as  a  collection  of  dim,  uncertain 
facts  mixed  with  conceptions  of  tbe  imagination."     The  certainty  of  science  "gave 
peace  to  her  intellectual  conscience  ;  all  else  seemed  misty — delusive."     Within  five 
years  she  died  at  Grahainstowu,  but  witli  words  very  different  on  her  lips,  the  words 
of  triumpbant  faith  and  praise  which  make  up  the  Church's  "  Gloria  in  excelsis," 
and  with  the  Church's  viaticum  for  her  journey  into   the   unseen  world.      The 
bi  graphy  is  mainly  an  acciaiiit  of  the  converson  of  her  mind.     It  was  a  progress 
without  a  break.     Slie  lost  nothing  she  had  ever  had.     No  part  of  her  hold  on 
scientific  truth,  her  tr.ist  in  scientific  method,  ever  vanished.     She  did  but,  as  she 
described  it,  gradually  wake  up  in  a  larger  world  and  found  that  the  spiritual  truths 
which  she  held  by  faith,  th'iugh  reached,  it  is  true,  by  a  different  process,  were  still 
the  "  crowning  knowledge  of  all  that  she  had  won  before,  perfecting  and  completing 
what  was  otherwise  rudimentary  and  broken."    The  premature  death  of  her  master, 
VOL.    I.  13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

CliSord,  and  the  discipline  of  sorrow  and  suffering,  rudely  shattered  the  complete- 
ness which  she  had  at  first  assigned  to  the  life  in  the  mere  -visible  world.  The  im- 
paiious  exigencies  of  an  awakened  spirit  forced  her  into  the  sphere  of  spiritual  and 
suijernatural  facts.  The  recoirnitiou  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood  came  slowly  but 
surely  upon  the  mind.  Through  DiviueFatherhood  came  the  belief  in  the  Divine  Son- 
ship  manifested  in  Christ,  and  while  she  was  yet  far  off  any  clear  grasp  of  the 
accuracies  of  the  Christian  faith,  the  Christian  Church  presented  itself  to  her  as  em- 
bodying the  truth,  and  satisfying  man's  obvious  need  for  order,  for  spiritual  shelter, 
for  unity.  She  had  none  of  that  intellectual  vauity  which  keeps  clever  people  from 
confessing  themselves  wrong  ;  none  of  that  pride  which  makes  us  preserve  our  iso- 
lation. She  desiied  to  have  perfect  fellowshiiJ  with  the  common  Christian  life.  She 
accepted  the  Church  in  practice.  She  jn-esented  herself  for  confirmation.  She  sought 
and  found  in  South  Afiica  the  fellowship  of  the  saints  in  the  Church.  Authority 
presented  itself  to  her,  and  was  accepted  by  her  just  in  the  shape  of  something  which 
embodied  what  her  soul  wanted.  She  recognised  the  truth,  so  hard  to  the  natural 
will,  that  we  must  surrender  ourselves,  merge  ourselves,  if  we  are  to  find  our  true 
selves.       (C.    Gore,   3LA.)  Sptritual  judgment : — The   epithet  ■pneumatikos  as 

applied  to  believers  is  significant  and  comprehensive.  It  does  not  mean  rational 
as  opposed  to  sensual.  It  is  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  that  gives  character 
to  the  believer.  The  Spirit  has  an  illuminating  power,  so  that  new  discern- 
ment is  imparted  to  the  soul.  This  does  not  arise  from  light  shed  on  the 
object,  but  from  the  effect  produced  on  the  mind.  Its  faculty  of  vision  is 
restored;  its  eves  are  opened.  Before  it  was  blind — not  rationally  so  as  not  to 
I^erceive  truth  in  its  logical  relations,  nor  morally  so  as  to  be  insensible  to  moral 
distinctions,  but  spiritually  so  that  it  cannot  discern  the  tilings  of  the  Sjjirit.  The 
case  of  the  Jews  in  their  judgment  concerning  Christ  is  an  example.  Thej'  saw 
that  He  was  a  wise  man,  that  He  was  just,  benevolent,  and  kind.  They  under- 
stood His  words,  but  had  no  such  discernment  of  His  character  as  enabled  them  to 
see  the  glory  of  God  as  it  shone  in  Him.  The  effect,  therefore,  produced  in  the 
mind  is  the  ability  to  discern  the  things  of  the  Spirit.     Hence — I.  Theke  is  a 

COIXCIDENCE    OF    JUDGMENT    BEIWEEN    THE    BELIEVER   AND    GoD.       What    God    declares 

to  be  true  the  believer  sees  to  be  true.  He  acquiesces  in  the  judgment  of  God  as 
to  sin,  the  method  of  salvation,  tbe  person  of  Christ,  the  doctrines  of  grace,  the 
reality  and  importance  of  eternal  things.  So  in  his  judgments  of  men.  Those 
whom  God  approves  the  believer  approves.  This  is  tlie  ground — 1.  Of  the  unity 
of  faith  among  believers.  2.  Of  the  unity  of  fellowship  ;  so  that  all  Christians 
recognise  each  other.  3.  Of  the  authority  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  only  legitimate 
authority  of  tradition.  4.  Why  schism  is  a  sin.  II.  There  is  also  a  coincidence 
OF  feeling,  i.e.,  the  spiritual  love  what  and  whom  God  loves,  and  hate  what  and 
whom  God  bates.  The  friends  of  God  are  their  friends.  This  is  the  reason  why 
they  have  a  common  experience,  and  why  they  love  each  other  as  brethren. 
III.  There  is  a  coneorjiity  in  the  life  of  the  believer  with  the  will  of 
God.  He  does  what  is  in  accordance  with  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  This  is  the 
ground  of  the  community  of  worship.  They  all  walk  by  the  same  rule  and  worship 
the  same  God  and  Saviour.  IV.  All  believers  are  united  so  as  to  form  one 
BODY.  (C  Hodge,  D.I).)  Spiritual  judgment  :■ — Its  range.  I.  "He  that  is 
spiritual  judgeth  all  things."  1.  It  is  not  said  that  he  judges  all  men,  or  any  man ; 
he  has  his  opinion  as  to  their  views  ;  but  in  regard  to  their  persons,  "  to  their  own 
Master  they  stand  or  fall."  "  Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judj^ed."  Spiritual  judg- 
ment, then,  has  to  do  not  with  persons,  but  with  things.  Still,  does  it  absolutely 
judge  all  things  ?  It  is  clear  that  it  will  not  make  a  man  acquainted  with  the  truths 
of  science,  or  the  facts  of  history,  or  the  details  of  business.  Many  a  great  states- 
man has  had  very  little  spiritual  judgment.  It  will  not  make  a  man  a  skilful 
Biblical  critic,  nor  a  profound  theologian.  2.  Paul  speaks  of  those  thinprs  which 
come  within  the  sphere  of  the  spritual  nature.  The  Spirit  of  God  reveals  to  the 
soul  a  world  which  lies  both  within  the  present  and  outside  it.  It  is  in  a  hidden 
chamber  whose  existence  we  dimly  felt,  but  which  God's  Spirit  makes  known  to  us  ; 
and  this  chamber  has  in  it  a  window  which  looks  out  on  a  new  and  infinite  universe. 
We  do  not  know  ourselves,  our  fall  and  possible  rise,  our  sin  and  salvation,  until 
we  are  taken  in  there.  This  world  may  seem  to  those  who  have  not  been  in  it  a 
narrow  and  poor  and  almost  non-existent  thing.  But  to  those  who  have  lived  in  it, 
it  grows  in  certainty  as  its  life  grows,  and  it  deepens  and  expands  nnd  rises,  until 
it  penetrates  and  comprehends  the  natural  world  on  every  side.  II.  Its  indepen- 
dence— "he   himself   is   judged   of   no   one."      1.  This  does  not  mean  that  the 


CHAr.  n.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  195 

Bpiiitual  man  is  beyond  the  judgment  of  others  when  he  has  contravened  human 
law.  Nor  is  he  exempt  from  judgment  in  his  spiritual  life.  He  can  never  be  freed 
from  the  judgment  of  God,  and  his  fellow-Christians  may  have  it  in  their  power  to 
instruct  and  correct  his  judgment.  And  then,  again,  any  man  of  the  world  can 
judge  a  Christian  man's  conduct,  so  far  as  it  comes  before  the  outward  eye  ;  he  can 
approve  it  or  he  can  condemn  it,  and  he  has  a  right  to  do  so.  2.  What,  then,  is 
meant  by  "  he  is  judged  of  no  man  "?  (1)  The  apostle  is  speaking  of  an  inward, 
spiritual  region  into  which  the  Christian  man  has  been  introduced  by  God's  Spirit, 
and  of  the  judgments  which  natural  men,  who  have  no  experience  of  it,  may  form 
of  it,  and  of  him  as  he  lives  in  it.  (2)  Perhaps  the  best  way  of  illustrating  this  is 
to  take  Paul  himself,  and  see  how  he  had  a  whole  world  within  him  removed  from 
the  judgment  of  natural  men  around.  Take  (a)  the  great  truth  of  salvation  by 
grace  without  the  works  of  the  law.  It  was  looked  on  by  many  then  and  since  as 
an  immoral  doctrine.  But  they  could  not  understand  that  in  receiving  this  free 
grace  there  is  a  new  nature  received,  tbe  motions  of  which  are  always  sauiig,  "How 
shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  '?  "  {h)  Neither  could  lie  be 
judged  as  to  the  way  his  new  life  was  supported.  Men  saw  the  persecutions,  &c., 
to  which  he  was  exposed.  The  world  could  not  unf^erstand  how  tbe  spirit  in  him 
was  sustaineJ,  and  rose  up  in  fresh  flames  of  consuming  zeal,  (e)  The  mere 
natural  man  could  not  understand  the  happiness  of  his  life.  Let  us  only  think  of 
this  chain  which  begins  with  hope  and  ends  with  it,  like  two  golden  nails  fixed  to 
the  gate  of  heaven,  while  the  links  hang  down  into  all  the  trials  of  life,  which  are 
touched  and  turned  to  gold  by  their  Divine  fastenings  (Horn.  v.  2-5).  Now  this  was 
not  peculiar  to  the  apostle.  The  experience  of  most  Christian  men  will  fall  very 
far  short  of  that  of  tlie  apostle,  but  it  is  the  same  in  kind  ;  and  they  have  a  right 
to  set  this  inner  world,  in  which  their  spirit  is  living  and  moving,  against  all  the 
arguments  which  the  outer  can  advance.  IH.  Irs  guidance  and  tests.  1,  It 
must  never  separate  itself  from  its  source — God's  Spirit  acting  tluough  God's  Word. 
The  spiritual  judgment,  if  it  is  to  be  sound,  can  never  be  cut  off  from  this  fountain- 
head.  "  The  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  sure,  making  wise  the  simple,"  &c.  But  in 
order  to  this  there  are  two  things  to  be  observed.  (1)  We  must  not  form  onr  judg- 
ment on  single  texts,  but  on  the  breadth  of  Scripture — the  letter  may  kill,  the 
spiiit  gives  life;  and  I  know  no  better  way  of  reaching  the  breadih  of  Scripture 
than  by  carrying  it  up  in  its  final  issue  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Many  things  that 
are  doubtful  become  simple  wben  we  ask.  What  would  tbe  example  and  spirit  of 
Christ  lead  us  in  this  case  to  say  and  do  ?  (2)  We  must  ask  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit  which  gave  the  Word,  and  which  kindled  any  light  in  us  that  we  may 
possess.  To  ask  the  Author  of  the  book  to  explain  it  is  the  true  way  of  being 
guided  aright  (Psa.  xxv.  C).  2.  After  this  guidance  from  the  Source,  there  is  that 
which  we  may  receive  from  the  new  nature  formed  within,  and  from  the  growth  of 
it  in  obedience  to  God's  will.  (J.  Ker,  D.D.)  The  spiritual  man  unkwucn  to  the 
world: — We  have  liere — I.  A  spiritual  characteb.  The  "natural  man"  is  man 
in  his  unregenerate  state,  under  the  power  and  influence  of  th^f-e  principles  and 
affections  which  are  natural;  the  sjjirilual  man  is  man  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  1.  Spiritual  men  have — (1)  Spiritual  appetites  :  they  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness.  (2)  Spiritual  senses,  which  are  exercised  to  discern  good  and 
evil;  spiritual  eyes — they  can  see  Him  on  His  throne;  sj^iritual  ears — they  can 
hear  His  voice.  (3)  Spiritual  lips— they  show  forth  His  praise.  (4)  A  spiritual 
taste — and  therefore  they  can  savour  the  things  of  God.  2.  Let  us  j)articularise, 
and  lay  down  a  few  tests  by  which  the  spiritual  may  be  known.  As  regards — (1) 
The  thoughls.  They  cluster  around  the  Cross.  Evil  thoughts  may  enter,  but  they 
enter  eitht-r  by  fraud  or  force.  But  they  enter  the  nrind  of  the  natural  man  as 
friends  and  acquaintances.  (2)  The  desires.  "  There  be  many  that  say.  Who  will 
show  us  any  good  ?  "  They  seek  their  happiness  in  the  things  of  time  and  sense 
only.  But  "  the  spiritual"  pray,  "  Lord,  liit  Thou  up  the  hght  of  Thy  countenance 
upon  me."  These  desires  in  the  Christian  may  not  arise  so  hi^h  as  he  could  wish  ; 
but  this  is  the  current  in  which  they  flow,  t'le  end  to  which  they  move.  (S) 
Gratitude.  If  ever  a  natural  man  feels  anything  like  gratitude  it  is  for  some 
temporal  favour.  Now  a  spiritual  man  overlooks  none  of  God's  mercies.  He 
blesses  Him  for  his  daily  bread,  but  much  more  for  heavenly  bread.  He  blesses 
God  for  his  civil  freedom,  but  aliove  all  for  the  freedom  with  which  the  Son  hath 
made  him  free.  (4)  The  use  of  creature  possessions.  A  natural  man  only  uses 
them  as  bodilv  gratification  ;  or,  if  mentally,  as  objects  of  curiosity  and  science. 
But  a  spiritual  man  sees  God  in  everything.     (5)  Association.     While  here,  we 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

must  have  to  do  with  thewo-ld;  otherwise  we  must  needs  go  out  of  it.  But  a 
spiritual  man,  when  he  is  entirely  free,  will  say  with  David,  "  I  am  a  companion  of 
all  them  that  fear  Thee,  and  of  them  that  love  Thy  name."  (G)  ('ouversation. 
Spiritual  discourse  to  a  natural  man  is  always  uninviting,  and  even  irksome.  But 
the  spiritual  man  encourages  it  and  is  at  home  in  it.  (7)  Devotional  exercises. 
The  spiritual  man  does  not  draw  nigh  to  God  with  his  lips  while  his  heart  is  far 
from  Him.  II.  An  attiubute  attaciiep  to  this  character.  "The  spiritual 
judgeth"  {i.e.,  discerns)  "  all  thing's."  This  mu-t  be  qualified  by  being  taken  with 
four  limitations.  "  All  things"  mean  religious  things,  and  apply — 1.  To  religious 
things  only.  True  religion  tends  to  make  men  wiser  in  other  things — by  arousing 
their  faculties,  by  exciting  their  energies,  by  inducing  them  to  redeem  their  time ; 
but  Paul  does  not  refer  here  to  the  knowledge  of  nature,  arts,  science,  &c.,  but  to 
"the  things  of  the  Spirit,"  "the  things  which  are  of  God."  2.  Only  to  religious 
things  that  are  revealed.  "  Secret  things  belong  to  God,"  &c.  3.  To  religious 
things  only  of  importance.  Everything  in  religion  is  not  equally  momentous, 
though  it  is  equally  true.  What  you  are  required  to  know  is  not  the  decrees  of 
God,  buL  His  commands  ;  His  promises,  ivilher  than  H'S  firophecies.  A  man  may 
be  spiritual  and  yet  not  able  to  judt4e  what  kind  of  creature  the  leviathan  was; 
or  know  w'nere  is  the  locality  of  Op'iir,  or  the  len'^th  of  a  Jewish  cubit.  A  mau 
may  be  able  to  open  the  seals  and  blow  the  trumpets — that  is,  in  his  own  imagina- 
tion— and  be  no  nearer  to  the  kingdom  of  God  than  before.  4.  Only  to  the  know- 
ledge of  these  C'>mpaiatively ;  not  absolutely  and  completely.  For  who  by  searching 
can  find  out  God — who  can  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfection?  Paul,  after 
knowiig  so  much  of  Christ  for  so  many  years,  says,  "  That  I  may  know  Him." 
(See  also  Eph.  iii.  18,  19.)  III.  A  distinction.  "Yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no 
man."  1.  Tuis  distinction  must  be  exemplified.  (1)  You  have,  perhaps,  acquired 
a  certain  art,  and  a  person,  ignorant  of  the  art,  calls  in  question  your  proficiency  in 
it,  and  you  say,  "  I  am  n.it  to  be  judged  of  by  such  as  y"U."  How  could  Handel 
be  judged  of  propel ly  by  a  novice  in  the  principles  of  music?  How  could  a  states- 
man, 111  executing  the  complex  concerns  of  a  whole  nation,  be  judged  of  by  a  man 
not  able  to  manage  his  own  family,  or  even  hims  If?  (2)  It  is  always  difficult  to 
judge  a  man  religiously.  For  we  are  ignorant  of  the  heart  and  of  a  thousand  things 
which  may  tend  either  to  extenuate  or  condemn.  For  a  man  may  be  conscientious 
in  certain  things  in  which  he  is  condemned.  Therefore  our  Saviour  says,  "Judge 
not,"  and  afterwards  applauds  judgment.  "  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance, 
but  judge  righteous  judgmeut."  (3)  But  the  spiritual  is  absolutely  inexplicable  to 
the  natural  man.  "  He  is  a  new  creature,"  and  not,  therefore,  to  be  judged  of  by 
the  old  rules  and  principles  of  natural  men.  He  knows  them,  but  they  know  not 
Him  !  He  has  been  in  their  condition,  but  they  have  not  been  in  His  !  2.  The 
spiritual  are,  therefore,  said  to  be  "  men  wondered  at."  (1)  Others  may  think  it 
strange  that  we  "  run  not  with  them  to  the  same  excess  of  riot  " ;  but  they  know 
not  what  it  is  that  lias  weaned  us  from  it  all,  viz.,  the  discovery  of  something 
infinitely  superior.  (2)  They  wonder  that  you  should  find  such  delight  in  the 
exercises  of  the  Lord's  clay.  While  they  say,  "  What  a  weariness  it  is  ! — when  will  it 
be  o\ev?"  you  are  "  made  joyful  in  the  house  of  prayer."  (3)  Their  experience 
under  affliiHion  often  perplexes  the  people  of  the  world.  They  see  their  attiictions, 
but  they  do  not  see  their  consolations.  (4)  Tlieir  conduct  is  often  equally  puzzling 
to  them.  They  wonder  to  see  them  follo\\ing  a  course  which  exposes  them  to 
eridure  reproach  and  self-denial.  They  know  not  the  lever  that  moves  them,  and 
are  unacquainted  with  the  machine— the  love  of  Christ — that  sets  all  in  motion. 
(5)  Neither  can  they  judge  of  the  system  of  doctrine  which  they  hold.  It  maj"^ 
seem  to  them  as  though  they  may  "  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound."  But 
no,  they  hate  the  very  "appearance  of  evil."  "  How  can  we  who  are  dead  to  sin 
live  any  longer  therein  ?  "  Conclusion  :  1.  Our  subject  accounts  for  Christians  not 
being  very  ready  to  communicate  to  men  of  the  world  of  their  religion  and 
expeiience.  They  would  not  understand  it.  David  said,  "Come  and  hear,  all  ye 
that  fear  God,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  He  hath  done  for  my  soul."  They  could 
relish  it,  but  others  could  not.  2.  Christ  accounts  for  the  divers  misrepresenta- 
tions of  Christians  by  men  of  the  world.  "  The  world  knoweth  them  not,"  although 
they  are  very  free  in  speaking  of  them,  Let  us  learn,  then,  to  be  indit^'erent  as  to 
the  judgment  of  the  world.  3.  But  is  there  nothing  by  which  the  people  of  the 
world  may  judge  you  who  are  spiritual?  Yes.  They  can  judge  of — (1)  Your 
talents.  They  may,  perhaps,  be  able  to  say  to  you,  "  You  think  more  highly  of 
yourself  than  you  ought  to  think."     (2)  Y^our  outward  condition,  and  know  that 


CHAP.  11,]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  107 

you  live  above  your  income,  and  tliat  you  had  better  lower  some  of  your  sails. 

(3)  Your  consistency  as  j^rofessors  of  religion.     "  What  rlo  ye  more  than  others?" 
You  profess  more  than  others,  and  you  are  to  be  judged  of  by  your  own  pretensions. 

(4)  The  moral  and  practical  eS'ecLs  of  your  feeliugs  and  experience.     You  should, 
therefore,  seek  to  abound  in   all  the   fruits  of  righteousness,  and  to  adorn  the 
doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things.     (U'.Jny.)  The  spiritual  Jaculty  : 
— Nothing  seems  at  first   sight  more  reasonable   than  to   expect   that  a  revela- 
tion which  is  intt-nded  for  all    mankind    should    rest   on    sucli    evidence  as   can 
be  appreciated  by  all   men.      How  otherwise   can   it  be  universal  ?      Surely    the 
evidence  ought    to    be  such  as  to  bear  the  fullest  and  strictest  investigation  by 
all  sound  intellects;  it  ought  to  be  impossible  for  any  one  who  reasons  exactly 
to  fail  to  reach  the  right  conclusion.     Nay,  there  seems  to  be  not  only  truth  but 
justice  in  this  claim.    The  revelation  professes  to  be  made  not  to  perfect  but  im- 
perfect men,  not  to  the  holy  but  to  the  sinful.     To  send  such  a  revelation  to  men 
who  have  some  peculiar  power  of  appreciating  the  evidence  for  it,  and  to  make  the 
reception  of  it  depend  on  their  exercise  of  that  power,  seems  to  contrMdict  not  only 
rational  expectation  but  the  demands  of  equity.    How  are  sinners  to  be  saved  if  the 
means  of  their  salvation  cannot  reach  them  on  account  of  something  in  the  very 
sinfulness  from  which  it  is  the  purpose  to  deliver  them  ?     Ought  not  religious 
knowledge  to  be  treated  as  all  other  knowledge  is  treated?     Ouj-ht  it  not  to  be 
considered  a  branch,  in  fact,  of  natural  science?     Ought  not  its  evidence  to  be 
subjected  to  the  same  kind  of  investigation  ;  ought  not  its  basis  to  be  observed 
facts,  handled  by  strict  reasoning  ;  ought  not  its  truth  or  falsehood  to  be  decided 
in  precisely  the  same  way  as  the  tiuth  or  falsehood  of   any  other  assertions. 
Nevertheless,  in  spite   of   all   this,  which   is   undeniably   weighty,   we   find   the 
revelation   which  we  have  received  distinctly  declining  to  submit  its  claims  for 
recognition  to  these  conditions.     It  appeals  to  a  distinct  faculty  from  those  which 
decide  on  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  assertions  conct^rning  the  laws  of  nature.     It 
insists  that  the  spiiitual  man  who  accepts  its  teaching,  while  still  keeping  all  his 
natural  faculties  and  capable  as  ever  of  judging  all  questions  which  those  natural 
faculties  can  handle  and  determine,  has  in  him  a  faculty  of  judging  of  spiritual 
truth  which  is  either  wanting  or  dormant  or  possibly  dead  in  others.     It  declares 
with  St.  Paul  that  if  the  gospel  be  hid  it  is  hid  to  those  who  are  blinded.     How, 
then,  can  we  call  this  reasonable  or  fair?     Now,  as  regards  the  reasonableness,  it 
must  be  i^lain  that  even  in  regard  to  natural  phenomena  there  is  a  vast  difference 
between   one  observer   and  another,  and    that  not  only  as    between  the  trained 
observer  and  the  untrained,  but  between  the  capacity  of  one  man  for  being  trained 
and  the  capacity  of  another.     There  are  men  who  cannot  see  for  themselves  the 
facts  on  which   the  inferences  of  science  are  based,  *,nd  some  cannot  even  see 
them  when  aided  by  having  them  pointed  out  by  men  of  clearer  sight  than  them- 
selves.    Tlie  concliisions  rest  on  observations  in  the  making  of  which  men  differ 
in  power  from  one  another,  and,  nevertheless,  no  man  is  aUowed  to  plead  that 
because  his  faculties  cannot  discern  the  fact,  therefore  the  fact  is  no  fact  at  all. 
Now,  the  same  thing  is  unquestiimsibly  true  as  regards  the  fundamental  facts  of  all 
real  religion.     The  claim    that  the  intellect  and  not  the   spiritual   faculty  shall 
judge  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  religious  revelation  is  a  claim  that  bad  men 
and  good  men,  men  with  aspirations  to  holiness  and  men  content  with  their  own 
moral  and  spiritual  condition  and  desiring  nothing  higher,  shall  be  on  precisely  the 
same  level.     And  this  is  not  so,  and  never  can  be  so.     The  man  who  hungers  and 
thirsts  after  righteousness  sees  truths  which  are  not  seen  by  men  who  have  no  such 
hunger  nor  thirst.     He  not  only  knows  better  what  is  meant  by  the  beauty  of  self- 
sacriiice,  of  holiness,  of  unearthliness,  but  he  knows  too  and  sees  as  others  do  not 
see  the  eternity  and  supremacy  of  these  things.     And  the  perception  of  these  factr. 
makes  an  enormous  difference  in  the  inferences  wdiich  he  perpetually  draws  from 
the  sum  total  of  the  facts  before  him.     He  draws  different  inferences  because  he 
takes  into  account  different  premises.     He  sees  that  the  inferences  drawn  from 
the  partial  premises  which  alone  are  within  the  reach  of  bodily  observation  are  of 
necessity  incomplete,  and  he  cannot  be  content  with  them.    The  question,  whether 
there  is  a  God  at  all,  whether  the  Bible  comes  from  Him,  whether  the  his^tory  told 
in  the  New  Testament  is  a  true  history,  have  to  be  determined  with  due  regard  to 
the  insight  which  he  ever  has  within  himself  into  the  eternal  nature,  into  the 
absolute  sovereignty,  into  the  more  silent  but  imperative  command  of  the  great 
law  of  duty.     Tlii.:;  will  demonstrate  to  him  the  existence  of  God  ;  this  will  largely 
determine  his  judgment  on  the  true  nature  ol  Ihe  Bible ;  this  will  never  De  tor- 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ii, 

gotten  in  his  estimate  of  the  historical  truth  of  the  New  Testament.     Tlie  value 
which  he  attaches  to  particular  human  testimony,  the  degree  in  which  he  will 
allow  the  possibility  of  exceptions  to  those  generalisations  which  we  call  the  laws 
of  nature,  but  which  after  all  are  nothing  but  generalisations,  must  be  and  must 
rightly  be  gravely  affected  by  his  looking  at  the  evidence  taken  as  a  whole  from 
the  point  of  view  which  belongs  to  his  spiritual  character.     If  his  premises  are 
different,  it  is  inevitable  that  his  conclusions  must  be  different  also.     So  true  is 
this  and  so  sure  is  the  operation  of  the  spiritual  character  upon  the  hold  that  a 
man  has  on  religious  truth,  that  we  can  trace  it  not  only  in  the  decision  of  the 
great  question  of  all,  bhall  we  believe  in  a  God  or  not  ?  but  in  the  acceptance  of 
particular  doctrines  contained  in  the   revelation  we  have   received.      Thus,  for 
instance,  the  doctrine  oi  our  Lord's  Atonement  is  grasped  with  a  strength  by  some 
Christians  which  is  not  to  be  traced  in  the  convictions  of  others.   And  if  we  search 
for  the  reason  we  always  find  it  in  the  conflict  which  these  men  have  had  to  pass 
through  which  others  have  not  known.     St.  Paul,  from  the  agony  of  his  struggle 
with  his  own  lower  nature,  came  to  the  Cross  with  a  passionate  conviction  of  his 
need  of  a  Saviour  which  we  cannot  find  expressed  with  the  same  fervour  in  any 
other  writings  than  his.     The  man  wliose  inner  life  has  been  comparatively  calm 
and  who  has  known  nothinc;  of  such  violence  of  battle,  will  not  see  with  the  same 
vividness  that  the  Cross  of  Christ  is  his  one  hope,  and  while  accepting  the  doctrine 
will  not  i^lace  it    at   the    very  height  of  all  his  faith.      The   varying   spiritual 
characters  give  an  insight  into  varying  aspects  of  spiritual  truth,  but  without  the 
spiritual   character   such   ins-ight   cannot  be.      When,  therefore,  it  is    seen  that 
religious  men  decide  differently  from  other  men  questions  which  have  to  be  decided 
on  evidence,  there  is  nothing  in  this  that  is  contrary  to  reasonable  expectation. 
They  are,  of  course,  liable  to  make  mistakes  in  the  inferences,  just  as  all  men  are 
liable  to  make  mistakes.     But  the  difference  in  their  conclusion  is  not  due  to  the 
fact  that  they  reason  differently  from  others,  and  set  aside  the  ordinary  canons  of 
inference.     It  is  due  to  their  taking  into  account  certain  premises  which  others 
disregard  and  cannot  help  disregarding.     But  to  deal  with  the  other  demand, 
namely,  that  a  revelation  to  sinners  ought  to  be  appreciable  to  sinners  :  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  the  revelation  was  never  intended  to  work  mechanically  without  any 
demand  on  the  moral  action  of  those  to  whom  it  was  made.     It  was  intended  to  be 
effectual  on  those  who  were  willing  to  use  it,  and,  therefore,  it  was  made  to  be 
appreciated  in  accordance  with  that  willingness.     It  was  offered  to  all,  but  it  was 
offered  without  relieving  or  being  intended  to  relieve  any  from  responsibility  for 
his  own  life.     The  responsibility  of  every  individual  moral  being  is  a  fundamental 
religious  truth,  never  to  be  set  aside.     And  in  order  that  this  responsibility  may  be 
complete,  it  must  extend   not   only  to   action  in  obedience  to  revelation  when 
accepted,  but  to  the  act  of  acceptance  itself.     Men  shall  not  be  prevented  from 
accepting  it  because  they  have  sinned;  provided  there  still  remain  the  power  of 
longing  for  higher  things,  even  though  that  longing  be  of  the  faintest  and  the 
feeblest.     The  revelation  of  God  meets  the  aspiration  of  man.     Where  there  is  the 
upward  spring  of  the  soul,  even  though  that  soul  be  in  the  very  blackest  depths  of 
evil,  there  shall  penetrate  the  power  of  the  voice  of  God,  and  shall  give  force  to  the 
effort,  and  shall  touch  the  heart,  and  shall  clear  tlie  insight,  and  shall  revive  the 
conscience,  and  shall  make  the  will  the  master  of  the  life,  to  go  on  ever  and  to  go 
on  upwards,  in  spite  of  falls  and  failures  many,  to  the  very  presence  of  God  Him- 
self.    But  if  now  it  be  asked  what  jud^^mentcan  be  formed  of  those  who,  notwith- 
standing, have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  revelation  is  not  true,  the  answer 
is  plain,  no  judgment  can  be  formed  by  us.     We  are  speaking  all  this  time  not  of 
the  application  of  the  laws  of  the  spiritual  world  to  individual  men,  but  of  the 
laws  as  they  are  in  themselves.     It  is  conceivable  that  a  man's  spiiitual  faculty 
may  be  palsied  by  the  concentration  of  his  mind  on  tbe  phenomena  of  sensible 
things.     The  possibilities  travel  beyond  our  conceptions,  and  leave  us  unable  to 
say  what  exceptions  to  His  general  rules  our  heavenly  Tather  may  make.     Of  this 
we  are  sure,  to  begin  with,  that  His  justice  is  absolute,  and  we  are  told  expressly 
that  when  all  secrets  are  revealed  this  also  shall  be  plainly  seen.     But  until  that 
day  we  must  be  content,  in  spite  of  apparent  contradictions,  to  leave  all  jmlgment 
on  men's  souls  absolutely  to  Him.     These  arguments  are  not  to  enable  us  to  judge 
others,  but  to  enable  us  with  strong  certainty  to  live  in  our  own  faith,  and  to  show 
irs  in  what  direction  we  are  to  seek  for  that  which  will  confirm  that  faith  in  us  and 
aid  the  formation  of  that  faith  in  others.     There  is  nothing  which  will  help  either 
others  or  ourselves  more  than  the  perpetual  reiteration  of  the  majesty,  of  the 


CHAP.  II.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  199 

eternity,  of  the  supremacy  of  that  which  is  the  very  essence  of  the  nature  of  God 
Himself,    the   hxw   of   duty.       (BLiliop    Tmiph'.)  For    who    hath   known    the 

mind  of  the  Lord?  .  .  .  But  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ. — Tlic  mind  of  God 
is — I.  Unfathomable.  His  thoughts  are — ^1.  Vast.  2.  Unsearchable.  3.  Un- 
biased. II.  Disclosed  to  His  servants.  1.  In  Chiist.  2.  By  His  Spirit. 
3.  Through  faith.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  The  mind  of  Christ : — We  may  have  the 
mind  of  Christ — 1.  Eepresentatively.  The  minds  of  great  men  I'epresent  them- 
selves— (1)  Through  the  character  of  their  disciples.  Jesus  put  His  disciples  in 
130?sessiou  of  His  mind — both  its  great  ideas  and  governing  sympathies.  They 
faithfully  represented  His  mind  to  others.  They  died  ;  but  their  followers,  in  their 
turn,  transmitted  the  mind  which  they  received.  We  look  at  the  true  Church,  and 
we  can  see  in  it  the  mind  of  Christ.  (2)  Through  literature.  A  man's  book  is  a 
kind  of  second  incarnation  of  himself.  Thus  the  mind  of  Jesus  has  come  down  to 
us  in  the  New  Testament.  (3)  In  their  historic  influence.  Christ's  mind  has  come 
down  to  us  in  this  waj'.  2.  Personally.  Christ  has  distinctly  assured  us  that  He 
— not  His  mere  influence,  but  Himself — is  with  His  Church  always,  even  unto  the 
end,  to  enlighten,  sanctify,  guard,  and  strengthen  it.  This  fact  gives  the  Bible  a 
wonderful  advantage  over  other  books.  I  take  up  the  work  of  a  departed  author, 
and  I  find  many  things  which  I  cannot  understand,  but  I  have  no  help.  But  when 
I  take  up  the  Bible — though  it  has  been  written  for  centuries — its  Author  is  by  my 
side.     If   we   have  the   mind  of   Christ,  then — I.  Whether  we  rightly   act  ix 

RELATION    TO  THAT  MIND  OR  NOT,  OUR    OBLIGATION  IS  IMMENSE.       Our  obligation  is  CVer 

regulated  according  to  the  powers  and  privileges  with  which  Heaven  has  endowed 
us.  "  Unto  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  will  be  required."  In  connection 
with  this  principle  note — 1.  That  the  most  precious  thing  in  the  universe  is  mind. 
Matter,  in  all  its  forms  of  life  and  beauty,  is  but  the  creature,  symbol,  and  servant 
of  mind.  One  human  soul,  though  tabernacling  in  poverty,  is  of  more  essential 
worth  than  the  sun.  The  sun  has  no  feeling,  thought,  volition  ;  it  can  neither 
form  an  idea  of  itself,  nor  of  its  Author.  But  the  feeblest  moral  mind  has  all  this, 
and  can  do  all  this.  2.  That  the  most  precious  mind  in  the  universe  is  the  mind 
of  Christ.  (1)  All  human  minds  are  not  of  tlie  same  relative  value.  The  minds  of 
such  men  as  Newton,  Bacon,  Milton  ai'e  worth  the  aggregate  mind  of  tlieir  age. 
But  he  who  is  instrumental  in  restoring  one  soul  to  moral  truth  and  God,  may  do 
a  greater  work  for  the  universe  than  he  who  corrects  a  hundred  inferior  minds. 
But  the  most  majestic  intellects  bear  no  comparison  with  the  mind  of  Christ ;  His 
mind  was  "  the  image  of  the  invisible  God."  (2)  Now  nothing  enhances  our 
responsibility  so  much  as  connection  with  minds  of  a  liigh  and  holy  order.  But 
contact  with  the  mind  of  Christ  enhances  our  responsibility  a  thousandfold.  "  If  I 
had  not  come,  and  spoken  unto  them,  ihey  had  not  had  sin,"  etc.  "This  is  the 
condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,"  &c.     II.  If  we  act  rightly  in 

RELATION    TO    THAT    MIND,    THE    EFFECTS    ON    OUR    CBAEACTER    WILL    BE    MOST    GLORIOUS. 

There  are  three  great  blessings  which  will  result.  1.  Mental  vivacity.  Mind  is 
the  quickener  and  developer  of  mind.  The  amount  of  vital  energy  and  impulse, 
however,  which  one  mind  is  capable  of  imparting  to  another  will,  perliaps, 
generally  depend  upon  two  conditions.  (1)  The  character  of  the  subjects  of  inter- 
course. Where  they  are  tame  commonplaces  or  vague  abstractions,  but  a  small 
amount  of  impulse  will  be  imparted  ;  but  where  they  are  of  an  opposite  character, 
a  powerful  effect  may  be  expected.  (2)  The  native  vigour  of  the  mind  that 
presents  these  subjects.  The  most  moving  subjects  will  produce  little  elfect  when 
presented  by  a  lifeless  mind  ;  but  where  there  is  great  native  energy  in  the  soul  of 
the  communicator,  in  any  case,  there  must  be  a  j)owerl'ul  effect.  Now  you  have 
just  these  two  conditions  in  the  highest  form  in  connection  with  the  mind  of 
Christ.  His  mind  is  life  and  light — condensed  energy  and  focal  flame.  His  mind 
broke  the  mental  slumbers  of  humanity,  put  the  world  in  action,  and  gave  it  an 
impulse  that  shall  go  on  accumulating  for  ever.  He,  therefore,  who  is  rightly 
connectc'l  with  the  mind  of  Christ  must  be  a  man  of  mental  earnestness.  A  sieepy- 
miuded  Christian  is  a  solecism — a  contradiction.  2.  Moral  assimilation.  "  He 
that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise."  Fellowship  with  a  pre-eminently 
sj^iritual,  holy,  humble,  benevolent,  and  devout  mind  is  eternally  incompatible 
with  worldliness,  impurity,  pride,  selfishness,  and  impiety.  3.  True  happiness. 
Christ's  mind  does  two  things  towards  human  hajpiness.  (1)  It  removes  all 
obstructions.  Sin  is  the  great  obstruction,  and  the  great  work  of  Christ  is  "  to 
put  away  sin  "  ;  to  put  it  away  in  its — (a)  Idfa  form — the  intellectual  errors  of  men 
are  sources  of  misery,    (b)  Disposition  form — the  wrong  and  conflicting  ditpositiohs 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  ir. 

of  men  are  sources  of  misery,  (c)  Guilt  form — the  sense  of  guilt  upon  the  conscience 
is  a  sore  element  of  distress.  (2)  It  supplies  the  necessary  condiiion  of  happiness. 
A  suitable  object  of  supreme  love.  Our  supreme  affection  is  the  fountain  of  our 
happiness ;  but  for  the  supreme  affection  to  yield  jierfect  happiness  it  must  be  free 
from  all  moral  defects,  capable  of  helping  us  in  all  the  contingencies  of  our  being, 
ever  reciprocating  our  affections,  and  one  which  will  continue  with  us  for  ever.  In 
Christ  we  have  all  this,  and  nowhere  else.  If,  then,  we  are  in  right  connection  with 
the  mind  of  Christ,  we  are  happy.  Melancholy  and  gloom  are  foreign  to  Christianity. 
(D.  Tliomas,  D.D.)  "  Tlie  mind  of  Clirist  "  ; — A  wonderful  property,  even  for  an 
apostle  !  And  if  it  is  within  our  reach  that  man  must  be  a  fool  who  does  not  give 
his  mind  to  consider  what  it  is,  and  how  it  is  to  be  obtained.  The  expression  is  a 
full  one — for  you  may  take  the  words  and  actions  of  a  man,  and  still  fall  short  of 
his  mind.  For  that  is  his  spirit,  the  motive  which  actuates  him,  the  feeling  which 
BQOulds  his  conduct,  the  inner  life  which  gives  tone  and  character  to  his  outer 
being.  So  you  might  copy  Christ's  example,  and  speak  and  act  like  Christ — but 
all  the  while  be  unable  to  say,  "  I  have  the  mind  of  Christ."  Note — I.  What  the 
CONSTITUTION  OF  "  THE  MIND  OF  CiiKisT  "  WAS.  1.  It  was  altogether  human.  It  is 
an  idle  thought  that  the  body  of  Christ  was  human,  but  the  spirit  or  mind  of  Christ 
was  Divine.  That  which  is  Divine,  being  always  infinite,  is  incapable  of  any  growth 
or  increase.  But  Christ  "  increased  in  wisdom."  So  complete  was  Christ's  emptying 
of  Himself  here  for  our  sakes  that  His  mind  became  subject  to  all  the  laws  by 
which  our  intellect  is  governed.  2.  This  is  necessary  for  the  truth  of  the  history, 
to  the  integrity  of  His  humanity,  for  tire  perfectness  of  His  sympathy  and  power, 
for  His  being  an  exemplar  that  we  may  imitate.  II.  How  Din  thk  human  mind  of 
Jesus  become  that  sublime  and  perfect  thing  it  was?  He  had  "the  Spiiit 
without  measure."  1.  This  thought  is  the  connecting  link  which  unites  our  little 
minds  with  His.  For  this  is  exactly  Paul's  reasoning.  "  The  spirit  which  is  of 
God  "  is  identifipd  with  the  mind  of  Christ.  Tliat  soul  of  Jesus,  then,  infinitely 
stored  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  becomes  a  fountain  from  whence  that  Spirit  is  always 
pouring  out  into  His  own  people;  so  that  "  out  of  His  fulness  have  all  we  received.". 
And  this  it  is  which  makes  a  gift  of  the  Spirit  so  very  sweet  to  a  Christian. 
2.  And,  as  that  process  goes  on,  every  fresh  communication  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
passing  as  it  does  from  the  bosom  of  Jesus,  enables  us  to  say  with  greater  and 
greater  truth,  "  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ."  III.  The  advantages  which  belong 
TO  those  who  have  "  the  mind  of  Christ."  1.  As  respects  that  great  search 
after  truth,  no  man  can  really  understand  the  Bible  who  does  not  bring  to  the  stu^ly 
of  it  "  the  mind  of  Christ."  Now  mark  the  apostle's  reasoning.  He  says,  no  man 
can  tell  what  is  passing  in  any  man's  mind  except  that  man  himself.  In  like 
manner  he  says,  no  one  can  know  what  is  passing  in  the  mind  of  God  but  God 
only.  But  if  only  God  knows  God,  how  can  we  know  God?  By  having  "  the  mind 
of  Christ."  Thus,  then,  it  is,  by  bringing  "  the  mind  of  Christ  "  in  onr  souls  to 
"the  mind  of  Christ"  in  the  Bible  tbat  we  can  understand  the  mind  of  God. 
2.  The  possession  of  "  the  mind  of  Christ  "is  a  wonderful  cine  to  the  intricate 
windings  of  the  labjannth  of  life.  There  are  thousands  of  points  which  require 
instantaneous  decision.  The  juncture  gives  little  space  to  go  to  some  friemt,  or 
even  to  the  Bible.  At  such  moments  a  rapid  perception  of  the  right  is  an  inestim- 
able gift,  and  we  shall  have  that  if  we  have  "  the  mind  of  Christ."  3.  They  have 
the  benefit  of  "  the  mind  of  Christ  "  who  wish  to  pray  rightly.  God  has  given  us 
the  license  to  "  ask  what  we  will,  and  it  shall  be  done."  But  may  not  a  man 
inadvertently  ask  and  obtain  a  cur^e  ?  Our  security  in  that  dangerous  privilege  is 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  Bible — an  acquaintance  with  God's  promises.  But  we  want 
something  quicker.  Those  who  bring  Christ  in  them  to  their  knees,  having  "  the 
mind  of  Christ  "  in  asking,  know  what  is  "  the  mind  of  Christ  "  in  giving.  And  it 
is  surprising  to  what  an  extent  this  may  control  and  fiuide  prayer.  The  Syro- 
phenician  woman  had  it,  when  she  would  not  cease  till  she  had  obtained  what  she 
wanted.  Abraham  had  it  equally  when  he  stayed  his  supplication  for  Sodom  at 
"  the  tf-n."  And  doubtlets  Paul  also,  when  he  ceased  to  deprecate  "the  thorn  "  at 
the  third  petition.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Christhj  sinrit  (Phil  ii.  5,  and 
text) : — Let  the  thought,  the  aim,  the  spirit  of  Christ  be  in  you  and  be  yours.  All 
that  He  did,  wills,  approves,  and  blesses,  even  in  the  details  of  everj'-day  life. 
Observe  here  the  Christly  spirit — I.  Urged  as  the  supreme  pattern  of  self- 
renunciation.  Mark — 1.  Voluntary  humiliation.  "  He  emptied  Himself,"  "became 
obedient  unto  death."  He  who  would  study  the  grand  pattern  for  the  Christly  life 
must  begin  in  the  valley  of  humiliation.    2.  Absolute  surrender  for  others — the  per- 


CHAP.  III.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  201 

fection  of  self-saciihce.  "He  came  "not  to  be  ministered  unto,"  &c.  3.  Dis- 
interestedness in  benevolence — "  Looldug  to  the  things  of  others."  4.  The  grand 
law  of  Christian  disciplesliip.  Though  we  may  never  be  able  to  equal  the  incom- 
parable humility,  gentleness,  and  self-sacrifice  of  Christ,  yet  we  may  follow  His 
example.  H.  Possessed — as  the  Divinest  inspipation  to  the  hisher  life.  No 
man  that  would  ascend  to  the  loftiest  moral  excellence  but  must  possess  "  the 
mind  of  Christ."  By  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  there  is  imparted  into 
us — 1.  Strength  to  fight  against  sin  and  to  achieve  a  victory.  2.  Inspiration  to 
spiritual  power,  beauty,  excellence,  and  holiness.  3.  Harmony  of  heart  with  the 
heart  of  God.  III.  Eealised — as  the  ckowmng  endowment  for  the  noblest 
service.  "  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ."  The  conscious  possession  of  the  mind 
of  Christ  has  led  thousands  to  make  the  highest  .'sacrifice  and  to  render  the  noblest 
service— Luther  to  attempt  the  Eeformation  ;  Eobert  Eaikes  to  establish  the 
Sunday-schools ;  Charles  of  Bala  to  originate  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible 
Society,  (fcc.  Lessons  :  The  attainment  is — 1.  Possible.  2.  Certain.  "  We  have." 
3.  Let  us  all  seek  it  afresh,  for  the  glory  of  God,  for  the  good  of  others,  and  our 
own  happiness.  (J.  Harries.)  The  certnintij  and  soliditij  of  the  e.rperience  of 
Chriatian  believers  : — I.  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ.  1.  Enlightening  the 
understanding.  2.  Assuring  the  conscience.  3.  Informing  the  judgment.  4. 
Kenewing  the  heart.  II.  W^e  are  thus  fortified  against  the  orjections  of 
ALL  UNBELIEVERS.  Because — 1.  They  do  not  know  the  mind  of  God.  2.  Are 
incompetent  to  judge  of  spiritual  things.  3.  Much  more  to  offer  any  instruction 
to  those  who  have  the  Spirit  of  God.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Yers.  1-12.  And  I  .  .   .  could  not  speak  unto  you  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto 
carnal  .  .  .  babes  in  Christ. — Incopacily  in    hearers: — I.    That   the   ignorance 

AND  sinfulness  OF  A  PEOPLE  ARE  A  JUST  CAUSE  WHY  FAITHFUL  AND  WISE  MINISTERS 
OF    THE    W^OKD    DO    NOT    SOMETIMES    PREACH    OF    THE     MORE     SUBLIME     AND     EXCELLENT 

POINTS  IN  Christianity.  Paul  desired  not  only  to  lay  a  good  foundation,  but  also 
to  build  an  excellent  superstructure,  but  the  iL'Uorance  of  his  hearers  restrained 
liim.  Even  as  the  husbandman  does  not  sow  his  best  seed,  wheat,  and  the  like, 
because  his  ground  is  so  barren  that  it  will  not  bear  it.  As  the  schoolmaster 
teacheth  not  his  choicest  notions,  because  tlie  scholar  cannot  receive  them.  To 
open  the  doctrine,  consider  that  in  Christianity,  and  so  in  our  preai-hing,  there  is  a 
twofold  kind  of  matter.  1.  That  which  is  fundamental,  plain,  necessary,  and 
easy,  being  the  first  principles  of  religion,  the  total  ignorance  whereof  damneth. 
2.  There  are  admirable  consequences  and  conclusions  to  be  deduced  from  and 
improved  out  of  these,  unto  which  the  godly  are  to  grow,  not  resting  in  the  former, 
but  greedily  desiring  the  latter.  This  is  to  show  you  that  Chiist's  school  hath 
many  forms,  and  it  is  a  sin  and  a  shame  to  be  always  in  the  alphabet.  For  further 
prosecuting  the  doctrine,  consider,  first,  how  ignorance  doth  restrain  the  minister's 
abilities.  And  ignorance  is  an  impediment  to  our  preaching,  in  these  particulars  : 
first,  the  more  eminent  and  sublime  mysteries  of  the  gospel  about  Christ  and  His 
righteousness  we  cannot  so  frequently  preach  upon,  but  these  things  \vhi>h  may  be 
known  of  God  by  the  natural  light  of  conscience  and  by  the  works  of  creation. 
There  are  things  known  of  God  ]iartly  by  natural  light  of  conscience,  especially  if 
furthered  with  education,  and  things  by  supernatural  revelation  ami  authority  of 
the  Scripture  merely ;  such  is  the  old  doctrine  about  Christ  and  His  ofiicts.  Now 
this  later  sort  of  matter,  \\hich  is  the  marrow  and  life  of  all  preaching,  many  of 
our  congregations,  as  they  now  stand  corrupted  with  blindness  and  ignorance,  are 
not  prepared  to  receive  it.  Secondly,  as  those  sublime  mysteries  cannot  be  often 
preached  on  (though  sometimes  we  must,  because  we  are  debtors  to  the  wise  as 
well  as  the  foolish,  and  there  are  spiritual  as  well  as  carnal  in  our  congregations), 
so  likewise  that  growth  in  knowledge,  and  increase  more  and  more  in  heavenly 
light  and  knowledge,  cannot  be  pressed  where  gross  ignorance  is.  Can  we  expect 
any  increase  or  fruit  when  men  are  not  so  much  as  plants  planted  by  God  ?  Alas  '. 
the  ministers  of  God  have  ffir  higher  and  larger  degrees  of  knowledge  and  grace  to 
press  you  to  if  once  the  foundatiou  were  laid.     Thirdly,  there  aie  many  choice 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

and  excellent  duties  in  the  exercise  whereof  a  Christian  would  have  much  joy  and 
bring  much  glory  to  God  ;  but  the  ignorance  of  a  people  makes  the  minister  not  so 
frequently  ui-ge  tho?e,  because  other  things  must  be  done  tirst.  The  duties  are 
these :  Let  the  Word  of  God  dwell  plentifully  in  you,  teaching  and  admonishing 
one  another  (Col.  iii.  6).  Fourthly,  the  ignorance  of  a  people  restraineth  the 
ministers  of  God,  that  they  cannot  so  powerfully  press  at  first  the  pure  and  sincere 
worship  of  God,  and  the  leaving  of  all  superstitious  and  traditional  ways  of  wor- 
ship ;  but  they  must  by  degrees,  here  a  little,  and  there  a  little,  as  they  are  able  to 
bear  it.  Thus  much  for  iguorance.  Then  the  sinfulness  of  peoj^le  makes  them 
incapable  of  many  precious  truths  in  religion.  As,  first,  the  minister's  labour  is 
most  spent  in  discovering  the  damnable  nature  of  gross  sins,  taking  them  oI^l  from 
their  brutish  ways  ;  and  as  for  spiritual  sins,  unbelief,  diffidence  in  the  promises, 
carnal  confidence  in  themselves,  &c.  These  they  cannot  so  much  press  against, 
because  such  auditors  come  far  short  of  civility,  and  therefore  much  less  reach  to 
piety.  Secondly,  to  a  people  living  in  gioss  sins  we  cannot  so  frequently  and 
gloriously  preach  Jesus  Christ  in  the  offices  of  a  Mediator.  We  cannot  make  it  our 
work  to  set  forth  the  promise  of  the  gospel  in  its  glory.  We  cannot  preach  of  joy 
and  peace  in  believing.  Thirdly,  the  performing  of  duties  in  a  spiritual  and 
gracious  manner,  so  as  to  have  communion  with  God  and  to  enjoy  Him.  This  also 
is  too  high  for  wicked  men.  Use :  To  awaken  people  out  of  their  ignorance  and 
sinfulness.  If  Aristotle  thought  a  young  man  no  fit  auditor  for  his  morals  because 
he  was  subject  to  unruly  affections,  how  fit  can  people  blind  in  mind,  corrupt  in 
affections,  be  to  receive  the  truths  of  God !  How  much  of  the  stud}',  labour,  parts, 
and  godliness  of  a  minister  may  be  lost  through  the  indocibleness  of  hearers ! 
Though  we  preach  not  Latin,  yet  the  matter  we  preach  may  be  so  spiritual, 
heavenly,  that  it  may  be  as  unintelligible  as  an  unknown  tongue.     II.  That  even 

AMONG  THOSE  WHO  ARE  TRULY  AND  INDEED  OF  THE  VISIBLE  ChuECH  OF  GoD, 
THERE    IS    A   VAST    DIFFERENCE  ;     SOME     ARE     SPIRITUAL,    SOME     ARE     CARNAL,    SOME    ARE 

MEN,  SOME  ARE  BABES.  Though  God  Created  Adam  and  Eve  in  their  full  perfection, 
yet  He  doth  not  regenerate  us  into  a  full  stature  in  Christ.  The  ajaostle  in  the  text 
speaks  of  two  degrees  only  amongst  the  godly — the  spiritual  and  the  carnal,  the 
men  and  the  babes.  These  Corinthians  are  said  to  abound  in  all  utterance,  and 
they  came  behind  no  Church  in  any  gift ;  yet  no  Church  so  carnal.  Here  were 
gross  heresits,  divisions,  and  several  gross  practices  ;  so  that  a  spn-itual  people  is  not 
a  people  of  parts  and  knowledge  and  abilities  only,  but  of  grace  and  raised  sanctifica- 
tion  also.  Now  as  there  are  these  degrees  in  the  truly  godly,  so  there  are  peculiar 
duties  required  of  them.  The  spiritual  man  is,  first,  to  be  charitable  and 
indulgent  to  those  that  are  weaker,  not  to  despise  them.  Secondly,  the  spiritual 
man  is  to  walk  humbly,  and  to  be  always  in  an  holy  fear  and  tremblmg.  Thirdly, 
the  spiritual  man  is  to  consider  God  requireth  more  of  him  than  of  others;  his 
account  will  be  the  more  terrible.  Then  as  for  the  carnal  or  babes,  two  things 
belong  to  them.  First,  that  they  be  not  dejected,  or  quite  out  of  hopes,  because 
they  are  babes.  Fathers  have  naturally  tender  affections  to  those  children  that 
are  most  infirm  and  weak.  Secondly,  take  heed  of  resting  in  low  things.  To  be 
always  weak,  to  be  always  carnal,  doth  highly  provoke  God  and  grieve  a  faithful 
ministry ;  to  grow  in  grace  and  bring  forth  much  fruit  are  made  necessary  to  our 
continuance  in  the  state  of  grace.  Use  1.  To  confute  that  proud  and  arrogant 
doctrine  that  will  have  none  members  of  a  Church  but  who  are  perfect,  and  those 
also  who  arrogate  perfestion  to  themselves.  Where  can  such  be  found  ?  Use  2, 
If  those  that  are  truly  godly,  yet  imperfect,  retaining  some  ignorance  and  some 
infirmities  on  them,  are  such  a  trouble  unto  the  godly  ministers,  how  unsuiferable 
then  are  such  as  are  altogether  carnal!  If  wheat,  because  of  some  blemish  in  it, 
be  to  be  blamed,  what  then  is  cockle  and  plain  weeds  ?  If  imperfect  fruit  displease 
the  gardener,  what  then  do  brambles  and  weeds?     (A.  Burgess.)  The  com- 

parative carnality  of  Christians: — I.  Christians  are  decidedly,  though  not  wholly, 
SPIRITUAL.  The  marks  of  their  spirituality  are  these : — 1.  A  freedom  from  wilful 
and  habitual  subjection  to  any  sin.  2.  The  measurement  of  their  obedience  by  the 
perfect  law.  3.  The  ascribing  of  all  the  excellences  attained  by  them  to  a  Divine 
source.      4.  Union  among  themselves.      II.    But  they  have  the  remains  of  an 

OPPOSITE    character   STILL   EXISTING    WITHIN   THEM,  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  WHICH  THIS  NE^ 

ONE  HAS  SPRUNG  UP.  They  remain  loo  much  carnal  and  become  too  little  spiritual. 
1.  They  bear  not  affliction  well.  2.  Their  behaviour  in  the  Church  is  not  good ; 
they  quarrel  and  contend.  3.  They  pay  too  much  attention  to  the  pomp  of  this 
world.     This  state  must  be  altered.     Be  no  longer  carnal,  but  walk  ye  in  the  Spirit, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORLNTHIANS.  203 

{J.  Leifchild,  D.D.)  Rejlectlons  for  Churches  : — I.  The  graddatino  method  of 

TEACHING  (vers.  1,  2).  Truth  is  to  be  acliiiinistered  with  reiJard  to  the  receptive 
powers  of  the  stiulent,  just  as  the  administration  of  bodily  food  must  have  regard 
to  the  digestive  capacities  of  those  who  need  it.  Though  men  might  Hve  on  milk, 
strong  meat  would  kill  children.  There  are  truths  in  the  gospel  of  such  an  elevated 
character,  requiring  so  much  intellect  and  culture  to  appreciate  them,  tbat  to 
enforce  them  on  the  attention  of  mental  and  moral  children  would  be  positively  to 
injure  them.  Christ  practised  this  method  of  teaching.  He  had  many  thinj-s  to 
say  which  His  disciples  could  not  bear.  This  method  of  teaching  shows — 1.  That 
a  minister  that  may  be  useful  to  one  class  of  men  may  be  unprofitable  to  another. 
2.  The  necessity  of  all  who  would  enjoy  the  higher  teaching  to  cultivate  their 
mental  and  moral  powers.  II.  The  carnality  of  churchisjis  (vers.  3,  4).  By 
chui'chisms  I  mean  sectarianisms,  denominationalisms,  &c.  Paul  says  this  is 
"  carnal."  Carnal  because  it  engrosses  the  soul— 1.  In  the  buman  rather  than  the 
Divine.  2.  In  the  personal  rather  than  in  the  universal.  8.  In  the  selfish  rather 
than  in  the  self-denying.  4.  In  the  transitory  rather  than  in  the  permanent.  III. 
The  unity  of  all  true  ministers  (vers.  5-8).  1.  One,  notwithstanding  the 
diversity  of  talents  and  kinds  of  labour.  2.  One  in  grand  practical  aim.  What 
were  they  working  for?  The  spiritual  cultivation  of  mankind.  One  planting, 
another  watering,  &c.  Different  kinds  of  labour,  but  still  one.  3.  One  in  their 
connection  with  God.  (1)  Whilst  all  depended  on  Gol  for  success,  God  gave  tbe 
"  increase."  (2)  All  were  co-workers  with  Him.  "  Labourers  together  with  God." 
4.  One  in  their  ultimate  reward  (ver.  8).  Each  from  the  same  God,  each  according 
to  his  work.     {IJ.  Thomas,  D.D.)  St.  PnuVs  spiritual  treatment  of  the  Church 

whilst  in  a  state  of  faction : — Not>= — I.  His  economic  management  of  truth. 
Economy  in  a  household  means  frugality  in  opposition  to  extravagance.  In  the 
dispensation  of  truth  it  means  that  prudent  distribution  which  does  not  squander 
it  uselessly,  but  which  apportions  to  each  age  and  capacity  the  amount  it  can  turn 
to  good  account.  For  dilferent  ages,  different  kinds  of  food.  For  childhood,  or 
"babes  in  Christ,"  milk,  &c. ;  but  reverse  this,  and  what  is  strength  to  the  man  is 
injury  to  the  child — it  cannot  bear  it.  1.  The  doctrine  whicli  the  apnstle  calls 
"  strong  meat,"  if  taught  at  first,  would  deter  from  further  discipleship.  "  No 
man  putteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  into  an  old  garment,  &c.  Now  "  strong  meat" 
does  not  mean  high  doctrine,  such  as  election,  regeneration,  justification  by  faith, 
but  strong  demands  on  self,  a  severe,  noble  life.  St.  Paul  taught  the  Corinthians 
all  the  doctrine  he  had  to  teach,  but  not  all  the  conceptions  of  the  blessed  life  which 
he  knew  of.  He  showed  them  that,  leaving  the  principles  of  doctrine,  they  were  to 
grow  up  unto  Christ  in  all  things,  but  by  det^rees.  From  a  child  we  must  not  ask 
sublime  forgiveness  of  injuries.  That  which  would  be  glorious  in  a  man  might  be 
pusillanimity  in  a  boy.  You  must  content  yourself  at  first  with  prohibiting  tyranny. 
Do  not  ask  of  your  child  to  sacrifice  all  enjoyment  for  the  sake  of  others  ;  but  let 
him  learn  first  not  to  enjoy  at  the  expense  of  another.  2.  Another  reason  for 
this  is  the  danger  of  familiarising  the  mind  with  high  spiritual  doctrines  to 
which  the  heart  is  a  stranger,  and  thus  engendering  hypocrisy — e.fj.,  self-sacri- 
fice, self-denial,  are  words  easily  got  by  rote  ;  and  while  fluently  talking  of  these 
high-sounding  words,  and  of  man's  or  woman's  mission  and  influence,  it  never  occurs 
to  us  that  as  yet  we  have  not  power  to  live  them  out.  Let  us  avoid  such  language, 
and  avoid  supposing  that  we  have  attained  such  states.  It  is  good  to  be  temperate; 
but  if  you  are  temperate,  do  not  mistake  that  for  self-sacritice.  It  is  good  to  be 
honest ;  but  when  you  are  simply  doing  your  duty,  do  not  talk  of  a  noblelife.  The 
danger  of  extreme  demands  made  on  hearts  unprepared  for  such  is  seen  in  the  case 
of  Ananias.  Tliese  demands  were  not,  as  we  see,  made  by  the  apostles ;  but  public 
opinion,  which  had  made  sacrifice  fashionable,  demanded  it.  And  it  -was  a  demand 
like  strong  meat  to  the  weak,  for  Ananias  was  "  unable  to  bear  it."  II.  His 
depreciation  of  the  part  played  by  man  in  the  great  work  of  progress,  and 
HIS  exhibition  of  the  part  of  God  (ver.  5).  1.  In  all  periods  of  great  social 
activity  there  is  a  tendency  to  exalt  persons  and  means  of  progress.  Hence,  in 
turn,  kings,  statesmen,  parliaments:  and  then  education,  science,  machinery,  and 
the  press.  Here,  at  Corinth,  was  "  minister-worship."  2.  St.  Paul's  remedy  was 
to  point  out  God's  part  and  ours.  "Ye  are  God's  husbandry,"  we  are  only 
labourers.  We  execute  a  plan  which  we  only  slightly  understand — nay,  not  at  all, 
till  it  is  completed,  like  workmen  in  a  tubular  bridge,  or  meu  employed  in  Gobelin 
tapestry,  who  cannot  see  the  pattern  of  their  work  until  the  whole  is  executed. 
Conceive  the  labourer  saying  of  some  glorious  piece  of  architecture:  "  Eehold  my 


20i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

work  !  "  or  some  poet,  king,  or  priest,  in  view  of  some  progress  of  the  race  :  "  See 
what  I  ha^e  done  !  "  Who  is  Paul,  but  a  servant  of  higher  plans  than  he  knows  ? 
{F.    W.  Robertson,   M.A.)  The  mlmaterial  office: — As  their  dissensions  had 

reference  to  their  religious  teachers,  the  apostle  endeavours  to  correct  the  evil  by 
presenting  the  ministerial  office  in  its  true  light.  I.  Ministers  were  not  heads 
OF  schools  or  rival  sects,  as  were  the  Grecian  philosophers,  but  mere  servants, 
without  any  authority  or  power  of  their  own.  One  may  plant,  and  another  water, 
but  the  whole  increase  is  of  God  (vers.  5-7).  II.  Ministers  are  one.  They  have 
one  Master  and  one  work.  They  may  have  different  departments  in  that  great 
work,  but  they  are  like  fellow-labourers  on  the  same  farm,  or  fellow-builders  on  the 
same  temple  (vers.  8,  9).  III.  In  the  discharge  of  their  respective  duties 
THEY  incur  a  gekat  RESPONSIBILITY.  If  they  attempt  to  build  up  the  temple  of 
God  with  the  rubbish  of  their  own  wisdom,  they  will  be  severely  punished.  If 
they  employ  the  materials  which  God  has  furnished,  they  will  be  rewarded  (vers. 
10-15).  The  Church  is  the  temple  of  God,  and  ministers  will  be  held  to  strict 
account  for  the  doctrines  which  they  preach  and  for  the  way  in  which  they  execute 
their  office  (vers.  16,  17).  IV.  No  minister  need  deceive  himself  in  this  matter. 
He  cannot  preach  a  higher  wisdom  than  the  wisdom  of  God ;  and  to  learn  that 
wisdom  he  must  renounce  his  own  (vers.  18-20).  V.  Therefore  the  people 
SHOULD  NOT  PLACE  THEIR  CONFIDENCE  IN  JiiNiSTERS,  who  belong  to  the  Church,  and 
not  the  Church  to  them.  To  the  interests  and  consummation  of  the  Church  all 
things,  visible  and  invisible,  are  made  subservient  (vers.  21-23).  {C.  Ilodge,  D.D.) 
Paul  an  examj)le  to  Christian  ministers : — I.  His  wisdom.  1.  He  discriminates  the 
spiritual  condition  of  his  charge.  2.  Unfolds  it.  3.  Adapts  himself  to  it.  II. 
His  HUMILITY,  1.  He  repudiates  all  the  glory  of  his  success.  2.  Claims  no 
superiority  over  his  brethren.  3.  Ascribes  all  honour  to  God.  III.  His  exalted 
VIEWS  OF  HIS  WORK.  1.  Co-operatioH  with  God.  2.  God's  husbandry.  3.  God's 
building.  IV.  His  deep  sense  of  his  responsibility.  1.  He  would  build  on  the 
right  foundation.  2.  With  solid  material.  3.  Under  the  solemn  conviction  that 
his  work  must  be  tried  by  fire.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  I  have  fed  you  with  milk  and 

not  with  meat. — Milk  for  hahes : — This  second  verse  is  a  further  amjilifiL-ation  of 
Paul's  complaint:  they  were  babes,  and  not  strong  men.  Wherein  did  this  appear? 
By  the  meat  he  did  j^rovide  for  them.  He  compareth  himself  to  a  nurs»,  who  does 
not  provide  strong  meat,  but  milk  for  babes ;  for  that  were  to  kill  them  rather  than 
to  nourish  them.  Kow  this  action  of  Paul's  does  denote  the  great  skill  and 
prudence  which  the  apostle  used,  considt-ring  what  was  fit  for  his  hearers,  and  con- 
descending thereunto.  He  that  was  raj^t  up  into  the  third  heavens,  what  sublime 
my.iteries  might  he  have  preached  upon  !  Eut  he  preaches  not  to  show  his  learn- 
ing, but  to  do  good  to  them.  I.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  prudence  and  wisdom 
eequired  in  the  ministers  of  God  so  to  preach  as  that  it  may  be  profitable 
TO  the  hearers.  Tiie  nurse  is  carefully  to  obs-erve  what  meat  the  child  may  eat ; 
the  shepherd,  what  are  the  fit  pastures  for  to  lead  his  sheep  into  ;  the  husbandman, 
what  is  the  proper  seed  for  such  ground  ;  the  physician,  what  is  the  proper  i)hysic 
for  such  constitutions.  To  open  this  doctrine,  consider  tliat  a  minister's  duty  of 
feeding  his  flock  lies  in  two  things — his  teaching  of  them  and  his  governing  of 
them — and  both  these  require  great  prudence.  If  Solomon,  above  all  things,  prayed 
for  wisdom  to  govern  the  people  in  civil  things,  how  much  more  have  we  cause  to 
pray  for  wisdom  in  the  administration  of  spiritual  things  ?  How  easily  may  we 
give  you  poison  for  bread  without  wisdom !  1.  For  information.  There  is  required 
judgment  and  a  sound  mind  to  separate  truth  from  falsehood  ;  to  know  wliich  is 
gold  and  precious  stone,  and  which  is  hay  and  stubble  ;  to  winnow  the  chaff  from 
the  wheat.  2.  As  wisdom  is  required  to  choose  out  true  and  sound  matter,  so 
to  i^roportion  it  to  the  capacity  of  the  hearers.  (1)  To  pieach  the  nature  of  God 
and  His  attributes  ;  of  original  sin,  of  conversion,  of  jiistitieation ;  as  also  about 
Christ  and  His  offices.  (2)  To  i^reach  comfort,  and  dispense  the  grace  of  God 
in  the  gospel.  But  here  is  much  wisdom  required  that  he  doth  it  not  to  impenitent 
sinners.  (3)  To  rebuke  and  reprove  for  sin.  Now  how  great  a  skill  is  it  wisely 
fo  re^jrove,  to  have  zeal  and  knowledge  together  !  Some  must  be  reproved  sharply 
(Titus  i.  13),  cuttingly.  We  must  not  spare.  Thus  John  called  some  a  generation 
of  vipers  (Matt.  iii.  7),  and  our  Saviour,  "Woe  to  you,  scribes,  Pharisees,  hypocrites," 
many  times  repeating  that,  upbraiding  of  them.  Others,  again,  are  tender,  tract- 
aide  ;  meekness  will  do  more  than  austeiity.  As  for  Church  government,  the  wise 
management  of  that  is  far  more  difficult  than  political.  Let  us  consider  the 
reason  why  this  doctrinal  feeding  rccpurcth  such  skill  and  prudence.    First,  because 


CHAP.  III.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  205 


Divine  truths  are  not  to  be  miniged  by  human,  worldly  wisdom,  but  by  spiritual 
wisdom.  As  it  is  G  )d  that  tea,uheth  people  to  profit  (Isa.  xlviii.  17),  so  it  is  God 
that  teacheth  the  minister  to  preacli  profitably.  Secondly,  therefore,  is  wisdom 
necessary  in  our  preaching  of  Divine  things,  because  the  miscarriage  of  these 
precious  truths  is  a  far  greater  loss  than  any  earthly  loss.  It  is  pity  for  want  of 
skill  in  any  calling  to  miscarry  in  a  man's  worldly  affairs,  but  much  more  in 
heavenly;  there  needs  not  only  faithfulnes-:,  but  wisdom.  Thirdly,  therefore  is 
wisdom  necessary,  because  of  the  untowardness  and  unteachableuoss  of  people 
which  have  sundry  humours,  sundry  appetites,  sundry  affections  and  desires. 
Use  :  To  show  people's  duty,  how  much  they  are  to  pray  unto  God  for  their 
teachers,  that  they  miy  be  directed  into  all  good  thoughts  for  their  soul's  good.  The 
second  doctrine  remaineth  to  be  ami^lilied,  which  is — II.  That  it  is  very  neces- 
sary  TO    HAVE  A  PEOPLE    INSTRtlCTED  WITH    THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  RELIGION    BEFORE    THEY 

MAKE  FDRTHEU  PRoGRjcss  IN  RELIGION.  Consider,  first,  and  bewail  the  miserable 
atheism,  ignorance,  and  blindness  that  every  man  naturally  is  born  in  about 
religion  and  Divine  truths.  Darkness  covers  our  congregations,  as  it  did  the  chaos 
at  first.  Seci)ndly,  as  peoi:)le  are  thr.s  naturally  ignorant  of  Divine  truths,  so  also 
their  wilful  slothfulness  about  them  is  much  more  damnalde.  Thirdly,  because 
naturally  we  are  thus  like  a  wilderness  full  of  briars,  therefore  God  hath  strictly 
commandt^d  this  duty  of  instructing  and  informing  those  that  are  rude  and  ignorant 
in  the  ways  of  God.  Fourthly,  the  two  principles  of  religion  are  reduced  to  several 
heads,  and  are  both  short  and  easy,  but  necessary  to  be  known.  The  doctrine 
about  God,  and  Christ,  and  ourselves,  which  is  the  Credendum  ;  the  doctrine  about 
faith  and  repentance,  which  is  the  Agendum  ;  and  about  things  to  come,  which  is 
the  Sperandum.  But  now,  when  we  say  these  Divine  principles  are  easy,  you 
must  take  heed  of  two  mistakes.  1.  We  do  not  mean  that  the  Divine  faith  and 
belief  of  them  is  easy  to  flesh  and  blood.  No  ;  but  they  are  easy  supposing  the 
grace  of  God  in  respect  of  other  particulars  in  religion.  The  principles  of  religion 
are  easy  and  plain  to  the  mind  enlightened,  but  they  are  either  foolishness  or 
absurdities  to  the  greatest  scholar,  that  is,  if  his  heart  be  not  opened.  2.  We  do  not 
mean  that  the  bare  saying  of  the  principles  of  religion  by  heart  and  rote  is  the  true 
believing  and  knowing  of  them.  As  the  child  is  not  said  to  be  fed  with  milk  unless 
it  swallow  it  down  and  be  nourished  by  it,  so  neither  can  they  be  said  to  believe 
the  principles  of  religion  unless  they  do  with  understanding  apply  them  and  receive 
them  into  their  hearts.  Now  the  grounds  for  instruction  in  these  principles  are, 
first,  because  God  accounts  of  no  zeal  nor  devout  affections  if  they  be  not  the  fruit 
of  knowlf dge.  Thus  Christ  told  the  woman  that  was  so  zealous  for  her  Father's 
worship,  "  Ye  worship  ye  know  not  what "  (John  iv.  22).  Secondly,  the  principles 
are  foundations,  and  are  the  root.  Now,  he  would  be  an  unwise  artificer  that 
should  intend  to  rear  up  a  house  and  lay  no  foundation.  So  that,  so  long  as  we 
pi-each  to  a  people  ignorant  of  these,  we  have  no  bottom  to  stand  upon.  Thirdly, 
without  this  good  foundation  laid,  no  preaching  or  duties  can  have  any  spiritual 
effect.  Fourthly,  conversion  cannot  be  wrought  without  some  knowledge  of  the 
principles.  We  cannot  believe  in  Him  we  do  not  know.  We  cannot  love  Him  we 
do  not  know.  Fifthly,  the  knowledge  of  these  principles  is  necessary  to  salvation. 
You  that  are  ignorant  totally  of  them  cannot  upon  any  just  grounds  hope  for  sal- 
vation. "  This  is  eternal  life,  to  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ 
whom  Thou  hast  sent  (John  xvii.  2).  "  They  are  a  people  of  no  understanding, 
therefore  He  that  made  them  will  not  save  them"  (Isa.  xxvii.  11).  God  would 
have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  (2  Tim.  iii.  7). 
Sixthly,  none  can  jDretend  excuses  for  their  ignorance  herein.  That  it  is  a  great 
sin  and  just  rejjroach  to  a  people  that  have  lived  long  under  the  means  of  grace  if 
they  have  not  got  the  true  profit  by  it.  The  Word  preached  is  commended  in 
Scripture  for  several  and  Divine  operations.  Now  if  thou  hast  many  years  been 
under  these  droppings,  and  yet  art  a  dry  wilderness,  how  unsufferable  is  it !  In 
other  things  of  the  world  you  think  it  not  to  be  endured.  I.  For  opening  this,  let 
us  consider  what  are  those  choice  and  noisle  effects  of  the  ministry  for  the 
DEFECT  whereof  A  PEOPLE  MAY  BE  SEVERELY  BLAMED.  First,  illumination  and 
enlighteninjj  of  the  understanding  to  believe  the  first  principles  and  foundations  of 
religion.  Every  science,  and  so  that  of  Divinity,  hath  its  first  principles,  which 
are  easy  and  plain.  They  shine  with  their  own  light,  as  the  sun  sLineth  with  its 
own  light;  you  need  not  another  sun  to  see  it.  So,  though  the  sun  be  never  so 
visible,  if  the  eye  be  not  prepared  all  is  in  vain  to  a  blind  man.  What  do  such 
bats  and  owls  in  the  sunshine  of  the  gospel  ?     Oh,  if  thou  hadst  lived  in  Sodom  or 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Et-'ypt,  it  had  not  been  such  a  wonder  ;  but  in  Jerusalem  to  be  so  blind  argueth  thy 
case  damnable  !  Secondly,  the  Word  preached  expects  this  effect,  not  only  to  lay 
a  foundation,  but  to  build  upwards  ;  not  only  to  plant,  but  to  grow.  Thus  Eph. 
iv.  13,  the  offices  in  the  Church  are  to  bring  us  to  a  full  stature  in  Christ.  Where 
God  gives  talents,  He  looks  for  increase.  The  ministry  is  a  talent  of  which  God 
wih  require  a  strict  account.  As  Paul  doth  sharply  reprove  the  Hebrews  for  this 
want  of  growth  (Heb.  vi.).  Oh,  then,  sit  not  down  at  the  lower  round  in  the  ladder, 
stay  not  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill !  Christianity  is  a  race.  There  is  work,  and 
work  enough  for  thee.  Let  all  the  world  see  there  is  a  vast  difference  between 
living  under  no  ministry,  or  a  negligent  ministry,  and  an  instructing  one.  If  corn 
should  grow  no  better  in  improved  grounds  than  in  tbe  barren  heath  it  would  be 
very  strange.  To  a  blind  man  the  day  and  night  is  all  one  ;  he  seeth  as  well  at 
one  time  as  another.  Oh,  fear  thyself  in  a  state  of  blindness,  to  whom  preaching 
and  no  preaching,  the  ministry  and  no  ministry,  is  all  one  ;  for  thou  makest  no 
more  progress  !  Thirdly,  a  third  effect  of  the  ministry  is  to  establish  and  settle  in 
the  truth,  to  give  a  sound  mind.  For  through  men's  corruptions,  pride,  and  vain- 
glory, the  ministry,  as  it  may  increase  men's  parts,  so  accidentally  increase  their 
errors.  As  April  nhowers  that  make  the  flowers  fresh  and  sweet,  so  cause  many 
croaking  froths  also.  Lastly,  it  is  a  shame  to  a  people  living  under  the  ministry  of 
the  gosptl  a  long  while  if  they  are  not  thereby  furnished  with  abilities  for  thuse 
seveial  personal  duties  that  God  requireth  of  them.  Oh,  the  many  duties  God 
looks  for  at  your  bands  which  will  not  be  expected  from  others  !     IL  In  the  next 

place,    LET     us     OBSERVE    WHAT   A    SIN    IT    IS   IF    PEOPLE     AEE     NOT     ABLE     TO    BEAK     OR 

RECEIVE  TRE  PRACTICAL  OPERATIONS  OF  THE  WoRB.  For  all  knowledge,  if  It  be  not 
after  godliness,  is  a  tinkling  cymbal.  The  W^ord  is  not  only  the  tree  of  knowledge, 
but  the  tree  of  life  also.  If  ye  would  receive  the  Word  in  the  light  and  efficacy 
of  it,  keep  not  any  compliance  with  carnal  lusts.  The  truth  is  above  your 
natural  umlerstamiing,  and  the  duties  above  yonr  corrupt  lives  and  affections. 
Sure  eyes  cannot  bear  the  light.  Festered  wounds  cannot  bear  salt;  and  yet  the 
ministry  is  both  light  and  salt.     [A.  Burgess.)  The  distinction  between  milk  and 

tiieat: — I.  Neratively.  This  distinction  is  not — 1.  That  between  the  wisdom  of 
the  world  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  Paul  did  not  preach  the  wisdom  of  the  world 
to  babfS  in  Christ,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  to  advanced  Christians.  2.  Not  that 
between  the  Disci plina  Arcani,  or  doctrine  of  the  hidden  essence  of  Christianity, 
which  was  introduced  in  later  times.  For  the  sake  eitber  of  conciliating  the 
heathen,  or  of  preventing  beginners  from  forming  false  notions  of  the  gospel,  it 
became  common  deliberately  to  conceal  the  truth.  This  is  the  foundation  of  the 
Eomish  doctrine  of  reserve — inculcating  a  blind  faith  and  keeping  the  people 
in  ignorance.  3.  That  which  prevailed  in  the  early  Church  between  truth  as  the 
object  of  faith  and  as  the  object  of  knowledge.  This  is  a  distinction  true  in  itself, 
but,  as  then  understood,  it  meant  nothing  less  than  the  differen  :e  between  the 
d  ctrines  of  the  Bible  and  the  speculations  of  men.  Philosophers  of  our  own 
and  of  every  other  age  have  been  willing  to  allow  the  people  the  truth  as  presented 
in  the  Scriptures,  provided  they  themselves  were  allowed  to  e\plain  them  away 
into  philosophic  formulas.  The  true  nature  of  the  distinction  is  to  be  learnt — IL 
Positively.  1.  From  the  import  of  the  figure,  which  leads  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  difference  is  rather  in  the  mode  of  instruction  than  in  the  things  taught.  The 
same  truth  in  one  form  is  milk,  in  another  strong  meat.  "  Christ,"  says  Calvin, 
"  is  milk  for  babes,  and  strong  meat  for  men."  Every  doctrine  which  can  be 
taught  to  theologians  is  taught  to  children.  We  teach  a  child  that  God  is  a  Spirit, 
everywhere  preset  t  and  knowing  all  things,  and  he  understands  it.  We  tell  hira 
that  Christ  is  God  and  man  in  t*o  distinct  natures  and  one  person  for  ever.  This 
to  the  child  is  milk,  but  it  contains  food  for  ant.'els.  The  truth  expressed  in  these 
propositions  maybe  expanded  indefinitely,  and  furnish  nourishment  for  the  highest 
intelle<ts  to  eternity.  The  difference  between  milk  and  strong  meat,  aci  ording  to 
this  view,  is  simply  the  difference  between  the  more  or  less  perfect  development  of 
the  things  t>!Ught.  2.  From  parallel  passages.  In  Heb.  v.  11-14  the  reference  is 
to  the  distinction  between  the  simple  doctrine  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ  and  the 
full  development  of  that  doctrine.  The  important  truth  is  that  there  are  not  two 
sets  of  doctrine,  a  h'gher  and  a  lower  form  of  faith,  one  for  the  learned  and  the  other 
for  the  unlearned  ;  there  is  no  part  of  the  gospel  which  we  are  authorised  to  keep 
back  from  the  peojde.  Everything  which  God  has  revealed  is  to  be  taught  to  ever^? 
one  just  so  fast  and  so  far  as  he  has  the  capacity  to  receive  it.  (C.  Hodfie,  D.D.) 
The  doctrines  of  the  (josjwl  the  food  of  Chri!.tiaiis  : — I.  What  doctrines  the  apostlh 


CHAP.  III.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  207 

PREACHED  TO  THE  CoRiNTEiiANS.  Ill  all  teaching  it  is  necessary  to  bpgin  with 
essential  and  fundamental  prineii:)les.  Tlie  same  holds  good  in  preaching  the 
gospel  to  those  who  never  heard  it,  and  chaps,  ii.  2,  iii.  10  show  that  this  was 
the  apostle's  practice  in  Corinth,  and  the  contents  of  his  two  Epistles  bear  this  out. 
1.  The  moral  depruvity  of  man  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  gospel,  otherwise  he 
■would  not  need  that  salvation  which  it  ofJers.  Accordingly  we  find  the  apostle 
bringing  this  into  view  (chap.  ii.  14).  2.  This  sentiment  is  intimately  connected  with 
regeneration.  For  if  natural  men  are  under  the  dominion  of  sin,  then  their  hearts 
must  be  renewed  before  they  can  become  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (2  Cor.  iv. 
6,  V.  6).  3.  The  immediate  effvct  of  regeneration  is  love,  which  is  the  essence  of 
all  true  religion  (chap.  xiii.).  Love  to  God  produces  love  to  Chiist;  and  love  to 
Christ  is  the  very  essence  of  that  faith,  wliich  is  connected  with  eternal  life. 
Accordingly  the  apostle  exhorted  the  Corinthians  to  embrace  Christ  as  the  only 
ground  of  salvation  (2  Cor.  v.  18-21).  4.  After  men  have  become  reconciled  to 
God,  they  still  need  the  Spirit  of  promise  to  carry  on  a  work  of  sanctification  in 
their  hearts  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  5.  Tlie  doctrine  of  piTseverance  is  a  consequence  of 
sanctification  (2  Cor.  i.  22,  v.  1,  5,  8).  6.  As  God  begins  and  carries  on  a  good 
Avork  in  whom  He  pleases,  so  Divine  sovereignty  is  an  essential  doctrine  of  the 
gospel  (ver.  G).  Which  leads  up  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  II. 
Why  he  called  these  docthines  milk.  Heb.  v.  12-14  throws  light  upon  the 
metaphor.  Tlie  doctrines  which  Paul  preached  to  the  Corinthians  may  properly 
be  called  milk,  because — 1.  They  are  easy  to  be  understood.  Milk  is  much  easier 
to  digest  than  meat.  So  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God  are  plain  to  the 
lowest  capacity.  They  require  attention  rather  than  deep  penetration.  2.  They 
are  highly  pleasing  to  the  pious  heart.  Peter  represents  all  Christians  as  "  new 
born  babes  ''  who  "  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word."  3.  They  are  nourishing. 
The  converts  at  Corinth  made  swift  advances  in  knowledge  and  holiness,  while 
they  were  fed  by  the  doctrines  according  to  godliness  (chap.  i.  4-7).     III.  Why  the 

APOSTLE    PREACHED    SUCH    PLAIN   AND    PRACTICAL    DOCTRINES   BATHER   THAN    ANY  OTHERS. 

1.  Their  internal  state  required  such  plain  preaching.  They  were  Gentiles  who 
had  never  been  favoured  with  the  knowledge  of  Divine  revelation  (chap.  i.  21).  2. 
Their  external  state  required  the  same  mode  of  i^reaching.  The  heathen  philo- 
sophers opposed  the  pure  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  endeavoured  to  persuaiie  the 
Christians  to  renounce  them  and  return  to  tlieir  former  superstition.  Nor  were 
they  altogether  unsuccessful,  for  they  overthrew  the  faith  of  some.  By  clearly 
unfolding  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  the  apostle  took  the  best  method 
to  guard  them  against  the  plausible  arguments  of  infidels.  IV.  Improvement.  1. 
If  the  metaphor  of  milk  has  been  properly  explained,  then  by  meat  Paul  means 
some  other  sentiments  less  plain  and  necessary  to  be  known  by  common  Christians. 
Such  as — (1)  The  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  We  can  hardlv 
suppose  that  he  would  teach  the  Gentile  Corinthians  these  dark  things,  because  they 
were  not  prepared  to  understand  them.  (2)  The  types  and  predictions  respecting 
the  character  and  coining  of  Christ.  It  would  have  been  very  diCticult  to  explain 
these  things  intelligibly  to  a  people  who  were  without  the  Old  Testament.  (3)  The 
predictions  in  the  New  Testament  concerning  the  great  apostacy  ;  the  rise  and  fall 
of  the  man  of  sin  ;  the  calling  in  of  the  .Jews  ;  the  millennium  ;  and  the  state  of 
things  to  the  end  of  the  world.  2.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  paid,  that  Paul's 
doctrines  have  been  greatly  misrepresented.  How  many  ministers  have  quoted  his 
own  words  against  himself,  and  emplo.^ed  the  text  to  justify  themselves,  not  only 
in  neglecting  to  preach  the  doctrines  which  he  preached,  but  in  stigmatising  those 
doctrines!  3.  This  subject  affords  an  infallible  criterion,  by  which  to  determine 
who  are  the  plainest  preachers  in  point  of  sentiment.  Those  who  preach  tlie 
doctrines  which  Paul  called  milk  are  the  plainest  preachers,  and  the  easiest  to  be 
understood  by  every  class  of  hearers.  There  never  was,  and  there  never  can  be, 
any  false  scheme  of  religion  so  easy  to  explain  and  understand  as  that  which  Paul 
taught.  4.  If  the  foregoing  observations  are  just,  then  theie  is  no  reason  to  think 
that  any  people  are  unable  to  bear  the  doctrines  which  Paul  preached  to  the 
Corinthians.  The  inability  lies  in  the  heart,  and  not  in  the  understanding.  5.  It 
also  appears  that  now  is  a  proper  time  for  ministers  to  f'  ed  their  people  with  milk, 
and  not  with  meat.  Our  congregations,  in  general,  are  in  a  situation  very  similar 
to  that  of  the  Corinthians.  (iV.  Eiiimonn,  D.D.)  For  ye  are  yet  carnal  .  .  .  and 
walk  as  men. — Carnalitii : — The  two  ideas  of  the  text  are — Men,  as  men,  are 
carnal ;  Christians,  as  Christians,  ought  not  to  be  carnal.     Note — I.  What  it  is  to 

BE  CARNAL,  AND    HOW  FAR  THE  CHARGE  MAY  BE  MADE    GOOD  AGAINST  HUMANITY.       1.    The 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi 

word  is  of  the  same  kindred  as  "  flesh,"  "  fleshly,"  &c.  Flesh,  however,  is  some- 
times used  in  a  good  sense,  as  "  the  heart  of  flesh,"  and  sonn-times  in  an  inlifl'erent 
sense,  as  "  all  flesh  is  grass."  Mostly,  however,  it  expresses  what  is  bad.  Perhaps 
the  terras  "carnal"  and  "fleshly"  have  become  the  equivalents  of  depraved 
humanity  from  the  fact  of  man's  being  in  the  body,  and  therefore  from  the  evil 
in  him  being  more  openly  manifested  by  the  lustiiigs  and  corruptions  of  the  animal 
appetites.  There  might  have  been  sin  without  the  body,  but  in  that  case  men 
would  not  have  been  stigmatibed  as  carnal.  Having  thus  got  the  identity  of 
"carnal"  and  "fleshly,"  observe  the  kinds  and  gradations  of  their  manifestation. 
(1)  The  first  spheie  is  that  known  as  "  fleshly  lusts" — irregular  animal  appetites. 
Everything  that  partakes  of  brute  impulse;  gluttony,  drunkenness,  lust.  (2) 
"  Flesbly  wisdom,"  by  which  is  meant  not  only  falsehood  and  cunning  to  gain 
one's  own  ends,  but  thought  which  has  no  regard  for  God  or  duty,  but  which  may 
be  quite  moral.  (3)  The  "  fleshly  mind  " — the  actings  of  the  intellect  and  heart 
in  relation  to  truth  and  love  which  are  irregular  or  defective.  Note  the  forms  in 
which  it  displays  itself,  (a)  The  form  in  which  the  intellect  rejects  truth  altogether 
and  turns  away  from  God's  revelations  in  nature  and  the  Bible,  to  its  own  systems 
and  philosophies,  (h)  Or  the  revelations  may  be  admitted,  but  so  corrupted  by 
liypotheses  as  to  make  the  Divine  in  nature  and  the  Bible  merely  the  occasion  for 
filling  the  invisible  with  monstrous  creations,  turning  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie. 
(f)  There  may  be  a  holding  of  the  truth  simply  and  uncorrupted ;  but  they  who 
hold  it  may  be  so  little  instructed  in  it  as  to  know  nothing  but  its  first  elements, 
and  remain  babes.  2.  To  be  carnal  in  any  of  these  forms  is  characteristic  of  man 
as  man.  In  illustration  take — (1)  The  history  of  man  as  connected  with  civilisation. 
Begin  with  a  natioir  in  a  stats  of  barbarism  and  we  see  disgusting  outlireaks  of 
appetite  and  lust.  Elevate  them  a  stage.  Let  the  nation  rise  into  a  really  civilised 
society,  and  understand  the  nature  of  prosperity,  social  comforts,  arts,  arms,  science 
and  commerce  ;  when  all  the  energies  look  no  further  than  the  piesent  life.  You 
know  what  develops  then — pride  of  prosperity,  graspings  of  avarice,  lust  of  power. 
Then,  when  things  have  advanced  further,  and  minds  appear  with  high  spiritual 
capacity,  they  srirround  themselves  with  forms  of  beauty,  and  school  tliemselves 
in  philosophy.  Bat  speculation  runs  rampant,  "professing  themselves  wise  they 
become  fools."  They  are  as  fur  from  God  as  when  given  up  to  the  gratification  of 
animal  passion.  (2)  Sacred  history.  Soon  after  the  Fall,  with  abundant  testimonies 
of  God's  character  before  it,  the  world  got  so  corrupted  that  it  had  to  be  purified  by 
the  flood.  The  little  church  x:)reserved  in  the  ark  had  a  fresh  earth  to  begin  upon, 
and  erected  its  first  altar  to  the  true  God.  But  in  a  very  short  time  all  was  wrong 
again.  Next,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Divine  idea,  out  of  the  mass  of  idolaters 
one  man  was  taken,  and  Abraham's  seed  were  separated  from  the  world  and  shielded 
from  corruption.  Alas!  their  constant  effort  was  to  break  away  and  get  back  to  the 
carnal.  And  when  by  afflictions  and  successive  revelations  the  nati'jnal  mind  was 
improved  carnality  broke  out  in  Sadduceeism  and  Pharisaism.  Tlien,  when  Jesus 
appeared  and  revealed  His  truth  and  established  His  Church,  came  the  man  of  sin, 
and  all  men  worshipped  him.  (3)  The  history  of  the  individual.  He  begins  as  the 
slave  of  his  appetites.  By  and  by  he  awakes  as  if  another  soul  were  given  him,  and 
becomes  respectable ;  he  now  serves  his  passions  instead  of  his  appetites :  a  mere 
man  instead  of  an  animal.  But  some  go  farther.  They  get  tired  of  tlu  i  •  passions, 
as  they  did  of  their  appetites,  and  take  themselves  to  philosophy,  taste,  and  science, 
vainly  puffed  up  with  their  fleshly  mind.  (4)  Society  and  literature  for  the  last 
two  hundred  years.  At  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  English  literature  and 
manners  were  licentious  in  the  extreme.  The  latter  part  of  the  eighteenth  century 
was  an  improvement ;  people  got  prudent,  calculating,  and  respectable.  Their 
understandmg  was  developed  ;  but  tbere  was  a  want  of  all  high  j)erception  of  the 
spiritual  and  the  Divine.  To  come  to  the  present  day,  men  talk  differently  from 
the  moralists  of  the  last  century.  They  speak  of  the  Divine  and  of  the  vast  things 
for  which  man  was  made,  and  there  is  a  warmth  and  grandeur  about  their  specula- 
tions. But,  with  all  their  grand  thoughts,  and  their  respect  for  Christianitv  and 
Christ,  they  have  no  idea  of  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  It  is  just  the  worship  of 
taste,  beauty,  and  mind.  II.  The  reasons  inherent  i.\-  Christianity  why  Christiaxs 
ARE  not  to  be  carnal.  Because — 1.  Christiauity  claims  to  be  a  system  of  suj^er- 
natural  dogmatic  truth.  The  gospel  meets  man  at  the  highest  point  in  the 
development  of  the  carnal  mind,  asking,  "  What  am  I,  whence  and  whither?  "  and 
says,  "  I  can  tell  you  ;  I  can  discover  to  you  the  unseen  and  the  eternal.  Listen 
to  me  with  unhesitating  faith."     All  who  will  do  this  will  find  there  is  not  a  single 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  209 

question  respecting  God,  man,  wants,  duties,  prospects,  which  it  cannot  answer, 
and  by  answering  put  an  eud  to  the  intrusions  of  the  fieslily  mind.  2.  The 
truth  thus  revealed  aims  at  tlie  purification  of  our  spiritual  nature,  and  must 
necessarily  counteract  carnality.  It  is  "  the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth 
salvation,"  and  under  it  men  "live  soberly,"  putting  away  carnality  from  the 
body,  the  first  sphere  of  its  manifestation;  "righteously,"  putting  it  away  from 
social  life — the  second  sphere;  and  "godly,"  putting  it  away  from  the  spirit — ■ 
the  third  spheie.  3.  Christianity  as  a  system  of  intiuence  forbids  it.  (1)  It  is 
contained  in  a  Book.  I  come  to  that  Book  that  it  may  meet  me  in  my  spiritual 
condition  as  a  sinner  and  teach  me  how  to  be  reconciled  to  God ;  and  if 
rightly  studied  it  will  be  the  instrument  of  constant  development  of  intellectual  and 
moral  strength.  (2)  It  employs,  in  addition,  the  preacher,  whose  otlice  it  is  to 
cause  men  to  grow  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  (3)  It  is  a  system  of 
worship.  Christians  approach  the  Infinite.  What  an  influence  for  purifying  the 
heart,  raising  man  above  the  carnal,  inspiring  him  with  the  Divine.  (4)  And  all 
are  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  The  opposite  of  this^ihe  temper 
and  habits  of  a  spiritual  life  are  essential  to  their  character  and  preparation  for  a 
life  to  come.  5.  They  cannot  give  any  other  satisfactory  evidence  of  their  being 
Christians.  6.  The  work  they  have  to  do  forbids  it.  They  are  "  the  light  of  the 
world,''  "  the  salt  of  the  earth."  The  tendency  of  man  as  man  is  to  darkness  and 
corruption,  which  have  to  be  counteracted  by  the  strenuous  efforts  of  the  life  of 
faith  and  spirituality.  III.  General  observations.  1.  Christianity,  whether  true 
or  false,  contains  those  things  which,  carried  out,  would  cure  all  the  disorders  of 
the  world,  and  make  society  everywhere  virtuous  and  healthy.  There  can  be  no 
question  that  carnality  in  its  grosser  forms  is  the  enemy  of  all  purity,  health,  and 
joy  ;  and  in  its  higher  manifestation  tends  to  degrade  and  disorganise  humanity. 
2.  The  nature  of  Christianity  demonstrates  its  truth.  It  would  be  a  greater 
miracle  for  "  carnal"  man  to  have  been  its  creator,  than  for  it  to  be  the  super- 
natural thing  it  is.  3.  He  that  hath  this  hope  purifies  himself  even  as  Christ  is 
pure.  {T.  Binnej/.)  The  remains  of  corruption  in  the  repenerate  :—I.  That  the 
relics  of  corruption,  which  do  abide  in  the  godly,  ought  to  be  a  heavy 
burden  to  them,  against  which  they  are  daily  to  strive  and  combat.  though 
the  tree  be  cut  down,  yet  here  is  the  stump  and  root  in  the  godly.  To  open  this, 
consider — 1.  That  even  the  nmst  spiritual  that  are,  the  Christians  of  the  first  mag- 
nitude, even  those  that  shine  like  suns  in  the  world,  have  yet  blemishes  in  them. 
But  the  best  gild  will  have  some  dross;  the  best  garden  will  have  some  weeds. 
2.  Yet  there  are  other  Christians  who  have  sin  more  prevalent  over  them,  and  are 
easier  overcome,  and  these  deserve  more  to  be  called  carnal  than  the  former,  their 
corruptions  are  more  visible  than  their  grace.  Oh,  take  heed  that  thy  life  be  not 
as  the  sluggard's  field,  all  grown  over  with  briers  and  thorns.  3.  As  corruption 
doth  thus  abide  in  all  the  godly,  and  worketh  differently,  so  it  doth  sometimes 
flame  out  into  open  fire  ;  so  that  it  is  no  longer  the  lust  and  motions  of  sin 
witiiin,  but  the  gross  operations  without.  In  Peter  you  see  what  a  leak  there 
was  ready  to  drown  the  whole  ship.  II.  Whence  it  is  that  the  godly 
DO  NOT  FULLY  CONQUER  SIN.  For  if  you  respect  Christ  He  is  greater  than  the 
devil ;  and  if  you  respect  grace,  that  is  more  efficacious  than  sin.  How, 
then,  should  any  lusts,  passions,  or  motions  abide  in  us  ?  Now  the  efficient 
ground-;  are  these  :  and  tlien  the  final  grounds  shall  be  mentioned  afterwards.  1. 
The  efficient,  because  original  corruption,  which  is  the  fountain  of  those  streams,  is 
not  wholly  dried  up.  So  that  there  cannot  but  be  those  sinful  affections  and 
corrupt  desires  stirring  in  thee  ;  these  noisome  vapours  cannot  but  exhale  as  long 
as  that  filthy  lake  or  bog  is  within  thee.  2.  The  Spirit  of  God  by  which  we  come 
to  moitify  these  corruptions  doth  not  put  forth  its  full  power.  3.  Therefore  doth 
corruption  remain,  because  the  instrument  of  sanctification  and  mortification,  that 
also  is  imperfect  and  weak.  Faith  puritieth  the  heart  (Kom.  11).  So  that  if  our 
faith  he  weak,  the  effects  of  it  also  will  be  weak.  Lastly,  therefore  doth  corruption 
al)iiie  in  us,  because  the  Law  of  God  is  spiritual,  pure,  and  exact.  This  is  not  an 
elHcient  ground,  so  much  as  occasional,  to  discover  and  manifest  that  this  sour 
leaven  still  is  in  us.  In  the  next  place,  observe  the  final  gi-ounds.  1.  Because 
God  intends  in  this  life  to  glorify  evangelical  grace,  and  the  righteousness  of  the 
gospel  by  taith,  as  the  Epistles  of  Paul  abundantly  witness.  Take  the  advantage  to 
gloriiy  the  grace  of  the  gospel ;  say  thou  needest  Christ's  robes  all  the  day  long 
for  thy  nakedness.  2.  God  suffers  these  relics  in  us,  that  there  may  be  daily 
exercise  for  faith,  patience,  and  other  graces,  so  that  these  are  left  to  increase  the 
VOL.   I.  14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iii, 

crown  of  gl  ry,  not  to  diminish  it.  Tempests  and  winds  discover  the  sldll  of  the 
mariner.  Thou  mayest  turn  these  clods  of  earth  into  chains  of  pearl.  3.  Tliat  we 
might  not  be  puffed  up  in  ourselves,  nor  others  lift  up  by  adniir.ition.  Lastly, 
These  thorns  are  still  in  thy  side,  that  heaven  may  be  the  sweeter.  Lift  up  your 
heads,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh.  (A.  Burpess.)  For  whereas  there  is 
amons  you  envying,  strife,  and  divisions,  are  ye  not  carnal? — Envying: — The 
apostle  generally  declared  the  ground  of  their  incapacity  of  heavenly  truths.  Now 
he  enumerates  the  particulars,  whereof  envy  staudn  in  the  front.     I.  That  envying, 

WHEKESOEVEK    IT    IS,  IS    A    FRUIT    OF    THE    FLESH,    AND    SUCH    A    SIN    THAT   A   GODLY   MAN 

SHOULD  ESPECIALLY  WATCH  AGAINST.     Are  ye  not  carnal  because  of  this  envying? 
To  open  this  doctrine,  consider — 1.  That  the  driginal  and  fountain  of  this  envy  is 
the  same  with  the  other  great  impieties  that  are  committed  in  the  world,  viz.,  the 
flesh,  or  corrupt  part  in   a  man.     So   Gal.  v.  and  James  iv.     2.   This  sin  of  envy 
may  eittier  be  in  tlie  full  predominancy  of  it,  or  only  in  motions  and  combats  ;  or 
if  breaking  out  into  act,  bewailed  and  rejiented  of.     In  tbe  former  manner  it  is  in 
wicked  men  ;  in  the  latter  sort  it  may  be  even  in   the  godly.     The  Church  of  God 
would  always  abide  like  an  ark,  conipactt-d  so  close  together  that  no  waters  could 
enter  in  ;  did  not  env\ingsand  evil  eyes   upon  one  another  dissolve  the  cement 
and  soldering  whereby  they  are  united.     We  shall  find  the  disciples  of  John  and  of 
Christ,  even  those  sweet  roses,  to  have  these  worms  breed  in  them.     3.  Consider 
that  envy  is  accompani.  d  with  a  grief  and  a  trouble,  that  others  are  indeed,  or  in 
an  apprehension,  in  a  better  couditiou  than  themselves.     Now,  the  good  that  is  in 
others,  for  which  this  envy  may  work,  may  be  of  several  natures.     As — 1.  Because 
of  the  riches,  power,  greatness,  and  outward  prosperity  of  others.     And  shalt  thou 
be  bad  to  thy  own  soul  because  God  is  good   to  others?     2.  It  may  be  because  of 
the   applause   and   honour,  or  esteem  others  have.     3.    It   may   be   still   higher 
because  of  the  parts  and  abilities  that  others  have  better  than  theirs.     And  it  is  a 
greater  sin  to  envy  others  because  of  their  religious  parts  and  abilities  than  for  any 
outward  mercy,  because  these  are  the  free  giit  of  God's  Spirit.     Now  for  this  were 
the  great  euvyaigs  amongst  the  Coiinihians.     It  is  far  more  happy  to  have  sancti- 
fying graces  than  enlarged  gifts;  far  mure  gloiious  to  have  love  than  large  know- 
ledge.    Lastly,  that  is  the  highest  wickedness  that  can  be  in  envy,  viz.,  when  it  is 
for  the  graces  and  godliness  of  others.     How  many  men  are  reproached,  envied  by 
their   neighboars  and  otheis,  merely  for  their  godliness!      Thus  much  for  the 
object  of  envy.     In  the  next  place  let  us  consider  the  subject,  who  are  prone  to  it 
and — 1.  Those  that  are  of  weak,  ignorant,  and  narrow  spirits  (Job  v.  21).     Envy 
slayeth  the  silly  one.     It  is  the  fruit  of  weakness  in  a  man,  his  very  envy  betrayeth 
his  thoughts,  tbat  he  thinks  otheis  are  above  him.     2.  Those  are  subject  to  this 
sin  of  envy,  who  are  in  a  similitude  of  condition,  estate,  trade,  or  profession,  or 
where    there  is    any  competition   for  one   thing,   and  both   cannot  have  it.     One 
ttade-man   envietb  another  of    the   same  trade.     These  were  teachers,   and  they 
thought  Paul  like   themselves,  ambitious   of  glory.     3.  Such  are  subject  to  envy 
who,  because  they  cannot  abide  the  good  of  others,  they  therefore  study  all  the 
ways  to  disparage,  and  obscure  the  name  and  excellency  of  such.     Thus  where 
charity  covereth  a  multitude  of  sin  envy  covereth  a  multitude  of  graces.     (1)  Of 
all  envyings  take  heed  of   that  which   is   against   men,  because  they  are    godly, 
because  they  live  moie  holily  than  thou  dost.     (2)  You  that  are  godly  especially 
take  heed  of  this.     How  contrary  is  this  spirit  of  envy  to  that  love  Christ  hath  put 
into  you!     Let  us,  in  the  next  pl.ce,  consider  the  aggravation  of  this  sin.     1.  The 
wickedness  of  this  sin  may  be  excellently  illustrated  by  that  admirable  good  it  is 
opposite  to  ;  for  this  is  a  rule,  that  j)rivatiou  is  the  worst  whose  habit  is  the  best, 
that  is  the  greatest  evil  which  is  opposite  to  the  greatest  good.     2.  It  oj^poseth  that 
admirable  goodness  in  Christ.     Oh,  come  with  admiration,  and  read,  and  consider 
the  life  of  Christ  and  His  death,  and  you  will  see  envy  is  as  direct  contrary  to  Him 
as  the  serpent  to  the  dove.     1.  The  grace  of  love  and  charity  is  often  prayed  for, 
and  that  by  Christ  Himself,  that  His  people  might  have  it.    He  prayeth  for  nothing 
so  earnestly  as  that.     It  is  made  the  sign  of  Christ's  disciples,  not  by  miracles, 
not  by  prophecies,  but  by  love,  shall  all  meu  know  Christ's  disciples.     2.  There  is 
still    further    abomination  in  this  sin ;    lor   it    is    the   very  lively  image   of    the 
devil.     3.  This  sin  of  envy  is  a  mother-sin,  a  fountain-sin.     There  is  no  wicked- 
ness in  the  world  but  this  sin  will  conceive  it  and  bring  it  forth.     4.  This  sin 
is  a  just  torment  to  him  that  commits   it.      5.    This  siu  of    envy  doth  deprive 
Christians  of  all  exercise  and  comfort  of  common  graces.     Lastly,  it  is  a  tenacious 
inbred  sin.     These  worms  will  breed  in  the  sweetest  roses  ;   these  moths  in  the 


CHAP.  III.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  211 

finest  garments.  So  that  the  more  contumacious  and  inherent  this  sin  is,  the 
greater  cause  to  be  afraid  of  it.  Well,  if  it  be  so  dangerous  a  sin,  what  remedies 
may  be  used  against  it  ?  1.  Turn  envy  into  pity;  and  this  is  an  excellent  cure. 
Nothing  breaketh  envy  so  soon  as  pity.  He  hath  received  more  talents,  and  so 
greater  increase  is  expected ;  so  that  he  is  more  to  be  prayed  for.  He  having  a 
greater  treasure  is  more  obnoxious  to  thefts  and  dangers.  2.  Consider  that  if 
instead  of  envy  thou  wouldst  bless  and  praise  God  for  the  gifts  and  graces  bestowed 
upon  others,  they  would  thereby  be  made  thine.  Lastly,  be  contented  witli  thy 
condition.  Envy  commonly  comes  from  discontent  at  what  is  ours.  (Ibid.) 
Strife. — Contentions : — -We  are  come  to  the  second  sign  specified.  This  thorn 
argued  them  to  be  brambles,  not  tigs.  In  a  great  measure  carnal,  not  spiritual. 
Observe  that  strifes  and  quarrelling  contentions  among  Christians  argue  them  to 
be  so  far  carnal.  Consider — 1.  That  the  true  ground  of  all  love  and  peace,  all 
concord  and  agreement,  can  only  be  upon  a  motive  of  godliness  and  honesty. 
Only  godly  men  can  truly  love  one  another,  because  the  motive  of  it  is  the  image 
of  God.  The  cause  of  it  is  God's  command,  and  the  end  of  it  is  to  do  good, 
temporal  and  spiritual,  to  one  another.  Hence  this  is  called  love  in  the  faith  (Tit. 
iii.  15),  and  in  the  Spirit  (Col.  i.  8).  And  therefore,  if  the  people  of  God  at  any 
time  quarrel,  and  strive  with  one  another,  there  is  so  much  manifestation  that  their 
love  was  not  because  they  were  godly,  but  for  other  ends.  In  the  second  place, 
take  notice  there  is  a  twofold  striving  or  contention.  1.  That  which  is  good  and 
laudable.  Thus  Jude  commands  to  contend  for  the  faith  once  delivered.  To  be 
in  an  agony  for  it  (ver.  4).  2.  There  is  a  sinful  and  ungodly  striving.  And  that 
may  be  about  a  twofold  object.  Either  in  civil  worldly  things  quarrelling  and 
■wrangling  about  them,  or  in  religious  matters.  (1)  Show  the  sinfulness  of  the 
causes.  (2)  The  effects  wherein  they  manifest  themselves,  and — (3)  The  aggrava- 
tion of  the  sin.  The  cause  in  the  general  is  that  bitter  poisonous  fountain  of 
corruption  within  every  man.  Man  by  nature  is  a  spider,  a  toad.  He  can  spit 
nothing  but  venom.  He  is  a  bramble  that  tears  every  one  that  cometh  near  him. 
Thus  Gal.  V.  ;  strifes  and  contentions  are  made  the  manifest  works  of  the  flesh. 
But  the  particular  lusts  are — 1.  Pride.  Where  pride  is  there  is  contention  (Prov. 
xiii.  10).  A  proud  man,  he  cannot  but  strive,  no  more  than  fire  cannot  but  set  all 
on  a  flame  where  it  is.  The  chimney  that  is  higher  than  other  parts  of  the  house, 
puts  out  all  the  smoke  and  dark  vapours ;  and  those  sometimes  that  would  exalt 
themselves  above  others,  they  must  needs  evaporate  their  loathsome  stomach 
against  others.  2.  Ambition  and  vain-glory,  which  comes  near  to  pride.  Absalom's 
ambition  for  the  kingdom,  what  a  terrible  shake  did  it  make  in  Israel !  3.  Malicious 
froward  dispositions.  There  are  some  of  that  rancorous,  turbulent  nature  that 
they  cannot  be  quiet  but  in  the  disturbing  of  others.  Salamanders  that  can  live 
nowhere  but  in  fire,  never  at  rest  but  when  they  are  in  brawlings  or  contentions. 
4.  Covetousness  and  sinful  love  to  the  things  of  the  world  that  makes  men  quarrel 
and  brawl.  Lastly,  impatience,  when  men  know  not  how  with  patience  and  godly 
wisdom  to  pass  by  many  injuries  and  wrongs.  Now  the  sinful  effects -1.  Of 
striving  about  worldly  things  is  discovered — (1)  In  passionate  and  railing  speeches. 
Let  all  clamour  and  evil  speaking  be  laid  aside  (Eph.  iv.  31 ;  Matt.  v.  22).  (2)  It 
is  seen  in  backbiting,  slandering,  inventing  of  lies  against  others,  whispering,  and 
secretly  reproaching  of  others  where  they  are  not  present  to  justify  themselves. 
(3)  A  delight  to  go  to  law,  and  to  implead  others  at  the  courts  of  judicature  (chap, 
vi.).  (-l)  Lastly,  this  civil  or  uncivil  contention,  rather,  is  seen  in  the  procuring  of 
all  that  hurt  and  mischief  to  others  we  can,  either  in  name  or  estate.  2.  As  for 
striving  in  religious  matters,  that  is  seen  two  ways.  (1)  When  men  are  given  to 
cavil  and  contradict  the  truth,  though  never  so  evidently  discovered,  esjjecially 
because  of  the  purity  of  it,  because  it  convinceth  and  arraigneth  thy  lusts,  greatly 
condemning  them.  (2)  When  men  dote  about  questions  and  disputes  that  have  no 
profit,  or  if  profit,  yet  attend  not  to  them  in  their  place  (Titus  iii.  9).  3.  I  come 
to  the  aggravation  of  this  sin  of  contention.  (1)  This  striving  temper  is  directly 
opposite  to  many  commands  that  vehemently  press  love,  brotherly  kiu'lness, 
peaceableness  (Rom.  xii.  18  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  8).  (2)  These  strifes  and  quarrellings 
make  all  our  prayers  and  religion  in  vain.  (3)  The  relation  we  are  in  comm  .nds 
peace  and  unity.  There  is  one  God,  one  Christ,  one  Spirit,  one  baptism  (Eph. 
iv.  5).  {Ibid.)  Divisions. — Discord  : — That  divisions  and  factions  do  quickly 
creep  into  the  best  and  purest  Churches,  This  Church  of  Corinth  was  a  garden 
planted  by  Paul,  and,  notwithstanding  all  his  care,  his  constant  inspection,  \  et 
these  weeds   grow  up  in  it.     1.   Divisions  or  factions  may  be  either — (1)   Civil 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

or  ecclesiastical.  Civil  are  all  those  rents  and  ruptures  that  are  made  hy  the  lusts 
of  men  in  a  commonwealtli.  Thus  Jeroboam  made  a  division,  he  rent  ten  tribes 
from  the  other  two.  The  other  divisions  are  in  the  Churcli,  and  they  are  of  two 
sorts,  either  when  different  doctrines  or  ojiinions  are  maintained,  and  these  are 
called  heresies.  Or  when  there  is  a  soundnf ss  of  doctrine,  yet  men  break  the  bonds 
of  love,  and  live  in  malice  and  uncharitablenes^s,  and  this  is  called  schism.  (2) 
Factions  or  divisions  are  either  personal,  between  godly  men  particularlj',  or  more 
public  between  societies  and  societies.  Churches  and  Cnurches.  Between  persons. 
Thus  Paul  and  Barnabas,  they  were  in  a  bitter  dissention  one  with  another  (Acts 
XV.  39).  So  Paul  and  Ptter ;  Paul  reproved  Peter,  and  withstood  him  to  the  face 
(Gal.  i.).  Or  more  public.  Thus  many  Jews  that  believed  raif  ed  great  dissensions 
about  circumcision,  and  the  retaining  of  the  customs  of  the  law.  2.  In  the  next 
place,  what  makes  division  or  foction?  And — (1)  That  is,  when  men  promote  any 
false  or  wicked  way  a^jainst  truth  and  godliness.  (2)  Faction  and  division  is  seen 
when  though  the  matter  be  true  or  good  they  strive  for,  yet  tliey  do  it  not  in  a 
g.'dly,  ordeily  way.  A  good  intention,  even  in  a  good  matter  without  good  order,  is 
not  wairiiutable.  (3)  A  third  thing  in  division  is  when  men  do  not  keep  to  their 
proper  places,  to  their  ofitices.  (4)  Thus  it  is  division  and  faction  when  the 
affections  and  passions  of  men  are  embittered  with  any  carnal  distempers ;  so 
that  this  sin  duth  affect  the  heart  and  spirit  of  a  man,  and  then  it  breaks  out 
into  actions.  3.  In  the  next  place,  what  are  the  causes  that  make  these  the  efficient 
causes?  (1)  The  ignorance  of  men,  as  long  as  men  know  but  in  part,  have  not 
perfection  in  the  understanding;  and  tbis  breedeth  difference  of  opinions,  and 
difference  of  opinions  difference  of  affections.  (2)  Self-confidence  and  arrogancy. 
(3)  The  last  efficient  are  worldly  hopes  and  desires  of  carnal  advantages.  (4)  Lastly, 
there  is  an  occasional  cause,  but  not  efficient,  and  that  bath  been  the  tyranny  and 
scandalous  lives  of  Cliurcli  officers.  This  bath  many  times  made  sad  rents. 
{Ibid.)  And  walk  as  men. — Walkmg  as  men: — The  apostle  in  this  phrase,  "  To 
live  as  men,"  or,  "  Accoiding  to  man,"  may  imply  these  things.  1.  Mere  men  have 
no  Divine  faith  in  the  matters  of  religion,  wrought  in  tin m  hy  the  Spirit  of  God,  but 
walk  according  to  the  natuial  dictates  of  conscience  and  education,  and  so  are  for 
that  religion  which  they  have  been  brought  up  in  and  accustomed  to,  whether  it 
be  right  or  wroug,  whether  good  or  bad.  This  our  Saviour  cleareth,  when  Peter 
made  that  excellent  confessi  n  of  faith,  that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.  Our 
Saviour  graciously  accepts  of  it,  and  tells  him,  "Flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed 
this  to  him  "  (Matt.  xvi.  17).  2.  To  walk  as  a  mere  man  is  to  propound  some  out- 
ward inferior  comforts  as  the  ultimate  end  and  chief  felicity  of  our  souls.  Take  a 
man,  as  a  mere  man,  and  the  utmost  end  for  which  he  labours  and  strives  in  this 
world  is  some  earthly  advantages.  Oh,  but  what  saith  the  apostle  of  true 
Christians  ?  "  We  walk  not  by  sense,  but  by  faith  "  (2  Cor.  v.  7).  3.  To  walk  as 
mere  men  is  to  put  confidence  and  hope  only  in  second  causes  and  visible  instru- 
ments, not  trusting  the  promise  of  God  or  believing  His  power,  that  He  reigneth 
and  ruleth  in  heaven  and  earth,  doing  what  He  pleaseth.  4.  To  walk  like  men  is 
to  be  full  of  falsehood,  deceitfulness,  or  hypocrisy,  to  have  no  truth  in  heart  or 
word  one  to  another.  5.  To  walk  as  men  is  here  in  the  text  to  be  in  anger,  hatred, 
and  re\engeful  thoughts  one  against  another  ;  whereas  all  beasts  agree  among 
tliemselves,  even  the  savage  bears  and  tigers,  yea,  the  devils  are  not  divided  one 
against  another.  Man  naturally  finds  nothing  so  sweet  as  revenge  upon  others. 
6.  To  walk  as  men  is  to  make  a  man's  self  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  centre 
wherein  all  the  lints  must  meet.  "  All  seek  their  own,  and  not  the  things  of  Jesus 
Christ  "  (PJiil.  ii.  21).  7.  Lastly,  to  walk  as  man  is  to  commit  any  sin  rather  than 
to  be  persecuted  for  the  truth  of  God.  To  swear,  or  foreswear,  to  turn  into  all 
shspes,  to  avoid  danger.  How  are  all  our  congregations  ?  How  live  they  ?  How 
walk  they  ?     Do  they  not  live  as  men  ?     Yea,  how  many  like  brute  beasts  ?     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  4-8.  For  while  one  saith,  I  am  of  Paul  .   .  .  are  ye  not  carnal  ? — The 

cariialitij  of  ChurcJiisms : — In  the  Church  at  Corinth  there  was  a  variety  of 
elements  ;  the  Eoman  democratic  —  independent  in  thought  and  action  ;  the 
Greek — cultured,  philosophic,  and  ffistlietic  ;  the  Jewish — craving  for  signs  and 
wonders.  Here  consei[uently  there  was  diversity  of  thought,  and  discussions  which 
would  lead  to  divisions.  The  Corinthian  Christians,  therefore,  instead  of  being 
united  by  having  Christ  as  the  supreme  object  of  thought  and  love,  were  divided  by 
certain  forms  of  religious  thought.  No  two  men  wiU  have  exactly  the  same  views 
on  the  same  subject.     Paul  would  not  give  out  the  same  views  in  the  same  way  as 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  213 

Apollos  or  Peter,  and  their  auditors  would  therefore  have  their  preferences.  Herein 
we  have  the  philosophy  of  existence  of  various  Churches.  Note — I.  The  nature 
OF  Churchism.  The  Corinthians  who  said,  "I  am  of  Paul,"  "I  am  of  Apollos," 
had  such  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  their  particular  favourites  as  led  them  to 
depreciate  the  merits  of  the  others.  To  the  Paulites  there  was  no  teacher  equal  to 
him,  &a.  This  I  call  Churcbism.  To  become  members  of  institutions  called 
Churches,  and  advocate  the  peculiar  views  they  represent,  may  be  i-ight  and  useful. 
It  affords  opportunities  for  mutual  counselling  and  spiritual  stimulation.  But 
when  our  communion  becomes  the  centre  and  circumference  of  our  souls  it  is 
sectarianism.  One  says,  I  am  of  the  Catholic  Church ;  another,  I  am  of  the  Greek ; 
another,  I  am  of  the  English,  etc.  There  is  only  one  true  Church,  and  that  ia 
composed  of  those  only  who  have  a  vital  and  practical  faith  in  Christ  Himself. 
"  I  determined,"  says  Paul,  "to  know  nothing  amongst  men  save  Jesus  Christ  and 
Him  crucified."  II.  The  depravity  of  Chuechisii.  "Are  ye  not  carnal?" 
This  bodily  part  of  man's  being  possesses  desires,  tendencies,  and  appetites,  whicli 
our  corrupt  imaginations  nurture  and  inspire  with  sinful  propfnsities.  Hence  to 
this  Paul  seems  to  trace  nearly  all  immoral  conduct  (ver.  3).  That  man  is  carnal 
who  allows  his  mind  to  be  engrossed — 1.  In  the  human  rather  than  in  the  Divine. 
The  walk  of  the  spiritual  man  is  with  God,  he  sees  Him  who  is  invisible  ;  the 
"carnal"  man  lives  in  the  human,  never  rises  above  the  clou^iy  atmosphere  of 
human  opinions.  How  some  men  are  chained  to  their  little  sects  !  With  them  it 
is  all  "  our  Church,"  "  our  body,"  "our  principles."  Instead  of  climbing  up  the 
breezy  heights  of  Divine  ideas,  they  live  down  in  sectarian  glens,  breathing  the  fog 
of  human  crotchets,  and  with  souls  half  suffocated,  they  excKim,  "  I  am  a  Church- 
man," "  I  am  a  Nonconformist,"  &c.  2.  In  the  selfish  ratlier  than  in  the  benevo- 
lent. The  spiritual  man  lives  not  to  himself,  but  to  God,  and  for  others  ;  to  the 
"  carnal "  man  self  is  the  object  of  his  supreme  interest  and  aim.  Churchism 
often  cuts  the  soul  away  from  all  but  the  members  of  its  own  little  community.  3. 
In  the  transitory  rather  than  the  permanent?  The  spiritual  man  labours  not 
supremely  for  the  bread  which  perishes,  but  is  ever  more  in  quest  of  eternal  life  or 
eternal  goodness.  Not  so  the  "  carnal  "  man,  he  is  ever  in  pursuit  of  temporary 
pleasures,  possessions.  Now  Churchism  lives  in  tlie  teujporary.  "  Our  little 
systems  have  their  day,  they  have  their  day  and  pass  away."  Human  thoughts, 
even  the  best  of  them,  are  only  as  the  "grass  that  withereth,"  God's  thoughts 
alone  endure,  the  "word  of  the  Lord  shall  stand  for  ever."  {D.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  Partisanship    iti    the    Church  : — I.    Its    phases.     1.    Undue    partiality 

for  certain  ministers.     2.  The  offensive  exaltation  of  party  names.     II.  Its  evils. 

1.  It  does  dishonour  to  God.  2.  Occasions  strife  in  the  Church.  3.  Damages 
God's  servants.  4.  Neutralises  their  work.  III.  Its  occasion — carnality  of 
heart — consequently  imiDlies  a  weak,  babyish  (ver.  1)  Christianity.  (-7.  Lyth.) 
Thinkinrj  too  much  of  ministers  : — The  apostle's  scope  is  to  repress  the  pride 
and  contentions  that  were  in  the  Church  of  Corinth.  That  although  it  is  the 
duty  of  people  to  have  a  great  and  high  esteem  of  the  ministers  <'f  the  gospel,  yet 
they  are  not  sinfully  and  inordinately  to  admire  or  rest  merely  upon  any  man's 
person.  I.  That  gkeat  and  high  respect  is  to  be  showed  to  the  faithful 
ministers  of  the  gospel.  1.  Highly  to  account  of  the  office  and  the  work  of  the 
ministry  as  being  the  Divine  institution  and  appointment  of  Ch'ist  in  His  Church. 
Thus  the  ap  'stle — "  Let  a  man  account  of  us  as  the  stewards  of  Christ  "  (chap.  iv.  1). 

2.  Your  spiritual  respect  lieth  in  the  hearing  of  the  Word  preached  and  the 
receiving  the  Word  with  all  gladness  of  heart.  Thus  Christ  saith,  "  He  that 
heareth  you  heareth  Me  "  (Luke  x.  16),  and  therefore  they  are  compared  to  am- 
bassadors, that  do  in  Christ's  stead  entreat  you  to  be  reconciled  unto  God  (2 
Cor.  V.  20).  3.  You  are  not  only  to  give  them  respectful  hearing  and  diligent 
waiting  upon  their  ministry,  but  to  obey  and  submit  unto  that  work  of  the  Lord, 
which  they  enjoin  you  out  of  God's  Word.  4.  All  this  hearing,  love,  and  obedience, 
must  be  to  them  for  the  work's  sake.  This  the  apostle  uigeth,  and  there  is  a 
greater  matter  in  that :  "  Have  them  in  all  respect  for  their  work  sake  "  (1  I'hess.  v. 
13).  5.  You  ought  to  show  your  spiritual  respect  and  entertainment  to  the 
ministry,  in  avoiding  all  those  evil  and  wicked  ways  which  mav  grieve  and  make 
sad  the  hearts  of  godly  ministers.  When  Jeremiah  saw  his  people  walk  so  dis- 
obediently, he  said  his  soul  should  mourn  in  secret  for  them  (Jer.  xiii.  17).  Did 
not  Christ  weep  over  Jerusalem  ?  II.  Now  let  us  consider  wjen  this  respect 
MAY  degenerate  INTO  SINFUL  AD.MiRATioN.  1.  When  we  Set  up  the  gifts  and 
persons  of  men,  so  as  to  neglect  Christ  working  in  and  by  them.      If    it  be  so 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

great  a  sin  in  temporal  and  outward  things   to   take    of   the  glory  due  to  God, 
and  attribute  it  to  instruments,  how  much  more  is  this  in  spiritual  things.     2. 
TLen  men  sinfully  admire  when  they  set  up  the  gifts  and  abilities  of  one  to  the 
contempt  of  others.      3.  Then  men  sinfully  admire  when  their  failings  and  errors 
they  will  follow  and  defend.     If  these  Corinthians  that  were  for  Peter  should  have 
been  led  aside,  as  he  did  many  to  circumcision,  this  was  their  infirmity.   {A.  Burgess.) 
That  it  is  not  lawful  for  Christians  to  call  themselves  by  the  name  of  any  men, 
thouph  never  so  eminent,  so  as  to  build  on  them.     Christ  and  His  truth  are  the 
foundation  we  must  build  upon.     The  apostles,  indeed,  are  called  the  foundations 
(Rev.  xxii.  14),  but  they  were  immediately  inspired ;  and  they  were  but  secondary 
foundations.      So  that  we  are  not  believers  in  Paul  or  Peter.     We  are  not  the 
apostles'  believers,  much   less  the  fathers',  or   any  doctors  and  teachers  in  the 
world.     For  the  opening  of  this,  let  us  consider,  first,  the  names  that  Christians 
have  had  in  the  New  Testament,  and  afterwards  in  the  Church.     For  by  wise 
names  we  come  to  know  the  nature  of   things.      1.    Christ  did  often  call  those 
that  followed  Him  His  disciples.     Thus,  he  that  would  be  His  disciple  must  hate 
father  and  mother  for  His  sake.     Lean  not  to  thy  own  understanding.     Lean  not 
to  others  ;  for  only  Christ  is  Truth.     Another  name,  and  that  most  frequent,  was 
believers.     Christians  are  often  called  by  this  title ;  none  more  frequent.     And  thia 
also  doth  difference  Christians  from  all  other  sects  in  the  world.     All  the  philo- 
soi)hers  they  affected  to  be  kno\^ing  men,  not  believing.    Faith  of  assent  would  breed 
faith  of  fiducial  adherence.     Another  name  often  attributed  to  Christians  is  saints. 
"  The  saints  at  Corinth,"  and  in  many  places.     But  the  most  famous  and  dis- 
tinguishing name  of  the  people  of  God  is  Christians.     There  are  pregnant  reasons 
for  this.     1.  Because  as  our  faith  in  regard  of  the  efficient  cause  is  the  gift  of 
God,  so  the  object  and  motive  of  it  must  be  God's  authority,  because  He  speaks 
and  revealeth  such  things.     Human  faith  is  because  a  man  saith  such  a  thing ; 
Divine  faith,  because  God  saith  so.     Now  see  how  careful  the  apostle  was  that 
the  Church's  faith  should  not  be  in  human  wisdom,  but  in  the  mighty  power  of 
God.     2.  Therefore  we  may  not  be  called  after  men,  to  build  on  them,  because  we 
are  not  baptized  into  any  man's  name  ;  and  we  are  only  to  possess  those  whose 
name  we  are  baptized  into  (chap.  i.  13).     3.  The  apostle  presseth  another  argu- 
ment :  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for  you  ?    Did  Paul  die  for  you  "  (chap.  i.  13)  ?     His 
meaning  is.  In  Him  only  are  we  to  believe  who  is  able  to  make  our  reconciliation 
with  God,  who  hath  wrought  our  redemption  for  us.     4.  Our  apostle  urgeth  a 
further  argument  in  the  same  chapter,  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord ; 
and  Christ  is  made  unto  us  wisdom.     So  all  boasting  in  men  is  to  be  excluded,  as 
well  as  boasting  in  works.     5.  The  Scripture  makes  it  a  great  sin  in  matters  of 
religion  and  the  worship  of  God  to  be  servants  of  men  (chap.  vii.  23).     6.  The 
ministers  of  God,  though  never  so  eminent,  have  been  afraid  of  this,  they  have 
prohibited  such  restings  upon  them.     That  it  is  the  property  of  godly  ministers 
not    to    bring    men    to    themselves,    but    to    Christ.      (Ibid.)        Partiality    for 
preachers  to  be  avoided : — A  Christian  hearer,  meeting  an  acquaintance  who  had 
been  to  hear  a  sermon,  said,  "  Well,  I  hope  you  have  been  gratified."     "  Indeed  I 
have,"  replied  the  other ;  "  I  wish  I  could  have  prevailed  on  you  to  have  heard 
him.     I   am  sure  you  would  never  afterwards   have  liked  any  other  preacher." 
«'  Then,"  replied  the  wiser  man,  "  I  never  will  hear  him  ;  for  I  only  wish  to  hear 
ministers  who  show  so  high  an  esteem  for  the  Word  of  God,  that  their  hearers  shall 
love  it,  hear  it  from  whom  they  may.     For  '  who  is  Paul,  or  who  is  Apollos,  but 
ministers  by  whom  ye  believed  ?  '  "         Who  then  is  Paul  ? — Party  spirit  unbecomivg 
and  injurious  : — Note — I.  Sojie  of  those  cases    in    which   party  spirit  is  blam- 
ABLE.     1.  The  case  of  those  who  look  on  their  connection  with  particular  parties  as 
serving  of  itself  to  insure  their  salvation.     No  paity  distinction  can  assure  any 
man   of   God's   favour,   or    heaven.     It   is   not   Church    memberphip,  but   union 
with  Christ  that  warrants  the  hope  of  salvation.     "  Neither  circumcision  availeth 
anything,"  etc.     2.  Tlie  case  of  those  who  confine  their  attachment  to  particular 
ministers,  and  think  more  highly  of  them  than  they  ought  to  think.     Not  that 
hearers  are  wrong  in  feeling  for  their  own  ministers  more  esteem  than  for  others 
(1  Thess.   v.   12),  nor  in  esteeming  those  most  through  whom  they  receive  most 
benefit.     But  blamable  they  are  when  even  to  these  they  confine  their  attachment, 
and  when  they  do  not  sincerely  esteem  all  whose  preaching  and  practice  prove  that 
they  are  the  servants  of  Christ.      II.  That  ministers  can  only  be  useful  and  suc- 
cessful so  far  as  God  blesses  the  means  they  employ.     1.  Paul  here  speaks  of 
means  being  used.   In  allusion  to  husbandry  he  speaks  both  of  planting  and  of  water- 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  215 

ing  as  preceding  the  increase ;  and,  indeed,  without  both,  the  hope  of  an  increase  would 
not  be  authorised.  Now,  does  this  not  teach  that  unless  we  be  diligent  in  using  the 
means  we  cannot  expect  to  be  instruments  of  good?  2.  But  means,  although  of 
God's  appointment  and  furnishing,  can  only  by  Himself  be  rendered  effectual.  (1) 
In  the  nature  of  tbings  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  If,  in  reference  to  the  body,  God 
only  can  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  unstop  the  ears  of  the  deaf,  loose  the  tongues 
of  the  dumb,  how  can  it  be  supposed  that  any  less  power  than  the  power  of  God  is 
sufficient  to  effect  such  changes  as  these  with  respect  to  the  soul?  With  counsels 
the  most  fi-iendly,  warnings  the  most  solemn,  arguments  the  most  persuasive,  we 
may  labour  to  reclaim  men.  But  although  we  had  the  zeal  and  learning  of  Paul, 
and  besides  the  eloquence  of  Apollos,  yet  sinners  will  remain  in  the  gall  of  bitter- 
ness, unless,  as  accompanied  with  the  blessing  of  God,  the  efforts  we  make  be 
crowned  with  success.  And  it  is  no  less  evident  that  of  God  only  is  also  the  pro- 
gressive improvement  of  tbe  saints.  If  the  life  of  the  body  be  dependent  on  God, 
how  can  any  but  God  preserve  and  nourish  the  life  of  the  soul  ?  (2)  I  may  also 
appeal  in  evidence  of  this  to  your  own  observation.  It  cannot  but  be  obvious — {a) 
That  the  means  and  instruments  most  likely  to  be  useful  often  fail,  while  good  is 
often  done  by  means  and  instruments  which  are  known  to  be  far  less  promising. 
(b)  That  persons  most  likely  to  be  profited  by  ministers,  not  unfrequently  remain 
unedified  ;  while  those  who  are  less  likely  to  be  profited  by  them  often  make  much 
improvement,  (c)  That  effects,  too  wonderful  to  be  the  effects  of  mere  human 
power,  are  often  produced  by  the  ministry  of  the  gospel.  (8)  Nor  is  it  more  con- 
tirmed  by  observation  than  it  is  by  experience,  that  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apollos 
water,  but  it  is  God  alone  who  giveth  the  increase.  (4)  Turning  to  this  blessed 
book,  how  plainly  do  we  find  this  doctrine  uniformly  taught  by  the  sacred  writers  ! 
It  is  said  of  Lydia  that  "  her  heart  the  Lord  opened  in  attending  to  the  things 
which  were  spoken  by  Paul."  It  is  said  of  the  converts  in  the  house  of  Cornelius, 
"  Then  hath  God  also  unto  the  Gentiles  granted  repentance  unto  life."  It  is  said 
of  the  Ephesians,  "You  hath  He  quickened,  you  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins."  "  No  man,"  says  the  Saviour,  "  can  come  unto  INIe,  except  the  Father  who 
hath  sent  Me  draw  him."  And  the  regenerate  are  "  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  III.  iMPRovE^tExx.  Is  it  so 
that  the  success  of  ministerial  labours  is  wholly  of  God? — then — 1.  ]\[inisters  should 
look  upon  themselves  as  only  instrumental  in  the  doing  of  good.  Melancthon, 
when  he  was  converted,  thought  he  should  be  able  to  make  people  soon  see  what 
he  saw,  and  feel  what  he  felt ;  but  the  want  of  success  soon  led  him  to  say  that  he 
found  old  Adam  too  powerful  for  young  Melancthon.  2.  That  God  should  be 
viewed  by  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  as  He  who  alone  can  effectually  profit  them. 
3.  Ministers  and  hearers  ought  to  pray  to  God  for  His  eff'ectual  blessing,  (d. 
Telfer,  A.M.)  Undue  partialitij  to  God's  ministers  : — I.  Ignores  tbeiu  true 
CHARACTER.  1.  As  mere  instruments.  2.  Possessing  different  qualifications.  3. 
Yet  all  used  of  God.  4.  For  the  benefit  of  them  that  believe.  II.  Dishonours 
God — because  it — 1.  Transfers  to  man  the  honour  due  to  Him  alone.  2.  Puts 
contempt  on  some  of  the  instruments  whom  He  has  chosen.  3.  Refuses  the  benefit 
which  might  be  received  through  them.  (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  The  true  estimate  of 
the  ministers  of  Christ: — I.  Thkir  office — all  alike  instruments  in  the  hands  of 
God.  1.  He  chooses  them.  2.  Qualifies  thcTn  for  some  special  department  of 
toil.  3.  Gives  them  success.  4.  llewards  them,  each  according  to  his  own  labour. 
II.  Their  work — co-workers  with  God.  1.  The  sphere,  ye  are  God's  husbandry, 
God's  building.  2.  Their  separate  departments,  one  lays  the  foundation,  another 
builds.  3.  Their  particular  duty  to  work  in  harmony  with  God's  plan.  III.  Their 
SOLEMN  REsroNSiFiiLiTY.  1.  In  the  selection  of  material.  2.  Every  man's  work 
must  be  tested  by  fire  in  that  day,  and  abide  the  issue.  (Ihid.)  Unprofitable 
hearinij — its  cause  : — A  lady  who  was  present  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  where  the  Eev. 
Ebenezer  Erskine  was  assisting,  was  much  impressed  with  his  discourse.  She 
went  again  the  nest  Sabbath  to  hear  him.  But  she  felt  none  of  tho=e  strong  im- 
pressions she  experienced  on  the  former  occasion.  Wondering  at  thiSj  she  CKlled 
on  Mr.  Erskine  and  asked  him  if  he  could  account  for  it.  He  replied,  "  Madam, 
the  reason  is  this — last  Sabbath  you  went  to  hear  Jesus  Christ ;  but  to-day  you 
have  come  to  hear  Ebenezer  Erskine."  {W.  Baxendale.)  I'lie  success  of  the 
gospel  entirely  of  God : — I.  God  not  only  sends  and  employs,  bdt  qualifies  all 
WHOM  He  employs  eor  PROMOTING  His  SERVICE.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  the 
glory  of  the  whole  work,  and  the  success  of  every  particular  servant,  is  entirely 
owing  to  their  great  Lord  and  Master  (1  Cor.  iv.  7).     1.  All  the  endowments  of 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

mind  which  fit  a  man  for  common  or  special  service  are  the  gift  of  God.  He  only 
endows  them  with  knowledge  and  comprehension  to  understand  His  sacred  truths, 
and  enables  them  to  communicate  their  knowledge  to  others  in  an  acceptable 
manner  (Exod.  iv.  11,  12).  Further,  as  it  is  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  that 
giveth  understanding,  so  the  improvement  of  natural  parts  by  acquired  learning  is 
no  less  to  be  ascribed  to  Him.  As  He  gives  the  di^position  and  ability,  so  it  is 
He  who,  by  the  course  of  His  providence,  furnishes  the  means  and  presents  the 
opportunity  of  making  progress.  Let  human  efforts  be  what  they  will,  if  God  do 
not  smile  upon  them  they  will  infallibly  be  blasted.  2.  It  is  God  who  endows  His 
ministers  with  holy  and  gracious  dispositions,  which  serve  to  turn  their  other 
talents  into  the  proper  channel,  and  to  give  them  force  and  influence  (2  Cor.  iv. 
5,  6).     II.  God  gives  ErncACY  to  the  insteuctions  even  of  the  most  eminent 

AND    best    qualified    MINISTERS,  BY  THE  IMMEDIATE  SDPEENATUKAL    OPERATION    OF   HiS 

Spirit  and  grace.  With  every  other  advantage  they  shall  not  be  able  to  make  one 
sincere  convert,  unless  Almighty  God  be  pleased  to  open  the  way  by  His  Divine 
grace  into  tlie  heart  and  conscience  of  the  sinner.  The  husbandman  may  manure 
and  dig  the  soil,  and  sow  his  seed  with  the  greatest  diligence  and  care  ;  but  he 
hath  not  so  much  as  begun  the  great  process  of  growth.  How  many  things  must 
necessarily  concur  which  are  beyond  the  reach  of  his  power  !  The  enlivening  heat 
of  the  sun,  the  refreshing  dews  and  rain,  are  wholly  under  the  direction  and  disposal 
of  the  omnipotent  Jehovah.  Just  so  in  spiritual  husbandry.  "  So  then  neither  is 
he  that  planteth  anything,"  &c.  III.  God  exercises  much  of  His  ow"n  sovereignty 
in  the  manner  of  bestowing  success.  He  takes  care  to  show  that  it  is  from 
Himself,  by  the  measure  in  which  He  proportions  the  success  to  the  nature  and 
sufficiency  of  the  means  He  sees  proper  to  employ.  But  when  there  is  a  regular 
proportion  always  observed  between  the  means  and  the  end,  men  are  ready  to  over- 
look or  forget  the  great  and  first  cause  of  all.  For  this  reason  He  sees  it  often 
meet  to  work  without  means,  or  by  the  weakest  means,  or  even  contrary  to  means, 
and  blasting  the  effect  of  tliose  that  were  most  excellent  and  promising  in  human 
judgment.  Wheu  the  gospel  was  first  preached,  the  apostles  were  indeed  fully 
furnished  for  their  work,  but  it  was  by  a  miracle.  Ihey  were  originally  poor 
illiterate  fishermen,  quite  unequal  in  themselves  to  their  astonishing  undertaking. 
But  that  proper  respect  might  still  be  had  to  the  qualifications  of  mini-ters,  and 
that  none  might  be  justified  in  pouring  contempt  on  human  science,  the  Apostle 
Paul  was  the  most  active,  useful,  and  successful  of  all  the  apostles.  At  the  same 
time  there  were  such  circumstances  in  his  calling  as  made  him  one  of  the  most 
illustrious  monuments  of  the  sovereignty  and  riches  of  Divine  grace  that  any  age 
has  iiroduced.  IV.  Improvement.  1.  A  deep  and  lively  impression  of  this  truth 
will  be  to  those  who  preach  the  gospel  an  excellent  preservative  from  many  tempta- 
tions. It  will  preserve  them  from  trusting  in  themselves,  it  will  engage  theui  to 
maintain  a  continual  intercourse  with  the  Father  of  lights,  and  the  author  of  every 
good  and  perfect  gift.  It  will  also  particularly  be  an  excellent  mean  of  preserving 
them  from  the  dfingerous  extremes  of  ostentation  and  sloth.  2.  A  deep  impression 
of  this  truth  will  be  an  excellent  preservative  to  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  from  many 
temptations  which  often  render  their  attendance  on  ordinances  as  fruitless  as  perni- 
cious. It  will  purify  their  views  and  motives  in  attending  on  ordinances.  It  will 
deliver  them  from  a  sinful  attachment  to  men,  and  carry  them  more  immediately  into 
the  presence  of  the  living  God.  It  will  preserve  them  from  hearing  the  gospel  merely 
as  critics,  in  order  to  pass  their  judgment  on  the  soundness  or  ability  of  their 
teachers.  It  will  settle  their  esteem  of  and  attachment  to  their  pastors  upon  the 
best  and  most  immovable  foundation.  It  will  make  them  in  a  great  measure  lose 
view  of  the  creature,  and  hear  the  gospKl,  not  "as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  it  is 
indeed,  and  in  truth,  the  Word  of  God."  3.  Let  me  intreat  the  prayers  of  this 
congregation,  that  we  may  be  abundantly  qualified  for  the  discharge  of  our  im- 
portant trust  iti  all  its  parts.  The  Apostle  Paul  never  fails  to  ask  the  i-irayers  and 
intercessions  of  the  faithful  in  his  behalf  (Eph.  vi.  19).  (J.  Withersjwori,  D.D.) 
Preachers  in  their  relations :  —In  these  verses  the  apostle  gives  a  fourfold  view  of 
evangelical  preachers.  I.  To  the  people  (ver.  5).  As  against  the  foolish  and 
heedless  cry  raised  by  the  Corinthians,  "  I  am  of  Paul,"  &c.,  the  apostle  raises  this 
pertinent  question:  Who  are  these  men?  &c.  1.  Ministers.  At  the  root  of  the 
word  there  lies  the  idea  of  voluntary  and  responsible  service.  We  have  in  St. 
Paul's  own  writings  a  full  answer  to  his  own  question  :  "Who  then  is  Paul  .  .  . 
but  ministers?"  Ministers  of  what?  (1)  "Of  the  New  Testament  "(2  Cor.  iii. 
5,  6).     (2)  Of  "  the  gospel  "  (Col.  i.  23).     (3)  Of  "  the  mystery  of  Christ  "  (Eph.  ii. 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  217 

4-7).  (4)  Of  "  the  Church  "  (Col.  i.  24,  25).  (5)  "  Of  Christ  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  23).  (6) 
"Of  God"  (2  Cor.  vi.  4).  2.  "Ministers  by  whom  ye  beUeved."  When  the 
Corinthians  beUeved,  there  were  three  factors  directly  contributing  to  that  result : 
the  minister  of  God,  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  God.  And  so  it  is  still ;  the 
minister  sets  forth  the  need  and  the  nature  of  faith  in  Christ ;  the  Holy  Ghost 
applies  the  truth  and  inspires  trust ;  the  Lord  Jesus  is  Himself  the  Object  of  saving 
faith.  Ministers  ai'e  instrumental  in  bringing  together  the  sinner  and  the  Saviour, 
even  as  men  brought  Bartimasus  to  Jesus.  They  could  not  give  sight  to  the  blind 
man,  but  they  led  him  unto  One  who  said,  "  Receive  thy  sight."  II.  To  each 
OTHER  (ver.  S).  The  Corinthian.s  had  spoken  of  the  apostles  as  rivals.  The  apostle 
shows  that  Paul  and  Apollos  are  one,  and  illustrates  tbe  oneness  of  the  workers  by 
the  unity  of  the  work.  Through  the  circling  seasons  there  runs  a  notable  unity  in 
all  the  operations  of  husbandry.  As  soon  as  the  harvest  is  gathered  in,  prepara- 
tions for  the  next  are  commenced.  In  the  time  between  the  first  plough's  entering 
the  field  and  the  last  waggon's  leaving  it,  many  hands  are  at  work — men,  women, 
lads;  and  many  kinds  of  work  were  done,  skilled  and  unskilled;  but  it  is  all  for 
one  master,  and  all  for  one  end.  He  that  plougheth  and  he  that  soweth  and  he 
that  reapeth  are  one.  And  this  oneness  among  farm-workers  is  never  felt  so  keenly 
as  when  the  last  sheaf  is  pitcheil,  and  the  cry  is  raised  of  "harvest-home!  "  A 
Christian  Church  is  made  and  maintained  on  this  same  j)rinciple :  manifold 
operations  and  many  workers.  In  carrying  on  this  spiritual  husbandry,  ministers 
are  not  aloue  in  the  field.  We  look  to  Sunday-school  workers,  to  local  preachers, 
<S:c. ,  and  say,  "  We  are  labourers  together."  It  is  a  partnership  in  holy  toil.  The 
farm-servant  who  guides  the  reaping-machine  in  the  harvest-field  does  not  disown 
his  fellow-servants  who,  in  the  chilly  days  of  later  autumn,  did  the  ploughing  and 
the  sowing.  He  knows  that,  but  for  their  work,  he  would  not  have  found  any 
employment  in  reaping.  And  those  who  reap  in  the  Church  thankfully  recognise 
as  fellow-labourers  the  men  who  broke  up  the  fallow-ground,  and  put  in  the  seed- 
corn,  and  cared  for  the  crop  in  early  spring.  III.  To  present  success  (ver.  6). 
"  I  have  planted  "  ;  this  lies  at  the  root  of  all  good.  Paul  must  plant  before  there 
can  be  anything  for  Apollos  to  water  ;  and  until  man  put  in  something,  God  cannot 
give  increase.  But  while  recognising  this  fact  he  says,  We  are  nothing.  That 
which  the  two  apostles  contributed  toward  success  was  labour.  They  had,  so  to 
speak,  no  capital.  The  very  truth  they  taught  was  not  their  own  ;  it  was  the  truth 
of  God.  That  mysterious  force  which  we  call  growth  belongeth  only  unto  God  ; 
and  were  it  not  for  the  secret  influence  of  His  Spirit,  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom 
scattered  broadcast  would  in  no  case  take  root  and  spring  up.  Increase  is  of  God, 
and  wholly  of  Him.  IV.  Preachers  in  relation  to  final  reward  (ver.  8).  True, 
he  that  planteth  and  he  that  watereth  are  one  ;  but  "  every  man  shall  receive  his 
own  reward  according  to  his  own  labour."  In  order  to  reward,  there  must  be  not 
only  work,  but  labour,  and  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward  not  according 
to — 1.  His  success.  Visible  and  numerical  success  is  not  always  in  proportion  to 
labour.  2.  His  reputation.  Whilst  some  sermons  win  for  the  preacher  a  name 
and  a  place  in  public  opinion  beyond  their  merit,  there  are  others  which  are  too 
full  of  thought  to  be  appreciated  by  the  many ;  and  so  it  comes  to  pass  that,  now 
and  then,  a  preacher's  reputation  is  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  quality  of  his 
preaching.  3.  His  position.  For  a  time  the  position  of  a  man  in  the  ministry 
may  be  above  his  deserts,  or  below.  A  good  place  may  be  secured  by  favouring 
incident,  and  a  lowly  one  through  inadvertence.  4.  His  gifts  or  talents.  We  are 
not  responsible  for  the  number  of  talents  given  to  us  ;  and  God  does  not  make  our 
reward  depend  upon  a  circumstance  over  which  we  had  no  control.  5.  But  every 
man  shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own  labour.  {J.  Biixh.) 
God's  husbandry  and  huildivg : — I.  Odr  praise  for  any  good  we  have  received 
SHOULD  BE  given,  NOT  SOLELY  TO  MEN,  BUT  MAINLY  TO  GoD.  The  Coriutbians  felt 
that  gratitude  was  due  somewhere,  but  Paul  was  afraid  lest  they  should  give  it  to 
himself  and  Apollos  instead  of  to  God.  II.  It  is  to  God  we  must  look  for  all 
FURTHER  GROWTH.  W^e  must  couscieutiously  employ  such  means  of  grace  as  our 
circumstances  permit ;  but,  above  all,  we  must  ask  God  to  give  the  increase.  III. 
If  ■we  ARE  God's  husbandry  and  building,  let  us  reverence  God's  work  in  our- 
selves. 1.  It  may  seem  a  very  rickety  and  insecure  structure  that  is  rising 
within  us,  a  very  sickly  and  unpromising  plant ;  and  we  are  tempted  to  be  dis- 
appointed at  the  slow  progress  the  new  man  makes  in  us.  But  different  thoughts 
possess  us  when  we  remember  that  this  transformation  is  not  a  thing  to  be  accom- 
plished only  by  ourselves  through  a  judicious  choice  and  a  persevering  use  of  fit 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

means,  but  is  God's  work.  2.  For  the  same  reason  we  must  hope  for  others  as  for 
ourselves.  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  hope  to  know  that  God  has  always  been 
inclining  men  to  righteousness  and  will  always  do  so.  IV.  But  Paul's  chief 
inference  is  the  gkave  kesponsibility  of  those  who  labour  for  God  in  this  work. 
1.  As  for  Paul's  own  part  in  the  work,  the  laying  of  the  foundation,  he  says  that 
was  comparatively  easy.  "  Other  foundation,"  &c.  Any  teacher  who  professes  to 
lay  another  foundation  thereby  gives  up  his  claim  to  be  a  Christian  teacher.  He 
who  uses  the  Christian  pi]lf)it  for  the  propagation  of  political  or  socialist  ideas  may 
be  a  sound  and  useful  teacher ;  but  his  proper  place  is  the  platform  or  the  House 
of  Commons.  The  question  at  present,  says  Paul,  is  not  what  other  institutions 
you  may  profitably  found  in  the  world,  but  how  this  institution  of  the  Church, 
already  founded,  is  to  be  completed.  Other  foundation  no  Christian  teacher  is 
proposing  to  lay;  but  on  this  foundation  very  various  and  questionable  material  is 
being  built.  In  Corinth  itself  huge  slabs  of  costly  and  carefully  chiselled  stone  lay 
stable  as  the  rock  on  which  they  rested,  but  now  the  glory  of  such  foundations  was 
dishonoured  by  squalid  superstructures.  The  picture  in  Paul's  mind's  eye  of  the 
Corinthian  Church  vividly  suggested  what  he  had  seen  while  walking  among  those 
heterogeneous  buildings.  The  foundation,  he  knows,  is  the  same  ;  but  he  sees  the 
teachers  bringing,  with  great  appearance  of  diligence,  the  merest  rubbish,  apparently 
uncnnsL-ious  of  the  incongruity  of  their  material  with  the  foundation  they  build 
upon.  What  would  Paul  say  did  he  now  see  the  superstructure  which  eighteen 
hundred  years  have  raised  on  the  one  foundation  ?  How  obviously  unworthy  of  it 
is  much  tliat  has  been  built  upon  it;  hjw  many  teachers  have  laboured  all  their 
days  at  erecting  wh-it  has  already  been  proved  a  mere  house  of  cards ;  and  how 
many  persons  have  been  budt  into  the  living  temple  who  have  brought  no  stabiUty 
or  beauty  to  the  building.  How  careless  often  have  the  builders  been,  anxious  only 
to  have  quantity  to  show,  regardless  of  quality.  As  in  any  building,  so  in  the 
Church,  additional  size  is  additional  danger  if  the  material  be  not  sound.  2.  The 
soundness  of  the  material  which  has  been  built  ujjon  the  foundation  of  Christ  will, 
like  all  things  else,  be  tested.  The  Corinthians  knew  what  a  trial  by  fire  meant. 
They  knew  how  the  flames  had  travelled  over  their  own  city,  consuming  ail  that 
fire  could  kindle  on,  and  leaving  of  the  slightly  built  houses  nothing  but  charred 
timber,  while  the  massive  marbles  stood  erect  among  the  ruins  ;  and  the  precious 
metals,  even  though  molten,  were  prized  by  the  conqueror.  Against  the  fire  no 
prayer,  no  appeal,  prevailed.  Its  judgment  and  decisions  v«ere  irreversible:  wood, 
hay,  stubble,  disappeared:  only  what  was  solid  and  valuable  remained.  By  such 
irreversible  judgment  are  we  and  our  work  to  be  judged.  Fire  simply  burns  up  all 
that  will  burn  and  leaves  what  will  not.  So  shall  the  new  life  we  are  to  pass  into 
absolutely  annihilate  what  is  not  in  keeping  with  it,  and  leave  only  what  is  useful 
and  congruous.  The  work  that  has  been  well  and  wisely  done  will  stand  ;  foolish, 
vain,  and  selfish  work  will  go.  3.  Paul  accepts  it  as  a  very  possible  contingency 
that  a  Christian  man  may  do  poor  work.  In  that  case,  he  says,  the  man  will  be  in 
the  position  of  a  man  whose  house  has  been  burnt.  He  may  have  received  no 
bodily  injury,  but  he  is  so  stripped  that  he  scarcely  knows  himself,  and  the  whole 
thought  and  toil  of  his  life  seem  to  have  gone  for  nothing.  To  many  Christians  it 
seems  enough  that  they  be  doing  something.  If  only  they  are  decently  active,  it 
concerns  them  little  tliat  their  work  is  really  elTecting  no  good.  Work  done  for  this 
world  must  be  such  as  will  stand  inspection  and  actually  do  the  thing  required. 
Christian  work  sliould  not  be  less,  but  more,  thorough.  4.  There  is  a  degree  of 
carelessness  or  malignity  to  be  found  in  some  Christian  teachers  which  Paul  does 
not  hesitate  to  doom  (ver.  17).  A  teacher  may  in  various  ways  incur  this  doom. 
(1)  He  may  in  guiding  some  one  to  Christ  fit  him  obliquely  to  the  foundation,  so 
that  firm  rest  in  Christ  is  never  attained  ;  but  the  man  remains  like  a  loose  stone 
in  a  wall,  unsettled  himself  and  unsettling  all  around  him.  Any  doctrine  which 
turns  the  grace  of  God  into  licence  incurs  this  doom.  (2)  To  lift  stones  from  the 
mire  they  have  been  lying  in  and  fit  them  into  the  temple  is  good  and  ri^iht,  but  to 
leave  ttiem  uncleansed  and  unpolished  to  disfigure  the  temple.  5.  But  we  are 
responsible  as  well  as  our  teachers  for  the  appearance  we  present  in  God's  temple. 
Would  it  not  make  a  very  obvious  change  in  the  appearance  and  strength  of  the 
Church  if  every  member  of  it  were  at  pains  to  set  himself  absolutely  true  to  Christ  ? 
Some  persons  are  prevented  from  resting  satisfactorily  on  Christ  because  some  pet 
theory  or  crotchet  has  i^ossessed  the  mind  and  keeps  them  unsettled.  Some  will 
not  rest  on  Christ  until  they  have  such  repentance  as  they  judge  sufficient ;  others 
so  rest  on  Him  that  they  have  no  repentance.    But,  alas  !  with  some  it  is  some 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORLNTHIANS.  219 

worldly  purpose  or  some  entangling  and  deeply  cherished  sin.  One  sin  consciously 
retained,  one  command  or  expression  of  Christ's  will  unresponded  to,  makes  our 
whole  connection  with  Him  unsettled  and  insecure.  G.  And  more  must  be  done 
even  after  we  are  securely  fitted  into  our  place.  Stones  often  look  well  enough 
when  first  built  in,  but  soon  lose  their  colour ;  and  their  surface  and  fine  edges 
crumble  and  shale  off.  So  do  the  stones  in  God's  temple  get  tarnished  by  exposure. 
One  sin  after  another  is  allowed  to  stain  the  conscience  ;  one  little  corruption  after 
another  settles  on  the  cbaracter,  and  eats  out  its  fineness,  and  when  once  the  fair, 
clean  stone  is  no  longer  unsullied,  we  think  it  of  little  consequence  to  be  scrupulous. 
Then  the  weather  tells  upon  us  :  the  oi'dinary  atmosphere  of  this  life,  with  its 
constant  damp  of  worldly  care  and  its  occasional  storms  of  loss,  and  disappoint- 
ment, and  social  collisions,  and  domestic  embroilment,  eats  out  the  heavenly  temper 
from  our  character,  and  leaves  its  edges  ragged ;  and  the  man  becomes  soured  and 
irritable,  and  the  surface  of  him,  all  that  meets  the  casual  eye,  is  rough  and  broken. 
7.  Above  all,  do  not  many  seem  to  think  it  enough  to  have  atttiined  a  place  in  the 
building,  and  take  no  step  onwards  during  the  whole  remainder  of  their  lives? 
But  it  is  in  God's  building  as  in  highly  ornamented  buildings  generally.  The  stones 
are  not  all  sculptured  before  they  are  tilted  into  their  jilaces  ;  but  tbey  are  built  in 
i"ough-hewn,  so  that  the  building  may  proceed:  and  then  at  leisure  the  device 
proper  to  each  is  carved  upon  it.  This  is  the  manner  of  God's  building.  Long 
after  a  man  has  been  set  in  the  Cliurch  of  Christ,  Ctod  hews  and  carves  him  to  the 
shape  He  designs  ;  but  we,  being  not  dead,  but  living,  stones,  have  it  in  our  power 
to  mar  the  beauty  of  God's  design,  and  indeed  so  distort  it  that  the  result  is  a 
grotesque  and  hideous  monster,  belonging  to  no  world,  neither  of  God  nor  of  man. 
{M.  Duds,  D.D.)  I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered  ;  but  God  gave  the  increase. — 
Gospel  planting  :— That  it  is  God's  unspeakalile  goodness  sometimes  to  send  His 
Word  and  plant  His  gospel  among  a  people  that  never  heard  or  knew  anything  of  it 
before.  To  amplify  this  doctrine  many  things  are  observable.  First,  That  when 
the  apostle  saith  that  he  planted  the  gospel,  it  doth  suppose  all  people  to  be  a  wild, 
barbarous  people  till  the  gospel  both  civilised  and  sanctified  them.  To  ])\a.nt  is 
properly  of  orchards,  and  gardens,  and  vineyards,  and  supposeth  the  great  care  and 
skill  of  him  that  plants.  Thus  God  is  said  to  plant  Eden  (Gen.  ii.  8).  It  is  a  great 
mercy  to  be  born  in  such  times,  in  such  an  age,  and  in  such  places,  where  the  name 
of  Christ  is  published  ;  for  this  is  wholly  in  God's  disposal ;  He  hath  determined 
to  all  men  the  times  of  their  life  and  habitations.  Secondly,  That  in  the  Old 
Testament  God  did  limit  His  gracious  preference  to  the  .Jews  only.  Thirdly, 
Therefore,  that  there  might  be  spiritual  plantations  and  holy  colonies,  the  Lord 
Christ  appointed  extraordinary  officers,  furnished  with  extraordinary  abilities,  to 
propagate  the  gospel.  Fourthly,  God's  severity  and  mercy  hath  been  observable 
about  the  first  planting  of  the  gospel.  For  when  a  people  have  Jived  rebelliously 
under  it  a  long  time,  then  He  takes  it  away  and  gives  it  to  another  nation.  Fifthly, 
In  planting  of  Churches,  commonly  their  infancy  and  beginning  hath  been  more 
pure  and  g  >dly  than  the  successive  ages.  Lastly,  Because  of  that  proneness  to 
degenerate,  and  from  gold  to  becme  dross.  (A.  Burgess.)  Spiritual  u-aterimj  : 
— I.  Let  us  consider  wherein  this  spieitual  watering  consists.  First,  It  lieth  in 
a  more  explicit  and  distinct  instruction  about  the  principles  of  religion  already 
received.  Secondly,  This  watering  lieth  not  only  in  advancing  our  knowledge,  but 
in  giving  further  and  clearer  aiguments  to  confirm  our  faith  and  to  make  us 
unshaken  and  steadfast.  Thirdly,  This  watering  containeth  direction  about  the 
beauty  and  order  of  Churches  in  the  government  thereof  when  once  planted. 
Fourthly,  This  watering  lieth  in  the  stirring  up  of  men  to  fruitfulness  in  their 
places  and  relations.  The  end  of  watering  is  to  make  fruitful;  and  thus  all  the 
spiritual  plants  in  God's  garden,  though  they  have  deep  root,  yet  need  this  outward 
watering.  II.  Let  us  consider  why  there  is  such  daily  need  of  these  quickening 
MEANS  OF  grace.  Fiist,  It  dotli  arise  from  the  heart,  which  is  an  unnatural  soil  to 
grace  and  supernatural  things.  Secondly,  The  temptations  that  are  so  frequent 
and  many  do  likewise  wonderfully  destroy  and  wither  all  if  this  constant  watering 
be  not.  As  there  are  Pauls  to  plant  and  Apollos  to  water,  so  there  are  also  the 
devil  to  plant  and  his  instruments  to  water  men  in  wickedness.  Ttiirdly,  There 
needs  watering  because  of  that  indispensable  duty  to  grow.  {Ihid.)  Spiritual  in- 
crease  : — Consider — First,  That  though  God  only  gives  the  increase,  yet  it  is  only  in 
and  through  the  ministry.  We  must  not  make  such  cavils  :  What  use  is  there  of 
preaching?  Secondly,  As  God  givelh  the  increase  only,  so  the  time  when,  and  the 
persons  on  whom,  is  wholly  at  His  good  pleasure.     Now  let  us  consider  why  God 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

only  giveth  the  increase ;  and  then  the  ends  that  God  hath  in  this.  First,  God  only 
can  give  the  increase,  because  He  only  hath  a  sovereignty  and  power  over  the  heart. 
No  potentate,  no  emperor,  can  say,  I  will  give  a  man  another  heart.  He  may  force 
the  body,  but  not  change  the  heart.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Scripture  attributes  all 
the  work  of  grace  ;  to  believe,  to  repent  only  to  God.  Oh,  then,  lift  up  your  hearts 
on  high  in  every  sermon !  Secondly,  God  only  can  give  the  increase,  because  the 
increase  is  of  spiritual  and  supernatural  consideration.  It  is  altogether  heavenly. 
Now  there  is  no  proportion  between  human  abilities  and  heavenly  graces. 
Thirdly,  Therefore  God  only  giveth  the  increase  because  of  the  deep  pollution  that 
is  in  every  man,  who  is  not  only  blind  and  deaf,  but  dead.  Now  to  what  purpose 
is  an  eloquent  pathetical  oration  to  a  dead  man  ?  Let  us  consider  the  ends,  why 
all  increase  mubt  be  of  God  only,  and  that  is,  to  preach  humility  both  to  the 
preacher  and  to  the  people.  The  apostle  carrieth  it  wholly  for  this  end,  that  he 
that  glorieth  may  glory  in  the  Lord.  And  that  no  tlesh  should  glory  in  His  presence. 
First,  tlie  minister.  That  Peter,  who  had  so  many  thousands  converted  by  his 
sermon,  that  Paul,  who  was  so  exalted  by  God  that  he  might  not  be  lifted  up  above 
measure.  For,  alas!  what  have  they  done?  It  is  God  that  gives  the  increase. 
Secondly,  It  teacheth  the  people  also  to  glorify  God,  not  to  rest  in  the  parts  and  gifts 
of  men.  As  Michal  said,  "  Now  God  will  bless  me,  because  I  have  a  Levite  in  the 
house."  So  we  are  npt  to  say,  "  Now  we  stiall  go  to  heaven;  now  we  shall  have 
salvation,  because  we  bave  such  preaching."  It  is  not  enough  to  be  affected  with 
and  admire  the  gifts  of  ministers.  Thirdly,  Therefore  God  only  gives  the  success 
that  so  we  may  seek  and  pray  to  Him  and  do  all  those  things  that  God  may  be 
pleased  with.  Now,  that  God  may  give  increase,  do  these  things.  First,  Bewail 
bypast  unthankfulness  and  unfruitfiilness.  O  Lord,  how  often  have  I  been  a 
hearer !  Yet  what  a  barren  wilderness  is  my  heart !  Secondly,  Love  that  preaching 
which  will  more  discover  thyself  to  thyself.  Which  will  acquaint  thee  with  thy 
own  deformities.  As  sore  eyes  are  afraid  of  the  light,  so  many  men  have  so  much 
guilt  within  and  live  in  so  many  secret  corruptions  that  they  dare  not  have  the 
Word  come  with  all  its  might  upon  them.  No  wonder  then  if  (lod  bless  it  not  with 
increase  when  thou  lovest  it  not  and  bringest  it  not  home  to  thee.  Thirdly,  If  thou 
"wouldst  have  God  give  the  increase  come  not  prepossessed  with  thine  own  righteous- 
ness, with  thine  own  good  heart.  Our  Saviour's  preaching  had  no  such,  though  m 
Him  were  the  treasures  of  all  wisdom,  because  His  hearers  were  those  that  justified 
themselves.  Use  1.  Is  it  God  that  giveth  the  increase?  Then  we  ministers  are 
not  to  be  inordinately  cast  down  if  people  receive  no  Divine  stamp  on  them.  Use 
2.  To  the  people.  Sigh  and  mourn  unto  God  in  earnest  prayers  for  this  inci'ease. 
How  terrible  will  it  be  if  the  want  of  profiting  be  in  yourselves  !  You  do  not  what 
God  would  have  you.  If  the  patient  distemper  himself  wilfully  all  the  physic  in 
the  world  cannot  cure  him.  To  clear  this,  consider — Wherein  this  work  of  God  to 
give  increase  doth  consist.  And  first.  In  that  spiritual  revelation  and  illumination 
or  opening  of  the  eyes  whereby  the  mind  understands  and  perceiveth  the  things  of 
God.  The  Word  is  compared  to  light,  only  God  by  this  works  above  all  light.  For 
the  sun,  though  it  gives  light,  yet  it  doth  not  give  a  blind  man  eyes.  Secondly, 
God's  giving  increase  lieth  in  removing  the  negative  incapacity  and  the  positive 
contrariety  in  all  men's  heart  to  the  word  preached.  As  the  husbandman,  he  first 
prepareth  the  ground  by  stocking  up  all  those  briers  and  thorns  and  removing  all 
the  stones  that  lie  in  the  way  which  would  hinder  the  corn's  growth.  So  it  is  here. 
God  takes  away  all  that  cursed  and  serpentine  nature  which  is  in  thee.  Thirdly, 
God  giveth  the  increase  when  He  makes  the  Word  preached  to  take  root  and  settling 
in  men's  hearts.  Fourthly,  God  giveth  increase  when  He  makes  this  rooted  word  to 
grow.  For  as  there  is  in  corn,  first  the  blade  and  then  the  ear,  it  comes  to  perfec- 
tion by  degrees.  Now  this  growth  that  God  giveth  it  may  be  either  intensive  or 
extensive.  Intensive  so  God  giveth  increase  when  those  graces  that  are  already 
planted  in  the  soul  are  made  more  lively  and  fervent.  This  may  be  called  a 
particular,  personal  increase.  Art  tliou  made  more  believing,  more  holy,  more 
humble  than  before?  Oh  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  see  the  decays  and  abatements  that 
are  even  of  godly  men's  graces  !  When  God  is  the  same  God,  the  Word  is  the  same 
Word,  there  is  as  much  cause  to  grow  as  ever.  Now  the  grounds  why  God  only 
giveth  increase  may  be,  first.  Because  even  in  natural  blessings  and  outward 
mercies  success  is  attributed  to  God,  not  to  men,  much  more  in  spirituals.  Thus 
the  Psalmist  attributes  to  God  that  the  ridges  are  full  of  corn,  that  cattle  are 
fruitful  and  do  not  miscarry.  God,  He  keeps  the  key  of  heaven  and  gives  earthly 
blessings  as  He  pleaseth  (Prov.  x.  22).     Secondly,  God  only  can  give  increase. 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  221 

because  He  only  hath  the  supreme  power  and  dominion  over  men's  hearts.  "We  are 
teachers  to  tlie  e^r,  God  is  a  teaclier  of  the  heart.  Object :  But  you  may  say,  If 
God  gave  the  increase,  why  then  doth  not  the  Word  bear  fruit  in  every  place  ?  Are 
any  hearts  too  strong  for  the  Lord  ?  I  answer,  a  people  by  their  sins  may  provoke 
God  to  depart  from  His  ordinances.  Secondly,  You  may  ask,  If  God  only  gives 
increase,  what  means  may  we  take  to  have  God  bless  us  in  tbis  manner?  (Ibid.) 
Farm  labourers  : — I.  The  Chtjrch  is  God's  farm.  1.  The  Lord  has  made  the  Church 
His  own.  (1)  By  His  sovereign  choice.  (2)  By  purchase.  It  is  God's  freehold, 
and  He  holds  its  title  deeds.  (3)  By  enclosure.  It  lay  exposed  aforetime  as  part 
of  an  open  common,  covered  with  thorns  and  thistles,  and  the  haunt  of  every  wild 
beast.  Hath  not  the  Lord  declared  that  He  hath  chosen  His  vineyard  and  fenced 
it?  (4)  By  cultivation.  What  more  could  He  have  done  for  His  farm  ?  He  has 
totally  changed  the  nature  of  the  soil  :  from  being  barren  He  hath  made  it  a  fruitful 
land.  2.  This  farm  is  preserved  by  the  Lord's  continual  piotectidn.  "I  the  Lord 
do  keep  it ;  I  will  water  it  every  moment :  lest  any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and 
day."  If  it  were  not  for  this  her  hedges  would  soon  be  thrown  down,  and  wild 
beasts  would  devour  her  fields.  3.  Inasmuch  as  the  Church  is  God's  own  farm, 
He  expects  to  receive  a  harvest  from  it.  Barrenness  suits  the  moorland,  but  to  a 
farm  it  would  be  a  great  discredit.  Love  looks  for  returns  of  love  ;  grace  given 
demands  gracious  fruit.  Ought  not  the  Lord  to  have  a  harvest  of  obedience,  of 
holiness,  of  usefulness,  of  praise?  4.  See,  then,  the  injustice  of  allowing  any  of 
the  labourers  to  call  even  a  part  of  the  estate  his  own.  When  a  great  man  has  a 
large  farm  of  his  own,  what  would  he  think  if  Hodge  the  ploughman  should  say, 
"Look  here,  I  plough  this  farm,  and  therefore  it  is  mine:  I  shall  call  this  field 
Hodge's  Acres."  "  No,"  says  Hobbs,  "I  reaped  that  land  last  harvest,  and  there- 
fore it  is  mine,  and  I  sh.sll  call  it  Hobbs's  Field."  What  if  all  the  other  labourers 
became  Hodgeites  and  Hobbsites,  and  so  parcelled  out  the  farm  among  them  ?  I 
think  the  landlord  would  soon  eject  the  lot.  The  farm  belongs  to  its  owner,  and 
let  it  be  called  by  his  name.  Eemember  how  Paul  put  it :  "  Who  then  is  Paul,  and 
who  is  Apollos  ?  "  II.  The  Great  HusTiANuiuN  employs  labourers.  1.  By  human 
agency  God  ordinarily  works  out  His  de^igns.  He  can,  if  He  pleases,  by  His  Holy 
Spirit  get  directly  at  the  hearts  of  men,  but  that  is  His  business,  and  not  ours ;  we 
have  to  do  with  such  words  as  these:  "It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  to  save  them  that  believe."  The  Master's  commission  is  not,  "  Sit  still 
and  see  the  Spirit  of  God  convert  the  nations";  but,  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Observe  God's  method  in  supplying  the 
race  with  food.  2.  Our  Great  Master  means  that  every  labourer  on  His  farm 
should  receive  some  benefit  from  it,  for  He  never  muzzles  the  mouth  of  the  ox  that 
treadeth  out  the  corn  (ver.  8).  8.  The  labourers  employed  by  God  are  all  occupied 
upon  needful  work.  Notice:  "I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered."  On  God's  farm 
none  are  kept  for  ornamental  purposes.  I  have  read  some  s-ermons  which  could 
only  have  been  meant  for  show,  for  there  was  not  a  grain  of  gospel  in  them.  They 
were  ploughs  with  the  share  left  out,  drills  with  no  wheat  in  the  bcx,  clod-crusheis 
made  of  butter.  I  do  not  believe  that  God  will  ever  pay  wages  to  men  who  only 
walk  about  His  grounds  to  show  themselves.  Many  Christians  live  as  if  their  only 
business  on  the  farm  was  to  pluck  blackberries  or  gather  wild  flowers.  They  are 
great  at  finding  fault  with  other  people's  ploughing  and  mowing;  but  not  a  hand's 
turn  will  they  do  themselves.  Come  on!  Why  stand  ye  all  the  day  idle?  The 
harvest  is  plenteous,  and  the  labourers  are  few.  4.  On  the  Lord's  farm  there  is  a 
division  of  labour.  Even  Paul  did  not  say,  "I  have  planted  nnd  watered."  And 
Apollos  could  not  say,  "I  have  planted  as  well  as  watered."  No  man  has  all  gifts, 
and  therefore  instead  of  grumbling  at  the  honest  ploughman  because  he  did  not 
bring  a  sickle  with  him,  you  ought  to  have  jjrayed  for  him  that  he  might  have 
strength  to  plough  deep  and  break  up  hard  hearts.  5.  On  God's  farm,  there  is 
unity  o'  purpose  among  the  labourers.  "  He  that  planteth  and  he  that  watereth  are 
one."  One  Master  his  employed  them,  and  though  He  may  send  them  out  at 
different  times,  and  to  different  parts  of  the  farm,  yet  they  are  all  one  in  being  used 
for  one  end.  to  work  for  one  liarvest.  Planting  needs  wisdom,  and  so  does  watering, 
and  the  piecing  of  these  two  works  together  needs  that  the  labourers  should  be  of 
one  mind.  It  is  a  bad  thing  when  labourers  are  at  cross  purposes.  How  can  I 
plant  with  success  if  my  helper  will  not  water  what  I  have  planted ;  or  what  is  the 
use  of  my  watering  if  nothina  is  planted?  6.  All  the  labourers  put  togt-ther  are 
nothing  at  all.  "  Neither  is  he  that  planteth  anything,"  &c.  The  workmen  are 
nothing  at  all  without  their  master,  and  all  the  preachers  and  Christian  workers  in 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

the  world  can  do  nothing  unless  God  be  with  them.     7.  The  labourers  shall  be 
rewarded.     God  works  our  good  works  in  us,  and  then  rewards  us  for  them.     Here 
we  have  mention  of  a  personal  service,  and  a  personal  reward  :  "  Every  man  shall 
receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own  labour."    The  reward  is  proportionate, 
not  to  the  success,  but  to  the  labour.   Many  discouraged  workers  may  be  comforted 
by  that  expression.     You  are  not  to  be  paid  by  results,  but  by  endeavours.     8. 
Unitedly  the  woikers  have  been  successful,  and  that  is  a  great  part  of  their  reward, 
'When  Paul  plants  and  Apollos  waters,  God  does  give  the  increase.     We  do  not 
labour  in  vain.     HI.   Gon  Himself  is  the  Great  Woeker.     He  may  use  what 
labourers  He  pleases,  but  the  increase  comes  alone  from  Him.     You  know  it  is  so 
in  natural  things  :  the  most  skilful  farmer  cannot   make   the  wheat  germinate. 
What  can  you  and  I  do  in  this  matter?     W^e  can  tell  out  the  truth  of  God ;  but  to 
apply  that  trutli  to  the  heart  and  conscience  is  quite  another  thing.     Equally  it  is 
the  Lord's  work  to  keep  the  seed  alive  when  it  springs  up.     IV.  Practical  lessons. 
If  the  whole  farm  of  the  Church  belongs  exclusively  to  the  Great  Master  Worker, 
and  the  labourers  are  worth  notljing  with  Him — 1.  Let  this  promote  unity  among 
all  whom  He  employs.     If  we  aie  all  under  one  Master,  do  not  let  us  quarrel.     2. 
This  ought  to  keep  all  the  labourers  very  dependent.     Man  is  vanity  and  his  words 
are  wind  ;  to  God  alone  belongeth  power  and  wisdom.    3.  This  fact  ennobles  every- 
body who  labours  in  God's  husbandry.     We  are  mere  labourers  on  His  farm,  and 
yet  labourers  with  Him.  4.  How  this  should  drive  us  to  our  knees.   (C.  H.  Spiirgeon.) 
Moral  increase : — I.  All  increase  is  of  God.     The  nature  of  the  thing,  Scripture 
and  Christian  experience  alike  show  that  God  alone  can  give  it.     II.  The  moral 
INCREASE  WHICH  He  GIVES  IS  MOST  GLORIOUS  in — 1.  Itself.     2.  Its  adaptation.     3.  Its 
extent.     4.  Its  perplexities.     5.  Its  benevoknce.     III.  He  gives  it  all  on  a  fixed 
PRINCIPLE.     There  must  be — 1.  Personal.     2.  United.     3.  Believing.     4.  Earnest. 
5.  Prayerful.     6.  Persevering— labour.     {B.  Wanl.)        So,  then,  neither  is  he  that 
planteth  anything  .  .  .  but  God  that  giveth  the  increase. — Hnninninatrumentality 
useless  without  God: — I.  This  maybe  akgukd  from — 1.  The  condition  of  all  mankind 
by  nature,  viz.,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  therefore  moral  suasion  or  educa- 
tion can  never  reach  the  evd.     2.  The  change  which  is  contemplated,  which  is 
nothing  less  than  to  create  man  anew,  to  implant  new  principles  into  his  soul.     3. 
The  statements  of  Scripture  itself.     "  Neither  is  he  ihat  planteth  anything,"  Ac.   4. 
The  history  of  the  Church  in  every  succeedint^  age.     IL  But  the  Lord  and  Givek 
OF  LIFE  oriiiuarily  works   by  human  instrun)entality.     Would  not  the  husbandman 
tempt  God's  providence  if  he  should  say,  "I  need  not  sow  or  culture  the  ground,  for 
I  have  no  power  to  cause  the  seed  to  grow,  and  therefore  I  will  remain  quiet,  and 
leave  it  to  Go  I "  ?     Would  he  not  justlv  be  left  without  a  harvest  and  suff  .r  for  his 
own  folly  and  madness?     And  so  will  it  1)6  in  grace.     Therefore,  it  is  ours  to  use 
the  means,  while  we  remember  that  conversion  is  generally  attributable  to  the  Word 
of  God.     How  fearful,  then,  the  responsibility  which  attaches  to  the  preaching  and 
hearing  of  God's  holy  Word!     Gonclusim:  The  subject  teaches  us^l.  That  we 
should  ret' ard  ad  Imman  instrumentality  in  its  proper  place.     2.  That  the  Word 
of  Gol,  spite  of  all  the  opposition  th  it  may  be  made  to  it  by  ungodly  men,  will 
be   the   gaud   instrument  of    the  renovation  of   our  fallen  world.      3.    That  to 
God  we   are  to  asciibe  all  the  praise  and  all  the  glory.      (-7.  Haxlegrave,  B.A.) 
God   the  gircr  of  mcn'ajie;— Christianity  had  made  rapid  advances  amongst  the 
people  of  Corinth.     Numbers  and  success  had  produced  the  alas  !  too  commonly 
attendant  evils.     Party  spirit  had  developed  itself.     St.   Paul  v.-rites,   seeking  to 
correct  all  this.     He  bids  them  think  of  the  source  of  th*^  gospel  they  had  received, 
of  the  power  by  which  it  was  prop  lyated,  of  the  life  by  which  it  was  sustained. 
They  would  find  all  this,  not  in  the  wisdom  or  the  eloquence  of  their  teachers,  not  in 
the  completeness  of  their  Church  organisation;  but  in  the  presence,  the  jirace,  the 
love  of  God.     God  gives  the  increase.     I.  We  naturally  and  rightly  look  for 
increase.     We  want  fruit,  as  the  product  of  our  toil.     We  all  work  with  a  distinct 
aim  (chap.  ix.  7).     The  fact  of  inciease  is  at  once  one  of  the  greatest  inducements 
to  labour,  and  one  of  the  greatest  rewards  of  it.     \f\\o  would  continue  to  work  if 
the  work  proved  altogether  barren  and  resuitless  ?    We  should  look  for  mcr.  ase  hIso 
in  higher  things.     There  is  the  Church  with  its  work.     We  should  desire  to  see  it 
grow  under  our  fostering  care.    We  should  look  for  growing  num!iers  and  increasing 
usefulness.     We  should  look  for  increase  also  in  the  personal  S'ul.     Wliat  is  our 
Christianity  ?   Not  a  creed  only,  not  a  theology  only,  not  a  piece  of  social  organisa- 
tion only,  but  a  life.     Growth  is  a  characteristic  of  life.     The  apostles  cou  d  say  to 
many  of  the  Christians  of  their  age  :  "  Your  faith  groweth,"  "  Your  lovegroweth." 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  223 

Can  it  be  said  of  us?  II.  If  we  want  the  incbease,  we  must  t.\ke  the  proper 
MEANS.  This  is  true,  not  only  of  the  grent  matters  of  which  tlie  apostle  is  speaking, 
but  also  of  the  commonest  things  of  daily  life.  It  is  one  of  the  great  lessons  of  the 
harvest.  So  is  it  in  business.  Sedulous  care  is  one  of  the  secrets  of  success.  So 
is  it  in  education.  There  is  no  royal  road  to  learning  for  any  man.  In  every 
domain  of  life  God  blesses  human  forethought,  and  toil,  and  faith.  God  had  given 
the  increase  in  the  Church  at  Corinth.  But  how  earnest  had  been  the  labour  of 
•which  this  growth  was  the  reward.  St.  Paul  had  planted  with  all  his  zeal. 
Apollos,  with  his  renowned  eloquence,  had  laboured  too.  These  were  the  antece- 
dent conditions  on  the  human  side  to  which  that  growth  was  to  be  ascribed.  III. 
Paul  may  plant,  Apollos  may  water,  isdt  God  giveth  the  increase.  This  is  so, 
even  in  the  commonest  things  of  daily  life.  Take  the  ordinary  annual  produce  of 
the  earth.  The  ultimate  causes  of  productiveness  are  altogether  beyond  our  power 
to  reach.  So  is  it  in  business  life.  Two  men  start  together  ;  the  conditions  which 
promise  success,  such  as  neighbourhood,  the  conduct  and  industry  of  the  men,  and 
so  on,  seem  precisely  ec^ual.  Yet  while  one  man  prospers  in  largest  measure,  the 
other  goes  his  way  to  poverty.  But  this  only  states  the  fact  without  explaining  it. 
The  question  at  the  root  of  the  matter  is  :  What  is  it  that  determines  a  man's 
action  at  the  critical  moment  in  his  history  ?  What  gives  the  insight  and  the 
courage  which  enable  him  to  grasp  the  hapjiy  chance?  What  sends  him  bounding 
on  the  flood  to  fortune?  May  not  this  be  God,  the  ruler  of  all,  who  "  doeth 
according  to  His  will,'' who  selteth  up  one  and  putteth  down  another?  Toil  is 
ours,  but  increase  is  in  the  hands  of  God.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they 
labour  in  vain  that  build  it."  (iod  does  give  the  increase  in  all  the  many  regions 
of  human  life.  God  blesses  all  honest  humble  toil.  He  crowns  the  ploughing  and 
the  sowing  with  the  golden  harvest.  Study  is  rewarded  with  growth  both  in  our 
stores  of  knowledge  and  also  in  our  mental  power  to  grasp  the  truth.  So  also  all 
real  spiritual  work  is  largely  blessed  by  God.  God  is  ever  near.  God  labours  with 
us.  May  we  ever  bear  it  in  mind  in  all  our  work.  God  crowns  our  work  with  His 
all-sufticient  blessing.  It  is  true  in  all  ways.  In  the  personal  soul  our  religious 
acts  in  public  works  and  in  sacraments,  as  well  as  in  private  devotion,  are  planting 
and  watering ;  but  faithfully  used  a  richer  Divine  life  will  possess  us,  for  God  will 
give  the  increase,  and  there  will  be  a  sure  growth  in  righteousness.  (Ralph  Williams.) 
'That  the  best  ministry  is  notlung  icithout  GocVs  power  giving  the  increase  : — 1.  Let  us 
consider — W^hat  the  apostle  doth  not  mean  in  saying  the  ministry  is  nothing. 
First,  he  doth  not  mean  as  if  the  ofllcers  of  the  Church  were  not,  in  their  way  and 
place,  necessary  ;  for  then  the  ap-stle  in  the  same  tongue  should  contradict  himself, 
for  he  saith,  "We  are  workers  together  with  God"  (2.  Cor.  vi.  1).  Secondly,  when  the 
apostle  calls  the  ministry  nothing,  the  meaning  is  not  as  if  it  were  not  sufficient  in 
its  kind  to  work  those  things  for  which  it  is  appoiuted,  otherwise  this  would  reflect 
upon  the  wisdom  of  God.  Thirdly,  when  the  apostle  saith  they  are  nothing,  this 
is  to  be  understood  of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  and  preaching  of  it  as  well  as  the 
ministers  of  the  law  and  preaching  that.  What  he  positively  meaneth  or  inferreth 
are,  first,  tliat  it  is  not  iu  the  power  or  choice  of  the  minister  to  make  it  eUectual. 
Secondly,  the  apostle  by  this  intends  that  both  the  ministers  and  the  people  should 
keep  thunselves  iu  their  due  bounds.  Lastly,  in  making  the  ministry  nothing  and 
God  all,  the  apostle  would  have  both  minister  and  people  iu  their  ministry  to  have 
our  hearts  and  eyes  up  to  heaven.  But  how  may  we  address  ourselves  to  hear  and 
to  the  ministry  so  that  God  may  make  them  something  to  us  ?  To  be  made  some- 
thing is  when  the  Word  doth  greatly  wound  thy  heart  or  comfort  thee.  First, 
make  it  a  real  and  conscientious  matter  to  pray  unto  God  to  give  increase.  As 
to  the  woman  our  Saviour  said,  "  According  to  thy  faith  so  be  it  unto  thee,"  So 
according  to  thy  prepared  prayer,  saith  God,  this  sermon  and  this  duty  shall  be 
blessed  upon  yon.  Secondly,  exercise  strong  and  divine  acts  of  faith;  this 
will  make  the  ministry  something  to  thee.  The  Word  profited  not,  because  it 
was  not  mingled  with  faith  (Heb.  iv.  2).  Thirdly,  "lay  aside  all  superfluity  of 
naughtiness  "  (James  i.  21).  Labour  to  find  the  ministry  somethiog,  some  great 
thmg,  some  terrible  thmg,  some  comfortable  thing  to  thee.  [A.  Burgess.) 
The  success  of  the  ministry  owing  to  a  Divine  influence  : — I.  Such  is  the  present 
degeneracy  op  human  nature,  that  all  the  ministrations  of  the  gospel  cannot 
remedy  it  without  the  concurring  efficacy  of  Divine  grace.  The  gospel  is 
designed  to  reclaim  men  from  sin  ;  but  they  are  obstinately  set  upon  it.  It  is 
intended  to  bring  apostate  lebels  back  to  God  and  the  universal  practice  of  holiness  ; 
but  we  love  estrangeraeut  from  Him,  and  have  no  inclination  to  return.     Instruc- 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap    in. 

tions  may  furnish  the  head  with  notions,  and  correct  speculative  mistakes ;  but 
they  have  no  power  to  sway  the  will,  and  sweetly  allure  it  to  holiness.  Persuasions 
may  prevail  to  bring  men  to  practise  what  they  had  omitted  through  mistake,  care- 
lessness, or  a  transient  dislike ;  but  they  have  no  effect  where  the  heart  is  full  of 
innate  enmity  against  the  things  recommended.  II.  The  promises  and  declara- 
tions OF  THE  Word,  which  appropriate  all  the  success  of  the  gospel  to  God 
alone.  Jehovah  is  not  fond  of  ostentation  and  parade.  The  doctrine  of  the 
necessity  of  Divine  influences  to  render  the  administrations  of  the  gospel  effectual 
for  saving  purposes,  is  a  doctrine  familiar  to  the  sacred  oracles.  III.  That  the 
different  success  of  the  same  means  of  grace  in  different  periods  of  the 
Church,  sufficiently  shows  the  necessity  of  gracious  assistances  to  render 
them  efficacious.  We  find  that  religion  has  flourished  or  declined,  not  so  much 
according  to  external  means  as  according  to  the  degree  of  Divine  influence.  Alas  ! 
what  could  Noah,  that  zealous  preacher  of  righteousness  do,  during  the  120  years 
of  his  ministry  ?  He  miglit  warn,  he  might  persuade,  he  might  weep  over  a  secure 
world,  in  vain  :  they  would  rush  upon  destruction  before  his  eyes.  How  little  could 
Moses,  the  favourite  messenger  of  God,  prevail  to  make  his  people  dutiful!  Alas! 
after  all  the  astonishing  wonders  he  wrought  before  their  eyes,  they  continued 
obstinate  and  rebellious  ;  "  For  the  Lord  had  not  given  them  an  heart  to  under- 
stand," &c.  (Deut.  xxix.  4).  What  inconsiderable  success  had  that  zealous  prophet 
Elijah,  the  eloquent  Isaiah,  or  that  tender-hearted,  mourning,  weeping  prophet, 
Jeremiah  !  Surely  many  feeble  servants  of  Christ,  in  all  respects  inferior  to  them, 
have  been  crowned  with  more  extensive  success !  IV.  Our  own  experience  and 
observation  furnish  us  with  many  instances  in  which  this  great  truth  has  been 
exemplified.  Sometimes  a  minister  who  is  a  universal  scholar,  a  masterly 
reasoner,  and  an  accomplished  orator,  and  withal  sincerely  engaged  for  the  conver- 
sion of  sinners,  labours  in  vain ;  while  another  of  much  inferior  accomplishments 
is  the  successful  instrument  of  turning  many  to  righteousness.  Sometimes  we  have 
seen  a  number  of  sinners  thoroughly  awakened  and  brought  to  seek  the  Lord  in 
earnest ;  while  another  number,  under  the  very  same  sermon,  and  who  seemed  as 
open  to  conviction  as  the  former,  have  remained  thoughtless  as  usual.  And  \\'hence 
could  this  difference  arise  but  from  special  grace  ?  Your  own  experience  proves  the 
same  thmg.  Have  you  not  found  thnt  the  very  same  things  have  very  different 
effects  upon  you  at  different  times?  Hence  we  learn — 1.  How  essential  and  impor- 
tant the  doctrine  of  Divine  influence  is  to  the  Church  of  God.  The  very  life  and 
the  whole  success  of  the  gospel  depend  upon  it.  2.  That  when  we  enjoy  the  minis- 
trations of  the  gospel  in  the  greatest  purity  and  plenty,  we  should  not  j^lace  our 
trust  upon  them,  but  wholly  depend  on  the  influence  of  Divine  grace  for  the  success. 
3.  Hence  also  we  may  learn  whither  we  should  look  for  grace  to  render  the  gospel 
successful  among  us.  Let  us  look  up  to  God.  Saints,  apply  to  Him  for  His  inUu- 
ences  to  quicken  your  graces  and  animate  you  in  your  Christian  course.  Sinners, 
cry  to  Him  for  His  grace  to  renew  your  nature  and  sanctify  you.  4.  We  observe 
that  whatever  excellent  outward  means  and  privileges  a  Church  enjoys,  it  is  in  a 
most  miserable  condition  if  the  Lord  has  withdrawn  His  influences  from  it ;  and 
whether  this  be  not  too  much  our  own  condition  I  leave  you  to  judge.  (S.  Davies, 
A.M.)      The  Christian  hearer'' s  first  lesson : — Let  me — I.  For  the  preventing  of  all 

MISTAKES,  briefly   ILLUSTRATE    THE    DOCTRINE  CONTAINED  IN  THESE  WORDS.       But    first 

it  will  be  fit  to  tell  you  what  is  to  be  taken  for  granted  of  the  persons  here  spoken 
of.  1.  That  they  have  a  sufficient  call  to  the  office  of  the  sacred  ministry,  and 
authority  to  exercise  the  same.  2.  That  they  be  furnished  with  a  competent  stock 
of  divine  knowledge,  and  understand  the  things  they  are  to  teach  unto  others,  and 
are  not  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  3.  That  they  have  at  least  such  a  faculty  of 
expression  as  that  they  may  be  nnderstood  by  those  whom  they  are  to  instruct. 
These  things  supposed,  I  am  now  to  show — (1)  What  every  minister  of  the  gosx^el 
may  and  ought  to  do.  He  may  both  plant  and  water,  and  do  the  whole  work  of 
God,  so  far  as  He  hath  thought  fit  to  entrust  man  with  it,  i.e.,  exercise  the  whole 
ministry  of  reconciliation.  (2)  What  one  minister  may  be  able  to  do  more  than 
another.  God  hath  not  given  to  all  the  same  number  of  talents  (chap.  xii.  7-11). 
All  the  apostles  had  not  St.  Peter's  quickness  of  apprehension,  forwardness  of 
speech,  or  zeal ;  all  were  not,  like  James  and  John,  sons  of  thunder ;  all  had  not 
Paul's  learning,  or  Apollos's  eloquence.  One  minister  of  Christ  may  have  a  more 
faithful  memory,  and  another  a  clearer  judgment,  and  a  third  a  more  fruitful 
invention,  and  a  fourth  a  better  elocution.  One  may  be  more  dexterous  at  planting, 
another  at  watering,  a  third  at  weeding,  and  a  fourth  at  fencing;  and  another  may 


cuAP.  III.]  I.   COrdNTHIANS.  225 

exceed  all  in  pruning  off  the  luxuriant  branches  and  cherishing  the  tender  plants. 
It  is  no  less  absurd  to  expect  the  same  abilities  in  all  ministers  than  it  would  be  to 
imagine  that  all  artists,  <\"C.,  should  be  of  ecjual  skill.  (3)  That  all  which  the  best 
can  do  is  in  itself  of  no  eflicacy.  Neither  is  Paul  nor  Apollos  anything,  i.e.,  with- 
out the  blessing  of  God.  What  is  it  that  the  ablest  ministers  can  do  to  make  men 
good  Christians?  All  comes  to  no  more  but  this:  tbey  can  declare  the  doctrine  of 
the  gospel ;  they  can  exhort,  persuade,  and  pray.  None  but  He  whose  voice  shaketh 
,he  heavens  and  the  earth  can  lend  the  stony  hearts  of  sinners.  (4}  That  the 
efficacy  of  all  is  of  God  only.  Whoever  planteth  or  watereth,  God  giveth  the 
increase.  He  hath  put  His  words  into  their  mouth,  and  His  seed  into  their  hands; 
but  still  the  seed  itself,  the  skill  and  activity  of  the  sowers,  the  goodness  of  the 
ground,  the  warmth  and  the  rain,  the  growth  and  harvest,  are  all  of  Him.     II.  Fou 

THE  HELP  OF  SUCH  AS  M.\Y  NEED  IT,  POINT  AT  S03IE  OF  THE  USES  WE  SHOULD  MAKE  OF  IT. 

Because  we  are  nothing,  and  all  the  increase  is  of  God — 1.  Let  us  take  heed  how 
we  depend  so  much  on  the  ministry  of  men  as  to  attend  too  little  in  their  ministry 
upon  God.  Whilst  you  are  pleased  to  afford  us  your  ear,  be  sure  that  you  give  God 
jour  heart.  It  is  a  very  lamentable  thing  to  see  in  what  extremes  we  are  apt  to 
lose  both  God  and  ourselves.  Because  neither  Paul  nor  Apollos  are  anything 
without  God,  or  in  comparison  of  God,  therefore — (1)  Some  rashly  conclude  that 
they  are  nothing  at  all  to  them.  But  though  the  very  best  instrument  be  able  to 
do  notljing  by  iiself  out  of  the  workman's  hands,  yet  even  an  indift'erent  one  may 
do  much  wheu  managed  by  the  hand  of  a  skilful  workman.  It  is  certainly  God 
alone  that  gives  the  increase  in  the  tield  as  well  as  in  the  Ciuuch,  and  yet  men  are 
not  so  unreasonable  as  to  expsct  a  good  harvest  from  God  without  the  labour  of  the 
husbandman.  (2)  Others  make  God  Himself  almost  nothing,  and  the  minister  all. 
Such  are  they  who  place  the  greatest  part  of  their  religion  in  hearing  many  ser- 
mons, and  wlien  they  have  heard  enough  are  apt  to  jjersiiade  themselves  that  they 
have  served  God  well  enough.  So  our  ears  be  but  constantly  exercised  ;  a  barren 
hcarh,  which  bringeth  forth  no  fruit  of  righteousness  to  Godor  to  our  neighbour  in 
our  life,  never  troubles  us.  (3)  Others  attribute  so  much  to  the  choice  of  the  preacher, 
as  if  they  thought  that  God  Himself  is  like  to  some  woikmen  who  cannot  do  their 
work  to  any  purpose  unless  they  have  the  very  best  tools  to  work  with.  2.  Let  ua 
learn  how  we  are  to  behave  ourselves  in  relation  to  the  ordinances  of  God  adminis- 
tered  by  men.  (1)  More  generally,  let  us  see  that  we  rightly  distinguish  between\^ 
the  work  of  God  and  the  ministry  of  man,  neither  expecting  from  men  what  God  >» 
alone  can  do,  nor  expecting  that  God  will  do  that  alone  which  He  ordinarily  doth  by  \ 
the  ministry  of  men.  (2)  ilore  particularly,  remember — {a)  That  the  men  who  minister  \ 

to  you  are  still  men,  and  will  as  long  as  they  live  have  more  or  less  the  infirmities  I 

of  men.  You  must  therefore  be  so  just  as  to  allow  for  the  common  infirmities  of 
human  nature,  and  so  charitable,  too,  as  to  overlook  some  personal  failings.  If  the 
workman  build  on  the  right  foundation  and  by  his  true  rule ;  if  he  do  his  work/ 
truly,  faithfully,  and  substantially,  this  ought  to  satisfy,  (b)  That  as  they  are 
ministers  of  Christ  they  are  not  to  be  despised,  and  as  they  are  no  more  but  minis- 
ters they  may  be  too  much  magnified.  If  he  that  glorieth  in  Apollos  had  iudeea\^ 
profited  by  Apollo's  preaching,  as  he  ought  to  have  done,  he  would  be  very  well  y\ 
pleased  with  Paul.  And  if  he  that  glorieth  in  Paul  had  improved  in  sincere  Chria^^ 
tianity  by  Paul's  ministry,  he  would  be  well  enough  pleased  with  Apollos.  I  know 
that  it  is  pleaded  by  some  that  they  cannot  profit  by  some  as  by  others,  and  pos- 
sibly there  may  be  some  truth  in  this,  and  yet,  it  may  be,  the  fault  doth  not  always 
lie  where  they  would  have  it  laid,  but  where  they  have  no  mind  at  all  to  find  it. 
However,  what  is  here  pleaded  deserves  to  be  considered.  And  first,  suppose  we 
that  the  Word  of  God,  the  wholesome  food  of  our  souls,  is  duly  and  fully  adminis- 
tered, there  is  no  room  at  all  for  this  plea.  The  san^e  living  water  coming  from  the 
Rame  spring  hath  the  same  virtue,  through  what  conduit  soever  it  may  pass  unto 
u«.  The  sound  we  hear  is  the  man's,  and  that  may  be  less  grateful ;  but  still  the 
Word  is  God's,  and  should  be  always  welcome.  Secondly,  the  scales,  it  may  be, 
hang  a  great  denl  evener  than  we  yet  think  they  do.  As  many  pious  people  are 
editied,  for  ought  we  know,  by  him  whom  we  forsake  as  are  by  him  we  follow. 
Some  persons  I  have  known  who,  through  an  unreasonable  prejudice,  have  been 
even  sick  at  the  sight  of  some  meat,  whereof  they  could  never  be  persuaded  to  taste, 
and  yet,  alter  they  have  but  once  or  twice  been  prevailed  with  to  eat  of  it,  have  fed 
upon  it  with  much  both  delight  and  benefit.  Possibly,  then,  you  may  not  be  edified, 
not  because  you  cannot,  but  only  because  you  think  so,  and  will  not  try.  (C  Elis.) 
Now  lie  that  plautoth,  and  lie  tliat  wateretli,  are  one. — Tlie  unity  of  Christian 
VOL.   I.  15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

work: — That,  although  there  is  diversity  and  variety  in  the  gifts  of  the  ministers, 
yet  they  all  ought  to  agree  in  one.  The  ministry  ought  to  be  one.  First,  in  respect 
of  doctrine,  and  true  doctrine,  that  is  the  soul  and  life  of  all  (1  Tim.  i.  b).  Secondly, 
there  ought  to  be  unity  in  regard  of  their  end  and  scope.  Thirdly,  there  should  be 
unity  in  affections,  to  love  one  another,  to  bless  God  for  the  abilities  and  gifts  of 
one  another.  Envy  and  pride  is  apt  to  get  even  amongst  the  best.  First,  when  the 
ministry  is  not  one,  this  is  apt  in  the  first  place  to  beget  atheism  and  irreligion  in 
the  people.  Secondly,  where  there  is  not  this  unity,  it  doth  much  grieve  and  un- 
settle the  hearts  of  the  godly.  Thirdly,  when  there  is  not  this  unity,  profaneness 
and  ungodliness  doth  the  more  increase ;  godliness  doth  exceedingly  decay  in  the 
power  of  it.  1.  Do  not  thou  by  thy  pragmatical  meddling  widen  the  difference  and 
raise  more  dust.  2.  Consider  this- — that  those  that  are  godly  do  agree  in  the  main 
fundamental  point.  3.  Do  thou  labour  to  be  informed  with  a  true  and  divine  faith 
out  of  the  Word  thine  own  self.  4.  Humble  yourselves  under  these  differences, 
when  they  go  not  the  same  way,  when  they  preach  not  the  same  thing.  {A.  Burgess.) 
And  every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own  labour. — 
The  reward  of  the  Christian  niinistrij  : — That,  according  to  a  man's  labour  and 
working  for  God,  he  is  sure  lo  have  a  proportionable  reward.  To  clear  this,  con- 
gicler- — First,  that  there  are  no  persons,  be  tiiey  never  so  mean,  so  poor,  so 
contemptible,  but  they  are  in  a  way  and  calling  to  do  God's  work.  Secondly,  there 
is  a  twofold  doing  of  God's  work — either  the  work  of  His  providence  as  passive 
instruments,  or  the  work  of  His  commands  as  active  instruments.  In  the  next 
place,  therefore,  let  us  consider  what  is  the  acceptable  doing  of  God's  work  which 
will  be  rewarded?  First,  that  only  is  God's  work  which  is  commanded  and  willed 
by  Him.  We  are  often  commanded  to  understand  the  good  and  acceptable  will  of 
God.  Many  think  they  are  doing  God's  work  when  it  is  the  devil's,  because  they 
look  not  for  warrant  of  it  in  Scripture.  Secondly,  it  is  acceptable  labouring  when 
it  is  done  in  such  a  manner.  1.  It  is  profitable  working  when  the  persons  are  first 
made  the  Lord's,  where  they  are  justified  and  sanctified.  Make  the  tree  good,  and 
then  the  fruit  will  be  good.  2.  A  reward  is  due  to  that  work  only  which  is  done 
for  God's  sake,  out  of  luve  to  Him.  .S.  That  work  only  will  have  a  reward  which  is 
done  with  that  measure  and  degree  of  love  and  fervency  that  it  ought  to  be.  4.  The 
work  to  be  rewarded  is  that  which  is  constantly  done  with  perseverance,  holding 
out  to  the  end  (Matt.  xxiv.  13).  5.  The  work  to  be  rewarded  is  that  which  is  done 
fully  and  plenarily.  WiU  a  good  work  thus  circumstantiated  be  sure  to  be  rewarded? 
Then  take  heed  of  two  contraries  to  this  work  of  the  Lord.  (1)  Of  idleness,  un- 
profitableness, and  unfruitfulness.  (2)  Take  heed  of  the  other  contrary,  upon 
which  the  greater  wrath  of  God  will  fall,  and  that  is,  to  do  the  devil's  work.  Our 
Saviour  told  the  Pharisees,  They  are  of  the  devil,  and  his  works  they  did  (John 
viii.  44).  Having  considered  what  the  work  is,  now  let  us  consider  and  admire  at 
the  reward;  and  before  we  come  to  show  what  reward  is,  take  notice  of  a  distinction 
or  two.  First,  there  is  an  essential  reward,  and  that  is,  the  enjoyment  of  God  in 
.full  assurance  and  delight.  This  all  that  work  for  God  are  sure  to  have.  Secondly, 
there  is  an  accidental  reward,  and  that  is,  some  degrees  of  glory,  because  of  greater 
labour  and  sufferings  for  Christ  one  may  partake  of  more  glory  than  another. 
Thirdly,  it  is  lawful  to  encourage  a  man's  self  in  working  for  God  by  this,  that 
there  is  a  reward.  There  is  a  lawful  self-seeking,  viz.,  of  immoitality,  and  honour 
and  glory  (Eom.  ii.  7).  Let  us  consider  wlierein  lieth  this  reward  of  working  for 
God,  either  in  this  life,  or  in  the  life  to  come.  And  truly,  in  this  life,  if  there  were 
no  heaven,  no  happiness,  no  enjoyment  of  God,  there  is  enough  to  put  us  on  it. 
First,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  peace  and  omfort  of  conscience  in  doing  what  is  good. 
Secondly, when  we  do  God's  work.  He  further  rewards  with  more  spiritual  strength, 
and  eulargeth  our  abilities,  so  that  the  more  we  work  for  God  the  more  we  may. 
Thus  in  the  parable,  he  that  had  five,  he  gained  ten  (Luke  xix.  16).  Lastly, 
they  are  sure  to  have  God's  protection  and  presence  to  support  them  in  their  labour. 
In  the  next  place,  consider  what  is  the  eternal  reward,  and  how  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive.  First,  it  is  God  Himself 
communicating  His  goodness  and  comfort  to  him  that  hath  done  His  work. 
Secondly,  this  reward  lieth  in  the  full  glorification  of  the  soul  in  all  the  fnculties 
thereof,  and  body  in  all  the  parts  thereof.  Thirdly,  the  eternity  of  this  happiness. 
Fourthly,  the  fulness  of  this  happiness — an  aggregation  of  all  things  that  may 
make  huppy,  either  within  or  without.  Fifthly,  consider  the  vast  disproportion  of 
this  to  those  works  thou  dost  for  God.  1.  The  one  is  infinite,  and  thou  art  a  finite, 
limited  creature.     2.  What  work  thou  doest  for  God,  God  He  first  works  it  in  thee, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  22'J 

so  that  thi)U  labourest  for  Him  of  His  own,  and  yet  He  rewards  it.  3.  What  thou 
doest  for  Him,  it  is  accompanied  with  much  evil  and  many  imperfections.  4.  TIiou 
hast  formerly  been  a  ser%'ant  to  Satan,  done  his  work,  so  that  God  might  damn  thee 
upon  the  old  score,  though  thou  wert  now  able  to  do  all  things  perfectly.  5.  What- 
soever thou  hast  done  is  but  tliy  duty ;  God  need  not  reward  thee,  or  might  have 
bestowed  a  less  reward.  6.  What  work  thou  doest,  it  is  a  due ;  besides,  God  doth 
not  need  it.  It  addeth  nothing.  7.  All  that  thou  doest  is  for  a  little  time ;  the 
reward    is    for  ever.      (Ibid.)  Eeivards  proportionable   to  worlcs : — The   very 

least  share  in  the  glorious  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  is  sufficient 
to  reconcile  a  man  to  the  greatest  hardships  of  a  virtuous  life  ;  but  the  sure 
prospect  of  more  abundant  glory,  as  the  recompense  of  a  more  exalted  holi- 
ness, must  be  allowed  to  carry  still  greater  degrees  of  encouragemeut  along 
with  it.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  the  most  natural  and  prevailing 
motive  to  make  men  grow  in  grace  and  goodness  is  a  well-grounded  confidence 
that  the  greatness  of  their  reward  will  be  proportioned  to  the  greatness  of  tljeir 
attainments.  I.  How  good  grounds  we  have  to  believe  that  diffekrnt  men  will 
EECEivE  A  ruFFEBENT  EEWAED  IN  HEAVEN.  To  confirm  US  in  the  belief  of  this  doc- 
trine we  may  observe  that  there  are  several  ranks  and  orders  of  good  men,  to  whom, 
in  a  peculiar  manner,  more  than  ordinary  degrees  of  hapiiiness  are  promised  in  the 
Scripture.  Of  tlie  prophets  under  the  Old  Testament  we  read  that  "  God  is  not 
ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,"  theirs  in  a  more  tlian  ordinary  manner,  and  that 
"  He  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city  "  (Heb.  xi.  16).  And  to  tlie  apostles  our 
blessed  Saviour  thus  addresseth  Himself  (Luke  xxii.  28-30).  Now  how  difficult 
soever  it  may  be  nicely  to  determine  the  full  meaning  of  these  expiessions,  \et, 
certainlj',  we  may  very  rationally  infer  from  them  that  there  are  some  particular 
marks  of  glory  with  which  the  apostles  of  our  Lord  will  be  honoured  above  other 
Christians.  And  to  this,  it  is  probable,  St.  John  alludes  when,  in  his  description 
of  Jerusalem  the  holj'  city,  he  particularly  observes  that  "  the  whII  of  the  city  had 
twelve  foundations,  and  in  them  the  names  of  tlie  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Rev.  xxi.  14).  St.  Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  breaks  out  into  joy 
upon  the  view  of  that  glory  which  at  the  day  of  judgment  would  redound  to  him 
from  the  success  of  his  ministry  among  them  (1  Thess.  ii.  19).  They  who  come 
nearest  to  the  apostles  in  an  unshaken  faith,  and  an  exemplary  holiness,  will  be 
next  them  likewise  in  hajipiness  and  glory.  True  it  is  all  the  blest  are  alike  children 
of  God  ;  but  it  is  as  true  also  that  all  children  have  not  the  same  provision,  all 
heirs  are  not  entitled  to  the  same  inheritance,  all  members  have  not  the  same 
honour.  II.  This  eew/e  j  will  be  allotted  to  eveey  man  accoeding  to  his  own 
LABOUE.  It  is  observable  that  the  apostle  doth  not  here  say  we  shall  be  rewarded 
for  the  sake  and  on  the  account  of  our  labour,  but  "  according  to  it."  There  is  no 
temptation  which  doth  more  frequently  overtake  us  than  the  fond  hope  of  repenting 
a  little  before  we  go  hence,  and  be  no  more  seen.  But  if  we  would  seriously  con- 
sider, that  though  we  were  never  so  sure  of  time  and  opportunity  and  will  to 
repent  hereafter,  yet  we  shall  by  this  conduct  necessarily  fall  short  of  many  degrees 
of  glory  which  we  might  otherwise  have  just  reason  to  expect.  This  consideration, 
one  would  think,  should  be  sufficient  to  convince  us  of  the  advantages  of  an  early 
piety,  a  universal  obedience,  an  uninterrupted  state  of  hapiDines-s.  {Bp.  Sniol- 
ri'lae.)  Work  and  ivancs : — I.  Evfey  man  is  a  woekee.  1.  For  a  livelihood. 
"Hi  that  will  not  work  neither  let  him  eat."  Masters  as  well  as  servants, 
princes  as  well  as  peasants,  are  subject  to  this  great  law,  and  those  who  strive 
to  evade  it  are  the  veriest  slaves.  2.  To  mould  the  character  and  life  of  all 
among  whom  we  mingle — either  for  good  or  evil.  3.  At  the  task  of  forming  our 
own  eternal  character,  and  we  are  either  becoming  assimilated  to  the  itnage  of  God, 
or  are  marring  the  precious  materials  of  heart,  intellect,  Ac,  which  we  have  received 
from  Him.  4.  Either  aiding  or  hindering  the  great  moral  movements  of  the  day  ; 
either  making  our  fellows  happier  or  lendmg  our  power  to  prolong  the  duration  of 
human  daikness,  degradation,  and  woe.  Here  there  is  no  neutrality.  "  He  who  is 
not  for  Me  is  against  Me."  II.  Eveey  man's  woek  shall  be  jcdged  of  by  itself. 
1.  God  has  created  every  man  complete  and  responsible  in  himself.  A  man  is  not 
a  mere  part  of  a  mass  of  humanity.  He  has  to  deal  for  himself  with  the  great 
ques  ion  of  duty,  and  by  himself  to  answer  to  the  Eternal  Judge.  2.  This  solemn 
truth — (1)  Is  frequently  forgotten,  and  more  frequently  neglected.  Men  act  in 
masses,  and  lose  the  sense  of  individual  responsibility.  Bat  this  does  not  lighten 
its  pressure  or  annihilate  it.  (2)  Involves  most  important  practical  consequences. 
Since  I  am  personally  responsible — {a)  No  human  priest  can  come  between  me  and 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

my  Maker,  (h)  Any  attempt  to  deprive  me  of  my  liberty  of  conscience  is  to  be 
sternly  resisted,  (f)  I  must  not  measure  my  duty  by  tbe  services  of  others,  {d)  It 
is  my  wisdom  to  cultivate  a  solemn  sense  of  my  respousibility.  III.  Evekt  man's 
WOKK  SHALL  RECEIVE  ITS  DUE  WAGES.  This  is  true  of — 1.  The  money-maker.  He 
gets  what  he  works  for.  2.  The  pleasure-seeker.  3.  The  culture  worshipper.  4.  The 
Christian,  who  receives  his  wages — (1)  In  the  quiet  approval  of  his  own  heart.  (2)  In 
seeing  good  accomplished  by  his  efforts.  (3)  In  contemplating  the  final  triumph  of 
his  cause.    (1)  In  the  approval  of  his  Master — "  Well  done,"  &c.    (G.  I).  Macgregor.) 

Ver.  9.  For  we  are  labourers  together  with  God. — Labourers  together  icith 
God  : — I.  The  imsiediate  application  of  the  text.  1.  Believers  though  they  were, 
Paul  could  not  address  the  Corinthians  as  spiritual  persons,  for  they  moved  in  the 
lower,  earthly  region  of  man's  nature,  where  strife  and  division  have  place,  and 
into  which  it  was  impossible  to  introduce  exalted  subjects.  2.  He  then  proceeds  to 
show  on  what  a  mistake  this  paity  feeling  proceeded.  The  different  teachers  i 
were  but  humble  instruments  in  the  hand  of  one  and  the  same  God,  who  com- 
missioned each  with  spiritual  gifts,  and  who  alone  prospered  their  work.  Paul 
might  have  taken  a  different  course.  He  might  have  urged  on  his  own  party  to 
more  determined  action.  But,  instead  of  that,  he  deprecated  the  existence  of  any 
parties,  and  bade  all  lise  into  that  higher  region  in  wliich  they  would  discern  that  | 
different  spiritual  teachers  were  working  together  with  one  God,  and  for  the  same 
spiritual  results.  3.  Oh,  that  these  words  had  been  heeded  by  the  Church  since ! 
They  would  have  rendered  impossible  most  of  the  divisions  which  have  been,  and 
are  still,  its  we.'ikness  and  its  curse.  Allot  us  "  labourers  together  with  God!"^ 
No  thought  could  be  more  exalted.  Well  might  anybody  who  felt  it  jirotest  against 
what  else  might  be  deemed  the  honour  of  leading  a  party.  II.  The  wider  applica- 
tion. For  is  it  not  profoundly  true  that,  since  we  aie  Divinely  made,  and  since  we 
live  in  a  Divine  world,  all  the  work  we  any  of  us  do  here  is  for  Divine  jjurposes,  and 
by  Divine  energy,  and  so  is  a  "  labouiing  together  with  God  "  ?  1.  It  may  be  said : 
On  this  view  all  other  things  work  for  God.  True;  for  "fire  and  hail,  snow  and 
vapour,  stormy  wind,  fi  Ifil  His  Word."  It  would  be  a  healthy  Christian  thing  to 
see  God's  ministers  in  all  the  forces  of  nature,  whether  silent,  like  those  at  work  in 
an  opening  flower  and  decaying  leaf,  or  imposing,  like  those  revealed  in  earthquakes 
and  volcanoes.  It  is  a  deeply  Christian  and  a  deeply  scientific  thought,  too,  to  see 
God  at  work  in  these  law-abiding  and  universal  changes;  and  unchristian  and  un- 
scientific is  the  tuo  common  thought  that,  in  general,  things  go  on  of  themselves, 
but  that  sometimes,  in  answer  to  prayer,  God  steps  in  to  interfere  with  them  and 
work  special  providences.  That  idea  sets  God  a]J  at  from  His  universe,  supposes  it 
can  go  on  without  Him,  and  sees  His  presence  only  in  irregularities.  The  other 
belief  supposes  God  at  work  always  and  everywhere,  and  recognises  His  intelligence 
as  displayed  in  the  glorious  order  of  His  works.  The  unconscious  energies  of  nature, 
then,  are  working  together  with  God.  The  univeise  "  is  God"s  husbandry  and  God's 
building."  2.  But,  if  so,  the  same  may  be  said,  with  much  higher  emphasis,  of  men. 
On  what  a  far  higher  level  of  being  do  they  live  and  work,  possessed  of  spiritual 
faculties  resembling  those  of  their  Maker,  and  entrusted  by  Him  with  a  certain 
independence  in  little  spheres  of  activity  !  So  that  they  can  delightfully  feel  that 
they  are  co-operating  with  Him,  or  idly  neglect  to  do  so,  or  wilfully  oppose  His  will. 
The  region  in  which  we  can  help  or  hinder  God's  plans  is  a  narrow  one  indeed ; 
but,  to  have  such  a  power  at  all,  how  woi.derful  and  great !  There  is  work  for  us 
to  do — no  granii,  famous  work,  but  sacred  daily  duty.  {T.  M.  Herbert,  M.A.) 
Labourers  together  ivith  God: — I.  In  spiriiual  hu:-bandry.  Now  it  is  the  province 
of  the  husbandman  to  plant  and  to  water,  but  neither  dexterity  in  planting  can 
ensure  the  striking  of  the  root,  nor  diligence  in  watering  command  the  ripening  of 
the  fruit.  In  the  spiritual  husbandry  of  the  Church  all  is  God's ;  the  field — the 
world;  the  plants — men;  the  instruments  wherewith  the  clods  are  broken — the 
appointed  ordinances  of  grace  ;  the  plan  for  the  direct  com'iination  of  labour — His 
Word  ;  the  water — the  purifying  infiiience  of  His  Spirit ;  the  sunbeams — the  quick- 
ening and  cheering  manifestations  of  His  love.  As  in  nature  the  husbaudman 
"  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  hath  long  patience,  until  he 
receive  tbe  early  and  lat'er  rain,"  relying  implicitly  on  the  Divine  pledge,  so  the 
faithful  minister  of  Christ  pursues  his  spiritual  husbandry  in  patience  and  in  faith. 
II.  In  spiritual  BriLinNd.  Here,  too,  the  labour  is  of  man,  but  the  power  of  God. 
In  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  Church  the  foundation  is  of  God's  laying,  the  mate- 
rial of  God's  preparing,  the  plan  of  God's  contriving,  the  projiortions  of   God's 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  229 


adjusting ;  and  if  ministers  of  Christ  may  be  said,  in  the  gathei-ing  or  the  raising, 
iu  the  cementing  or  compactintr,  in  the  edifying  or  carrying  up,  in  the  roofing  or 
covering  in,  to  "  build  up  Hvely  stones  into  a  spiritual  temple,  acceptable  to  God 
through  Jesus  Christ,"  yet  the  quiclieuing,  p  rvading  power  of  God  is  continually 
recognised  throughout.     For  what  could  impart  life  to  the  stone  except  a  miracle 
of  grace?     Conclusion:  From  this,  then,  it  will  follow  that  while,  with  St.  Paul, 
we  exalt  the  office  of  the  Christian  ministry,  at  the  same  time,  with  St.  Paul,  we 
abase  the  individuals  who  exercise  it.     Let  them  be,  like  Apollos,  "mighty  in  the 
ScrijJtures  " ;  let  them  be,  like  St.  Paul,  mightier  still  iu  "signs  and  wonders,"  etc., 
yet,  like  Paul   and  Apollos,  in   themselves   they  are   nothing.     ('/'.  Dale,   M.A.) 
WorJcinri  together  with  God: — We  are  delighted  with  the  sweet  invitation,  "Come 
unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  &c.     We  sometimes  forget  that  the  same  Saviour 
invites  us  alsi)  to  labour.     "Go,  work  in  My  vineyard."     I.  Wokk — 1.  Strengthens 
faith  (John  vii.  17).     Christian  experience  fortihes  against  infidelity.     The  m-in 
of  scientific  ability  cannot  convince  me,  against  my  years  of  experience,  that  water 
is  unwholesome,  or  that  its  Creator  is  a  blunderer.     2.   Strengthens  spiritual  life. 
The  little  child  craves  activity  quite  as  much  as  food.     Such  a  child  may  be  never 
so  well  fed,  and  clothed,  and  sheltered,  yet,  if  it  have  not  opportunity  to  exercise, 
it  will  be  a  dwarf.     So  work  is  a  means  of  spiritual  development  and  growth  to 
every  child  of  God.     3.  Purifies  the  life.     Society  is  kept  pure  by  activity,  just  as 
the  ocean  and  atmosphere  are  kept  pure  by  the  winds  and  waves.     The  Church  in 
which  all  minds  and  hands  are  busy  planning  and  executing  will  not  have  time  to 
criticise,  complain,  or  gossip.     4.  Employment  and  enjoyment  go  hand  in  hand. 
The  working  Church  is  the  happy  Church,  and  the  happy  Church  helps  to  keep 
members   from   backsliding.     II.  Together.      We   may  say   this   is   the   difficult 
problem.     There  are  so  many  wills  and  tastes — so  great  difference  in  culture  and 
habit — that  "working  together"  is  almost  impracticable.     1.  And  yet  when  we 
look  at  the  Christian  at  the  time  of  surrender,  it  will  not  seem  so  difficult.     Every 
true  convert  begins  the  service  of  the  Loi'd  with  the  question,  "Lord,  what  wilt 
Thou  have  me  to  do?  "  and  this  becomes  the  first,  middle,  and  ending  question  of 
the  converted  man's  life.     He  becomes  a  member  of  the  body  of  which  Jesus  Christ 
is  head.     As  the  members  of  a  human  body  are  controlled  by  the  will — the  head — • 
so  must  be  also  the  members  of  Christ's  body.     No  jealousies  between  such  mem- 
bers.    No  complaining  one  of  another,  but  each  bearing  the  burden  assigned.     2. 
And  then  nothing  will  help  to  unite  workers  so  much  as  a  high  appreciation  of  the 
work  to  be  done.     One  soul  is  worth  more  than  all  the  world  beside,  and  millions 
perish  daily  for  lack  of  the  bread  cf  life.     3.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  Jesns  prayed 
that  His  disciples  might  be  one.     III.  With  God.     No  man  has  a  right  to  engage 
in  a  work  in  which  he  cannot  ask  God's  presence   and   blessing.      Much   more 
roust  we  realise  God's  presence  and  blessing  in  the  advancement  of  His  kingdom.  , 
We  may  be  sure  that  God  will  not  allow  the   Son's  mission  to  fail.     "  Except  * 
the   Lord   build  the   house,  they   labour   iir   vain   that   build   it."     [R.    Moffett.)  ' 
God'.-i  co-Iahuiirers : — I.     The  basis   of  this  co-operation    is    the    high    and   holy 
relation  between  the  Cliristian  heart  and  God.     The  Christian  is  united  to  Him  as 
a  child  is  to  a  parent,  more  by  affection  than  by  mere  external  ties.     He  is  united 
to  God,  likewise,  by  a  fervent  sympathy  with  the  Divine  character.     God's  holiness 
is  exceedingly  attractive  to  him.     Besides,  a  Christian  has  tru'y  and  persistently 
submitted  his  will  to  God's  will,  feeling  that  tlie  Divine  will  includes   all  that   is 
wisest,  purest,  noblest.     A  Christian,  furthermore,  holds  his  soul  and  bis  thoughts 
in  daily  communion  with  God,  so  that  aft'ections  are  interchangpd  with  Him.     II. 
Its  nature.     The  Christian  accepts — 1.  The  Divine  idea  of  his  own  development 
of  character,  and  labours  to  produce  in  himself  those  things  which  God  seeks.     2. 
The  Divine  order  in  this  world,  and  endeavours  to  secure  among  men  that  intelli- 
gence and  goodness  for  which  God  endlessly  works,  and  causes  nature  to  work.     3. 
All  his  powers  and  affections  in  stewar^tship,  and  undertakes  to  use  himself  for 
God's  work.     His  personal  influence,  his  property,  his  children,  his  friends— all 
these  he  throws  in,  as  it  were,  to  the  counnon  stock,  and  administers  them  for 
God,  and  not  for  himself.     4.  The  duty  to  love  all  that  wdiich  God  loves,  to  pro- 
mote all  that  God  is  seeking  to  promote,  to  hate  what  God  hates,  and  to  destroy  it 
if    be   can.      III.  Practical  lessons.      1.  This   view   consoles   in   our    conscious 
weakness.     There  is  no  man  that,  when  he  looks  upon  the  eourse><  of  God  in  the 
world ;  the  results  that  he  is  to  achieve  in  himself ;  to  seek  among  his  fellows,  that 
does  not  often  ccme  to  a  consciousness  that  he  is  weakness  itself.      Sometimes  it 
makes  one  feel  utterly  worthless,  discourages  endeavour,  and  bads  one  to  desire  to 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

fly  away  and  he  at  rest,  becaufse  they  think  it  will  make  no  difference  whether  they 
live  or  die.  Wliat  is  a  drop  of  water  of  itself  ?  Wliat  is  weaker  ?  But  when  God 
has  marshalled  the  sum  of  the  weakness  of  myriad  drops  together,  they  lift  the 
mightiest  ship  as  if  it  were  but  a  feather,  and  pkiy  with  the  winds  as  if  they  were 
mere  instruments  of  sport.  And  yet  that  very  drop  is  there,  and  has  its  part  and 
lot  in  the  mit-'ht  of  the  whole  vast,  unbounded  sea.  2.  He  who  unites  himself  to 
any  great  truth  which  God  has  established  may  be  sure  that  he  will  go  forth  from 
conquering  to  conquer  ;  not  by  reason  of  any  might  or  skill  in  himself,  but  because 
!he  is  a  labourer  together  with  Gdd.  The  man  tliat  adopts  any  Divinely  appointed 
truth,  no  matter  wliat  the  world  thinks  of  it,  rides  in  God's  chariot,  and  has  God 
for  his  charioteer.  He  always  wins  who  sides  with  God.  On  the  other  hand,  no 
man  in  this  world  is  safe  or  victorious  unless  he  feels  that  he  is  going  with,  and 
not  against  God.  3.  No  life  can  be  barren  or  insignificant  that  is  a  part  of  God's 
life.  A  woman  that  seemed  to  be  endowed  with  everything  calculated  to  fit  one  for 
the  most  eminent  service,  was  called,  in  God's  providence,  to  marry  a  man  that 
was  not  her  equal.  She  was  placed  in  an  obscure  position.  While  she  might 
have  been  listening  to  the  chime  of  the  spheres  she  was  occupied  with  rocking  the 
cradle,  darning,  sewing,  washing,  and  cooking.  And  sometimes,  perhaps,  she 
thought  to  herself,  "  Woe  is  me  !  To  what  end  am  I  living?"  Her  child  developed 
under  her  care,  and  learned  to  call  her  mother  ;  and  then  she  tbought  God  spoke, 
so  sweet  was  its  voice  to  her,  and  in  that  child  she  expected  to  reap  her  reward  for 
all  that  she  had  done  and  suffered.  But  just  as  he  was  touching  manhood,  in  a 
moment  the  wave  closed  over  him,  the  labmar  of  her  life  was  ended,  and,  stranded 
on  the  shores  of  despair,  she  cried  out,  "  Why  was  I  born?  and  to  what  end  have  I 
lived  ?  "  A  hundred  had  marked  her  fidelity,  and  she  had  been  schoolmaster  to 
every  one  of  them.  A  hundred  had  witnessed  her  patience,  and  all  the  sermons 
they  had  ever  heard  had  not  preaelied  such  a  lesson  to  them  as  her  silent  example. 
Multitudes  that  had  learned  of  her,  in  turn  became  teachers  of  others.  Her 
influence  spiead  wider  than  what  she  dreamed.  It  was  not  until  she  had  gone  up 
to  the  end  of  life  in  obscurity,  and  God  had  caused  the  light  of  eternity  to  shine 
on  her  work,  that  she  understood  how  glorious  little  things  might  be.  The  good 
deeds  of  this  life  are  dewdrops,  innumerable,  lying  unseen  among  men;  but  when 
God  shall  pour  the  revealing  light  of  the  other  world  upon  them,  how  it  will  kindle  r^ 

them  and  make  them  sparkle!  Imagine  how  Solomon's  temple  was  built.  In  the 
forest  of  old  Lebanon  many  and  many  a  day-labourer  worked  in  obscurity,  and 
wondering  of  what  consequence  all  his  work  could  be.  In  another  place  were 
workers  in  metal.  Some  did  one  thing  and  some  another,  but  none  knew  the  plan 
of  the  temple,  none  knew  what  they  wrought  till  on  a  certain  day,  when  they  all  j 
trooped  to  Jerusalem.  Then  they  stood  entranced,  and  wondered  that  out  of  1 
things  so  insignificant  in  the  mountains  thete  should  come  such  glory  in  Jeru-  J 

salem.  God  had  sent  some  to  the  cedar  forest,  some  to  the  stone  quarry,  some  to 
the  dark  and  dank  places  of  this  world;  but  He  is  collectiitg  materials  which  will 
glow  with  untold  splendour  in  the  temple  that  He  is  building  for  the  New  Jeru- 
salem. (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Man  a  ivorker  uitli.  God  : — God  a  labourer,  a  labourer 
■with  men,  God  a  labourer  with  men  for  men,  are  tiie  facts  stated  in  this  passage. 
I.  God  wokks  alone.  We  are  not  wont  to  consider  God  in  His  wonderful 
activities,  but  more  accustomed  to  think  of  Him  as  having  created  the  universe, 
and  complacently  beholding  its  wondrous  workinps  and  results.  Nevertheless,  the 
God  referred  to  in  this  passage  is  not  only  glorious  in  holiness,  but  also  a  God 
doing  wonders.  Tlris  activity  of  the  Infinite  One  is  involved  in — 1.  The  doctrine 
of  providence.  The  preservation  of  the  action,  harmony,  and  stability  of  nature 
requires  His  constant  oversight  and  direction  and  application  of  nature  and  of  its 
laws.  This  is  also  true  of  all  the  beings  which  God  had  created.  Every  one  of 
them  lives  in  Him.  The  seraph  before  His  throne,  and  the  men  upon  His  foot- 
stool, are  each  of  them  the  objects  of  His  ceaseless  care.  So  is  every  sun  and  star 
as  well  as  every  plant  and  tiower.  How  wondrous,  how  inconceivably  glorious 
must  be  the  activity  of  the  Divine  mind!  2.  The  doctrine  of  the  final  judgment. 
We  shall  be  summoned  to  the  Divine  presence,  the  Omnipotent  Judge,  who  has 
known  our  motives  and  all  the  circumstances  under  which  we  have  acted,  and  we 
shall  receive  from  Him,  from  His  personal  knowledge,  the  decisions  of  that  day. 
How  wonderful  must  be  the  presence,  and  [lerception,  and  memory  of  this  Infinite 
God,  who  is  thus  our  judge!  3.  The  reception  of  worship.  How  necessary,  in 
order  that  Goil  may  properly  regard  our  approaches  to  Him  and  our  devotion,  that 
He  should  understand  everything  that  affects  thought  or  feeling  at  the  time  that 


CHAP.  III.]  .    I.  CORINTHIANS.  231 

those  services  are  rendered !  And  when  we  consider  how  great  is  the  number  of 
His  worshippers,  how  wonderful  must  be  the  exercise  of  His  inttdligence  and  of  His 
love!  There  are  two  things  which  render  it  dilMcult  for  us  to  rightly  appreciate 
these  activities.  (1)  The  one  is  that  trod  is  invisible.  ('2)  The  other  is  that  in 
most  of  His  works  God  operates  independently  of  rational  agencies,  (a)  In  making 
the  universe  He  employed  no  agents.  On  the  contrary,  He  spake  and  it  was  done. 
(b)  In  the  conservation  of  the  universe  none  of  the  beings  that  occupy  it  have  an 
agency  in  holding  it  in  its  orbit,  (c)  In  legislating  for  mankind  He  lias  no  legisla- 
tive assembly.  The  laws  by  which  we  are  governed  emanate  from  His  Tuind,  are 
promulgated  by  His  authority,  and  He  will  execute  His  own  sentence.  II.  Never- 
theless,  THERE   IS   ONE   OF   THE    DiVINE   ENTERPRISES   IN   WHICH    GoD   IS   PLEASED   TO 

ASSOCIATE  MEN,  and  that  is  the  work  of  human  salvation.  1.  But  there  are  several 
departments  of  it  in  which  God  acts  alone.  (1)  This  was  true  in  devising  this 
scheme  of  mercy;  there  were  no  consultations.  (2)  And  in  making  the  atonement 
that  was  necessary  to  accomplish  this  purpose  God  acted  by  Himself.  He  so 
loved  the  world,  &c.  Jesus  Christ  alone  is  the  Redeemer  and  Saviour  of  the  chil- 
dren of  men.  (.S)  It  is  equally  true  that  in  the  transformation  of  the  human  soul 
it  is  a  Divine  work ;  it  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Still  there  are 
departments  in  this  enterprise  in  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  employ  men.  (1) 
He  did  this  in  inaugurating  Christianity  in  the  earth.  By  prophets  and  priests  He 
prepared  the  world  for  the  reception  of  the  coming  Messiah.  (2)  And  then  when 
the  fulness  of  time  was  come  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem  listened  to  the  announce- 
ment of  the  fact  from  the  heavenly  host ;  wise  men  from  the  East  came  to  witness 
His  incarnation.  (3)  Disciples  were  with  Him  during  His  ministry,  and  just 
before  His  ascension  they  received  from  Him  His  great  commission.  And  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost  they  received  tlie  power  to  go  forth  and  pieach  the  gospel  which 
had  been  committed  to  them.  You  will  see  in  every  stej)  of  its  introduction  and 
inauguration  it  became  needful  that  human  instrumentality  should  be  employed. 
(4)  And  now  that  it  is  inaugurated  God  requires  His  people  to  promulgate  it.  He 
has  made  it  the  business  of  the  Church  to  give  these  Holy  Scriptures  to  all  nifn, 
and  in  this  there  is  a  very  large  service  to  be  rendered.  When  in  every  community 
upon  the  earth  th^re  shall  be  a  Christian,  a  Christian  pastor,  and  Christian  dis- 
ciples, it  will  be  their  duty  to  employ  every  possible  influence  and  agency  to  prevail 
upon  men  to  heed  the  call  of  Divine  mercy.  By  our  Christian  character,  onr 
constant  watchfulness,  and  every  influence  that  God  gives  us,  we  are  to  beseech 
men  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  III.  Practical  lessons.  If  our  views  of  this  sub- 
ject are  correct,  we  may  infer — 1.  The  greatness  of  the  work  of  human  salva- 
tion. It  is  the  only  enterprise  in  which  God  is  engiged  in  wbich  He  has 
taken  into  the  fellowship  of  labour  with  Him  either  augfls  or  men.  2.  The 
dignity  of  activity  in  the  cause  and  for  ttie  sake  of  Clirist.  We  are  not  acting 
upon  physical,  material  things  ;  we  are  not  seeking  to  promote  mainly  temporal 
interests  or  present  happiness  merely.  We  are  'seeking  to  recover  lust  spirits, 
redeemed  by  Christ,  for  whose  restoration  there  is  provision  made  by  the  power  of 
the  Spirit.  3.  The  certainty  of  success  in  these  spiritual  enterprises.  If  we  were 
to  do  this  work  in  our  own  wisdom  and  strength  we  might  well  hesitate  and  fear  as 
to  the  result,  but  if  we  are  labouring  with  God  who  can  doubt  the  success?  (Bishop 
Janes.)  The  icork  of  man  and  ilie  work  of  God: — I.  We  are  God's  fellow- 
labourers.  ].  Men  rush  into  the  ministry  or  into  similar  positions  without  a 
doubt  about  their  ability.  But  if  they  pondered  the  words,  "  We  are  God's  fellow- 
workmen,"  they  miglit  see  some  reason  to  question  their  fitness.  Every  workman 
has  two  things  which  must  not  be  wanting  in  God's  fellow- workman.  (1)  An  object. 
This  in  our  case  is  the  final  happiness  and  perfection  of  each  in  heaven,  and  the 
attraction  of  each  toward  that  Person  who  can  bring  him  there.  How  ought  we  to 
ask  ourselves  whether  this  is  substantially  our  object !  (2)  A  method.  Every  artisan 
not  only  knows  what  the  particular  result  he  designs  is,  but  he  knows  also  the  process 
by  which  he  must  arrive  at  it.  Now  we  who  undertake  to  teach  others  ought  to  be 
quite  sure  that  the  gospel  is  true  in  its  two  great  pai'ts,  the  offer  of  forgiveness  of 
sins  through  Christ,  and  the  offer  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  presence  to  transform, 
direct,  and  sustain  :  these  things  we  ought  to  have  experience  of  in  ourselves,  and 
so  be  able  to  declare,  as  of  our  own  knowledge,  that  those  who  listen  to  us  may 
attain  the  great  object  if  they  will  only  use  the  proper  means.  2.  It  is  in  carrying 
on  this  work  in  this  way  that  we  are  God's  fellow-workmen.  God  has  the  same 
object  that  we  have,  and  God  is  co-operating  with  us  in  our  endeavours  after  it. 
II.  Ye  are  God's  husbandry,  with  regard  to  the  state  of  your  hearts  and  charac- 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

ters  at  any  particular  time.  1.  By  nature  the  soil  is  cold  and  hard,  shallow  and 
barren.  It  bears  some  thinf;s  which  look  good  and  beautiful,  waiting,  as  it  were, 
for  the  Holy  Spirit  to  turn  them  from  natural  gifts  into  spiritual  graces  ;  bitt  not 
yet  receiving,  because  we  prefer  having  them  as  they  are,  and  shrink  back  from 
prayer,  which  is  the  connecting  link  between  the  soul  and  God.  Now,  when  we 
see  how  slow  we  all  are  to  take  this  little  step  in  earnest,  we  feel  that  nothing  can 
give  us  any  hojDC  at  all  but  the  assurance  that  God  is  here  engaged,  and  that  He 
can  work  with  ns,  preparing  the  stony  ground  to  receive  the  good  seed  of  His 
Word,  that  it  may  take  deep  root  and  spring  up  into  an  abundant  harvest.  2.  And 
as  it  is  with  the  ground,  so  it  is  with  respect  to  the  weeds  which  grow  so  rankly. 
Long  experience  teaches  us  to  expect  them.  We  say  to  ourselves,  It  must  go  on  so 
to  tlie  end;  no  care  or  pains  of  ours  will  ever  root  them  up.  Perhaps  not :  and 
yet  it  may  be  not  only  our  duty  to  labour  on  as  if  we  might  succeed ;  but  more 
than  tliis  ;  the  fault  may  be  in  great  part  ours  for  not  having  remembered  tbat  we 
are  God's  husbandry,  and  for  not  having  prayed  to  God  more  earnestly  to  do  for  us 
tbat  which  for  ourselves  we  could  not  do.  III.  Ye  are  God's  building.  1.  This 
is  especially  true  of  young  people.  Your  characters  are  forming  now  ;  soon  they 
will  be  (what  we  call)  formed :  then  habits  of  good  or  evil  will  have  become  a 
second  nature,  and  change,  if  it  come  at  all,  will  be  a  difficulty  beyond  anything 
that  you  have  yet  known  of.  Every  day  is  adding  something  to  the  building  : 
something  of  good,  or  something  of  evil,  some  accession  of  knowledge,  of  self- 
control,  of  practice  of  good  and  conquest  of  evil,  or  else  of  carelessness  and  indif- 
ference, of  self-indulgence  or  vanity  or  forgetfulness  of  God.  2.  Yet,  blessed  be 
God,  He  has  not  left  us  (strictly  speaking)  to  build.  Ye  are  God's  building.  0 
how  gracious  an  assurance  ;  that,  while  that  formation  of  chai'acter  is  going  on,  to 
all  appearance,  so  easily  and  almost  casually.  Still  all  the  time  God  is  working, 
God  is  building;  if  we  will  only  seek  Him  and  trust  Him  and  not  thwart  or 
counteract  His  work.  He  is  carrying  on,  in  the  secret  of  the  soul,  a  process  of  foima- 
tion,  and  the  finished  thing  will  be  His  own  temple,  in  which  He  will  abide  for 
ever  and  be  satisfied  with  His  travail !  But,  indeed,  we  must  seek  Him.  {Dean 
Vaiifihan.)  The  nnion  of  Divine  axel  human  agency  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ :  — 
I.  What  thr  work  includes  in  which  God  and  His  people  are  labourers 
TOGETHER.  1.  The  Spread  of  the  go'^pel  tlirough  the  world.  2.  The  conversion 
of  sinners.  3.  The  increase  and  prosperity  of  the  Christian  Church.  II.  The 
spirit  in  which  the  work  under  consideration  should  be  prosecuted.  In  the 
spirit  of — 1.  Humility.  2.  Love  to  God.  3.  Love  to  men.  4.  Holy  zeal.  5. 
Prayer  and  of  faith.  {S.  Brnini.)  Self-creation  : — The  Creator  does  a  part,  and 
the  chief  part,  but  He  kindly  gives  us  a  part,  as  considerate  parents  let  their 
children  join  them  in  their  works,  though  they  could  often  do  it  better  themselves. 
Creation  is  not  finished,  nor  ever  will  be,  but  is  always  proceeding.  In  this  pro- 
gressive system  man  can  put  in  his  hand  and  make  or  mar.  I.  Look  at  the 
material  creation.  1.  The  elements  are  in  a  rude  state.  The  rivers  run  waste  to 
the  sea  ;  the  ocean  rolls  a  vast  desert  of  waters  round  the  world  ;  the  forests  grow 
and  decay,  and  furnish  nourishment  for  new  generations  of  the  same  species  ;  the 
fire  is  a  hidden  force,  and  the  lightning  plays  apparently  at  haphazard  among  the 
clouds.  But  God  has  delegated  to  man,  as  His  vicegerent  on  the  earth,  the  power 
and  skill,  within  certain  limits,  of  using  these  unwieldly  and  fearful  a<,'encies,  and 
carrying  out  the  plan  of  their  creation.  2.  So  with  the  animals.  They  are  created 
in  kind,  but  the  type  may  be  improved.  Man  can  cross  and  perfect  their  breeds. 
He  can  tame  the  wild,  multiply  their  number,  and,  by  better  shelter,  food,  &q., 
develop  new  excellences.  3.  So  flowers,  fruits,  and  vegetables  all  require  to  be 
improved  by  human  skill  and  ingenuity.  C'  mpaie  the  dinner  of  a  savage  under 
his  native  palm  with  a  horticultural  exhibition,  and  we  see  the  endless  room  for 
man  to  work  in,  and  the  effects  of  his  science  and  experiments.  4.  The  forests 
■were  given  to  his  hands  uncut,  the  ores  buried  in  the  earth  undug  and  unworked, 
the  pearls  in  the  sea,  the  fire  in  the  flint,  the  steam  in  the  water,  the  temple  and 
the  palace  in  the  quarry.  The  arts,  useful  and  beautiful,  are  thus  a  species  of 
creation.  Man  was  sent,  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.  II.  It  is  a  great  thing  to 
learn  distinctly  and  impressively  this  duty  of  a  man  to  be  a  co-worker  with  God. 
Some  nations  have  not  learned  it  yet.  The  savage  tribes  still  linger  on  the  animal 
plane.  But  even  the  civilised  nations  do  not  yet  fully  comprehend  that  a  new 
sioral  and  spiritual,  as  well  as  material  creation,  is  to  be  called  forth  by  man. 
The  conquest  of  matter  is  not  enough,  Christianity  is  to  be  superadded.  Man  has 
not  done  his  work  when  he  has  built  a  house  and  woven  a  suit  of  garments.     He 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  233 

can  co-work  with  God  in  the  building  of  his  body  and  his  mind — a  Divine  car- 
pentry. 1.  Physical  education  is  a  part  of  this  sub-creation.  The  body  is  to  be 
unfolded,  invigorated,  and  kept  as  a  pure  temple  for  the  soul,  with  nothing  to  do  it 
sacrilege.  2.  Guided  by  the  rules,  and  animated  by  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  man 
is  to  be  a  co-worker  with  God  in  the  building  of  his  character.  The  Creator 
necessitatfs  no  holiness.  Even  Jesus  learned  obedience.  The  materials  of  this 
higher  architecture  are  given  in  abundance.  There  is  reason  for  the  truth,  under- 
standing for  practical  affairs,  conscience  for  the  right,  love  for  the  good,  hope  for 
progress,  so  that  our  own  nature  is  a  forest,  quarry,  and  mine,  containing  all  the 
needful  means  for  our  great  work.  But  beside  these  native  faculties  society  and 
Christianity  give  us  the  tools  to  work  with,  the  motives,  books,  teachers,  to  aid  us 
in  the  sub-creation.  We  are  called  to  be  labourers  with  God,  in  no  meagre  plan 
and  for  no  trivial  results.  The  plan  is  Divine  and  the  results  are  eternal.  The 
problem  runs  somewhat  in  this  wise  :  Given,  passion,  energy  ;  required,  a  spirited 
character  and  an  active  life.  Given,  a  soft  infant;  required,  a  sturdy,  well-foimed, 
intelHgent,  and  virtuous  nnxn.  Given,  conscience;  required,  righteousness.  Given, 
affections  :  required,  love  to  all  in  heaven  and  earth.  Given,  instinct,  reason,  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  ;  required,  a  new  human  race,  a  new  moral  and  spiritual  creation. 
The  end  and  emphasis  of  all  things  is  formation  of  ourselves  on  God's  idea  of 
a  human  being.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  is  yet  but  in  its  infancy  in  this  respect.  It 
Las  done  little  compared  with  what  it  is  to  do.  It  has  only  begun  its  work  in  the 
soul  and  among  the  nations.  It  is  slosvly  becoming  a  power  in  the  earth. 
Conclusion  :  Ijet  us  not  forget  the  lesson  and  application.  This  creation 
is  a  self-creation,  this  formation  is  a  self-formation.  God  gives  us  means, 
materials,  motives,  guidance,  and,  to  let  nothing  escape  us  that  would  be 
of  help,  He  has  presented  the  exquisite  figure  and  spirit  of  a  Divine  Man. 
The  danger  is  in  turning  off  on  some  by-path  of  your  own,  instead  of 
following  the  way  God  has  marked  out,  in  fulfilling  some  little,  worthless, 
and  short-lived  plan  of  your  passions  or  pleasures.  {A.  A.  Liverwore,  D.D.) 
Co-njjerdtion  n-ith  God: — One  is  something  overwhelmed  by  the  thought  of  the 
manner  in  which  good  old  honest  words  occasionally  Inse  their  primitive  meaning 
and  become  attiiched  to  some  separate  part  of  daily  life,  and  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  become  terms  rather  of  leproach  than  anything  else.  You  talk  of  a  labourer  in 
ordinary  conversation  as  a  man  who  is  doing  day  by  day  unintelligent,  mechanical 
toil ;  but,  after  all,  labour  such  as  that  is  the  very  basis  upon  which  the  happiness 
of  the  world  is  built.  All  labour  is  Godlike  ;  and  the  single  test  which  you  may 
apply  to  see  whether  labour  is  succesf-ful  or  not  is  the  test  which  St.  Paul  applied 
in  these  words  when  he  said,  "  For  we  are  labourers  together  with  (iod."  I  want, 
then,  to  look  upon  the  harvest  as  the  fruition  of  successful  labour  with  God.  The 
fact  that  harvest  comes  year  by  year  to  a  successful  result  is  simjdy  an  evidence  of 
the  truthfulness  of  the  test  which  St.  Paul  applies.  Man  does  his  work,  tlien  there 
comes  side  by  side  with  his  work  the  work  of  God.  His  work  would  altogether  fail 
if  it  were  not  labour  with  God.  Now  let  us  suppose  for  a  moment  that  the  hus- 
bandman v.ere  to  labour  upon  the  assumption  tiiat  he  wiaild  work  by  himself  and 
not  labour  with  God.  Suppose  he  said  :  "  I  don't  believe  that  the  seasons  will 
come  round  in  their  accustomed  succession,  and  I  will  labour  as  for  sea-ous  of  my 
own."  Every  intelligent  man  knows  the  result  of  labour  such  as  that  would  be 
complete  disaster  so  far  as  tbe  harvest  is  concerned.  For  the  only  way  in  which 
the  wondrous  things  in  the  world  of  nature  are  brought  to  their  perfect  beauty 
and  fruition  is  because  you  have  on  the  one  hand  the  hard  toil  of  the  man,  and  on 
the  other  hand  the  hard,  unceasing,  unremitting  toil  of  God.  Now  what  is  true  of 
the  harvest  of  the  earth's  fruits  is  certainly  true  of  evei-y  work  which  man  under- 
takes in  daily  life.  The  rule  of  success  is  labour  with,  not  labour  against.  God. 
The  man  who  has  to  work  can  only  labour  successfully  by  working  with  God  ;  and 
by  working  with  God  I  mean  working  just  as  the  husbandman  works,  in  conscious 
subordination  to  the  law  of  God.  If  a  man  will  not  obey  the  law  of  God  his 
physical  work  cannot  be  successful  as  it  might  be  successful  if  he  worked  in  sub- 
ordination to  the  will  of  God.  If  a  man  breaks  down  his  physical  frame  by  indulg- 
ing in  sin,  that  man,  by  disobeying  the  will  of  God,  is  rendering  the  harvest  of  his 
daily  work  uncertain.  It  is  precisely  similar  with  a  man  engaged  in  business.  He 
who  will  labour  with  God  must  labour  according  to  God's  law,  and  where  there  is 
that  obeJience  to  the  will  of  God  thei'e  will  be  ultimate  success.  The  harvest  may 
not  come  as  the  harvest  of  some  of  the  transitory  things  in  nature  comes,  very 
quickly,  and  remain  only  a  short  time,  but  it  will  be  substantial  and  solid,  and  will 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

give  perfect  happiness  and  perfect  peace,  because  it  will  be  success  which  has  been 
honestly  won,  and  prosperity  which  has  been  rightly  gained.  Such  a  labourer  can 
see,  even  in  the  success  of  his  business,  his  o>vn  handiwork  co-operating  with  the 
handiwork  of  God,  and  in  all  the  good  fortune  which  has  befallen  him  he  can 
recognise  the  directing  providence  of  his  Heavenly  Father.  "Labouring  together 
with  God,"  that  is  the  grand  secret  of  successful  work.  Thei'e  is  one  other  thought 
that  I  would  like  to  leave  with  you  from  the  consideration  of  this  truth,  and  that  is 
this  :  that  just  as  there  is  labour  with  God,  and  just  as  the  conditions  of  successful 
labour  are  to  be  with  God,  so  after  labour  there  comes  rest,  and  the  conditions  of 
successful  rest  are  also  to  be  found  in  the  rest  with  God.  (J.  R.  Digfile,  M.A.) 
Workers  together  with  God: — This  ninth  verse  is  a  further  amplification  of  Paul's 
intent,  which  is  to  press  unity  against  factions  and  divisions  ;  and  it  is  a  declaration 
of  his  argument  before,  which  was  "  The  planters  and  waterers  are  one,  but  God 
gives  the  increase."  This  he  further  illustrates  in  the  beginning  of  this  verse — 
"For  we  are  workers  together  with  God."  We  are  all  in  God's  vineyard,  and 
labour  unto  Him.  In  what  sense  they  are  workers  with  God ;  not  by  immediate 
producing  of  any  spiritual  effects,  but  by  the  external  application  of  the  ministry 
to  the  people.  As  Gehazi  carried  his  master's  staff  and  touched  the  child  with  it, 
but  that  did  no  good  till  Elijah  came  himself.  In  the  first  place,  consider  what 
reasons  may  be  for  this,  why  God  will  use  such  workers  with  Him,  He  neeJeth 
not  the  parts  or  gifts  of  any.  First,  this  is  a  fit  and  an  accommodated  way  to  our 
nattires.  When  God  sends  men  of  tlie  same  mould  and  subject  to  the  same  affec- 
tions, this  may  the  more  easily  draw  us.  When  G>d  delivered  the  law  Himself, 
it  was  with  ^uch  terror  and  majesty,  that  they  desired  that  God  would  not  Himself 
spe^k  any  more  to  them,  so  that  mere  men  would  not  be  able  to  bear  the  immediate 
approaches  of  the  Divine  majesty  to  them.  As  the  fowler  catcheth  many  birds  by 
one  decoy  a  bird  if  the  same  feather,  thus  it  becomcth  us  to  have  such  to  bring 
us  home  unto  God,  that  are  affected  with  our  estates,  that  have  the  same  tempta- 
tions in  them  as  other  men.  Hence  the  more  experience  God's  ministers  have  of 
the  work  of  grace,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  tbe  deceitfulness  of  sin,  the  more 
fit  they  are  to  comfort  others,  or  to  deliver  them  out  of  snares.  Secondly,  He  may 
do  it  to  oblige  us  and  tie  us  to  His  instituted  means.  It  is  a  great  caveat  iu  the 
Scripture,  and  fr^quently  urged:  "  No  man  must  follow  the  imagination  of  his  own 
heart."  Now  God  would  prevent  such  loose  principles,  and  bind  us  up  to  His 
instituted  way  ;  He  will  bind  iis,  though  He  is  not  bound.  Thirdly,  hereby  God 
would  exercise  the  humility,  meekness,  and  obedience  of  men.  Oh,  it  is  a  great 
matter  for  men  to  submit  to  God's  institution  !  Fourthly,  that  men  might  be  the 
more  inexcustble.  For  if  thou  art  not  now  turned  from  thy  sin,  who  shall  plead 
for  thee  ?  Fifthly,  God  will  hereby  declare  His  power  so  much  the  more.  Now 
to  this  there  needs  one  caution  to  be  added,  viz.,  that  this  connection  between 
the  labour  of  the  minister  and  God's  working  is  not  natural,  necessary,  and 
perpetual.  We  may  work,  and  yet  neither  the  presence  or  power  of  God  be  therein. 
It  is  not  here  as  iu  the  works  of  nature  ;  there  God  hath  made  a  perpetual  and 
unalterable  decree.  Now  if  you  ask  when  may  it  fall  out  that  tbouijh  the  ministry 
laboureth,  yet  God  doth  not  work  with  it,  reasons  may  be  on  God's  part,  the 
minister's,  and  the  people's.  First,  work  with  God  in  prayer,  that  He  would  work 
with  the  ministry.  Secondly,  take  heed  of  such  sins  as  may  provoke  God  not  to 
be  with  the  ministry.  {A.  Burgesi^.)  Ye  are  God's  husbandry,  ye  are  God's 
huilding. — God's  husbandry  and.  building  : — The  metaphor  of  the  field  describes 
the  raw  material  on  which  God  works ;  that  of  the  house  describes  the  result  of 
the  work.  The  field  represents  the  individual  Christian  in  his  secret  power  of  life 
and  endless  growth  ;  the  bouse  represents  the  Church  in  the  unity  of  plan,  in  the 
beauty  and  strength  of  its  structure.  The  metaphor  of  the  building  lends  itself 
more  easily  than  that  of  the  farm  to  the  apostle's  purpose  in  the  subsequent  verses, 
and  leads  naturally  to  the  highest  conception,  that  of  God's  temple  in  ver.  16. 
[Principal  Edwards.)  God's  husbandry  .-^I.  The  fiest  condition  of  the  soHj 
— its  wilderness  condition — is  Nor  withoit  growths.  It  is  overgrown  with  forests, 
choked  with  underbush,  and  cumbered  with  falling  and  decaying  materials.  The 
sun  is  always  hidden  from  its  interior.  It  is  apt  to  be  a  lair  of  beasts.  This  is 
certainly  the  state  of  the  human  soil  before  religious  culture  is  applied  to  it.  Men 
are  in  a  state  of  wilderness  in  the  beginning.  II.  The  first  step  of  husbandry 
IS  TO  relieve  the  soil  of  these  wild  growths,  and  prepare  it  for  tillage. 
The  trees  are  felled  and  burned,  so  that  the  ground  may  be  disencumbered  and  laid 
open  to  the  sun.     But  some,  for  expedition,  are  only  girdled.      All  connection 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   COEINTHIANS.  235 

between  the  sap  at  the  roots  and  the  top  is  severed  by  a  line  of  sharp  cuts  around 
the  trees  ;  and  so  girdled,  they  will  stand  for  a  while,  but  they  will  never  leaf  again  ; 
80  that,  little  by  little,  more  and  more  ground  is  susceptible  to  the  plough.  The 
first  work  of  religion  is  analogous  to  this.  Many  of  the  things  which  men  practise 
in  an  unregenerate  state  are,  by  the  power  of  God's  grace  at  their  conversion,  cut 
down  peremptorily  and  taken  out  of  the  way.  But  there  are  a  great  many  things 
which  are  only  girdled,  and  only  little  by  little  brought  to  the  ground.  III.  When 
this  preliminaiy  process  is  comjjlete,  the  pioneer  farmer  is  ready  for  the  next 
STAGE,  which  IS  THAT  OF  SEED-PLANTING.  It  is  not  Smooth  sward  that  the  plough 
is  now  to  turn;  but  rough  soil,  full  of  the  green  stumps  of  trees  but  just  disap- 
peared. And,  worse  than  this,  roots  are  matted  all  over  the  ground  ;  but  the 
ground  is,  at  any  rate,  open  to  the  sun,  and  every  year  and  every  ploughing  will 
rip  up  and  throw  out  some  of  these  roots.  And  so  it  is  with  men.  Their  first 
efforts  at  goodness  are  very  crooked  and  shallow.  When  men  first  begin  to  let  go 
the  lower  forms  of  wickedness,  and  to  sow  the  higher  seeds  of  virtue,  it  is  often 
like  the  sudden  taking  away  of  the  forest,  and  the  laying  open  of  the  soil  to  the 
sun.  The  first  crops  are  very  unsatisfactory  ;  yet  these  incipient  mistakes  must  be 
taken,  if  you  are  going  to  have  a  good  farm  by  and  by.  IV.  Having  got  thus  far 
THE  HOiiE-LOT  IS  CLEARED.  The  stoues  are  cleared  away,  the  stumps  rooted  out, 
and  the  ground  fenced  round  where  his  house  is  to  be.  Then  he  gives  the  ground 
a  more  thorough  farming,  and  so  the  house-lot  is  got  into  a  better  condition.  So 
men  usually  begin  to  smooth  down  those  traits  of  their  character  which  lie  next  to 
themselves,"  as  it  were,  and  which  are  in  the  family.  Then  one  and  another  habit 
is  attacked,  and  trait  after  trait  is  added.  And  so  they  enlarge,  more  and  more, 
every  year,  their  husbandry.  V.  Hitherto  the  farmer  has  only  sown  the  grains  and 
roots  absolutely  needed  for  sustenance ;  but  now  a  garden  and  orchard  are 
PLANTED.  And  so  in  spiritual  life.  At  first  it  is  a  tough,  hard  fight  for  life.  By  and 
by  times  of  richer  gladness  come — more  liberty,  more  hope.  Prayer  grows  out  of 
duty  into  pleasure.  God's  Word  opens,  and  Christians  walk  amid  beds  of  flowers. 
Clusters  of  fruit  are  gathered — richer  experiences — the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 
VI.  Eventually  it  is  resolved  upon  to  bring  in  every  acre.  All  outlying  lots 
are  to  be  cleared.  So,  eminently,  is  it  with  advancing  Christians.  After  a  time 
many  men  experience  a  second  conversion,  as  it  seems  to  them.  They  are  aroused 
to  a  sense  of  the  largeness  and  symmetry  of  Christian  cliaracter.  And  their  pur- 
pose is  to  subdue  every  thought  and  every  feeling  to  the   will   of  God.     VII.   The 

farmer,  as   Ills   LAST    STEP,  APPLIES    TO    HIS    SOIL,    THUS    BROUGHT    FORWARD,  THE  MOST 

SCIENTIFIC  METHODS  OF  ASCERTAIN KD  HUSBANDRY.  He  undcrdrains  deep  the  whole 
estate  ;  and  when  all  those  stagnant  pools  and  chilling  springs  that  deluge  the 
roots  of  tender-growing  plants  are  carried  away,  then  he  subsoils.  He  puts  down 
the  plough  as  far  as  iron  can  go,  and  mellows  the  soil  and  the  subsoil  down  deep  in 
the  earth.  Then  he  begins  to  select  better  herbs  than  before.  And  just  so  it  is 
with  Christians.  As  they  grow  in  grace,  and  as  God,  the  great  Husbandman,  per- 
fects the  work  of  clearing  up  and  bringing  into  a  condition  of  complete  tillage  the 
human  heart,  the  religious  feelings  grow  deeper.  Many  of  those  causes  which 
obstructed  their  growth  are  now  drained  and  carried  off  from  the  soul.  Men  give 
themselves  more  thorough  religious  cultivation.  And  the  later  periods  of  Christian 
experience  are  by  far  the  most  assiduous  and  the  most  faithful.  Conclusions : 
Note — 1.  Some  practical  lessons  we  may  perceive  from  what  has  been  said.  (1)  The 
difference  between  instantaneous  beginnings  and  gradual  developments.  No  man 
ever  suddenly  cleared  up  forty  acres  of  land.  A  man  may  and  does  begin  suddenly, 
but  the  doing  requires  a  long  period.  And  so  no  man  ever  began  to  be  a  Christian 
without  an  instanttneous  volition  ;  but  the  mere  volition  is  only  a  beginning.  The 
evolution  of  Christian  character  is  gradual.  (2)  The  mefining  of  succession  in 
Christian  experience.  We  know  that  in  husbandry,  until  some  things  are  done, 
other  things  cannot  be  reached.  And  so  there  must  be  an  order  of  development  in 
Christian  life.  W^e  cannot  anticipate  those  graces  which  come  only  after  the 
ripening  of  preceding  graces.  Graces  grow  just  as  grains  do;  first  the  sprouting 
under  the  ground,  &c.  (3)  That  the  hardest  part  in  both  kinds  of  husbandry  is  apt 
to  come  at  the  beginning ;  but  that,  if  well  met  then,  it  grows  easier  and  easier 
every  successive  year.  How  hard  was  it  at  first  to  bring  the  soil  to  such  a  state 
that  you  dared  to  think  "  plough  !  "  and  how  hard  is  it  for  a  man  at  first  to  bring 
himself  into  such  a  state  that  he  dares  to  think  "prayer!  "  How  many  men  who 
would  like  to  be  able  to  get  their  graces  just  as  they  can  get  an  old,  well-cultivated 
farm ;   but,  though  you  can  do  that  in  natural  husbandry,  you  cannot  do  it  in 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

spiritual  husbandry.  2.  The  various  kinds  of  spiritual  husbandmen  and  hus- 
bandry. (1)  There  are  shiftless  and  lazy  farmers  who  raise  just  enough  grain 
to  keep  them  through  the  year.  That  is  all  they  ask,  and  therefore  they  have  no 
ambition  to  seek  for  more.  And  how  many  men  there  are  who,  after  having 
been  in  the  Church  ten  or  twenty  years,  are  just  about  where  they  were  when 
they  first  entered  it !  (2)  Scheming,  changeable  farmers  who,  instead  of  laying 
out  their  strength  upon  well-ascertained  processes,  are  bewitched  with  new 
schemes  and  experiments.  And  there  are  just  such  spiritual  farmers.  One  is 
running  after  new  promises,  another  after  a  new  faith,  and  another  after  new 
solutions  of  miracles.  One  has  got  a  new  doctrine,  ancither  some  new  idea  of 
Church  organisation,  and  another  some  new  way  of  putting  this  or  that  religions 
truth.  They  see  their  old  farms  left  untilled.  (3)  Pedigree  farmers,  whose 
fruit  bears  the  highest-sounding  names,  but  is  the  poorest  in  the  neighbourhood. 
Their  oxen  are  lean,  their  cows  are  milklefs,  but  what  a  line  of  blood  they  sprung 
from!  Did  you  never  see  just  such  husbandmen  in  the  Church? — men  who  had 
no  greater  morality,  or  piety,  or  spiritual  experience,  but  who  went  back  through  a 
long  [)edigree.  (4)  Chaff  farmers.  Suppose  you  should  find  a  farmer  who  said 
that  he  was  satisfied  that  farmers  had  been  doing  injustice  to  many  kimls  of  seeds; 
and  that  he  felt  assured  that  if  a  man  would  sow  c  'ckle-seeds ;  and  do  it  sincerely, 
God  would  give  the  increase:  so  He  would— rof  cockles.  Suppose  a  man  should 
sow  that  detestable  Canada  thistle,  and  say  that  it  was  wheat.  Would  any  amount 
of  botanical  sincerity  on  the  part  of  this  fool  secure  to  him  a  harvest  of  any- 
thing better  than  the  seed  sown?  Now  a  great  many  persons  say,  "  Why  do  you 
teach  us  such  doctrines  ?  What  matter  is  it  whether  we  believe  in  the  Bible  (>r 
not,  so  that  we  live  about  right,  or  that  we  are  sincere?  Is  not  that  enough?" 
No,  it  is  not  enough.  There  is  the  same  connection  between  spiritual  seed  and  the 
result.  Sincerity  is  a  very  good  thing,  but  it  cnnnot  make  grain  out  of  chaff : 
neither  can  it  make  Christian  graces  out  of  worldly  affections  and  worldlv  estates. 
(5)  Fence  fai-mers.  What  would  you  think  of  a  husWandman  who  neglected  every- 
thing because  he  was  giving  his  whole  time  to  the  buikhng  of  his  fences?  And,  oh, 
such  fences  !  The  best  and  highest  that  could  be  built.  Oftentimes,  when  he  has 
got  them  all  built  up,  he  goes  to  work  and  pulls  them  down  again.  And  what  for? 
W'^hy,  just  so  that  he  can  build  them  up  again  !  And  did  you  never  hear  of  spiritual 
husbandmen  that  were  for  ever  defining  the  great  points  of  doctrine  ;  for  ever 
running  boundaries  round  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  rebuilding  the  middle  walls  of 
partition,  but  never  sowing  and  never  reaping  ?  There  never  was  a  fence  that  would 
keep  vermin  out  of  a  man's  farm,  nor  a  fence  that  would  keep  hawks  off  from  it. 
The  best  thing  a  farmer  can  do  is  to  take  such  care  of  his  soil  as  to  have  a  harvesi 
so  rich  that  he  will  be  able  to  spare  a  little  to  vermin  and  birds.  The  only  safe 
waj'  is  to  have  so  much  spiritual  culture  in  the  Church  that  such  minor  troubles 
make  little  difference  witli  its  prosperity.  (6)  Nimrod  farmers — hunting  farmers. 
There  are  in  the  Church  heresy-hunters.  They  are  searching  for  foxes,  and  wolves, 
and  bears,  that  they  suppose  are  lying  waste  Gods  husbandry !  They  never  do 
anything  except  fire  at  other  folks.  I  have  no  doubt  that  Nimrod  was  a  very  good 
fellow  in  his  own  poor,  miserable  way;  but  a  Nimrod  minister  is  the  meanest  of 
all  sorts  of  hunters  !  (H.  W.  Beechfr.)  GocVs  hnshandry  : — The  harvest  is 
passed  ;  the  corn  is  housed.  Is  the  farmer's  labour  done  ?  No,  the  plough  is  even 
now  at  work  again  ;  the  seed  must  soon  be  sown  for  next  year's  crop.  So  continual 
is  the  round.  But,  as  the  work  of  husbandry  goes  on,  is  there  no  le=son  to  us  in 
these  things?  Yea,  all  nature  speaks  to  us  if  we  would  hear,  and  the  words  of 
the  text  call  us  to  listen  to  its  voice.  Let  these  words  teach  you— I.  The  care 
WHICH  God  has  had  for  tou.  1.  In  choosing  you  to  be  part  of  His  own  field — 
the  Church  of  Christ.  You  are  plants  set  in  the  Lord's  garden,  branches  grafted 
into  the  living  Vine  ;  your  heart  is  the  soil  on  which  God  deigns  to  bestow  culture, 
and  from  which  His  grane  is  able  to  bring  forth  fruits,  meet  for  the  paradise  of 
God.  2.  In  the  price  He  gave  for  this  field.  "Ye  are  not  your  own,"  &c.  3.  In 
enclosing  you  with  the  dt'sign  of  making  you  holy  to  Himself.  Have  you  ever 
seen  a  piece  of  ground  taken  in  from  a  common  ?  While  all  around  it  is  still 
barren  and  wild,  is  not  that  one  spot  fair  and  goodly  to  the  eye  ?  This  is  what 
God  would  have  you  be  in  the  midst  of  a  world  that  lieth  in  wickedness.  4.  In 
that  He  is  ever  seeking  to  improve  the  ground  of  your  hearts.  But,  as  the  farmer 
does  not  use  the  same  management  to  all  kinds  of  soil — the  stiff,  stubborn  clay 
must  not  be  treated  like  the  light,  drv  sand  —so  God  now  tries  to  win  us  by  mercies; 
now  to  frighten  us  by  judgments.     Perhaps  your  heart  clings  to  the  love  of  this 


CHAP,  in.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  237 

world  ;  then  He  shakes  it  loose  by  storms  of  trouble.  Perhaps  He  sees  you 
indulging  in  sinful  pleasures  ;  then  He  makes  you  taste  their  bitterness  and  gall. 
5.  By  employing  labourers  in  His  field,  for  your  sakes.  He  sends  His  ministers  to 
labour  among  you,  if,  by  any  means,  they  may  save  your  souls  alive.  II.  Th  ; 
KETUUN  you  OUGHT  TO  MAKE  TO  Hui.  What  is  this?  Surely,  to  take  care  that 
you  do  not  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain.  When  a  farmer  has  bestowed  much 
care  and  management  upon  a  field,  does  he  not  expect  some  increase  ?  How  few 
soils  are  hopelessly  bad,  as  not  to  be  made  better  by  good  management !  The 
earth  is  no  insolvent  debtor ;  you  do  not  put  into  its  bank  to  receive  nought  again. 
Shall  the  very  ground  we  tread  on  put  us  to  shame  ?  Ask,  then,  yourselves,  are 
you    bearing  fruit  to  God?      {E.  Blencoire,  M.A.)  God,   a  husbandman: — As 

such — 1.  He  is  thokoughly  acquainted  with  the  soil.  He  knows — 1.  Its  original 
state  ;  the  soul  with  all  its  pristine  powers.  2.  Its  present  condition  ;  its  barren 
and  wilderness  state — stony,  weedy,  and  thorny.  3.  Its  tillable  capabilities — what 
can  be  made  of  it.  Some  can  become  the  majestic  cedar,  whilst  others  only  tho 
shrub.  II.  He  has  all  necessary  instkumentalitiks.  This  stony,  weedy  ground 
requires  certain  well-contrived  implements  to  work  it  into  a  fruitful  condition. 
There  must  be  the  ploughshare,  the  pruniiig-hook,  &c.  He  has  them.  1.  In  the 
events  of  life.  All  the  dark  and  painful  circumstances  in  life  are  His  implements 
to  break  up  the  fallow  ground.  All  the  pleasant  and  jjr  ipitions  are  instruments  for 
mellowing  the  soil.  2.  In  the  revelations  of  truth.  There  is  law  and  love,  Sinai 
and  Calvary.  HI.  He  possesses  the  proper  seed.  His  Word  is  seed  in  many 
respects.  1.  Vitality.  Every  seed  has  life  in  it.  His  Word  is  spirit  and  life. 
2.  Completeness.  The  seed  is  complete  in  itself.  Nothing  can  be  taken  from  it, 
nothing  can  be  added  to  it,  any  alteration  injures  it.  3.  Prolificness.  One  seed  in 
course  of  time  may  cover  a  continent  and  feed  nations.  The  word  of  God  is 
wonderfully  fruitful.  IV.  He  commands  the  ccltdring  elements.  The  best 
agriculturists  who  understand  the  soil  possess  the  best  implements  and  the  best 
seed,  are  thwarted  in  their  efforts,  because  the  elements  are  not  propitious.  God 
has  command  over  the  elements.  The  heat,  the  cold,  the  dew,  the  shower,  the 
sunshine,  and  the  air,  are  all  at  His  disposal.  (D.  Thovtns,  D.D.)  God^s 
husbandry  : — The  Scripture  doth  delight  to  compare  the  Church  to  many  simili- 
tudes, all  which  show  the  tender  respects  it  stands  in  towards  God.  Sometimes  to 
a  wife,  sometimes  to  a  body,  sometimes  to  tlie  branches  of  a  vine  ;  at  other  times 
to  a  garden,  to  a  vineyard,  and  here  to  a  field,  and  a  house.  We  will  first  handle 
these  two  similitudes  jointly,  and  then  severally.  Jointly,  in  that  they  are  God's 
husbandry  and  house.  It  implieth  these  things — First,  the  power  and  goodness  of 
God  in  making  them  so.  A  building  is  not  of  itself;  everybody  that  seeth  a  house, 
presently  concludes  the  house  did  not  make  itself  ;  so  if  you  see  a  field  well  hus- 
banded, we  all  know  of  itself  the  earth  would  not  do,  but  rather  its  curse  is  to 
bring  forth  briers  and  thorns.  So  when  you  see  a  people  leaving  their  sins,  walking 
according  to  the  rules  revealed  in  Scripture,  you  must  necessarily  conclude,  this 
men  have  not  of  themselves,  they  cannot  have  this  by  flesh  and  blood.  Hence, 
God,  speaking  of  the  Church  of  Israel,  said  :  "  He  planted  a  vine  "  (Jer.  ii.  21). 
Secondly,  it  doth  imply  dominion  and  absolute  sovereignty  over  us.  Even  as  the 
master  that  buildeth  the  house  appointeth  what  customs  and  orders  shall  be  in 
the  house,  the  husbandman  appointeth  what  seed  he  pleaseth  for  the  ground. 
This  point  is  of  great  consideration,  for  how  durst  men  in  all  ages  have  brought 
in  such  superstition,  such  heresy,  such  tyranny  in  the  Church  of  God,  if  they 
had  reuiemliered  there  is  but  one  master  in  the  house  of  God— one  lawgiver. 
All  officers  are  but  servants,  and  not  masters.  Thirdly,  it  denoteth  propriety  and 
intpre^.t  that  God  hath  a  right  to  us,  that  we  are  His,  and  not  our  own.  The  house 
is  the  owner's,  he  hath  the  propriety  of  it ;  so  that  by  this  means  they  who  are, 
indeed,  of  this  building,  of  this  field,  they  are  more  happy  than  all  others  in  the 
world,  for  God  is  in  covenant  with  them.  To  them  only  God  is  their  God,  and 
they  His  people.  Fourthly,  it  supposeth  care,  love,  and  protection.  Propriety 
causeth  care  and  love  among  men.  What  cares  a  man  for  another  man's  field, 
another  mnn's  corn,  but  he  looketh  to  his  own  ?  He  weedeth  that,  he  fenceth  that, 
he  keepeih  that  from  all  violence.  It  makes  for  God's  praise,  that  thy  heart  be  a 
room  swept  and  kept  clear  for  Him  to  lodge  in.  Oh,  urge  this  in  prayer!  O  Lord, 
am  1  not  Thy  husbandry?  Is  not  my  soul  Thy  building?  Wliy,  then,  lieth  it 
thus  ruinous  ?  Why  is  it  neglected  by  Thee  ?  It  is  not  only  my  comfort,  my 
happiness,  but  Thy  glory  and  honour  is  interested  in  this.  Come  we  in  the  next 
place  to  consider  the  several  similitudes,  and — First,  ye  are  God's  husbandry. 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Take  notice  that  He  doth  not  here  speak  of  the  invisible  and  mystical  Church  of 
Chnst,  but  as  they  were  a  visible  Church  at  Corinth.  This  relation  of  being  God's 
husbandry  implieth  something  on  His  part,  and  many  things  on  ours.  On  His 
part:  I'irst,  that  He  finds  all  peop'e  of  themselves  like  a  barren  wilderness  and 
fruitless  desert.  The  curse  upon  the  ground  is  fulfilled  in  them — to  bring  forth 
nothing  but  briers  and  thorns.  All  the  things  of  grace  and  godhness  are  not  only 
above  our  natures,  but  contrary  to  them.  Secondly,  it  supposeth  that  grace  and 
godliness  is  wholly  planted  by  God  in  their  souls,  for  this  floweth  from  the  other. 
Seeing  we  are  such  a  burren  wilderness,  what  fruit  can  ever  be  expected  from  us? 
Thirdly,  this  supposeth  that  God  likewise  giveth  all  the  seasons  and  opportunities 
of  growth  and  fruitfulness.  As  the  gardener.  He  looketh  to  His  times  wheu  He 
must  water  the  plants,  lest  they  die.  The  season  of  the  year  helpeth  to  grow,  as 
well  as  the  nature  of  the  soil.  Oh,  then,  know  that  as  the  natural  seasons  and 
times  are  of  His  appointment,  so  much  more  the  gracious  ones.  On  our  parts, 
who  are  the  field  to  be  tilled,  there  are  the^e  things:  First,  a  willingness  to  have 
the  Word  of  God  prepare  and  wound  our  souls  ;  even  tearing  our  hearts  to  pieces, 
that  so  tlie  Word  as  seed  may  fi'uctify.  This  is  what  the  Scripture  calls,  "  Ploughing 
up  the  fallow  ground  "  (Jer.  iv.  3).  Oh,  expect  not  healing  and  peace  and  comfort, 
till  you  have  been  thus  disquieted  !  Do  not  then  quarrel  at  the  Word  of  God,  but 
rather  bless  Him  for  the  power  of  it,  when  it  changeth  the  whole  face  of  a  congre- 
gatinn.  Secondly,  this  implieth  that  you  should  answer  the  satisfaction  of  that 
husbandman  whose  husbandry  you  are.  W^lio  will  bear  that  ground  which,  after 
much  lal.our  and  cost,  brings  forth  no  fruit  at  all  ?  Thirdly,  it  supposeth  a  careful 
impiovement  of  all  those  means  which  God  useth  for  our  spiritual  good.  If 
we  be  God's  husbandry,  we  are  patiently  to  receive  and  fruitfully  to  inp  ove 
whatsoever  may  make  for  our  fruitfulness.  Now  the  means  are  of  two  oorts, 
either  essential,  and  entire  and  perfect,  such  as  the  hearing  of  the  Word, 
praying,  godly  communion  ;  or,  accidental  and  occasional,  such  as  afflictions, 
troubles,  and  persecutions.  They  need  a  winter  as  well  as  a  summer.  Lastly, 
consider  how  near  such  a  people  are  to  utter  ruin  ;  while  you  are  but 
near  it,  there  is  some  hope  of  e^capiDg,  if  you  seek  out;  who,  after  all  God's 
husbandry,  are  the  same  ignorant  and  profane  people  still.  Thy  soul  is  God's 
field.  Oh,  what  fruit,  what  reformation  shouldst  thou  show  forth  ?  Thus,  not 
only  the  Sabbath  day,  but  every  day  may  be  a  Sabbath  day ;  every  field  thou 
goest  into ;  every  goodly  crop  thou  seest  on  the  ground,  it  may  teach  and  preach 
unto  thee.  {A.  Burfiess.)  God's  huildimj  is  Divine — I.  In  its  plan.  II.  In  its 
STRUCTURE.  1.  Christ,  the  foundation.  2.  Living  stones,  the  superstructure. 
III.  In  its  workmanship.  Each  stone  by  God  is — 1.  Polished.  2.  Adjusted. 
3.  Cemented.  IV.  In  its  purpose.  1.  For  His  glory.  2.  For  the  inhabitation 
of    His   Spirit.      {J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  God's   building  : — There  have   1  e  n   many 

splendid  structures  which,  in  their  day,  have  been  the  wonder  and  admh'ation  of 
the  world,  but  this  infinitely  transcends  them  all.  The  colossal  palaces  and 
hanging  gardens  reared  by  Nebuchadnezzar  must  have  presented  a  gorgeous 
spectacle ;  while  the  fame  of  Solomon's  temple  has  filled  the  earth  in  every  agn. 
But  what  is  all  this  material  sjilendour,  which  has  long  since  passed  away,  to  this 
temple  whose  stones  are  innnortal  spirits — whose  foundation  is  the  rock  of  ages — 
whose  walls  no  rev(dutions  can  ever  s-hake — whose  fair  proportimis  shall  be  fully 
developed,  amid  the  ruin  of  all  the  miglitiest  and  loveliest  works  of  human 
ingenuity  and  power — whose  top-stone  shall  be  brought  forth  with  sboutings  wlien 
the  "heavens  shall  have  passed  away."  In  surveying  this  building,  note — I.  The 
FOUNDATION.  TMs  is  the  most  important  part ;  if  this  be  defective,  all  the  cost  and 
labour  of  the  superstructure  will  be  in  vain.  But  the  foundation  upon  which  this 
edifice  is  built  is  sueh  as  an  Omnipotent  hand  alone  could  lay,  and  for  vshich  no 
other  can  be  substituted.  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  the  Christian  Church,  as  He  is 
— 1.  The  source  of  her  being.  The  Church  could  have  no  existence  but  for  Him. 
The  spiritual  stones  that  constitute  the  edifice  are  sinners  rnnsomed  by  His  blood, 
and  renewed  by  His  Spirit.  Were  it  possible  for  the  connection  between  the  stones 
and  the  foundatioji  to  be  dissolved,  the  whole  edifice  would  become  a  heap  of 
ruins.  2.  The  author  of  her  creed.  In  regard  to  her  doctrines  she  rests  on  no 
human  authority,  but  takes  them  as  they  flow  pure  fi'om  Christ  and  His  inspired 
apostles.  8.  The  founder  of  her  discipline.  His  laws  are  few,  and  the  principles 
on  which  they  rest  are  equity  and  love.  "  One  is  your  Master,"  &c.  "  A  iv  w 
commandment  give  I  unto  you,"  &c..  4.  The  guaiantee  of  her  stability  and 
perpetuity.     "  Upon  this  rock  will  I  build  My  Church,"  &3.      These  were  His 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  239 

words — this  was  His  pledge ;  and  "  all  power  is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and 
in   earth,"   in    this    capacity,   and   for    this    very   purpose.       II.    The    materials. 

1.  Immortal  spirits,  redeemed  and  regenerated  men,  lively  stones,  or  what  Paul 
denominates  "  gold,  silver,  precious  stones " ;  the  accredited  and  the  durable 
materials  which  ministers  are  the  instruments  of  placing  in  the  Church.  But  in 
the  visible  Church  there  are  materials  of  another  kind-mere  professors,  hypo- 
crites, foimaiists,  "the  wood,  hay,  stubble";  but  they  form  no  part  of  the  true 
Church,  but  shall  ultimately  be  removed  from  the  edifice.  2.  Whence  are  the 
materials  taken?  See  these  "living  stones,"  as  in  successive  courses  they  rise  to 
constitute  and  adorn  the  edilice.  They  ai-e  of  various  colours — from  the  white  of 
Europe  to  the  jet  of  Africa ;  every  rank — from  the  monarch  to  the  labourer. 
"  They  shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,"  Ac.  "  They  shall  come  " 
from  tbe  east^-rn  Brahmins — from  the  western  savages — from  the  Southern  Isles — 
from  the  northern  Esquimaux;  "they  shall  come"  from  the  patriarchal  and  the 
prophetic  ages — from  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  dispensations.  David,  with 
the  harp,  shall  be  there  ;  and  Isaiah,  with  his  CNangelic  songs ;  and  Ezekiel, 
with  his  prophetic  visions;  mingling  with  the  malefactor  from  the  cross,  and  the 
poor  beggar  from  the  rich  man's  gate.  "  They  shall  come  "  from  every  denomina- 
tion :  the  Episcojialian,  the  Presbyierian,  etc, ;  all  forgetting,  or  lamenting,  that 
they  should  ever  have  been  otherwise  than  one.  III.  The  instrumentality  and 
AGENCY.  The  instrumentality  is  human;  the  agency  Divine.  Yet  the  instru- 
mentality is  of  Divine  appointment ;  and,  for  the  most  part,  inseparably  connected 
with  the  agency.  Though  it  is  God  who  "giveth  the  increase,"  yet  Paul  must 
"plant"  and  "  Apollos  water."  Ministers  are  not  architects,  but  simply  work- 
men, employed  under  the  guidance  of  the  Divine  architect.  Nor  can  any 
one  stone  boast  against  another  in  respect  of  "the  rock  whence  it  was  hewn," 
"  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  it  was  digged,"  for  all  alike  are  hewn  out  of  the 
quarry  of  a  common  deiiravity.  However  much  as  they  may  vary  in  other 
respects,  all  are  on  a  level  here — alike  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins";  whilst 
it  is  "God  who  has  quickened  them  together  with  Christ,"  A'c.  I  know  that  it 
is  not  with  us  to  "  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  nor  to  say  by  what  avenues 
He  shall  or  shall  not  obtain  access  to  the  human  heart.  It  may  be  affliction, 
&c.  ;  but  tbe  ministry  of  the  gospel  is  the  main  and  ordinary  instrumen- 
tality. Was  it  not  by  this  that  Peter  "pricked  to  the  heart"  three  thousand; 
that  Luther  shook  the  throne  of  papal  tyranny;  that  Wliitefield  and  Wesley 
aroused  the  slumbering  Churches  of  Great  Britain  and  America.  What  is  it  that 
has  caused  the  Rose  of  Sharon  to  bloom  amid  the  snows  of  Greenland  ?  What  ia 
it  that  has  gathered  the  savages  of  Kaffraria  and  New  Zealand  around  the  Cross  ? 
It  is  the  preMching  of  the  gospel  in  its  simplicity  and  purity — and  nothing  less— 
that  God  will  own  and  honour  for  this  great  and  glorious  purpose ;  Christ,  in  the  suffi- 
ciency of  His  atonement ;  in  the  prevalence  of  His  intercession,  &c.  (T.  Raffl.es,  D.D.) 
God's  luildinf) : — I.  God  is  our  huilder.  If  we  climb  some  high  hill  near  the 
sea  on  a  tine  day,  we  behold  on  one  side  hills  and  valleys  ;  and  on  the  other  the 
tremendous  ocean  stretching  to  the  horizon.  Then  we  feel  that  our  Fatber  is  a 
grand  God  to  make  such  things.  There  are  great  buildings  which  men  have 
erected,  but  there  is  no  building  which  is  so  great  as  the  splendid  planet  on  which 
we  live.  But  far  more  wonderful  than  the  woild  is  the  body  of  man;  but  a 
grander  thing  still  is  the  soul,  which  God  created  to  dwell  in.  It  appears  as  if 
He  had  given  to  the  soul  of  man  a  purtion  of  His  own  almighty  power.  Does  not 
the  Scripture  say,  "  Ye  fight  against  God  "  ?  We  have  power  to  say  "  No  "  to  the 
Almighty!  But  there  is  something  far  grander  and  more  prfcious  still — it  is  the 
new  spirit  which  is  breathed  in  every  man  who  believes  in  Christ.  This  is  God- 
like. II.  God  has  furnished  a  plan  for  the  building — the  life  of  Christ.  It 
is  the  best  life  and  nobody  can  improve  on  it.  The  Lord  does  not  mean  us  to  copy 
His  style  of  garment,  or  to  ent  the  same  sort  of  food,  or  to  be  put  to  d>  ath  on 
a  cross.  We  aie  to  copy  His  character.  III.  God  has  also  given  a  foundation 
FOR  THE  BUILDING.  "Cliiist  Jesus."  Then,  we  are  to  bflieve  His  words  and  to 
build  our  actions  thereon.  Jesus  is  our  foundation  for  the  knowledge — 1.  That 
Go'l  loves  us  as  our  Father.     We  are  to  live  from  day  to  day  feeling  certain  of  that. 

2.  That  Christ  lays  down  His  life  f-r  us.  So  we  are  to  rest  upon  Him  for  forgive- 
ness. 3.  That  in  Him  are  all  i lungs  necessary  for  our  peace.  Build  on  Him, 
then,  for  all  circumstances  of  trouble.  (IF.  Birch.)  The  Church  God's  huildinfi: — 
I.  The  apostli':'s  description  of  the  church.  "Ye  are  God's  builiing."  This 
building — 1.  Has  a  proprietor.     God  is  the  proprietor  of  the  site  (the  world),  of 


2.i0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

the  foundation  (Christ),  of  the  materials  (sinners),  of  the  builders  (ministeis), 
of  its  privileges  here,  and  its  ultimate  glory  in  heaven.  2.  Has  an  architect. 
Infinite  wisdom  and  power.  Before  this  building  was  commenced  there  was 
intention  ;  it  is  the  result  of  design.  3.  Has  a  good  foundation.  Christ,  called  a 
"stone,"  to  convey  the  idea  of  stability  and  durability;  and  a  "tried  stone,"  to 
indicate  that  it  is  completely  adapted  to  answer  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  laid ; 
"  a  sure  foundation,"  because  no  attacks  of  its  enemies,  no  revolutions  of  time,  no 
concussions  of  earth  will  ever  shake  or  destroy  it.  4.  Has  a  grand  superstructure. 
It  is  composed  of  materials  properly  fitted,  to  occupy  a  place  in  the  building 
(1  Pet.  ii.  5).  The  stones  once  had  no  connection  with  the  building,  deeply 
imbedded  in  nature's  quarry  of  guilt ;  but  by  the  hammer  of  God's  Word  and  the 
energy  of  the  Spirit,  they  have  been  detarhed  from  the  rock,  brought  from  darkness 
to  Hght,  &c.  By  regeneration,  by  sanctification,  they  are  fitted  for  a  position  in 
the  temple.  5.  Has  workmen — ministers,  all  Christian  workers,  missionaries. 
G.  Has  perfect  beauty  (Psa.  xlviii.  ;  Song  vi.  4).  See  the  polished  stones,  bearing 
the  inscription  of  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  See  their  love,  unicin,  benevolence. 
They  are  adorned  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  bear  the  image  of  God. 
II.  The  special  design  of  the  erection.  1.  Magnificent.  It  is  "  a  habitation 
for  God."  What  a  glorious  inhabitant !  "  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a 
refuge."  " Behold  the  heaven  of  heavens,"  d'c.  2.  Gracious  (Isa.  Ixvi.  1).  "The 
Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion."  HI.  The  blessedness  of  being  a  part  of  this 
BUILDING.  1.  It  is  honourable.  It  is  the  most  glorious  building  that  ever  was 
erected.  It  is  to  be  allied  to  the  gl  irious  Proprietor  Himself.  2.  It  is  advantageous. 
The  state  of  a  person  is  decided  ;  he  has  realised  the  Divine  power  by  which  he 
has  been  fitted  into  the  temple  of  God.  This  produces  peace,  contentment,  joy, 
hope.  He  has  an  interest  in  all  the  promises  and  privileges  of  this  house,  and  is  a 
participant  of  all  its  provisions.  3.  It  is  a  state  of  safety.  The  Proprietor  will 
never  suffer  this  building  to  be  destroyed.  He  ever  watches  over  and  defends  it ; 
He  is  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  it,  angels  minister  to  it,  all  the  attributes  of  God 
are  pledged  for  its  security.  (Hoinilist.)  The  Church  God's  biiildinp: — The 
metaphor  describes  the  work  of  God  as  being  not  the  gathering  together  of  certain 
devout  souls  wishing  to  abstract  themselves  from  the  corruptions  of  the  heathen 
around  them,  and  to  shape  their  own  lives  after  a  nobler  mode.  Such  persons 
might  have  dwelt  in  Corinth,  exciting  no  remark,  creating  no  enmity ;  the  worst 
that  could  have  befallen  them  would  have  been  an  idle  sco2  as  etnhusiastic  strivers 
after  an  ideal  of  unattainable  perfection.  But  by  representing  the  Christian  body 
as  a  Divinely  erected  building,  he  paints  at  one  stroke  a  picture  of  tangible  social 
system  rising  in  the  midst  of  the  old  heathen  world  like  a  new  sanctuary  in  the 
centre  of  one  of  its  temple-crowned  cities,  with  the  Christian  commuuity  growing 
up  in  Corinth,  with  its  groups  of  little  children  and  its  elder  men,  its  ministry  and 
ordinances  of  worship,  its  examples  of  whole  households  like  that  of  St.  Stephanas, 
enrolled  by  baptism  among  its  members.  This  was  not  a  philosophical  school 
created  by  Pauline  teaching,  but  an  all-comprehensive,  all-embracing  structure, 
reared  by  a  Divine  hand,  the  abode  of  supernatural  powers  and  operations,  a 
structure  which  invited  into  it  through  its  ever  open  gates  all  of  every  race,  and  age, 
and  class,  the  Jew  and  the  Greek,  the  vast  slave  f)opulation  of  the  old  world,  as 
well  as  its  most  privileged  citizens ;  and  this  in  order,  having  gathered  them 
within  its  walls,  to  weld  them  together  into  a  new  social  system  by  bonds  and 
principles  which  soon  would  supersede  existing  ties.  Nor  is  this  all.  A  building 
implies  not  a  sudden  emanation  of  opinion,  but  a  construction  of  progressive  stages, 
each  based  upon  that  which  lies  below  ;  from  the  foundation  which  the  earth  hides, 
to  the  pinnacle  which  loses  itself  in  the  blue  air.  And  so  St.  Paul  speaks  of  their 
being  "being  built  upon  the  foundation  of  apostles  and  prophets,"  coupling 
together  the  living  and  the  dead  as  a  substructure  of  the  Church  of  his  day.  Yes, 
even  that  Church  of  the  first-born,  in  all  the  fresh  light  of  its  new  faith,  was  to 
regard  itself  not  as  a  creature  of  its  own  age,  although  Christ  had  Himself  walked 
the  earth  in  that  age  ;  but  it  was  to  know  that  its  foundations  went  back  into  the 
depths  of  eternity,  that  its  creed,  short  as  it  was,  "Christ,  and  Him  crucified," 
gathered  up  into  itself  all  the  past  i-evealings  of  God.  Their  legend,  St.  Paul 
would  tell  them,  was  no  system  of  faith  and  morals  lying  on  the  surface  of  a  single 
generation  ;  it  penetiated  into  the  very  secret  of  them  all.  The  facts  were  the  out- 
come of  Gi'd's  determinate  counsel  working  gradually  century  after  century  up  to 
its  aceompMshment  from  the  birth  of  time.  Its  precepts  of  love  and  holiness  were 
not  arbitrary   precepts,  but  derived  from  the  very  being  of  God  ;  thus  the  corner- 


CHAP.  III.]  /.   CORINTHIANS.  241 

stone  of  tlie  building  had  been  laid  before  the  elder  angels  began  to  be.  And  as 
God  does  not  ci-eate  each  human  being  separately,  but  carries  forward  His  original 
work  continuously,  "  making  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,"  so  witli  the  work  of 
salvation,  the  Lord  does  not  simply  join  to  Himself  those  that  are  being  saved,  but 
He  adds  them  to  the  Church,  and  that  by  the  instrumentality  of  those  wlio  were 
Christians  before  tliem.  Tims,  you  see,  every  generation  of  the  baptized  is  bound 
together  by  a  spiritual  consanguinity  with  the  generations  which  jirecede  it.  The 
creeds  which  we  inherit  from  ages,  the  prayers  whose  solemn  tones  are  prolonged 
among  us  from  the  remotest  times,  like  the  long-drawn  note  of  solemn  music 
through  a  cathedral ;  the  influence  of  saints  and  doctors  and  confessors,  inde- 
structible as  that  influence  is,  whether  men  like  it  or  not ;  all  this  is  but  the 
outward  expression  of  that  essential  continuity  which,  through  the  one  baptism 
and  the  one  Bread  of  Life,  Jesus  Christ,  has  secured  to  the  fellowship  of  His 
disciples.  {I>p.  Woodford.)  I'lie  spiritual  temple  : — I.  Its  foundation.  A  wise 
builder  is  always  most  attentive  to  this,  because  the  stability  of  tiie  structure  can 
onlv  be  secured  by  that  of  the  foundation  (Matt.  vii.  24).  We  are  thus  prepared  to 
find  the  Church  of  Christ  represented  as  built  upon  a  rock,  i.e.,  Christ.  In  His  com- 
plex nature  He  becomes,  by  His  obedience  and  death,  the  grouml  on  which  guilty  men 
are  brought  to  stand  and  live  again  in  the  favour  of  the  Almighty  (Acts.  iv.  11,  12). 
If.  The  edifick.  1.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  an  editice  composed  of  rationnl  and 
immortal  beings,  brought  out  of  a  fallen  state,  to  stand  in  an  intimate  relHtion 
to  Him,  and  to  God  through  Him.  They  are  all  united  to  Him  in  their  hearts  by 
faith,  and  meet  together  in  that  union.  This  Church  hath  both  an  outward  form, 
and  an  inward  grace.  The  visible  Church  is  composed  of  all  in  every  place,  who 
make  an  open  profession  of  fnith  in  Christ.  But  many  of  these  make  this  profes- 
sion in  the  absence  of  any  Divine  principle  of  faith  in  their  hearts.  These  are 
only  nominally  of  the  temple  of  God.  They  live  upon  a  name.  "  Thou  hast  a 
name,  that  thou  livest,  but  art  dead."  The  profession  of  the  rest,  however,  is  that 
which  results  from  the  principle  within  :  for  "  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto 
righteousness,"  &c.  These  are  the  true  and  real  temple,  "  builded  together  for  a 
habitation  of  God,  through  the  Spirit. "  As  the  practised  eye  of  the  jeweller  discerns 
the  real  gem  from  the  artificial  resemblance,  and  uses  means  to  make  the  difference 
manifest,  that  the  precious  may  be  separated  from  the  vile,  so  does  Christ  distinguish 
those  in  His  Church  who  are  really  partakers  of  "  like  precious  faith,"  from  those 
who  have  the  Hppearanco  of  it  only.  2.  Such  is  the  analogy  to  be  traced  between 
the  spiritual  temple  of  (jod  upon  earth,  and  a  material  sacred  edifice.  As  far, 
however,  as  heavenly  things  exceed  earthly  ones,  they  are  incapable  of  being  fully 
represented  by  such,  e.g. — (1)  No  stme  moves  itself  to  the  foundation.  It  is  taken 
from  the  quarry  and  carried  to  it  to  be  placed  upon  it.  without  the  possibility  of  its 
own  concurrence.  But  here  there  is  a  principle  of  spiritual  life,  in  consequence  of 
which  the  individual  goes  to  Christ  to  be  redeemed  unto  God  by  Him  and  made  to 
live  in  His  sight.  "  Unto  you  that  believe,  Christ  is  precious  ;  to  whom,  coming, 
as  unto  a  living  stone,  ye  also,"  &e.  (2)  Every  stone  in  this  Divine  fabric  is 
immediately  united  to  the  Foundation,  and  all  of  them  that  are  equally  near  to  it. 
This  cannot  be  the  case  with  a  material  building.  But  the  souls  of  all  believers 
in  Christ  are  equally  intimately  united  to  Him  by  their  own  jjersonal  faith,  (a) 
The  faith  of  the  parent  cannot  save  the  child,  nor  that  of  the  husband  the  wife. 
(li)  Neither  have  we  any  saving  connection  with  Christ  by  an  outward  union  to  His 
Church  and  jDarticipition  of  its  ordinances.  "Being  in  the  Lord"  is  a  constant 
phrase  of  the  New  Testament  in  describing  a  state  of  salvation.  (3)  Every 
portion  of  spiritual  building  makes  increase  of  itself  and  the  whole  by  the  addition 
of  other  parts.  This  is  out  of  question  with  respei-t  to  any  erection  of  man. 
{J.  Leifrhild,  D.D.)  Charaeter  built  bit  by  bit : — Kemember  that  the  building 
of  a  noble  and  Godlike  and  God-pleasing  character  can  be  erected  on  the  founda- 
tion of  faith  only  by  constant  effort.  Growth  is  not  the  whole  explanation  of  the 
process  by  which  a  man  becomes  what  God  would  have  him  to  be.  Struggle  has  to 
be  included  as  well  as  growth,  and  neither  growth  nor  struggle  exhaust  the  New 
Testament  metaphors  for  piogress.  This  other  one  of  my  text  is  of  constant 
recurretice.  It  taKes  the  metaphor  of  a  building  to  suggest  the  slow,  continuous, 
>bit-by-bit  effort.  You  do  not  r^ar  the  fabric  of  a  noble  character  all  at  a  moment. 
No  man  reaches  the  exM'emity,  either  of  goodness  or  baseness,  by  a  leap  ;  you 
must  bn  content  with  bit-by-bit  work.  The  christian  character  is  like  a  mosaic 
formed  of  tiny  sijuares  in  all  but  infinite  numbers,  each  one  of  them  separately  set 
and  b^dded  in  its  place.  You  have  to  build  by  a  plan  ;  you  have  to  see  to  it  that 
VOL.    I.  16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

each  day  has  its  task,  each  day  its  growth.  You  have  to  be  content  with  one  brick 
at  a  tira(^  It  is  a  lifelong  task,  till  the  whole  be  finished.  And  not  until  we  pass 
from  earth  to  heaven  does  our  building  work  cease.  Continuous  effort  is  the 
condition  of  progress.  (A.  JIaclaren,  D.D.)  Soul  masonry  : — I.  A  good  plan.  1. 
What  is  a  good  plan?  (1)  A  plan  adapted  to  its  purpose.  If  the  edifice  is 
intended  for  study,  worship,  business,  recreation,  or  residence,  the  plan,  to  be 
good,  must  be  fitted  for  its  p'irpo>e.  (2)  A  plan  a?sthetically  j^leasiug.  Nature 
provides  for  the  sestlietic  instinct  in  boundless  varieties  of  forms  and  hues.  A 
plan  that  does  not  embrace  all  those  Unes,  and  curves,  and  proportions,  and  blended 
shades,  that  charm  the  esthetic  instinct,  cannot  be  considered  truly  good.  2. 
What  is  the  plan  on  which  moral  mnsonry  should  proceed?  The  character  of 
Ch'ist.  Tliis  ideal  has  the  two  grand  attributes  of  architectural  excellence,  fitness, 
and  beauty.  All  history  shows  that  such  an  ideal  is  to  be  found  nowhere  else.  Men, 
alas,  are  everywhere  biilding  character  on  other  plans  :  some  by  the  plan  of  sensual 
pleasure,  otheis  by  the  plan  of  commercial  greed,  otliers  by  the  plan  of  worldly 
vanity  and  ambition.  13  it  they  are  all  unsuitable  and  unlovely.  In  them  the  soul 
is  neither  hapijy  nor  beautiful.  II.  Good  materials.  However  fitted  and  beautiful 
the  plan,  if  the  mateiials  are  poor,  the  stones  crumbling,  the  tiles  leaking,  the 
timber  rotten,  the  edifice  will  be  an  s  thing  but  perfect.  What  are  the  materials 
with  which  we  are  to  build  up  a  gnod  cliara'-ter  ?  They  are  actions.  If  these  are 
corrupt,  the  materials  are  bad;  but  if  good,  tlien  the  character  is  all  right.  Gocd 
actions  are  actions  that  spring  from  a  supreme  sympathy  with  the  supremely  good. 
Such  actions  are  the  gold  and  the  silver  and  the  precious  stones  that  will  bear  the 
fires  at  the  last  day.  III.  A  good  found.^tiox.  What  is  the  good  foundation  of  a 
character?  IS'ot  conventional  mortality,  not  religious  observances,  not  orthodox 
creeds ;  but  Christ  and  Him  only.  See  in  Matt.  vii. ,  the  destinies  of  the  wise  man 
who  built  his  house  on  a  rock,  and  the  foolish  man  who  built  on  the  sand.  The 
one  endured  through  the  storm,  but  the  other  was  swept  away  in  ut;er  ruin. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  God^s  huilding  :■ — Now  this  comparison  of  building  supposeth 
these  things — First,  that  a  people  of  themselves  are  noihing  but  so  much  rubbish, 
and  that  it  is  God  who  makes  them  this  glorious  building.  That  as  you  see  the 
temple  was  built  by  excellent  art.  The  trees  in  the  forest  and  the  stones  in  the 
quarry  could  never  have  prepared  thems-lves,  nor  put  themselves  into  so  goodly  a 
structure.  So  it  is  here.  Men  by  tlieir  own  power,  their  own  ability  and  strength, 
could  never  become  a  fit  habitation  for  the  Lord  to  rest  in.  Secondly,  it  implieth 
that  the  matter  of  this  building  should  be  sound,  precious,  and  substantial.  Oh 
that  you  would  think  of  this,  what  ye  ought  to  be !  Holiness  to  the  Lord  should 
be  writ  on  your  hands,  foreheads,  and  whole  conversation.  Thirdly,  it  implies 
the  gracious  presence  and  power  of  God  among  His  people.  A  house  is  the  place 
where  a  man  continually  res- ides  ;  and  this  is  one  ureat  reason  why  God  useth  this 
metaphor  to  show  with  what  rest  and  delight  He  will  take  up  His  habitation  in  His 
Church.  Fourthly,  this  house  or  building  doth  imply  God  to  be  the  Master  therein, 
that  He  only  may  prescribe  the  laws  and  orders,  what  shall  be  done,  and  what  not ; 
He  appoints  every  one  his  work  and  his  labour.  Fifthly,  liere  is  this  further  in 
this  building.  It  is  not  an  ordinary  building,  but  a  sacred  and  holy  one.  There- 
fore th<^y  are  called  the  temple  of  the  living  God.  Now  then,  what  an  astonishing 
consideration  is  this  ?  Sixthly,  it  being  a  house,  all  within  are  servants,  and  so 
they  are  to  do  their  Master's  work,  to  live  to  Him.  "  Whatsoever  you  do,  do  all  to 
the  glory  of  God"  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  Thus  this  health,  this  wealth,  these  parts,  this 
time  is  none  of  mine ;  I  must  improve  it  for  my  Master.  Seventhly,  it  supposeth 
order  and  government.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  house  ;  now  that  hath  domestical 
laws.  Paul  did  rejoice  to  see  the  Church's  order,  and  her  faith  (Col.  ii.  5).  Eighthly, 
unity,  love,  and  concord  among  those  that  are  in  the  same  house.  Oh,  let  this 
shame  all  animosities  and  quarrellings !  Are  we  not  of  the  same  house  ?  {A.  Bitrges^s.) 
The  church  a  building  : — 1.  It  is  a  spiritual  building.  What  our  Lord  Jesus  say  of 
His  kingdom  is  true  of  His  building,  that  it  is  not  of  this  world — in  it,  but  not  of 
it  (John  XV.  19).  It  is  a  building  of  souls.  2.  It  is  a  spacious  building  of  vast 
extent.  "  I  beheld,  and  lo,  a  great  multitude,"  &c.  (Eev.  vii.  9).  3.  It  is  a  high 
building.  Though  part  of  it  be  here  below,  yet  the  top  of  it  is  as  high  as  henven. 
There  it  is  that  the  glorious  angels  are,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  jierfect ; 
all  of  this  building.  4.  It  is  a  holy  buildiug  (Eph.  ii.  21).  Holiuess  to  the  Lord  is 
written  ui^on  the  front  of  this  building.  5.  It  is  a  living  building.  No  other  is  so. 
The  same  who  are  quickened  are  "  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets  '  (Eph.  ii.   1.  20).     6.  It  is  a  light  building.     This  is  one  thing  that 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  243 

makes  a  building  pleasant,  and  comfortable — many  and  large  windows.  All  the 
■world  besides  is  in  darkness  ;  it  is  the  Church  only  that  hath  the  true  light.  7.  It 
is  a  secure,  a  safe,  building.  The  Church  of  God  is  such  a  building  as  the  ark  was 
(1  Pet.  iii.  20,  21).     8.  It  is  a  spreading,  growing  building.     [Plnlip  Henri/.) 

Vers.  10-15.  According  to  the  grace  of  God  ...  as  a  wise  master  builder,  I 
have  laid  the  foundation.  .  .  .  But  let  every  man  take  heed  how  he  buildeth 
thereupon. — All  of  ijrace : — Now  when  we  say  a  godly  man  acknowledgeth  all  to 
grace,  consider — First,  he  dotb  it  heartily,  seriousil}'.  No  fountain  doth  run  more 
sweetly,  fully,  and  purely  tliHn  he  doth.  Oh,  his  heart  is  a  happy  spring  from 
whence  comes  such  rivers  of  living  water!  Secondly,  this  acknowledgment  is 
accompanied  with  a  renouncing  nil  his  own  works.  His  own  strength,  his  own 
duties,  he  doth  not  so  much  as  think  of  them,  nor  mention  thorn.  Thirdly,  this 
acknowledging  it  must  be  from  an  inward  sense  of  our  own  sin  and  unworthiness, 
how  ill  we  have  deserved  at  God's  hand.  No  man  can  ever  praise  grace  that  hath 
not  felt  the  sting  of  sin,  the  power  of  the  law.  Fourthly,  he  must  wholly  and 
solely  acknowledge  grace.  He  must  not  give  some  piece  to  grace  and  the  rest  to 
his  own  free-will.  He  must  not  by  grace  moan  the  outward  manifestation  and 
revelation  of  it,  but  the  inward  efficacy  of  it.  I^astly,  he  must  set  up  this  grace  of 
God  in  a  Scripture  way.  Not  to  oppose  godliness  or  holiness,  or  to  sin  more 
securely  and  boldly  :  this  is  not  to  acknowledge  grace,  lait  to  abuse  grace.  In 
the  next  place  consider  why  the  godly  are  so  sensible  of  God's  grace.  And  first, 
this  is  the  final  cause  of  all  the  good  thnt  God  doth  enable  us  unto.  This  is  all  He 
looks  for.  Secondly,  the  children  of  God  are  endowed  with  an  ingenuous,  free,  and 
excellent'!  spirit  ;  therefore  they  cannot  but  confess  by  whom  it  is  they  have 
obtained  grace.  Thirdly,  the  real  sting,  smart,  and  danger  they  have  been  in 
makes  their  heart  full  and  mouth  full  of  the  grace  of  God.  Fourthly,  they  are  an 
humble  debased  people  in  themselves.  They  have  low  thoughts  of  all  that  they 
do.  And  therefore  it  is  that  they  are  so  precious  with  God.  Fifthly,  they  must 
needs  acknowledge  grace,  because  they  have  the  experience  how  hard  it  is  to  do 
anything  spiritual  and  upon  heavenly  grounds.  And  therefore  if  they  are  ever 
enabled  thereunto  they  cannot  but  exalt  grace.  Sixthly,  to  jiraise  and  exalt  the 
grace  of  God,  it  is  a  very  profitable  and  advantageous  duty  also.  It  is  two  ways 
profitable.  1.  It  procures  more  grace  and  mercies  from  God  :  "  He  giveth  grace  to 
the  humble  "  (James  iv.  6).  2.  This  acknowledging  of  grace  will  enlarge  a  man, 
and  make  a  man  more  willing  and  ready  in  all  the  ways  of  God.  It  is  like  oil  to 
the  wheel ;  it  is  like  wings  to  the  bird.  Duties  done  witb  the  spirit  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving  have  great  life  and  vigour  in  them.  Now  I  shall  add  one  caution : 
corrupt  doctrinfs  and  opinions  in  religion  may  much  cool  this  duty  of  giving 
thanks.  I  shall  instance  some.  As  first,  the  denying  of  original  sin  is  a  great 
engine  against  the  grace  of  God.  Secondly,  the  maintenance  of  free-will  doth 
much  detract  from  free  grace.  Thirdly,  that  the  law  is  not  to  be  preached ;  no, 
not  for  direction  or  obligation.  Wliereas  Christ  and  Paul  do  often  press  tliis.  {A. 
Burgess.)  A  good  fouiuhttion  : — This  Paul  makes  the  jn-incipal  part  of  his  wisdom, 
that  he  began  with  a  good  foundation.  The  point  tlierefore  in  hand  is  of  gieat 
consequence,  both  to  the  preacher  and  to  the  auditor,  to  consider  what  foundation  his 
religion  and  godliness  is  fixed  upon.  I'or  the  opening  of  this,  consider  that  divines 
do  ordiuarily  make  a  twofold  foundation.  The  one  thej'call  the  foundation  of  our 
knowledge  and  faith  in  matters  of  religion  ;  and  tbis  is  the  Scriptin-e  only.  We 
can  lay  no  other  foundation  for  the  matters  of  faith  but  the  Word  of  God. 
Secondly,  there  is  the  foundation  of  the  being,  or  existence  of  all  our  glory  and 
salvation,  and  that  is  only  Jesus  Christ.  I  shall  instance  in  four  uncjuestionable 
foundations,  which  are  the  four  main  pillars  that  support  our  Christian  building, 
for  the  necessary  things  of  religion  are  these  four.  Either — 1.  The  matters  to  be 
believed.  2.  The  worship  and  necessary  service  of  God.  3.  The  spiritual  benefits 
and  mercies,  justification  and  salvation.  4.  The  things  to  be  done  by  us  in  our 
way  to  salvation.  We  will  begin  with  the  first,  the  foundation  of  our  faith  or 
Divine  assent  in  matters  of  religion.  What  is  thnt  which  every  man  must  build  his 
faith  upon?  And  tbat  is  the  Word  of  God.  As  God  at  first  put  all  the  light  into 
the  sun,  and  the  stars  shine  by  a  borrowed  light  from  it,  so  God  hath  now  put  all 
supernatural  light  into  the  Scripture,  and  all  guides  are  to  shine  by  that.  Now 
that  the  written  Word  of  God  is  the  only  foundation  of  our  Christian  faith,  ap- 
peareth  by  these  reasons— First,  a  Christian  faith  ought  to  be  a  Divine,  super- 
natural faith,  not  a  bare  human  faith.      Now  nothing  can  be  the   ground  ok  a 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 

Divine  faith  but  a  Divine  authority.  Secondly,  the  Scriptures  are  only  the 
foundation  because  they  are  the  immediate  verity  or  truth  coming  from  God,  who 
is  the  first  esspntial  truth.  They  have  not  only  a  Divine  authority,  but  evident 
infallibility.  Take  a  tree  from  the  river  side  and  plant  it  in  a  wilderness,  what  can 
you  expect  but  withering  ?  And  thus  it  is  if  you  take  a  man  from  the  Scripture ; 
his  seeming  faith,  graces,  godlines-s  will  all  presently  vani^h.  Thirdly,  the  Scrip- 
tures only  are  the  foundation  of  faith  because  they  are  only  immutable  and  uumov- 
able.  They  abide  always  the  same,  they  are  not  subject  to  changes,  to  perturbations 
of  affections,  as  men  are.  Councils  consisted  of  men  carried  by  i^ass-ions  and 
interests.  Lastly,  the  Scriptuie is  only  to  be  laid  for  a  foundation  because  this  only 
is  strong  enough  to  support  and  bear  up  in  sad  hours  of  temptation  and  dangerous 
times  ot  persecutions.  Our  Saviour  quelled  Satan's  temptations  by  arrows  out  of 
the  Sciipture  quiver.  Now  for  the  matter  of  doctrine  to  be  believed,  some  men  lay 
four  rotten  and  weak  foundations ;  others  may  be  reduced  to  this.  The  first  is 
that  of  the  papist,  the  authority  of  the  Church  and  the  Pope,  being  wholly  ignorant 
themselves,  but  resting  all  on  their  authority.  The  second  foundation  men  lay  is 
the  authority  of  the  civil  magistrate.  This  is  a  mere  political  faith.  The  third  is 
private  revelation  and  enthusiasms.  Fourthly,  another  false  foundation  is  mere 
human  reason.  (Ihid.)  Foinulntioits  : — The  foundation  therefore  of  every  good 
duty  or  work  we  do  hath  thtse  parts.  First,  there  is  a  foundation  by  way  of  a 
direction  or  rule,  to  which  everything  we  do  must  be  commensurate,  and  by  which 
it  must  be  regulated,  now  that  is  the  Woid  of  God.  For  God's  Word  is  not  only  a 
rule  of  faith  but  of  manners.  And  as  thou  must  be  of  no  other  religion  than  the 
Word  directs  to,  so  thou  must  do  no  other  actions  or  live  any  other  life  than  that 
guides  thee  too.  A  second  jjart  of  that  touiidaT.ion  we  must  lay  for  the  practice  of 
holiness  is  the  justification  and  reconciliation  of  our  persons  with  God  through 
Christ.  Thirdly,  another  foundation  we  must  lay  is  to  receive  power  and  strength 
from  Christ  only,  both  in  the  beginning  and  progress  of  all  good  actions.  Fourthly, 
the  last  part  of  this  foundation  is  a  renewed  and  sanctified  nature.  Now  let  us 
consider  why  we  are  to  be  careful  aboot  laying  this  foundation.  First,  because  it 
is  very  dnngerous,  and  it  is  very  easy  to  irjiscarry  in  this  matter.  If  the  foundation 
be  not  well  laid  thou  art  undone  for  ever.  In  matters  of  men's  estates,  or  of  their 
bodily  life,  how  careful  are  they  to  go  upon  a  sure  foundation.  Only  they 
wilfully  venture  tbeir  ruin  in  the  matters  of  their  soul.  Thou  wouldst  be  un- 
willing to  live  in  an  house  whose  foundation  is  rotten  !  Consider,  then,  am  I  in 
the  right?  Fear  would  njake  ihee  jealous  and  suspicious.  Secondly,  we  mistake 
easily.  We  see  the  greatest  part  of  Christians  never  attend  to  these  things.  And 
withal  the  difference  between  true  and  false  foun'iations  is  spiritually  to  be  discerned. 
Oh  then  say,  I  do  the  outward  wuiks  of  religion,  I  am  careful  to  discharge  them  ! 
But  how  easy  may  I  build  all  upon  a  false  foundation  !  Thirdly,  therefore  we  must 
look  to  our  foundation  because  of  the  great  confusion  that  will  be  at  last  on  those 
who  have  failed  therein.  Fourthly,  therefore  lay  a  good  foundation,  for  if  that  be 
wanting,  thou  doest  nothing  but  sin  in  all  thou  doest.  In  the  third  pilace,  let  us  take 
notice  what  are  those  weak  and  rotten  foundations  that  many  men  build  upon  in 
.regard  of  their  practice.  First,  a  conformity  to  the  life  of  others  ;  they  do  as  most 
/do,  they  sha'l  speed  as  well  as  they,  what  would  ye  have  them  to  be  singular,  to  be 
different  from  others  ?  This  is  a  most  rotten  foundation.  Secondly,  others  build 
upon  a  partial  practice  of  good  things.  The  hypocritical  Jews  they  rested  upon 
their  temple,  their  sacrifices,  their  outward  woisliip  of  God;  in  the  meanwhile  their 
hands  were  full  of  blood,  of  unrighteousness  and  injustice.  Thirdly,  another  rotten 
foundation  is  the  mere  work  done.  They  consider  no  more  than  the  external  act  of 
religion,  of  justice,  of  charity,  and  so  they  think  they  have  obeyed  the  command- 
ment. This  was  the  Pharisees'  foundation.  Fourthly,  another  rotten  foundation 
is  the  goodness,  yea,  supposed  perfection,  of  the  work  they  do.  (Ibid.)  lUiilding 
on  the  foundation  : — To  amplify  this,  consider,  there  may  be  a  twofold  building  or 
addition  to  the  Word  of  God,  either  dei^tructive  and  corruptive,  such  as  wholly 
overthroweth  the  true  meaning  and  sense  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  this  is  a  very 
dangerous  sin.  Or  else  perfective  and  explicative.  Thus  the  New  Testament  was 
added  to  the  Old  as  a  perfective  addition,  not  corruptive  ;  though  it  could  not  have 
been  added  as  Scripture,  but  that  the  authors  thereof  hud  a  Divine  infallibility. 
And  now  what  the  ministers  of  God  in  their  ministerial  labours  do,  it  must  be  an 
addition  exjilicative  of  the  foundation,  though  it  be  not  with  Divine  infallibility. 
Secondly,  the  Word  of  God,  which  containeth  the  foundation  that  the  apostles  have 
laid,  may  be  either  considered  in  respect  of  the  words  only,  or  in  respect  of  the 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIAXS.  245 

Bense  clothed  with  words.  In  the  next  place,  let  us  consider  why  we  ought  so  to 
take  heed,  and  that  is  to  be  manifest  in  many  respects.  First,  from  God  Himself, 
His  glory  and  honour  is  greatly  concerned  herein.  Secondly,  on  God's  part  we  are 
to  take  heed  because  He  hith  so  severely  threatened  all  those  that  add  or  detract 
to  His  Word.  Any  that  shall  alter  these  foundations  or  change  these  bounds. 
Secondly,  on  the  people's  part.     Therefore  we  ought  greatly  to  take  heed.     For — 

1.  The  Word  of  God  in  the  true  sense  of  it  is  the  only  food  and  nourishment  of  the 
soul.  2.  If  we  build  not  on  this  foundation,  the  preaching  of  the  Word  loseth  those 
glorious  and  excellent  effects  for  which  it  is  appomted.  3.  On  tiie  people's  part  we 
had  need  to  take  heed,  because  they  are  more  pione  and  ready  to  receive  any  corrupt 
sense  than  the  pure  meaning  of  the  Scripture.  Lastly,  on  the  minister's  part  it  is 
necessary  that  he  should  take  heed.  For — 1.  He  hath  not  a  magistery  but  a 
ministry  committed  to  him.  2.  He  is  accountable  for  all  the  sin  and  error  people 
run  into  through  his  neglect.  3.  He  must  take  heed  because,  though  a  man  do 
preach  the  sub^taniials  and  the  necessary  things  of  salvation  purely,  yet  if  he  add  or 
mix  any  corrupt  opinions,  tliough  of  a  les^s  nature,  that  man's  salvation  is  very 
dithcult.      {Ibid.)  Tlie  spiritual  fi)itiulatioii : — I.  The  foundation.     1.  Is  laid. 

2.  Is  one.  3.  Is  sure.  II.  The  superstructure.  1.  Is  in  course  of  erection. 
2.  Is  variable  in  character.  III.  The  test  is — 1.  Certain.  2.  Severe.  3.  Decisive. 
The  foundation  of  faith  : — I.  The  text  establishes  a  distinction  between  funda- 
mental DOCTRINE  .\ND  THAT  WHICH  IS  NOT  FUNDAMENT.Uj.  It  speaks  of  the  foundation 
which  must  be  laid  in  all  Christian  teaching.  It  speaks  also  of  the  superstructure, 
which  varies  according  to  the  disposition  or  knowledge  of  the  individual  teacher. 
II.  Christian  teachinc,  may  legitimately  be  carried  beyond  the  limits  of  funda- 
mental DOCTRINE.  There  have  certainly  been  seasons  in  the  history  of  the  Church 
in  -which  its  secondary  doctrines  have  u-uiped  the  first  place.  Times  of  re-action, 
in  which  the  Christian  mind  was  recalled  to  the  foundation,  have  in  some  cases 
promoted  the  development  of  other  secondary  doctrines,  which  have  overshadowed 
the  foundation  no  hss  than  those  which  obtained  acceptance  before.  One  phase 
of  the  Reformation  was  a  return  to  the  heart  of  Christianity  from  the  intricate 
subtleties  of  scholasticism.  Yet  Calvinism  in  its  extreme  development  is  at  least 
as  barren,  and  as  subversive  of  all  place  and  keeping  in  the  mutual  relation  of 
doctrines,  as  any  part  of  the  scholastic  system.  It  is  no  wonder  that  men  are 
tempted  from  time  to  time  to  cast  aside  all  but  the  most  elementary  doctrinal 
teaching,  as  to  content  themselves  with  accepting  the  bare  letter  of  the  Bible, 
denouncing  every  inference  from  it  as  a  corruption  of  Evangelic  il  simplicity.  Far 
different  was  the  teaching  of  the  apostle.  "  As  a  wise  master-builder  I  have  laid 
the  foundation,"  he  does  not  add  "  Let  no  man  build  thereupon  ;  "  but  "  Let  every 
man  take  hoed  how  he  buildeth  thereupon."  While  he  disparages  the  "  wisdom  of 
this  world,"  he  congratulates  his  converts  that  they  "  are  enriched  ...  in  all 
utterance,  and  in  all  knowledge,"  and  declnres  his  intention  to  "speak  the 
w-isdom  of  God  "  not  indeed  to  the  "carnal  babes  in  Christ,"  but  "among  them 
that  are  perfect "  and  able  to  bear  the  highest  teaching.  The  Hebrew  Christians 
also  are  reproved,  as  those  of  Corinth  are.  for  their  backwardness  in  the  school  of 
Christ  (Heb.  v.  12,  13).  III.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is 
laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ."  1.  To  preach  Christ  is  the  chief  office  of  God's 
messengers.  The  leading  events  of  the  gospel  history,  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
nature  which  is  a  necessary  inference  from  and  the  only  consistent  explanation  of 
those  events,  and  the  efficacy  of  His  redeeming  work  which  rests  on  the  truth  of 
His  nature,  make  up  one  complex  whole,  the  due  and  proportionate  exhibition  of 
which  is  preaching  Christ.  This  is  presupposed  in  all  further  Christian  teaching. 
2.  All  more  advanced  teaching  must  rest  upon  this.  (1)  It  must  not  be  inconsis- 
tent with  it.  For  the  superstructure  may  not  merely  overshadow,  it  may  disturb 
and  destroy  the  foundation.  Doctrine  whii-h  comes  into  collision  with  fundamental 
doctrine  is  a  virtual  denial  of  the  foundation.  (2)  It  must  stand  in  a  definite 
relation  to  it  and  grow  out  of  it.  Thus  the  doctrine  of  the  Sa'^raments  cannot  be 
duly  taught,  except  as  it  is  tiught  in  connection  with  those  of  the  Incarnation  and 
Atonement.  IV.  "  Let  every  man  take  heed  how  he  buildeth  thereupon."  1. 
There  may  be  teaching  which  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  leading  Christian 
verities,  and  which  nevertheless  is  false  or  worthless.  Those  who  promulgate  it 
will  have  to  answer  for  it  before  God.  "  The  day  shall  de^  lare  it."  Paul  was 
thinking  mainly  of  vain,  sulitle,  and  barren  questions  such  as  those  against  which  he 
frequently  warns  Timothy  and  Titus  (1  Tim.  i.  4-7,  iv.  7,  vi.  3-5  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  16,  23, 
iv.  4  ;  Titus  iii.  9).     But  the  words  ajjply  to  every  form  of  teaching  which  is  in  itself 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  hi 

false  and  groundless,  which  is  barren  and  unprofitable,  and  which  ministers  questions, 
rather  than  go  ily  edifying.  2.  If  men  are  answerable  for  teaching  which  is  not  incon- 
sistent with  the  foundation  of  the  faith,  how  much  more  for  that  which  directly  or 
indirectly  overthrows  it.  If  vain  and  unprofitable  religious  questions  cannot  be 
raised  with  innocence,  how  can  men  teach  heresy  without  guilt  ?  If  an  unwise 
builder  injures  the  Temple  of  God  by  unskilful  workmanship,  a  judgment  is  pro- 
nounced against  him :  how  then  shall  he  escape,  who  has  either  never  laid  the 
foundation  at  all,  or  who  (when  it  has  been  laid)  has  succeeded  in  disturbing  it  ? 
(Bj).    Basil  Ju)ies.)  Building  the   true  life: — I.    Christ  is  the  foundation  of 

Christian  trust  and  character.  No  other  King  and  Saviour  of  men  is  possible 
to  those  who  know  and  understand  what  He  was  and  taught.  Great  teachers  of 
religion,  and  great  examples  of  conduct,  have  been  in  the  world  :  but  in  comparison 
with  Christ,  they  are  but  stars  in  the  firmament  of  the  world's  night,  which 
become  lost  to  sight  when  the  glorious  sun  has  risen.  He  stands  unique  and  pre- 
eminent in  all  history,  the  only  true  Saviour  of  mankind.  A  Congregational 
minister  once  said  to  a  Unitarian  minister.  "  Can  you  conceive  of  anything  greater 
and  higher  than  the  life  and  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ?  "  and  the  Unitarian  minister 
frankly  answered,  "No."  "  Then  what  is  the  d'flerence  between  your  conception 
of  the  character  of  God  and  the  character  of  Christ?"  and  he  as  frankly  said 
again,  "  That  it  was  a  very  fine  point."  The  apostle,  as  a  wise  master  builder,  had 
Inid  this  foundation  as  the  basis  of  the  new  life ;  not  himself,  or  Apollos,  or 
Peter.  The  Corinthians  were  to  be  rooted  and  built  up  in  Christ,  and  in  no  other. 
But  they  were  to  take  heed  how  they  built  themselves  up  on  Him.  II.  Two  struc- 
tures ARE  POSSIBLE  EVEN  UPON  Christ.  A  Christian  life  must  have  Christ  as  the 
model  as  well  as  the  foundation.  The  gold  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  that 
constituted  the  glory  and  beauty  of  Christ's  character,  must  constitute  the  glory 
and  beauty  of  theirs.  But  it  was  possible  for  men  holding  some  connection  with 
Christ  to  build  up  a  pile  of  perishable  rubbish,  a  hut  instead  of  a  temple.  They 
might  mingle  doctrines  and  practices  which  had  no  necessary  connection  with 
Cluist  and  Him  crucified ;  and  they  were  doing  it.  1.  Some  men  never  think  of 
building  up  anything,  but  take  life  just  as  it  comes.  They  have  no  plan  of  life  to 
work  at.  Indeed,  nothing  is  so  irksome  to  such  men  as  to  live  by  rule.  They  live 
on  impulses,  come  from  where  they  may,  from  inward  passion  or  from  outward 
circumstances.  Drendful,  indeed,  is  the  fate  of  those  who  have  tried  to  make  this 
hfe  a  holiday.  2.  Others  live  for  a  purpose ;  but  they  are  building  only  for  this 
world,  and  not  for  eternity.  Their  foundation  is  on  the  very  surface  of  things,  and 
as  the  building  rises  it  tapers  off  into  nothingness.  A  man  may  bring  to  it  intellect, 
will,  energy,  and  all  for  what?  Perhaps  to  have  it  said  of  hiiu,  "  That  man  started 
with  halfa-crown,  and  he  has  made  a  fortune."  But  the  Divine  soul  withiu  him 
has  not  been  built  up ;  his  nobler  nature  has  lain  despised  and  neglected ;  he  has 
been  building  up  his  circumstances,  but  he  has  not  bnen  building  up  himself.  8.  I 
once  watched  the  building  of  a  new  church,  smd  remember  what  trouble  they  had 
in  getting  a  foundation  for  the  tower,  and  how  long  they  were  in  reaching  down  to 
a  solid  basis  of  stone  that  would  bear  the  immense  mass  of  weight  that  was  to  rest 
upon  it.  I  remembered  also  when  the  foundation  was  laid,  how  carefully  the  plan 
of  the  buildhig  was  studied  and  followed  by  the  workmen  ;  how  every  principal 
stone  was  selected  and  measured,  and  chiselled  to  a  nicety.  It  was  all  done  by  faith- 
fully working  according  to  the  plans  of  the  architect ;  and  when  the  building  was 
complete,  it  was  but  a  transcript  of  what  liad  been  in  the  architect's  mind  before  a 
stone  had  been  laid.  It  was  a  parable  in  stone  of  the  manner  in  which  a  human 
life  must  be  built.  We  must  get  down  beneath  the  surface  and  rubble  of  things 
before  we  can  reach  Christ  as  our  foundation,  as  the  rock  upon  which  our  eternity 
of  life  is  to  rest.  Hearing  and  doing  His  sayings  is  trusting  to  Christ ;  nothing 
more  and  nothing  less  (Matt.  vii.  24,  &c.).  He  drew  with  a  Divine  hand  and  an 
unerring  pencil  the  plan  of  a  human  life,  not  only  by  His  words  but  by  His  deeds, 
to  show  what  God  meant  in  creating  man.  To  believe  in  Christ  is  to  believe  that 
His  plan  is  to  be  our  plan,  faithfully  worked  ont  after  the  living  pattern  He 
exhibited.  But  our  mistake  and  disaster  is,  that  we  mix  up  the  wood  and  the  gold, 
the  stubble  with  the  silver,  and  the  hay  with  the  precious  stones.  One  man  has 
great  gaps  in  his  character  because  he  thinks  God  regards  faith  as  the  transcendent 
virtue  ;  and  if  faith  meant  the  prompt  and  active  loyalty  of  the  mind  to  all  Christ's 
commandments,  he  would  be  right ;  but  if  faith  is  taken  to  mean  an  indolent  con- 
fidence, sucli  a  notion  will  arrest  the  progress  of  the  building  up  of  the  soul. 
Another  man  says  that  prayer  is  the  principal  thing.     Now,  though  Christ  says 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  247 


that  we  ought  alwaj's  to  pray  and  not  to  faint,  He  says  also  that  it  is  he  who 
does  His  will  who  is  most  eminent  before  God.  What  would  be  otherwise  gold, 
becomes  wood  or  stubble  when  we  put  it  out  of  its  place,  and  make  it  a  substitute 
for  other  equally  essential  things.  The  doors  of  a  house  are  necessary  things  ;  but 
if  we  put  them  at  the  top  instead  of  on  the  floor,  they  are  useless  and  absurd.  It 
is  this  jumbling  of  things  which  often  makes  the  spiritual  structure  of  our  lives 
unsightly  and  unprogressive.  We  want  symmetry.  III.  If  we  could  follow  the 
Divine  order  in  the  building  of  the  soul,  how  beautiful  our  lives  would  be  ! 
If  the  first  act  of  the  new  life  could  be  an  act  of  faith,  grandly  receptive  and 
grandly  active  at  the  same  time  ;  and  if  to  such  a  faith  we  could  add  virtue  or 
mental  valour — an  enterprise  of  soul  that  would  launch  us  forth  upon  every  difficult 
work  with  enthusiasm  ;  and  if  to  such  valour  we  could  join  knowledge,  etc.,  &c. 
(2  Pet.  i.  5,  &c.).  These  are  the  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones  of  the  Christian 
life,  if  we  could  but  build  them  into  our  characters  with  symmetry  and  beauty.  IV. 
We  are  like  men  who  are  building  in  the  night,  who  cannot  see  exactly  what  they 
ABE  doing,  but  EVERY  jtan's  WORK  SHALL  BE  MADE  MANIFEST,  for  the  day  shall  declare 
it,  the  full  daylight  shall  show  the  true  value  or  worthlessness  of  that  which  we 
have  been  building.  A  gr^at  part  of  the  building  that  is  going  on  is  an  unconscious 
operation,  or  nearly  so.  That  which  we  knowingly  build  into  ourselves  is  but  a 
small  part  in  the  structure  of  our  lives.  A  habit  steals  upon  us  with  fuitive  steps, 
and  embraces  us  with  arms  which  are  as  soft  as  velvet  but  as  strong  as  chains.  We 
forget  the  work  that  has  been  wrought  upon  us  in  the  past,  because  we  were  never 
distinctly  conscious  of  its  kind  and  extent.  And  so  each  man  is  a  mystery  to  him- 
self, an  enigma  in  his  own  eyes.  He  feels  that  there  is  in  him  such  a  strange 
mixture  that  he  is  doubtful  of  himself,  doubtful  whether  the  gold  or  the  alloy  is  in 
the  larger  proportion.  Therefore  the  apostle  exhorts  us  to  take  heed,  to  be  vigilant, 
and  as  far  as  possible  to  know  how  we  are  building.  For  the  daylight  will  break,  and 
this  compound  structure  which  we  call  ourselves  shall  become  more  clearly  defined 
by  and  by.  (C.  Shurt,  31. A.)  IlitiUUnti  men  :—St.  Paul  here  calls  himself  a 
builder;  and  nothing  could  be  more  significant  of  the  specific  end  he  has 
in  view  than  this  word.  The  word  "build"  means  work  fitted  to  set  up,  to 
strengthen  and  establish.  In  this  sense  we  see  it  illustrated  in  all  the  business 
and  varied  occupations  of  human  life.  The  apostle,  in  his  sphere  as  a  preacher, 
was  as  much  a  builder  as  a  carpenter,  or  a  mason  ;  for  the  work  of  an  apostle 
was  a  most  assured  reality.  It  implied  all  the  deep  intensities  of  a  most 
zealous  soul  in  order  to  save  and  to  bless.  I.  What  is  a  builder  ?  A 
builder  is  one  who  brings  together  materials,  and  adjusts  them  properly,  in  order 
to  secure  symmetry,  strength,  coherence,  and  beauty.  A  wise  master-builder  in 
God's  Church  seeks  soul  after  soul;  its  rescue  from  sin;  so  that  each  godly  soul 
may  take  its  proper  place  in  the  spiritual  temple  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  This  process 
sets  before  us  the  vocation  of  a  spiritual  builder.  He  has  two  aims  before  him. 
His  work  is  first  to  jjet  hold  of  souls,  and  then,  second,  to  fix  them,  as  permanent 
parts  or  members  of  the  Chur  di  of  God.  1.  This  getting  hold  of  souls  is  a  great 
work,  and  success  therein  in  the  test  of  a  real  builder  for  God.  For  so  great  is  the 
subtilty  of  Satan,  and  such  is  the  hardness  of  the  heart  of  man,  that  to 
effectually  resist  the  one  and  to  prevail  with  the  other  is  the  surest 
proof  that  the  preacher  is  sent  of  God.  No  mere  human  learning,  sense, 
skilfulness,  or  eluquence,  can  make  a  master-builder  for  God.  No!  He  must 
have  that  spiritual  magnetism  by  which  one  soul,  strong  in  the  might  of  God,  can 
go  out  to  another  soul,  and  grapple  with  its  guilt  and  hate,  and  overcome  it  by  the 
love  of  Christ.  2.  But  souls,  when  saved,  are  to  be  fixed  into  the  temple  of  God, 
•as  permanent  parts  or  members  thereof.  Thus  St.  Paul  tells  the  Ephesian  Chris- 
tians :  "  Ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow-citizens  with  the 
saints,  and  of  the  household  of  faith ;  and  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the 
apostles  and  pr"phets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone;  in 
whom,"  adds  the  apostle,  "  all  the  building,  fitly  framed  to;4ether,  groweth  into  an 
holy  temple  in  the  Lord."  Here  we  have  tlds  permanent  abiding  of  saints,  their 
fixedness  in  God's  Church,  graphically  set  forth.  So  much,  then,  with  regard  to 
the  qualities  of  a  builder.  II.  Let  us  now  consider  what  is  the  obligation  of 
BEING  builders  OF  SOULS.  Surely,  it  is  to  be  this,  or  else  to  be  destroyers  !  In 
the  universe  of  God  there  are  two  great  principles  ever  antagonistic,  one  to  the 
other  ;  that  which  conserves,  and  that  which  destroys.  And  to  one  of  these  two 
classes  every  one  of  us  belongs.  There  are,  indeed,  differences  of  character  and 
degrees  of  depravity.     See  the  singular  light  which  comes  upon  this  point  from  the 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

narrative  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  When  you  examine  the  character  of 
Dives  you  can  discover  nothing  prodigious  in  immorality.  But  during  his  lifetime 
he  was  not  a  builder  for  God.  Self,  and  not  God,  was  the  mainspring  of  his  being. 
His  life  work  was  not  to  save  and  bless.  Hence  he  was  ranked  with  the  class  of 
destructives  in  time,  and  sent  to  keep  company  with  them  in  eternity!  It  is  your 
duty  not  to  be  destroyers,  but  to  be  builders,  consciously  and  with  purpose.  Note 
here  what  God  is — a  Builder  ;  ever  since,  as  a  great  Architect,  he  laid  the  founda- 
tions of  the  universe,  and  built  all  the  great  fabrics  of  His  creation  :  the  globe, 
beasts,  birds,  fishes,  and  man,  the  crown  of  all  !  And  if  this  is  the  fashion  of  the 
Omnipotent  being  of  God,  what  then  should  men  be,  who  are  His  image  and  like- 
ness ?  Ought  we  not  to  be  builders,  as  God  is  ?  How  otherwise  shall  we  show  our 
similitude  to  Him  ?  The  new  creation,  in  Christ  Jesus,  for  what  is  it  wrought  in 
us,  if  not  to  make  us  co-workers  with  Him?  Join  to  this  the  testimony  of  your 
own  nature.  Look  into  your  spiritual  framework,  and  see  that  in  every  way,  the 
sou!  of  man  was  fitted  in  every  attribute  to  be  a  builder  of  souls.  What  is  the 
power  of  thought  but  a  j)ower  formative  in  all  its  activities  ?  What  is  reas'm  but  a 
constructive  force?  What  imagination  but  a  creative  faculty?  Our  physical 
members  are  also  formed  for  creative  action.  Take  the  hand,  and  mark  its 
wonderful  adaptedness  to  operations  creative  and  fashioning.  It  can  demolish. 
But  every  one  sees  that  that  is  not  its  special  vocation.  It  was  made  to  construct. 
Hence,  naturally  from  the  functions  of  the  hand  have  sprung  up  the  divers 
formative  trades  of  men,  in  clay,  wood,  leather,  stones,  and  metals.  But  the  hand 
of  man,  of  itself,  had  no  skilful  cunning,  no  ingenious  art.  No  more  than  the  claw 
of  a  bird,  or  the  foot  of  a  squirrel  or  a  rat.  But  the  hand  is  the  instrument  and 
agent  of  the  soul.  And  because  the  soul  of  man  is  a  builder,  therefoie  it  is  that 
there  are  carpenters  and  wheelwrights,  blacksmiths  and  macldnists,  ship-builders, 
stonemasons  and  architects,  painters  and  sculptors.  But  what  are  all  these  func- 
tions and  faculties  of  men,  compared  with  the  gi'and  creative  piwer  of  God  ?  God 
made  man  in  His  own  image.  But  man  fell  into  ruin  ;  and  then  God  began  again 
the  refashioning  of  humanity  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  Fall.  And  ever  since  He  has 
been  building  up  man,  by  all  the  operations  of  the  kingdom  of  grace ;  l)y  the  work- 
ings of  the  Spirit.  But  angels,  and  men  too,  are  workers  together  with  God,  to 
the  same  gracious  end.  Jesus  died  to  build  men.  For  this  purpose  the  Holy 
Ghost  descended  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  So  again,  to  build  men,  the  ministry 
was  commissioned,  and  the  Scriptures  were  given.  As  God  is  a  builder  of  souls,  so 
are  all  His  disciples.  And  although  ministers  are  set  apart  to  special  duty  in  this 
grand  work  of  soul-building,  the  laity  of  the  Church,  in  a  subordinate  way,  are  like- 
wise called  the  same  solemn  vocation.  III.  And  now,  lastly,  let  us  consider  the 
CLASSES  OF  PEKSoxs  WE  SHOULD  BUILD  TP.  1.  First,  of  coursc.  ourselves.  It  is  a 
great  trust  to  have  souls.  Broken  and  impaired  as  are  the  spirits  of  men,  they 
show,  even  in  fragmentary  powers,  the  skill  of  a  Divine  architect.  2.  Next  to 
ourselves,  are  our  kmsfolk  and  relatives  to  be  built  up  in  the  faith  of  Jesus.  It  is 
our  duty  to  strive  to  build  up  parents  and  children  in  the  most  holj'  failh  ;  by  all 
the  several  means  of  training  and  teaching,  by  admonition,  by  prayer  and  spiritual 
example.  In  the  family  relation  this  is,  without  doubt,  the  most  obvious  of  all 
duties  to  train  up  our  children  and  servants.  Build  them  !  that  is  the  word  ;  not 
tear  them  down  to  ruin  by  indifference,  by  carnal  indulgence,  by  foolish  vanity ! 
3.  But  besides  kinsfdlk  and  family,  there  is  a  further  outer  circle  of  human  beings 
separate  from  ourselves,  for  whom  it  is  our  duty  to  live,  and  our  aim  to  build  up 
in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  So,  then,  it  seems  quite  apparent  that  our  life-work 
among  our  fellow-men  is  primarily,  constructive  and  restorative.  Christ  came  to 
seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  Learn:  1.  Do  not  destroy!  Keep  from  ruining  souls 
for  whom  Christ  died !  Do  not  destroy  little  children  !  Do  not  ruin  women  ! 
Boys  and  girls,  baptized  into  Christ,  do  not  destroy  !  Nay,  strive  to  save  other 
boys  and  girls.  Yea,  all  of  you,  do  not  destroy  !  Do  not  destroy  by  whisky  or  by 
wine !  Do  not  destroy  by  cursing,  nor  by  oaths  !  Do  not  destroy  by  scofhng  or  by 
filthy  speech,  or  carousing.  '2.  Build!  Strive  to  mould,  to  compact  and  strengthen 
the  immortal  spirits  around  you,  that  they  may  become  powerful  for  Christ. 
Endeavour  to  root  and  ground  every  soul  you  meet  in  the  truth.  Labour  to  build 
men  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  Christ.  Make  it  the  aim  of  your  life  to 
strengthen  and  uphold,  and  build  innnortal  souls.  Build  men  !  by  speech,  by 
influence,  by  godly  example.  Use  every  possible  instrument  and  agency,  both 
small  and  great,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  in  your  families,  in  the  world,  at 
the  woi'kshop,  <in  the  highway  or  in  tlie  street,  to  save  men,  and  to  glorify  Christ. 
{A.  Crummell.) 


^^v 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  COIilNTHIAKS.  249 

Ver.  11.  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus 
Christ. — TJic  one  foiduldtioii :  —I.  Mas  often  try  to  lay  axothku  i'Ounmiation.  1. 
Eeason.  2.  Self-righteousness.  3.  The  goodness  of  God.  II.  They  will  all 
FAIL.  Because— 1.  Unauthorised.  2.  Insufficient.  3.  Delusive.  III.  Cukist  is  the 
ONLY  found.^tion.  1.  Divinely  laid.  2.  Suitable.  3.  Strong.  [J.Lyth,  D.D.)  No 
other  foundation  : — I.  In  building,  the  first  thing  essential  is  the  foundation. 
1.  A  foundation  should  be  broad  and  deep  enough  for  the  structure.  2.  God 
Himself  has  appointed  such  a  foundation  (Isa.  xviii.  IG).  3.  There  is  but  one 
foundation,  and  it  is  laid  for  all  men.  II.  Christianity  is  something  more  than 
A  FOUND.ATiON — IT  IS  A  BUILDING.  1.  Christianity  provides  for  rtgeneration  of 
character.  2.  The  building  is  of  gold,  silver  and  precious  stones.  H.  Or  it  is  of 
wood,  hay  and  stubble.  III.  Every  man"s  work  will  be  tried.  1.  The  trial  is  to 
be  "  as  by  fire."  2.  There  will  be  most  astonishing  revelations  at  this  time  of 
trial.  Some  whom  you  haven't  counted  as  amounting  to  much  in  this  world — 
behold  how  their  buildings  loom  up  in  the  light  of  that  day.  Others  shall  suffer 
loss — wood,    hay,    stubble,  all  consumed.      (G.   F.    Pentecost,  D.D.)  llie   one 

foundation.     (J liriH  is  the  sole  foundation  :—l.  Of  all  saving  knowledge.     II.  Op 

ALL    acceptance     WITH    GoD.        III.     Op    ALL    HOLY    OBEDIENCE.        IV.      Op    ALL     TRUE 

HAPPINESS,  and  this  both  in  tbe  present  world  and  the  future.  {W.  lioniaine,  M.A.) 
The  one  foundation  : — I.  The  found.vtion.  Christianity  stands  opposed  to  every 
system  that  has  entered  into  the  mind  of  man.  It  is  an  original  system  founded 
upon  Christ  Himself.  So  distinct  is  it  from  all  that  existed  before,  that  it  changed 
the  whole  system  of  public  worship,  and  overthrew  the  HJtars  of  lieatheii  idolatry. 
And  if  men  deny  that  it  was  done  by  Divine  intiuenci',  the  onus  rests  upon  thtm  to 
show  how  it  was  effected.  Christianity  is  intended  as  th:it  wdiich  is  to  lay  at  the 
foundation  of  all  our  hopes,  to  the  overthrow  of  all  the  imaginations  and  dis- 
coveries of  man  when  left  to  himself.  II.  The  laying  of  this  foundation. 
1.  The  public  way  is  to  simply  lay  dow-n  the  doctrines  of  salvation.  2.  A  personal 
way  consists  in  my  bringing  Cliiist,  by  faith,  to  my  own  soul,  and  saying,  with 
Thomas,  "My  Lord  and  my  God!"  III.  The  sufficiency  of  the  foundation. 
No  foundation  is  laid,  if  this  be  omitted  ;  and  if  this  be  laid,  all  the  doctrines  of 
the  gospel  are  brought  into  harmony.  Is  man  a  ruined  creature?  "  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  woild  to  save  sinners."  Is  man  enslaved  and  lost?  .Jesus  Clirist  is 
"made  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  Conscience  con- 
demns, and  the  law  aggravates  the  condemnation  ;  but  Christ  is  "  the  end  of  the  law 
for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  How  many  have  built  their 
immortal  hopes  on  this  foundation,  and  not  one  of  them  has  ever  sunk  !  And  I 
appeal  to  your  own  experience.  Is  not  this  the  foundation  which  has  supported, 
and  succiiured,  and  sustained  you?  IV.  The  unity  of  the  foundation.  It  is 
absolutely  indivisible.  In  vain  shall  any  man  attempt  to  separate  it.  All  the 
good  works  of  the  Christian  are  the  fruits  of  his  union  to  Christ,  the  foundation. 
All  "holy  desires,  good  counsels,  and  just  works,  proceed"  from  Him:  and  it  is 
impossible  to  mix  up  anything  human  with  that  which  is  wholly  Divine.  (If.  II. 
Collyer,  D.D.)  The  one  foundation  : — There  cannot  be  two  of  the  kind,  for — 
1.  God  from  all  eternity  has  made  His  only-begotten  Son  to  be  the  foundation.  Of 
whom  else  is  it  written  that  verily  He  was  fore-ordained  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  ?  2.  It  is  Divine,  and  it  is  as  impossible  that  there  should  be  two 
foundations  as  that  there  should  be  two  Gods.  3.  Otherwise  there  must  be  two 
redemptions.  There  is — I.  No  Church  but  what  is  built  on  Chris  r.  Whatever 
community  may  call  itself  a  Church,  or  even  the  Church,  if  it  is  not  built  upon 
Christ  it  is  not  a  Church  at  all.  A  foundation  is — 1.  The  first  portion  of  a 
building ;  and  so  is  Jesus  first  with  His  Church,  for  His  people  were  chosen  in 
Him  (Eph.  i.  4).  2.  The  support  of  all,  and  there  is  no  Church  but  that  which 
derives  all  its  support  from  Christ.  Call  the  community  a  relij>ious  clnb  if  you 
like,  but  it  is  no  Church — (1)  Where  the  atonement  is  denied  or  ignored. 
(2)  W^hich  places  its  dependence  for  its  present  power  and  future  progress  anywhere 
but  in  Christ.  If  we  depend  upon  the  secular  power,  education,  eloquence,  prestitiC, 
or  our  own  zeal  and  ardour,  we  are  leaving  the  ro'k  for  the  sand.  3.  Has  the 
shaping  of  the  building,  and  the  true  Church  forms  itself  upon  Christ  as  its 
ground-plan  and  outline.  His  law  is  the  law  of  the  Church.  All  the  decrees  of 
councils,  synods,  &c.,  and  all  the  ordinances  of  men,  if  th-^y  at  all  differ  from  the 
law  of  Christ,  are  treasonable  insults  to  the  majesty  of  King  Jesus.  Steadfast  is 
that  Church  which  carefully  follows  His  guiding  line,  but  that  which  departs  froni 
it  has  left  the  foundation,  and  therein  ceased  to  be  a  Church.     4.  Indispensable. 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Tou  could  do  without  certain  windows,  you  might  close  a  door,  and  remove  parts 
of  the  roof,  and  still  it  might  be  a  house,  but  you  cannot  have  a  house  at  all  if  you 
take  away  the  foundation  ;  and  so  you  cannot  have  a  Church  if  Christ  be  not  the 
foundation.  If  any  people  find  their  joy  in  a  teaching  which  casts  the  Lord  Jesus 
into  the  background,  they  are  not  His  Church.  The  Church  is  not  formed — (1)  By 
the  union  of  men  with  men.  The  best  of  men  may  form  a  league,  for  good  and 
useful  purposes,  but  they  are  not  a  Cburch  unless  Christ  be  the  basis  upon  which 
they  rest.  (2)  By  a  mere  union  to  a  minister.  The  Church  is  not  built  on  Paul, 
nor  upon  Apollos ;  we  are  not  to  be  believers  in  Luther,  Calvin,  or  Wesley,  but  in 
Christ.  (3)  By  the  following  of  any  particular  form  or  rite.  IL  No  gospel  but 
WHAT  IS  BUILT  ON  Jesus  Christ.  For — 1.  There  is  but  one  Mediator,  by  whom 
God  speaks  words  of  grace.  If,  then,  any  man  say,  "  God  hath  spoken  to  me,  and 
bidden  me  say  other  than  what  Christ  has  said,"  receive  him  not.  2.  The  true 
gospel  has  Christ's  Divine  person  as  its  glory,  and  there  can  be  no  gospel  without 
this.  3.  Christ  is  the  essence  of  the  gospel.  (1)  If,  then,  you  hear  a  gospel  in 
which  free-will,  good  works,  or  the  forms  and  ceremonies,  are  set  up  as  being 
fundamental  things,  it  is  not  the  good  news  from  heaven.  (2)  The  teaching  ot 
doctrines  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  gospel  if  those  doctrines  be  taught  apart  from 
Christ.  Paul's  body  of  divinity  was  the  life  and  death  of  that  only  embodied 
divinity,  the  Lord  Jesus  (chap.  xv.  1-5).  (3)  Some  preach  experience,  and  ex- 
perience is  admirable  when  Christ  is  set  forth  in  it ;  but  if  you  take  up  an  experi- 
mental vein  of  things,  whether  of  human  coriuption  or  of  human  perfection,  and 
Christ  is  put  in  the  background,  yo^  are  marring  the  gospel.  (4)  So,  too,  with 
practice.  By  all  means  let  us  have  jjractical  preaching;  but  merely  to  denounce 
vice  and  to  extol  virtue  is  a  mission  fit  eucu^jh  for  Socrates  or  Plato,  but  does  not 
well  beseem  a  minister  of  Christ.     His  exanipie  shames  vice  and  encourages  virtue. 

III.    No  HOPE  OF  salvation    BUT    THAT  WHICH    IS    BUILT  UPON  C HEIST.       SomC  think  it 

must  he  well  with  them  because  their  pirents  were  excellent  Christian  people. 
But  if  this  is  your  only  hope  you  are  List,  for  "  Except  a  man  be  born  ngain,"  &c. 
"  Ay,  but,"  saith  another,  "I  had  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  performed  upon 
me."  Yes,  but  they  cannot  bt-ar  the  weight  of  your  soul.  "Ah,"  saith  another, 
"  but  I  have  diligently  performed  a  great  many  good  works."  Abound  in  good 
works,  but  do  not  trust  them.  Human  merit  is  a  foundation  of  sand.  "But  I 
have  had  spiritual  feelings,"  says  one.  Yes,  but  thpre  is  nothing  in  feelings  and 
excitements  which  can  be  a  ground  of  hope.  "Why,"  says  another,  "it  has 
troubled  me  that  I  have  not  had  these  feelings."  Do  not  let  it  trouble  you,  but  go 
to  Jesus  Christ  and  rest  in  Him.  IV.  No  Christian  but  the  hian  built  on  Jesus 
Chkist.  Here  is  a  Christian,  and  of  one  thing  in  him  I  am  sure  :  I  cannot  tell 
whether  he  is  an  Arminiau  or  a  Calvinist,  but  if  he  is  a  Christian  he  has  no 
foundation  but  Christ.  Every  man  to  be  a  Christian  must — 1.  Best  his  whole  soul 
upon  Christ  as  to  eternal  salvation.  2.  Have  Christ  for  his  model.  3.  Grow  up  in 
Christ,  for  the  temple  of  God  grows.  Nor  need  we  wonder,  for  it  is  a  living  temple. 
An  ordinary,  clumsy  bit  of  work  disp'ays  the  mason  and  the  carpenter,  but  perfect 
architecture  looks  as  if  it  grew.  But  all  our  ujj-growing  must  come  out  of  Christ. 
4.  Live  for  Christ.  Christ's  glory  must  be  the  great  object  of  his  being.  (C.  H. 
Spiirgcon.)  Tlie  one  foundation  : — St.  Paul  had  described  himself  as  a  master- 
builder,  whose  office  was  the  laying  of  foundations.  The  Corinthians  thought  any 
man  could  do  that ;  the  skill  of  the  architect  was  shown  in  the  building  he  raised 
upon  it.  A  teacher  who  was  fit  for  them  could  not  be  a  mere  teacher  of  elements. 
Those  who  only  spoke  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified  might  be  very  useful 
amongst  barbarians.  Men  who  had  been  used  to  hear  the  most  various  wisdom 
from  Pagan  professors,  were  prepared  for  the  most  advanced  Christian  instruction. 
This  opinion  jDiobably  was  not  confined  to  one  of  the  sects  into  which  their  Church 
was  divided.  Those  who  called  themselves  after  Apollos  supposed  that  he  had 
brought  a  lore  with  him  from  Alexandria  which  would  fill  up  the  imperfect  outline 
that  St.  I'atil  had  drawn.  Those  who  used  the  name  of  Cephas  thought  that 
circumcision  would  initiate  into  the  highe^t  privileges  those  who  had  been  made 
novices  by  the  rite  of  baptism.  And  the  Pauline  school  will  have  indignantly 
disclaimed  that  their  master  preached  a  simple  gospel.  Had  not  he  as  much 
Eabbinical  knowledge  as  Peter?  Was  not  he  better  acquainted  with  Greek  poets 
and  philosophers  than  Apollos?  Did  he  not  make  light  of  ceremonies  to  which 
they,  in  their  infantine  faith,  still  clung?  Had  he  not  been  seeking  for  deep 
principles,  while  they  were  reverencing  forms?  TIjc  praise  of  seeking  for 
principles,    if   it  had   been   accompanied   with  no   disparagement  of   his   fellow- 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   C0RINT111A}<S.  2S1 

labourers,  St.  Paul  would  not  have  disclaimed.  That  was  his  aim ;  and  therefore 
he  was  as  much  offended  with  the  conceit  of  his  admirers  as  of  tliose  who  despised 
him.  They,  as  well  as  the  others,  were  missing  that  which  was  dearest  to  all 
three — that  which  they  most  cared  to  make  the  Church  aware  of,  a  foundation 
lying  far  beneath  Paul  and  Cephas  and  ApoUos,  to  a  rock  against  which  the  gates 
of  hell  could  uot  prevail.  St.  Paul,  tlierefoi'e,  had  to  persuade  these  wise  Corin- 
thians that  they  were  the  stones  of  a  glorious  and  Divine  temple;  that  G^d  was 
hewing  and  shaping  them  into  their  fit  places  in  that  temple  ;  if  they  would  know 
whereabouts  they  stood,  they  must  give  up  disputing  about  the  theories  and 
opinions  of  this  doctor  or  of  that ;  they  must  ask,  "  What  holds  us  all  together?  " 
This  being  the  case,  it  was  necessary  for  St.  Paul  to  define  more  carefully  than  he 
did,  when  he  was  merely  speaking  of  his  relntiou  to  other  teachers,  in  what  sense 
he  called  himself  a  master-builder.  He  could  not  lay  Die  foundation.  All  which 
teaclieis  can  do  is  to  say,  "  There  it  is."  All  which  believers  can  do  is  to  recognise 
it.  That  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Ijiving  God,  of  whom  Cephas  sp'ke  in  his  great 
confession;  that  Word  of  God,  whom  Apollos  and  tbe  Alexandrians  declare  to  be 
the  Teacher  of  all ;  that  Jesus,  the  crucified,  whom  I  have  set  fortb  in  weakness 
and  death  ;  He  it  is  on  whom  the  edifice  rests,  by  whom  it  alone  con-ists.  St. 
Paul's  conversion  cannot  be  described  moi'e  accurately  than  by  saying  that  it  con- 
sisted ill  his  awaking  from  ignorance  of  this  foundation  to  a  full,  clear  apprehen- 
sion of  it.  He  had  thought  that  there  was  something  of  his  own  which  tie  could 
stand  upon  ;  some  wisdom,  or  righteousness,  or  exclusive  privilege,  appertaining  to 
him.  That  belief  made  him  hard,  narrow,  savage.  But  the  righteousness  and 
wisdom  which  became  so  truly  his  own  when  he  had  renounced  his  own,  this  was 
the  foundation  which  he  could  tell  the  Corinthians  was  lying  for  them  as  much  as  for 
him,  the  foundation  which  they  were  denying  and  setting  at  nought  by  their  Greek 
f.actions,  as  he  had  denied  it  through  his  Jewish  pride.  (F.  1).  Maurice,  M.A.) 
The  one  foundation : — 1.  Every  wise  man  should  some'imes  look  at  his  "  founda- 
tions," and  especially  at  the  "  fourdation  "  on  which  he  is  building  his  eternity. 
2.  Perhaps  the  chief  danger  is  of  treating  as  "foundations"  what  are  part  of 
the  suiierstructure.  And  therefore  you  should  take  it  as  a  first  principle  that  the 
"  foundation  "  is  nothing  which  you  have  laid,  or  can  lay.  Your  faith,  love,  change 
of  character,  good  works,  have  nothing  in  the  world  to  do  with  the  "  foundation." 
They  may  be  evidences  that  there  is  a  foundation,  and  may  be  a  test  of  how  firmly 
■we  are  attached  to  it,  but  they  are  not  the  foundation  itself.  3.  What,  then,  may 
I  ask,  is  at  this  moment  the  "foundation"  of  your  hope,  of  your  eternal  life? 
You  perhaps  say,  "  The  love  of  God."  But  that  is  not  all  jou  want.  Can  you  find 
your  foundation  in  the  justice,  in  the  truth  of  God?  Has  not  God  said,  "  The  soul 
that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  !  "  And  love  can  never  cancel  truth.  4.  Is  there,  then,  a 
"  foundation  "  deeper  and  more  sound  than  the  love  of  God  ?  Is  there  a  "  founda- 
tion "  which  shall  reconcile  and  combine  all  the  attributes  of  God  ?  Yes.  His  love 
makes  Him,  as  a  Father,  longing  to  forgive  all  His  children,  and  His  justice  makes 
it  to  be  unjust  to  punish  what  He  has  already  punished  in  the  Substitute.  There, 
then,  is  safety.  5.  But  what  has  led  me  to  that  position  of  safety?  Simply  the 
act  of  believing,  and  as  the  Holy  Spirit  puts  it  into  your  heart  to  believe,  we  come 
to  our  conclusion  that  our  "  foundation  "  lies  in  the  Trinity — Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost.  They  are  all  united  to  us  in  Christ.  6.  Do  any  object,  "  It  is  too 
easy?  "  The  grandest  things  of  the  universe  are  always  the  simplest.  (J.  Vaiighan, 
M.A.)  The  souVs  founiiation  : — Clirist  i^:  the  foundation  of  all — I.  Guspel  doc- 
trine. 1.  All  gospel  doctrines  centre  in  Christ.  2.  All  the  gospel  titles  are  taken 
from  Christ.  From — (1)  His  names.  (2)  His  perfections.  (3)  His  Word.  IT. 
EvAXGKLicAL  PREACHING.  The  objcct  on  which  every  minister — 1.  Directs  the  eye. 
2.  Delights  to  dwell,  must  be  Christ.  III.  Acceptance  with  God.  Christ  is — 1. 
The  atonement  for  our  sin.  2.  Our  only  way  to  God.  3.  The  remover  of  sin  away 
from  us.  IV.  Experijiental  knowledge.  He  is  the  foundation  of  both — 1. 
Theoretical ;  and — 2.  Experimental,  knowledge.  V.  Holy  practice.  All  our 
holiness  is  derived  from  Him.  Application:  1.  How  destructive  to  the  souls  of 
men  must  those  preachers  be  who  lay  other  foundations  than  Christ.  2.  Rejoice 
that  the  foundation  of  Christ  is  laid  already.  3.  Is  Christ  your  foundation  ?  (J. 
Sherman.)  The  alone  foundafion  : — I.  The  foundation.  1.  We  justify  the 
appellation  here  given,  and  the  situation  thus  assigned  to  Christ  by  a  reference  to 
— 1.  His  precedency.  The  foundation  stone  of  a  building  is  that  which  is  first 
laid.  Clirist  is  called  the  "Ancient  of  Days."  In  this  appointment  we  have  the 
richest  displays  of  the  everlasting  love  and  wisdom  and  power  of  Jehovah.     2.  His 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

strength  and  stability  (Isa.  xxviii.  16  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  fi,  7).  3.  The  strength  which  He 
imparts  to  His  people.  That  which  imparts  stability  to  the  superstructure  is  the 
foundation,  and  all  the  strength  which  the  believer  can  boast  he  derives  from 
Christ.  It  is  by  virtue  of  the  union  between  believers,  "  the  lively  stones,"  and 
Christ,  "  the  foundation,"  that  the  Church  has,  in  all  ages,  been  sustained  amidst 
the  storm.  II.  The  laying  of  this  foundation.  1.  When  was  it  laid  ?  "  Before 
the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ever  the  earth  and  the  world  were  formed." 
2.  By  whom  was  it  laid  ?  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a 
foundation  a  stone."  3.  How  is  it  yet  laid  ?  (1)  Officially  (ver.  10)  in  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel.  Hence — [a]  The  minister  himself  must  have  an  experimental 
acquaintance  with  the  truths  he  promulgates.  How  can  he  recommend  to  others  a 
"foundation"  he  has  never  te-^ted  and  proved  to  be  secure?  [h]  He  must  be 
endued  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  may  himself  be  truly  established  on  this  "foun- 
dation," but  this  is  not  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  lay  the  same  "  foundation  "  in 
the  heart  and  experience  of  others.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My 
Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  !  "  (2)  Personally'.  This  consists  in  the  response 
which  your  heart  gives  to  the  message  which  we  bring.  III.  The  excllsiveness 
OF  THIS  FOUNDATION.  1.  Were  we  to  attempt  to  lay  any  other  among  you,  how 
direful  the  denunciation  to  which  we  were  exposed  (Gal.  i.  8,  9) !  Laying  another 
foundation,  we  act  as  traitors  to  God,  handle  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully,  and 
basely  betray  tbe  best  interests  of  those  of  whom  we  may  receive  oversight,  pro- 
fessedly in  the  Lord  (Acts  xx.  28).  2.  And  as  it  is  important  that  your  ministers 
should  continually  bear  this  in  mind,  so  it  is  no  less  important  that  you  should 
carefully  and  habitually  examine  yourselves  as  to  the  ground  on  which  you  are 
resting  your  faith  and  hope.  Eemember,  there  is  no  other  foundation  needed, 
there  is  no  other  appointed.  "A  Saviour!  'twas  all  that  earth  could  want,  'twas 
all  that  heaven  could  give  !  "  (J.  Gaskin,  M.A.)  Christ,  the  only  foundation  : 
— 1.  Under  what  view  Jesus  Christ  is  the  foundation.  1.  It  is  not  His  person 
merely,  nor  any  views  of  Plis  person  abstractly,  that  constitute  the  foundation 
of  which  Paul  speaks.  2.  In  attending  to  the  subject  before  us,  it  is  important 
to  inquire  who  was  Jesus  Christ?  This  inquiry  the  New  Testament  fully 
answers.  Not  because  He  is  God,  but  because  He  is  the  Christ,  Jesus  is  the 
foundation.  3.  It  may  be  asked.  Are  we'  then  to  build  our  faith  and  hope  upon 
a  mere  man?  By  no  means.  As  it  is  not  as  God,  neither  is  it  merely  as  man,  that 
Jesus  is  the  foundation  ;  but  as  the  Christ,  the  Divinely  commissioned  messenger 
of  God.  4.  That  it  is  as  the  Christ,  as  a  Divinely  commissioned  per.^on,  Jesus  is 
the  foundation,  appears  from  the  plain  declarations  of  the  New  Testament  (Matt. 
xvi.  13-18  ;  Eom.  x.  9  ;  1  John  v.  1).  5.  Christians  are  to  build  on  tbe  foundation 
of  what  Jesus  revealed  and  taught.  We  can  build  upon  Jesus  Christ,  or  upon  His 
mission,  only  so  far  as  we  build  upon  the  truth  and  grace  of  God  which  came  by 
Him.  6.  But  is  not  the  death  of  Christ,  as  a  satisfaction  for  sins,  the  true 
foundation?  However  important  the  death  of  Christ  may  be,  it  is  not  the  founda- 
tion ;  for  when  Peter  confessed  the  truth  which  Jesus  declaimed  to  be  the  rock  on 
which  He  would  build  His  Church,  He  did  not  know  that  it  would  be  necessary  tbe 
Messiah  should  die.  II.  How  God  hath  laid  this  foundation.  1.  God  laid  Him  \ 
as  the  foundation  in  His  eternal  purpose  and  counsel.  2.  God  laid  this  foundation  I 
in  His  ancient  promises  and  declarations.  3.  God  laid  this  foundation  by  actually  I 
raising  up  Jesus  as  a  teacher  and  Saviour,  by  giving  Him  His  Divine  mission,  and  I 
all  the  qualifications  necessary  to  execute  it.  4.  This  foundation  was  firmly  I 
established  by  the  miracles  which  God  wrought  by  and  in  behalf  of  His  Son  Jesus,  I 
and  by  the  apostles  in  confirmation  of  their  testimony  concerning  Him.  5.  Bjj 
raising  Him  from  the  dead  and  exalting  Him  to  glory.  6.  In  the  ministry  of  the 
apostles  God  placed  Jesus  Christ  before  Jews  and  Gentiles,  before  the  whole  world, 
as  the  foundation  on  whic-h  mercy  is  built  and  salvation  prepared  before  the  face 
of  all  iDPople,  on  which  He  will  establish  the  habitation  of  holiness,  that  all  the 
earth  may  be  filled  with  His  glory.  7.  This  foundation  was  fixed  in  its  place  by 
all  the  Divine  perfections,  and  hath  remained  unmoved  through  all  succeeding 
ages,  though  exposed  to  hosts  of  assailants  who  sought  to  remove  it.  III.  Of 
WHAT  Jesus  Cueist  is  the  foundation.  1.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  foundation  of 
Christian  faith.  What  He  taught,  His  disciples  are  required  to  receive  ;  but 
nothing  else  ought  to  be  made  an  article  of  faith.  2.  He  is  the  foundation  of 
Christian  privileges.  3.  He  is  the  foundation  of  Christian  redemj^tion.  His 
gospel  and  resurrection  are  the  only  ground  of  an  assured  hope  of  redemption 
from  death  and  the  grave.     4.  He  is  the  foundation  of  evangelical  righteousness. 


CHAP.  III.]  /.   CORINTHIANS.  253 

He  hath  furnished  the  principles  and  motives  which  will  produce  it :  and  no  other 
principles  but  those  contained  in  the  gospel,  nor  any  weaker  motives,  can  produce 
true  evangelical  righteousness.  5.  He  is  the  foundation  of  our  hope.  (J.  God  hath 
laid  in  His  Son  Jesus  the  foundation  of  universal  happiness.     IV.  Let  every  m.\n 

TAKE    HEED    HOW   HE    BUILDETH    Ci-Ois'    TIII3     FOUNDATION.         1.    Take    llCcd    hoW     and 

what  doctrines  you  build  upon  Jesus  Christ :  that  they  be  not  contrary  to  reason  ; 
for  to  reason.  He  and  His  apostles  appealed ;  that  they  be  not  inconsistent  with 
the  character  and  perfections  of  God  as  plainly  revealed  in  the  Scriptures ;  that 
they  clash  not  with  those  plain  facts  and  declarations  of  the  New  Testament  which 
compel  universal  assent.  2.  Take  heed  in  what  spirit  you  build  upon  Christ.  You 
can  neither  build  doctrines  nor  anythiug  else  aright  upou  Christ,  any  further  than 
you  do  it  in  His  disposition  in  a  spirit  of  seriousness  and  pit-ty,  of  meekness  and 
humility,  of  purity  and  love.  3.  Take  heed  what  life  and  conduct  you  build  upon 
this  foundation  ;  that  it  be  such  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ.  4.  Take  heed 
how  you  build  upon  this  foundation,  because  your  all  is  depending;  consequences 
of  the  utmost  moment  are  involved  A  day  of  fiery  trial  will  come.  Try  your  own 
work  of  what  sort  it  is.  (J.  Wright.)  Jesus  Christ  the  foundation  : — I.  Jesus 
Cueist  as  the  foundation  of  the  Choech.  II.  Some  rEcuLiAEiTiES  characteb- 
isiNG  THIS  foundation.  1.  It  is  notable  for  its  strength  (Psa.  xxxi.  2,  3).  2.  It  is 
remarkable  for  its  suitability  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  3.  It  is  renowned  for  its  perpetuity 
(Heb.  xiii.  7,  8).  III.  The  folly  of  attempting  to  lay  any  other  foundation. 
The  way  wherein  other  persons  attempt  to  lay  unjustifiable  foundations  are — 1.  By 
relying  on  the  directions  of  carnal  reason  (1  Cor.  ii.  5).  2.  By  placing  affiance  in 
our  own  righteousness  (Rom.  ii.  5).  3.  By  trusting  to  God's  mercy  without 
regarding  the  Saviour's  merits  (1  John  v.  10).  4.  This  folly  appears  from  the 
sufficiency  of  the  foundation  laid  (Reb.  vii.  2-5).  5.  It  is  a  reflection  on  Jehovah's 
wisdom  and  goodness  (Bev.  vii.  12).  6.  It  invokes  the  soul  in  remediless  woe,  to 
despise  Christ  (Acts  iv.  12).  This  foundation  then  is— 1.  Invaluable.  2.  Necessary. 
3.  Most  costly.  4.  And  eternally  saving.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  The  gospel  the  only 
foundation  of  religious  a7ui  moral  diitt/ : — I.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  foundation  on  which 
we  are  to  build,  inasmuch  as  it  is  from  Him  alone  that  we  procure  a  knowledge 
OF  our  duty.  Look  to  the  opinions  and  practices  of  man  not  blessed  with  the 
light  of  revelation,  and  you  will  perceive  how  imperfect  is  the  knowledge  of  duty 
possessed  by  the  natuial  man.  Not  such  are  the  instructions  as  to  the  duty  of 
man  which  are  vouchsafed  us  by  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  lives  of  professors 
must  correspond  with  Christ's  commandments,  that  the  building  may  be  worthy  of 
the  foundation  !  11.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  Jesus  Christ," 
because  by  Him  alone  are  we  insteucted  in  the  eight  principle  on  which  our 
duty  is  to  be  performed.  A  sense  of  affectionate  gratitude  to  God  is  the  principle 
on  which  the  whole  duty  of  a  Christian  is  established.  This  is  the  foundation  of 
His  religion  :  this  is  no  less  the  foundation  of  His  morality.  Can  any  principle 
be  so  firm?  can  any  be  so  pure?  Honour  may  dazzle,  custom  may  mislead, 
expediency  may  perplex  us,  and  neither  honour,  nor  custom,  nor  expediency  will 
at  all  times  support  us  in  the  discharge  of  our  duty :  but  his  "  feet  are  set  upon  a 
rock,"  whose  "  goings  are  ordered  "  by  a  desire  of  doing  the  will  of  a  perfect  and 
unchangeable,  of  an  infinitely  wise  and  holy  Being.  Again,  unlike  the  principles 
of  the  world  in  another  important  respect,  what  motive  of  human  conduct  can  be 
so  pure  as  a  grateful  affection  towards  God  ?  "  God  is  love."  And  human  nature 
is  never  more  exalted  and  improved  than  when  it  partakes  most  largely  of  the 
quality  which  is  identified  with  God,  when  with  the  most  devout  affection  "we  love 
Him,  because  He  first  loved  us."  HI.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  foundation  on  which 
we  can  build,  because,  as  we  are  indebted  to  Him  for  the  knowledge  both  of  our 
duty  and  of  the  principle  on  which  it  is  to  be  done,  so  also  we  derive  from  Him 
the  power  of  doing  it.  IV.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  foundation  on  which  we  can 
build,  inasmuch  as  it  is  He  who  renders  oue  services  acceptable  to  Almighty 
God.  V.  Christ  Jesus  then  being  the  foundation,  the  only  foundation  on  which 
we  are  to  build,  let  us  inquire  whether  we  build  upon  Him  in  the  several  parti- 
culars that  have  been  now  passing  under  our  view.  1.  Is  our  practice  regulated 
by  that  perfect  law  of  religious  and  moral  duty  which  Christ  hath  set  before  us  in 
the  gospel?  Do  we  submit  ourselves— our  souls  and  bodies — our  thoughts,  vyords, 
and  deeds— to  the  Christian  commandments?  Do  we  yield  to  their  authority  an 
unreserved,  an  unquahfied,  an  universal  obedience?  2.  What  is  the  principle 
which  we  choose  as  our  actuating  motive?  Is  it  love  for  our  heavenly  Father  ? 
3.  In  the  execution  of  our  duty,  on  what  foundation  do  we  build  our  hopes  that 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

we  shall  be  able  to  perform  it  ?  Do  we  rely  upon  our  own  imaginary  strength  to 
sujipoit  us  in  the  hour  of  trial,  or  do  we  humbly  depeml  upon  the  Divine  grace? 
4.  After  ail  that  by  the  grace  of  God  we  have  been  enabled  to  do,  on  what  founda- 
tion do  we  rest  our  hopes  that  our  services  will  be  accepted  by  God  ?  Is  it  upon 
any  value  which  those  services  possess  of  themselves,  or,  renouncing  all  claim  to 
merit  on  our  own  parts,  do  we  trust  our  cause  to  the  perfect  righteousness  of 
Christ?  {Bp.  3Ia)it.)  The  sure  foun/lation  : — I.  The  fudndaiion.  In  building, 
it  is  essential  to  begin  with  a  good,  solid  foundation.  If  we  have  not  that,  we  may 
take  ever  so  much  pains  afterwards,  but  our  labour  will  be  all  in  vain.  Now,  there 
are  many  false  foundations.  Our  selection  of  ground  that  will  give  way  under  the 
weight  of  what  we  put  upon  it  is  quite  unlimited.  But  there  is  only  one  true 
foundation.  "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  whicli  is  Jesus 
Christ."  All  that  teachers  can  do  is  to  say,  "  There  it  is !  "  All  that  believers  can 
do  is  to  recognise  it.  It  is  God  Himself  who  has  laid  it  there  for  us.  Wheresoever 
else  th '.n  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  we  repose  our  chief  confidence  and  affection, 
it  will  sooner  or  later  repent  us  and  shame  us,  either  happily  in  time  while  we  may 
yet  have  recourse  to  Him,  or  miserably  when  it  is  too  late.  It  is  on  this  present 
world,  on  its  pleasures,  its  riches,  its  honours  most  men  try  to  rear  the  fabric  of 
their  happiness  ;  but  this  world  and  all  we  can  have  in  it  will  slip  from  under  our 
feet  like  the  sand.  But  let  us  lem^mber  that  it  will  not  avail  us  that  a  foundation 
has  been  hiid,  or  that  it  has  been  already  pointed  out  to  us,  if  we  do  not  make  choice 
of  it  and  use  it.  II.  The  surEitsTnocTuiiE,  or  what  is  built  on  the  foundation. 
St.  PhuI  knew  that  the  foundation  was  mo-t  important,  and  that,  save  on  the  one 
sure  foundation,  no  lastins<  building  could  be  raised  ;  but  he  knew  also  that  the 
foundation  was  not  the  house,  that  the  discovery  of  a  good  foundation  does  not 
dispense  a  man  from  the  necessity  of  Liuilding  his  house.  We  must  build.  We 
must  not  only  rest  on  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  for  salvation,  but  must  also  "  work 
out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  We  must  build,  and  to  build  is  to 
labour.  If  we  cannot  build  even  the  smallest  cottage  without  the  exertion  of 
putting  each  stone  in  its  proper  place,  still  less  can  we,  without  exertion,  build  up 
our  lives  into  temples  of  God.  To  do  so  is  the  grandest  of  all  works,  and  for  that 
very  reason  it  is  one  which  needs  the  most  thought  and  trouble.  It  demands  a 
constant  putting  in  of  whnt  is  solid  and  true,  and  a  constant  casting  out  <if  what  is 
hollow  and  false.  He  who  would  build  up  his  own  self,  his  own  mind,  and  heart 
and  soul  gradually  into  a  perfect  manhood,  must  see  to  it  that  every  day,  every 
hour  contiibutes  sotiiewhat  towards  that  result.  Some  accession  of  knowledge,  of 
self-control,  of  practice  of  good,  and  conquest  of  evil.  Six  kinds  of  material  for 
building  are  mentioned  in  the  text,  but  they  may  be  reduced  to  two — good  materials 
and  bad  :  those  which  will  stand  the  fire,  and  tliose  which  will  not.  Gold,  silver, 
precious  stones — the  fiie  will  not  burn  these;  wood,  hay,  stubble — it  will  burn 
these.  The  various  good  materials  may  be  of  very  different  degrees  of  goodness. 
The  various  bad  materials  are  not  equally  bad.  A  house,  not  so  very  uticomioi  table 
for  a  wiiile,  may  be  constructed  of  wood,  but  not  even  a  tolerable  hut  can  be  made 
out  of  hay  and  stubble.  Yet  all  are  bad  ;  for  even  wood,  if  fire  come  near  it,  will 
be  spee  dlv  reduced  to  ashes.  All  this  is  perfectly  applicatile  to  our  own  lives. 
We  may  build  with  different  degrees  of  diligence,  and  what  we  do  day  by  day  may 
be  most  unlike  in  a  thousand  respects ;  but  all  we  build  must  have  iis  source  either 
in  love  to  God  and  holiness,  or  to  self  and  sin,  and  will  either  be  approven  or  con- 
demned. The  very  best  of  worldly  lives  will  be  found  then  as  miserably  insufticient 
as  a  house  of  wood,  however  well  built,  however  commodious,  however  imposing 
without,  to  resist  the  fury  of  the  flames  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  no  life  which  has 
been  prompted  by  love  to  Christ  and  a  sincere  endeavour  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
however  far  it  may  have  fallen  below  what  it  ought  to  have  been,  will  be  proved 
by  the  fire  to  have  lieeu  othei;  than  enduring  and  precious.  Let  us  live,  then,  as 
nobly  and  sublimelv  as  we  can  ;  but,  oh,  at  le;ist  let  us  live  sincerely  and  righteously. 
III.  The  day  whiih  will  try  ihe  building  of  eaeh  one  of  us.  "  Every  man's  work 
shall  be  made  manifest,  for  th"  day  shall  declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  levealed  by 
fire,  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is."  The  aj  ostle,  I 
think,  refers  here  in  p^rt  to  any  time  of  peculiar  trial,  any  day  of  tesiing.  Tbere 
is  many  a  day  of  tliis  snrt,  and  they  often  make  strange  revelations.  Either 
adversity  or  prospeiity,  for  instance,  n-iay  serve  to  test  the  work  of  our  lives,  and 
both  often  find  tar  more  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  therein  than  either  we  or  others 
suspected.  Every  day  of  sore  afllieiion  is  a  day  of  fiery  revelation.  A  man  is 
living  altogether  for  this  world,  wholly  engrossed  with  his  farm  or  merchandise, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   COEIiSTHIANS.  255 

so  as  to  have  no  thought  beyond  that;  but  God  lays  him  on  a  bed  of  sickness, 
brings  him  to  the  very  verge  of  eternity,  reminds  him  of  his  sins  and  of  the 
condemnation  which  awaiteth  sin,  and,  oh,  how  clearly  he  then  sees  tliat  he  has 
been  living  like  a  fool  aud  judging  like  a  fool,  that  this  world  wliich  he  thought  so 
real  and  so  important  is  a  shadow  and  a  vanity,  while  that  other  world,  which  he 
never  thought  of,  is  alone  substantial  and  eternal ;  that  he  has  been  preferring 
wood,  hay,  and  y-'  'ible  to  g:>ld,  silver,  and  precious  stones.  It  is,  however,  mainly 
to  a  greater  and  i..oie  terrible  day  than  any  of  these  that  Paul  refers ;  it  is  mainly 
to  thai  awful  d;iy  on  which  tliere  is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed, 
neither  hid  that  shall  not  be  known — that  day  into  the  light  and  heat  of  which  no 
work,  however  subtle,  or  obscure,  will  not  be  brought,  so  that  its  true  character 
may  be  made  manifest — that  day  which,  as  we  are  told  by  a  prophet,  will  burn  like 
an  oven,  so  that  not  one  wicked  life,  not  even  one  bad  feeling,  or  one  base  act,  will 
pass  successfully  through  it.  Since  there  is  this  day  coming,  it  surely  well  becomes 
us  to  habituate  ourselves,  to  bring  our  conduct,  to  bring  our  most  secret  feelings  to 
the  test  of  that  law  by  which  they  will  then  be  judged,  and,  through  the  grace 
God  never  denies  to  those  who  sincerely  seek  it,  conform  ourselves  to  that  law  now 
as  far  as  we  can,  that  it  may  have  the  less  to  condemn  in  us  then.  {It.  Flint,  D.D.) 
The  foHiidationg  of  life: — I.  The  foundations  include  almost  all  that  we  cull 
LIFE,  IN  A  large  VIEW.  The  individual  is  like  an  apple-blossom  at  the  top  of 
some  tall  and  spreading  monarch  of  the  orchard.  The  entire  tree  is  to  that  flower 
a  foundation,  out  of  which  the  blossom  unfolds.  The  Hower  cannot  change  its 
place,  cannot  develop  into  anything  but  an  apple.  Its  destiny  is  bounded,  its 
efforts  limited  to  a  very  narrow  place.  It  is  mainly  so  with  a  man.  He  is  a  con- 
summate dower  on  the  tree  of  humanity.  For  his  personal  development  all  the 
foundation  facts  are  inevitable  and  irrefragable.  The  physical,  intellectual,  and 
moral  worlds  he  cannot  alter  by  the  breadth  of  a  hair.  He  can  only  build  upon 
them.  A  century  of  progress  has  tended  to  bewilder  some  minds  into  the  hope  of 
new  foundations.  To  such  men  progress  seems  a  thing  of  changing  the  bases  of 
life,  but  it  is  nothing  of  the  sort.  It  is  simply  and  only  the  uncovering  of  eternal 
foundations,  that  we  may  build  more  broadly.  The  widened  palaces  of  civilisation 
are  wider,  because  we  have  found  more  of  God's  unchangeable  foundations.  Every 
improvement,  every  application  of  an  invention,  is  made  possible  by  uncovering  a 
little  more  of  the  unbreakable  rock.  Look  at  social  and  political  changes  in  the 
same  light.  A  vast  numher  have  been  proposed  in  this  century  of  ours.  A  few 
have  succeeded,  because  they  struck  solid  foundation.  They  rose  upon  the  basal 
facts  in  the  nature  of  man  aud  his  social  and  moral  conditions.  The  dreams  of 
idealists  and  Utopians  have  come  to  naught,  because  they  had  no  gr  anite  under- 
girding  of  eternal  law.  You  might  as  well  try  to  change  the  constituents,  or  their 
proportions,  of  water  or  air,  as  to  attempt  to  vary  by  a  scruple  the  moral  order  of 
the  world.  You  might  as  well  try  to  defeat  g'avitation  as  try  to  abolish  one  jot  or 
tittle  of  any  of  the  Divine  order.  Nearly  everything  is  settled.  It  is  ours  to  find 
out  how  it  is  settled,  and  to  rear  our  house  on  that  solid  ground.  We  are  on  a 
foundation.  God's  fire,  God's  waves,  God's  tempests,  will  always  keep  their  steady 
ways  :  it  is  ours  to  make  ourselves  secure  against  the  fire,  the  waves,  the  storm- 
wind.  So  is  every  moral  law,  every  and  unchangeable  fact  in  our  nature,  every 
invincible  barrier  in  our  liberty.  We  must  uncover  this  bed-rock  if  we  would 
build  securely.  II.  All  forms  of  unbelief  resolve  themselves  into  incredulity 
EESPECTixa  fundamental  law.  Men  are  incredulous  about  law,  because  a  merciful 
provision  postpones  the  penalty.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
executed  speedily,  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  are  fully  set  in  them  to  do 
evil."  Nature  seems  to  the  careless  to  be  infinitely  tolerant  of  law-breaking.  Her 
process  of  punishment,  like  her  processes  of  growth,  are  slow,  and  are  so  concealed 
that  the  children  of  men  are  snared  as  birds  are  snared.  If  every  carelessly  caught 
cold  should  kill,  consumption  would  not  reap  its  awful  harvests.  If  one  glass  of 
liquor  caused  death,  there  could  be  no  alcohol  habit.  In  none  of  these  cases  is 
nature  tolerant  or  indifferent;  the  penalty  is  delayed  just  as  the  maturity  of  a  fruit 
is  delated,  but  it  comes  in  "  the  evil  time."  We  sin  by  inches  and  die  by  inches, 
because  we  refuse  to  see  the  penalties  of  vice,  gluttony,  carelessness,  or  drunken- 
ness. Because  sentence  is  not  executed  rpeedily,  men  build  cities  over  the  ruins 
wrought  by  earthquakes  ;  and  the  sides  of  Vesuvius  bloom  with  gardens  and  are 
green  with  olives,  and  villages  sleep  in  the  lava  paths  below  ;  and  on  our  streams 
towns  sleep  in  fancied  security,  where  floods  work  periodical  desolation.  Men 
faught  in  the  net  of  their  physical  sins  are  apt  to  have  the  courage  of  confession. 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [cnxv.  in. 

They  admit  that  they  ought  to  have  beheved  in  the  fundamental  law.  But  when 
snared  in  the  evil  nets  of  passion  or  vice,  they  are  apt  to  regard  their  conviction 
and  punishment  as  an  accitlent  or  injustice.  No  man  violates  one  of  the  Ten 
Commandments  with  impunity.  The  very  act  of  sinning  inflicts  a  punishment. 
III.  We  must  build  upon  the  eternal  foundations.  We  cannot  build  at  our 
caprice  the  foundations  themselves.  But  it  is  of  much  moment  to  remember  that 
our  own  work  becomes  fundamental  to  further  woik.  On  God's  rock  we  lay  our 
own  foundations.  The  walls  above  are  imperilled  by  the  weakness  of  the  walls 
below.  Poor  materials  in  the  basement  crack  the  roof  overhead.  The  tall  towers 
roi-k  and  reel  because  the  undergirding  is  unsound.  There  are  gifts  of  speech 
which  lack  the  support  of  the  gifts  of  wisdom.  There  are  capacities  for  action 
made  useless  for  lack  of  capacities  for  reflection.  There  are  mature  manhoods 
which  are  inefficient  because  they  are  not  bnilt  upon  an  industrious  youth.  There 
is  an  old  age  mourning  over  a  life  of  neglected  opportunities.  Theie  are  souls 
that  have  repented  of  pleasant  vices  too  late  to  recover  in  this  world  the  joys  of 
innocence.  IV.  The  individu.Uj  man  has  more  conspicuous  need  of  building 
ON  WHAT  is  noblest  IN  HIS  PAST.  This  personal  past  is  characterised  by  what  we 
call  the  law  of  habit.  The  thing  once  done  tends  to  be  done  again.  The  good 
and  the  bad  in  the  past  have  a  common  interest  in  this  foundation.  We  cannot 
unmake  tbe  law.  We  are  at  e  ich  new  step  influenced  by  the  path  we  have  travelled. 
It  Las  brought  us  here  ;  it  has  set  up  a  tendency  to  go  right  on.  But  our  past  has 
good  to  be  selected  from.  If  the  immt^diate  last  steps  were  wrong,  still  our  feet 
have  known  the  other  path.  Some  one  may  ask  what  I  make  of  that  doctrine  of 
grace  which  lies  so  close  to  my  text.  I  rei3ly  that  grace  is  as  much  and  as  fully  a 
foundation  under  moral  life  as  gravitation  is  a  foundation  of  physical  life.  We  do 
the  men  of  our  generation  infinite  damage  when  we  speak  of  grace  as  though  it 
were  a  matter  of  Divine  caprice.  God  helps  men  who  seek  His  help  as  truly  as 
He  helps  men  who  sow  and  reap.  There  is  no  whit  of  more  contingency  in  the 
one  case  than  in  the  other.  Grace  is  the  inspiring  name  for  the  Divine  co-operation 
with  man.      V.  To    suggest   the   importance  of  making  our  noblfst  past  the 

MATERIAL    FOR   BUILDING    OUR   FUTURE,  LET    ME    CALL    VOUR  ATTENTION  TO  OUR  PRESENT 

BUSINESS.  In  short,  we  can  build.  Our  building  is  on  God's  land  and  up  towards 
His  skies.  All  that  distinguishes  our  personality  comes  out  of  personal  aspiration 
and  endeavour.  One  man's  life  is  a  filthy  hut,  another  is  a  stately  palace.  The 
bed-rock  below  every  fixed  fact  of  material  or  season  is  the  same  for  both.  Ttie 
builders  have  made  the  enormous  diff^-reuce  in  the  results.  (</.  Wheeler,  D.D.) 
The   Christian  foundation: — Christ  is  the  foundation  of — I.  Christian  doctrine. 

1.  If  it  be  of  man  we  reason,  of  his  sinfulness,  his  corruption,  his  mortality ; 
even  here  shall  our  foundation  be  laid  in  Jesus  Christ.  For  in  His  Word 
is  our  fall  most  plainly  set  down,  and  by  the  necessity  of  His  sacrifice  is 
the  enormity  of  our  guilt  most  plainly  proved.  How  deep  must  be  that 
sinfulness  which   no    less   a   sacrifice    than   one   so   precious    could    atone   for ! 

2.  If  it  is  of  God  we  speak,  of  His  nature,  His  attributes.  His  dealings  with 
mankind;  here  must  our  foundation  still  be  Christ  Jesus  (John  i.  18).  II. 
Human  duty.  If  we  consider  what  line  of  conduct  men  ought  to  pursue,  as  most 
tending  to  their  osvn  happiness,  either  on  earth  or  in  heaven  ;  the  same  reference 
is  made  to  the  will  and  grace  of  Christ.  In  the  gospel  only  can  we  find  any 
sufficient  rule  of  excellence.  There  only  can  we  learn  how  to  become  pure  in 
heart,  lowly,  meek,  kind,  and  charitable.  There  only  ai'e  we  taught  sufficient 
motives  for  doing  what  we  ought  to  do,  or  avoiding  what  we  ought  to  avoid.  III. 
Eternal  hope.  Without  His  revelation  and  His  merits  how  dark  and  dreadful 
had  our  future  been.  Or  if  aught  we  could  suspect  of  any  further  existence,  it  was 
an  apprehension  of  punishment.  But  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  "  life  and  immortality 
are  brought  to  light."  IV.  Church  ordinances.  If  hither  you  resort  to  pray 
remember  it  is  because  Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  you  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  If  here 
you  offer  praise,  it  must  be  above  all  for  the  redemption  of  the  world  by 
Jesus  Christ.  If  hither  you  bring  your  children  to  be  baptized,  it  is  be- 
cause Jesus  Christ  ordained  this  holy  rite  (see  Matt,  xxviii.  19).  If  hither 
your  dead  are  borne  to  burial,  it  is  because  Christ  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life 
(John  iv.  25).  And  here  also  should  you  apply  this  rule  to  the  celebration  of  those 
holy  mysteries,  iu  which  Christ  is  Himself  set  forth  before  us.  His  very  body  and 
blood  received  through  faith,  and  made  eiiectual  to  the  strengthening  and  refresh- 
ing of  the  soul.  (C.  Girdlestone,  M.A.)  Christ  the  foundation  : — I.  The  proper- 
ties OF  Christ  as  a  foundation.      1.  He  is   a   laid  foundation  (Isa.  xxviii.  Ifi). 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  257 

Christ  did  not  take  upon  Himself  tlii^  honour.  He  that  eouM  best  tell  what  would 
best  sei've  jjitched  upou  His  own  Son  for  that  purpose.  2.  A  low  foundation. 
Foundilions  are  wont  to  be  laid  l.'W,  the  lower  the  surer.  So  the  Lord  Jesus  (Phil. 
ii.  6-9).     There  were  ses-eral  steps  of  His  humiliation.    (1)  Into  the  humau  nature. 

(2)  Into  subjection  under  the  law's.  (3)  Into  poverty  and  persecution,  contempt 
and  contradiction.  (4)  To  death  itself.  (.5)  To  the  grave.  3.  He  is  a  foundation 
of  stone  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  A  stone  is  the  fittest  thing  for  foiindation,  because  it  is 
hard  and  firm,  and  yet  easily  hewn.  Now  Christ  is  a  rock  (chap.  x.  4).  4.  He  is  a 
foundation  out  of  sight.  All  foundations  are  so.  Christ  is  out  of  sight,  not 
below,  as  He  once  was,  but  above,  in  glory.  (1)  His  person  is  out  of  sight, 
yet  we  love  Him  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  (2)  His  presence  is  with  us  everywhere, 
especial'y  in  His  ordinances,  but  in  an  invisible  way  (Matt,  xviii.  20,  xxviii. 
20).  (3)  His  proceedings  are  invisible— those  of  His  grace  within  ;  of  His 
providence  without  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  ult.).  5.  He  is  a  precious  ioundation  (Isa.  xxviii. 
10).  Tliough  all  stones  in  their  place  be  useful,  yet  they  are  not  all  precious 
stones.  Few  buildings  are  built  upon  preeiuus  stones,  but  the  Church  is.  Christ 
is  precious — (1)  In  Himself.  "  The  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether 
lovely."  (2)  In  the  account  and  esteem  of  His  disciples.  To  others  He  is  a  stone 
of  stumbling,  and  a  roi-k  of  offence  (1  Pet.  ii.  7).  6.  He  is  a  permanent  foundation 
(Isa.  xxvi.  4) — the  rock  of  ages,  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  The  saints  have 
been  building  on  Him  from  the  beginning,  and  will  build  on  Him  to  the  end  of 
time.  He  is  "the  same  j'e>terday,"  d'c.  His  righteousness.  His  premises  are 
unchangeable.  7.  He  is  an  elect,  or  chosen  foundation  (Isa.  xxviii.  Hi,  xlii.  1).  8. 
He  is  an  experienced  or  tried  foundation.  He  was  tried — (1)  By  God,  wlio  laid 
upon  Ilini  the  iniquities  of  us  all.  (2)  By  men  and  devils,  who  did  their  best 
agiinst  Him,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  (3)  By  the  saints,  who  have  had  occasion  to 
make  use  of  Him,  and  He  has  never  failed  them.  II.  Oue  duiy  in  keference  to 
THIS  FOUNDATION.  1.  To  bslieve  all  this  concerning  Hiiu.  2.  To  see  our  need  of 
Him.  We  have  each  of  us  a  building  to  rear,  and  what  foundation  have  we  ? 
None  in  ourselves.  3.  To  renounce  all  other  foundations.  They  are  but  smd 
(Matt.  vii.  24).  4.  To  repair  to  Him.  In  the  way  of  faithful  and  fervent  prayer 
tell  Him  you  are  sensible  of  your  need  of  Him,  and  that  you  are  undone  without 
Him.  5.  To  build  upon  Him.  (1)  In  the  great  business  of  justification.  (2)  In 
nil  our  perils  and  dangers  (Psa.  xlvi,  1,  Ixii.  1,  2).  6.  To  beware  what  we  build 
upon  this  foundation,  in  opinion  and  in  practice  (chap.  iii.  12-15).  If  we  build 
loose,  careless  walking,  our  hopes  built  will  be  accordingly  wood,  hay,  stubble, 
&c.  [rJiiUp  Henry.)  Chiitit  tlie  fouitdation  : — \Yhen  the  immense  stone  piers' 
of  the  East  River  bridge  were  begun,  some  years  ago,  the  builders  did  not  attempt 
to  manufacture  a  foundation.  They  simply  dug  down  through  the  mud  and  sand, 
and  found  the  solid  bed  rock,  which  the  Almightj'  Creator  had  laid  thousands  of 
years  ago.  It  is  a  wretched  mistake  to  suppose  that  you  need  to  construct  a  foun- 
dation. "  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus 
Christ."  Your  own  merits,  however,  cemented  by  good  resolutions,  will  no  more 
answer  for  a  solid  base  than  would  a  cartload  of  bricks  as  the  substratum  of  yonder 
stupendous  bridge.  God  has  provided  for  you  a  corner-stone  already.  (T.  L.  Cvi/ler, 
D.D.)  CJn-ist  the  only  Joundation  : — I.  Of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was  already 
built  uj)ou  Him  as  its  historical  foundation.  He  was  the  reason  and  account  of  its 
existence,  so  that  if  He  had  not  lived  and  died,  its  existence,  as  Paul  found  it, 
would  have  been  inexplicable.  Some  hold  that  Paul,  not  Christ,  was  the  founder 
of  Christendom — a  theory  he  by  anticijiHtion  contradicted.  "  Was  Paul  crucified  for 
you  ?  "  &c.  If  the  Church  is  built  on  the  labours  of  ajDostles,  apostles  themselves 
rested  ou  the  Chief  Corner  Stone.  II.  Of  Christian  thought  and  life.  1.  Christ 
Himself  is  the  only  foundation  on  which  the  soul  can  build,  and  not  merely — (1) 
Doctrines  about  Him.  Not  that  Scripture  texts,  or  the  creeds  are  to  be  disparaged. 
We  prize  both  for  His  sake,  but  not  Him  ior  theirs,  and  to  rest  upon  them  as 
distinct  from  Him  would  be  like  building  on  a  measuring  rule  instead  of  on  the 
granite  of  which  it  has  given  us  the  dimensions.  (2)  Feelings  about  or  towards 
Him.  These  are  great  aids  to  devotion  ;  yet  what  so  fugitive  and  unreliable.  And 
Hfter  all  they  only  point  to  Christ :  their  root  is  in  ourselves,  and  we  cannot  supply 
the  foundation  stone  out  of  the  exhausted  quarries  of  unrenewed  human  nature. 

(3)  His  work.  For  this  can  only  be  appreciated  in  the  light  of  His  person.  His 
death  is  at  best  heroic  self-devotion,  if  it  be  so  much  as  that,  unless  His  person  is 
superhuman  ;  and  no  more  reliance  can  be  placed  upon  it  than  upon  the  death  of 
Socrati  s.     (4)  His  teaching.     For  the  persistent  drift  of  this  is  to  centie  thought, 

VOL.    I.  17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

love,  adoration  on  Himself.  Eelatively  to  Himself,  it  is  part  of  the  superstructure. 
His  disciples  learnt  devotion  to  His  person  through  listening  to  His  words  ;  we 
believe  His  words  because  we  kt)ow  whose  words  they  are.  (5)  His  saciaments. 
These  are  only  picturesijue  unrealities,  unless  He  who  warrants  them  lives  and  is 
mighty.  Apart  from  Him  they  have  no  more  validity  than  our  armorial  bearing  or 
a  rosette.  (6)  His  example.  Take  only  the  pattern  of  humility  (Phil.  ii.).  If  He 
is  only  the  Son  of  Mary  His  condescension  is  but  one  acceptance  of  natural  circum- 
stances. His  example  in  tbis  and  in  other  respects  is  only  a  power  on  Paul's 
hypothesis.  2.  In  modern  times  an  effort  has  been  made  to  put  His  power  iu  the 
shade,  as  if  it  did  not  affect  the  essence  of  the  gospel.  What  Christ  was,  or  is, 
men  say  cannot  matter  if  we  profit  by  His  teaching  and  example.  And  that  is 
true,  if  Christ  was  merely  man.  And  a  high-minded,  disinterested  man,  after 
doing  his  best  for  his  fellow-creatures,  will  withdraw  as  far  as  possible  from  their 
notice.  But  we  know  that  Christ  imposed  His  person,  and  not  merely  His  maxims 
upon  the  thought  and  heart  of  the  world,  and  this  departure  from  the  ordinary 
instinct  of  high  human  goodness  must  have  depended  on  the  fact  tliat  such  a 
course  was  necessary.  It  implies  that  Chiist's  person  was  in  His  own  deliberate 
estimate  of  moie  importance  than  His  teaching  or  philauthmpy.  But  all  is 
sufficiently  explained,  if  we  Vielieve  with  Paul  that  Christ  is  Gud.  Otherwise  to 
make  Him  the  foundation  of  the  soul's  life  would  be  to  substitute  a  creature  for  the 
Creator.  A  purely  iiuman  Christ  might  be  the  architect,  and  even  the  scaffolding 
of  the  spiritual  temple;  He  could  not  be  its  own  foundation.  (Canon  Liddoii.) 
Christ  tlie  only  fouu'iation  : — I.  The  natdiie  of  this  foundation.  It  is  to  the 
atonement,  principally,  that  the  apostle  refers.  1.  It  was  prepared  from  eternity. 
2.  It  was  made  known  by  rev*  lation.  3.  It  was  finally  laid  at  the  death  of  Christ. 
II.  Its  PECULiAitiTY.  Christ  is  the  only  foundation — 1.  That  God  has  appidnted. 
2.  That  the  Scriptures  will  warrant.  3.  That  the  righteous  have  in  every  age 
reHed  upon.  III.  The  advantages  of  trusting  on  it.  1.  It  promotes  the  glory 
of  God.  2.  It  produces  evangelical  obedience.  3.  It  secures  safety,  lionour,  and 
happiness.  (1)  In  the  season  of  adversity.  (2)  In  the  hour  of  dissolution.  (3)  In 
the  day  of  judgment.  Conclusi'iii :  Let  us — 1.  Seek  to  obtain  correct  views  of  our 
true  condition  as  sinners  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  Beware  of  building  on  any  false 
foundation.  3.  Allow  nothing  to  move  us  from  this  blessed  hope.  (Essex  Concjre- 
(jational  Rememhrancer.)  Christ  the  sure  foundation  of — 1.  The  Church.  2.  The 
Christian  congregation.  3.  The  Christian  life.  4.  The  sinner's  hope.  5.  The 
hope  of  men.     (W.  E.  Stevenson,  D.I).)         Christ  the  strong  foundation  : — I.   The 

"foundation"    is    that    from    which    EVEKYIHING    SPRINGS,  WHILE    ITSELF    BEARS  ALL 

THE  WEIGHT.  So  from  Christ  all  that  is  beautiful  in  the  whole  structure  of  the 
Church  starts  ;  and  back  to  Him  every  part  throws  its  heft  and  burden.  1.  Christ 
was  the  "  foundation  "  of  the  material  world.  P'or  His  sake,  chietly,  this  world  was 
made — to  be  the  scene  of  the  di-play  of  His  exceeding  power  and  love  to  the  glory 
of  the  Father  (Prov.  viii.  23-31).  2.  So  that  when  this  world  f>dl  to  ruin,  there  was 
the  eternal  Son  of  God  ready  to  be  the  beginning  of  a  new  and  better  creation.  As 
the  promised  Messiah,  at  the  gate  of  Eden,  He  stayed  the  hand  of  universal  death; 
and  this  earth  and  everything  that  is  in  it  lived  on,  for  "  He  was  before  all  things, 
and  by  Him  all  things  consist,"  i.e.,  h(dd  together.  3.  After  that,  all  along, 
underlying  the  whole  Jewish  dispensation,  there  was  that  expected  One,  the 
"foundation  "  a  thought  of  every  Jew  till,  in  due  time,  He  came.  And  the  cradle 
of  Bethlehem  was  tlie  "  loundation  "  of  a  throne  before  which  every  throne  shall 
crumble  into  dust — of  a  kingdom  which  sliall  never  be  destroyed.  4.  Of  this 
kingdom  of  grace  and  glory  the  threefold  fundamental  princii)al  is — (1)  The 
person  of  Christ,  that  He  is  God  and  man — man  to  constitute  Him  a  representa- 
tive ;  God  to  give  ellicacy  to  the  representation.  (2)  The  work  of  Christ — that  He 
paid  the  debt  of  the  whole  woild,  and  wrought  a  righteousness  which  can  make  the 
whole  world  good  in  a  holy  Father's  sight.  (3)  The  glory  of  Christ — that  He  is 
occupying  heaven  for  us,  and  there  exercises  all  regal  functions  for  His  peoples 
sake.  II.  Foundation  presupposes  superstructure.  And  with  the  super- 
structure you  have  to ,  do.  And  the  height  of  the  superstructure  will  be 
according  to  the  depth  of  the  strength  of  the  "  foundation."  1.  The  founda- 
tion of  all  i^vayer  is  the  Christ  that  is  in  it.  Piealise  that  your  prayer  is 
made  prevalent  by  His  intercession,  that  whatever  you  ask  in  the  name  of 
Christ  shall  be  done.  2.  "Works  are  good  and  acceptable  to  God  just  according  as 
they  proceed  from  love — the  love  of  God.  But  you  cannot  love  God  till  you  are  in 
Christ.     Good  works  are  sweet  evidences  ;  the  pinnacles  and  the  decorations  of 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  259 

heavenly  architecture  ;  but  no  foundation.  3.  Is  there  any  one  in  this  church 
who  has  not  peace?  It  is  because  Ciirist  is  not  in  His  proper  place.  He  is  not  laid 
deep  enough  in  that  poor  heart  of  yours.  Nothing  else  can  bear  the  weight  of  that 
sin  of  yours.     (J.  Vainilian,  M.A.)         The  true  foundation  of  cJuiracler  : — I.  Thkke 

IS   AN    ANALOGY   BETWEEN    TUE    FOllMATION     OF     CIIAltACTER     AND     THE     ERECTION     OF     A 

BUILDING.  1.  In  the  variety  of  its  materials.  Moral  character  is  built  up  by 
impressions,  the  emotions,  thoughts,  volitions ;  by  all,  in  fact,  that  in  any  way 
affects  us.  2.  In  the  unity  of  its  design.  Every  building,  however  varied  its 
materials,  is  formed  on  some  plan.  The  master-purpose  of  the  soul,  whatever  it 
may  be,  gives  unity  to  the  whole,  ii.  In  the  function  it  fulfils.  Euildings  are 
generally  residences  of  some  kind  or  other.  The  soul  lives  in  the  character.  la 
some  cases  the  home  is  the  mere  stye  of  the  animal,  or  the  shop  of  the  barterer, 
or  the  prison  of  the  guilty,  or  the  temple  of  the  saint.  II.  CiiiasT  is  the  only 
rouNDATioN  OF  A  TRUE  CHARACTER.  There  are  sometimes  splendid  edifices  and 
poor  foundations,  and  the  reverse.  All  characters  are  based  ujion  some  one  idea. 
1.  Some  on  the  sensual  idea.  Such  as  th.it  on  which  the  prodigdl  son  started ; 
such  as  that  on  which  Dives  built  his  all.  Millions  now  do  the  same.  What  shall 
we  eat,  what  shall  we  drink?  is  the  grand  iiuxuiry.  2.  Some  on  the  secular  idea. 
On  this  Judas,  the  young  lawyer,  and  Demas  built ;  and  on  this  thousands  build 
now.  3.  Some  on  the  ambitious  idea.  Absalom,  Hainan,  Herod,  are  examples  of 
this.  Such,  too,  are  the  Alexanders  and  Napoleons  of  pem-ral  history.  4.  Some 
on  the  Christian  idea.  Supreme  sympathy  with  God,  and  this  requires  Christ  for 
its  existence.  Christ  is  its  foundation,  for  He  does  the  two  things  to  geuerate  this 
sympathy.  He — (1)  Demonstrates  to  man  the  propitiablcness  of  God.  ('2) 
Keveals  toman  the  moral  loveliness  of  God.  Thus  He  is  the  true  foundation.  HI. 
To  Christ  as  a  foundation  men  bring  worthless  as  w^ell  as  valuable  materials. 
There  are  edifices — 1.  Partially  formed  of  "  wood,  hay,  stubble."  (1)  The  mere 
creedal  character  is  worthless.  There  are  those  whose  Christianity  is  a  mere  thing 
of  idea.  (2)  Mere  sentimental  character  is  worthless.  There  are  those  whose 
Christianity  is  a  mere  tiling  of  frames  and  feelings.  (3)  Mere  ritualistic  character 
is  worthless.  There  are  those  whnse  Christianity  is  a  mere  matter  of  form.  All 
these  are  things  of  no  solidity,  value,  duration.  2.  Entirely  formed  of  valuable 
materials  brought  to  Christ.  They  are  formed  of  "gold,  silver,  precious  stones." 
The  lieart  is  in  vital  sympathy  with  Christ  as  the  Atoner  for  sin,  the  Exemplar  of 
holiness,  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  The  profoundest  thoughts,  the  strongest 
sympathies,  the  gold  and  silver  of  the  soul,  are  connected  with  Christ.     IV.  There 

IS   AN    ERA    TO    DAWN    WHEN    ALL    THE    EDIFICES    BDIl.T    ON    THIS     FOUNDATION    SHALL    BE 

TRIED.  Individually,  it  is  the  day  that  dawns  at  the  end  of  our  mortal  life. 
Universally,  it  is  the  day  that  dawns  at  the  end  of  this  world's  history.  The  fire  of 
absolute  justice  and  truth  will  burn  to  the  centre  of  all  souls,  consuming  all  that  is 
worthless.  1.  This  day  will  be  injurious  to  those  who  have  built  on  this  founda- 
tion with  worthless  materials.  (1)  They  will  suffer  loss.  There  will  be  the  loss  of 
labour,  of  opportunity,  of  position.  (2)  Though  they  suffer  loss  they  may  be  saved. 
Their  favourite  theories  and  cherished  hopes  shall  burn  like  wood  and  hay,  yet  they 
themsf'lves  may  survive.  2.  This  day  will  be  advantageous  to  those  who  liave 
budt  on  this  foundation  with  right  materials.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Fundamental 
truths  explained,  and  popular  errors  exposed: — We  have — I.  A  striking  figure. 
Christ  is  compared  to  a  foundation.  There  are  four  ideas  connected  with  Christ  as 
a  foundation.  1.  Selection.  A  foundation  stone  is  not  taken  at  random — wisdom 
and  care  are  required  in  the  choice  of  it.  The  motto  inscribed  on  this  stone  is, 
"  Chosen  of  God  and  precious."  When  any  great  building  is  about  to  be  erected,  it 
is  customary  for  some  person  of  eminence  to  lay  the  foundation  stone.  "  Therefore 
thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  bi^liold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation,  a  stone."  (1) 
How  sti-iking  was  the  description  which  represents  Him  as  a  "  tried  stone." 
He  was  tried  in  His  humiliation,  tried  by  the  lapse  of  age^,  by  the  malice 
of  devils,  by  the  opposition  of  His  enemies,  and  in  the  experience  of  His 
friends.  2.  Suitableness.  The  Divine  and  human  natures  wliich  meet  in  Him 
render  Him  suitable  for  the  work  He  undertook.  3.  StreDgth.  The  Saviour  has 
strength  to  sustain.  He  sustains  raidions  who  are  now  in  glory,  and  multitudes  who 
are  on  their  way,  and  tlie  whole  universe  cannot  furnish  one  instance  of  an 
individual  being  confounded  who  reposed  liere.  But  there  is  strength  to  destroy 
(Dan.  ii.  34,  35  ;  Matt.  xxi.  42-44).  4.  Stability.  This  is  well  represented  by  a 
stone;  yet,  however  durable,  the  elements  have  power  over  it.  But  "time  that 
doth  all  things  else  impair,"  has  no  power  over  the  foundation  of  the  Church. 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi. 

Eternity  claims  it  as  its  own — it  shall  stand  unshaken  amidst  the  shock  of  judgment — 
and  when  all  uature  shall  sink  in  ruins,  "  verily  the  foundation  of  God  standeth 
sure."  II.  A  solemn  fact.  Christ  is  the  only  foundation.  The  apostle  plainly 
intimates  that  attempts  would  be  made  to  lay  other  foundations.  Let  me  take  you 
to  three  spots  where  men  have  tried  to  build  their  hopes  for  eternity.  1.  Carnal 
reason.  I  mean  the  renson  of  man  set  up  in  opposition  to,  and  in  defiance  of 
revelation.  We  would  not  undervalue  reason,  nor  condemn  its  use  in  religion,  for 
religion  itself  is  a  reasonable  service.  In  all  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  there 
is  nothing  contrary  to  reason,  though  there  is  much  that  infinitely  surpa-ses  it. 
There  must  be  some  standard  by  which  to  guide  our  views  and  ft-eliugs  in 
reference  to  the  interests  of  the  soul,  the  claim  of  God  and  the  solemnities  of 
eternity.  Where  shall  we  find  such  a  standard?  Pride  of  intellect  has  set  up 
reason  ;  the  wisdom  of  God  revelation ;  and  to  make  the  latter  bow  to  the  former 
would  be  as  preposterous  as  to  make  the  s'm  acknowledge  his  inferiority  to  the 
glimmering  taper.  2.  Self-righteousness.  This  error  assumes  a  variety  of  forms 
all  of  which  are  fatal.  Here  is  a  benevolent  individual  who  wishes  well  to  all 
around  him.  The  acts  of  his  liberality  we  cannot  but  admire,  but  we  deplore  the 
principles  by  which  he  is  prompted  to  do  what  he  does  ;  he  prides  himself  on  his 
generosity,  and  imagines  that  God  will  accept  him,  though  the  general  tenor  of  his 
conduct  is  opjiosed  to  Christianity.  Let  him  come  to  the  tetnple  of  Christianity, 
and  read  on  the  stone  which  unites  and  sustains  the  whole — "  Other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ."  Let  him  enter  the 
building,  and  there  read  for  himself — "  Though  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the 
poor,"  &c.  Here  is  another  individual  strictly  moral,  a  respectable  and  re- 
spected member  of  society,  a  good  husband,  a  kind  father,  a  generous  master,  and 
a  sincere  friend.  Now  all  this  is  well  and  praiseworthy,  so  far  as  it  goes,  but  all 
these  excellent  traits  may  be  found  in  their  fullest  extent  while  the  heart  is 
estranged  from  God.  The  man  prides  himself  on  his  morality,  and  is  attempting  to 
make  of  it  a  bridge  over  which  he  shall  pass  to  heaven.  But  here  is  another  individual 
who  makes  aconsideiable  profession  of  religion,  his  creed  is  sound,  his  life  regular, 
his  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace  punctual,  etc.,  but  he  knows  nothing  of  the 
power  of  grace  or  the  experience  of  religion.  How  many  seek  to  make  a  ladder  of 
their  religious  duties  that  shall  reach  to  heaven  !  3.  The  general  goodness  of  God. 
Many  wish  to  be  saved,  but  in  their  own  Wiiy.  They  will  not  comply  with  the 
terms  proposed  in  the  gospel — they  would  have  salvation,  and  yet  retain  their  sins 
— they  desire  heaven,  not  because  they  love  holiness,  but  that  they  may  escape  hell. 
We  must  take  it  as  a  gospel  axiom,  that  if  the  salvation  of  Christ  is  in  the  soul,  the 
dominion  of  Christ  must  be  set  up  in  the  heart.  Conclusion  :  Let  me  seriously  inquire 
whether  I  am  building  on  this  foundation.  It  was  laid  in  the  eternal  counsels  of 
the  Sacred  Three — in  the  fulness  of  time  in  the  person,  work,  sufft^ring,  and  sacrifice 
of  Christ — and  is  now  laid  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  (Ehenezer  Temple.) 
Chriitianity  ultimate  and  absolute  truth  : — 1.  What  we  know  of  the  way  of  the 
world  hitherto  prepares  us  to  believe  that  a  great  many  things  which  are  now 
serving  their  purpose  will  be  superseded.  And  that  we  cannot  see  how,  gives  us 
no  assurance  that  certain  things  shall  not  be  got  beyond.  In  travelling,  there  may 
be  something  beyond  railways.  In  commnniiation,  no  one  can  say  that  the 
telegraph  is  the  ultimate  wonder.  And  in  all  tb.e  arts  and  conveniences  of  life,  the 
case  is  so  too.  2.  There  is  one  thing,  however,  which  will  never  be  superseded. 
The  world  has  seen  various  religions  ;  but  the  truth,  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  is  absolute 
and  ultimate  truth.  We  may  have  to  learn,  perhaps,  that  things  which  we  think 
to  be  part  of  Christianity,  are  not,  and  to  give  them  up  as  our  fathers  had.  But, 
in  the  face  of  all  pos.sibilities,  we  turn  to  the  conrtortable  assurance  in  the  text. 
There  is  no  "Christ  that  is  to  be":  the  One  Christ  has  come,  once  for  all. 
Among  the  ultimate  and  uufhaugeable  truths  are — I.  The  way  in  which  each  of  us 
MPST  BE  SAVED.  A  vital  thing,  which  cannot  go  amid  all  coming  changes,  is 
salvation  through  the  atonement  of  Christ.  We  are  sure  of  nothing  if  we  are  not 
sure  that  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins."  And  no  theory  of  the  way  of  salvation  but 
that  which  is  familiar  to  us  can  bear  being  calmly  looked  at  by  any  man  who  feels 
it  his  duty  to  accept  the  Word  of  God  as  decisive.  We  do  not  think  that  it  is  in 
any  way  profitable  to  p  sh  revealed  doctrine  into  minute  details;  but  we  cannot 
regard  it  as  other  than  vital  part  of  that  foundation  besides  which  there  never  can 
be  another,  that  Christ  is  a  Saviour:  that  His  sufferings  were  sacrificial,  and  borne 
for  us  .  that  by  His  obedience  and  death  He  reconciles  us  to  God,  satisfies  Divine 
justice,  and  secures  sanctitication  as  well  as  forgiveness  :  that  His  atoning  work  is 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   COrdNTHIANS.  2G1 

complete,  and  that  its  benefits  are  offered  fret-ly  to  all  who  will  receive  them.  II. 
The  rule  of  duty  and  help  in  duty.  1.  You  are  not  more  sure  of  your  own 
existence  than  that  the  requirements  of  Christianity  as  to  duty  will  never  grow 
less  and  can  never  grow  greater.  You  cannot  conceive  of  anything  beyond  per- 
fection. Nor  can  you  recall  anything  that  lies  outside  of  "  whatsoever  things  are 
true,  wdiatsoever  things  are  honest,"  etc.  And  there  is  set  before  us  for  constrain- 
ing example  the  life  of  One  who  was  sinless  in  humnnity,  peifect  in  Godhead  ;  and 
we  are  bidden  to  grow  like  Him,  2.  Then,  as  for  the  help  for  all  this  there  can  be 
no  change.  As  for  the  grace,  guidance,  vitality  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit — these,  too, 
will  be  needed  and  are  guaranteed  to  the  end.  Conclusion  :  There  may  be  other 
things  nearly  associated  with  tlie  scheme  of  Christian  belief  which  will  endure. 
Christian  worship,  surely,  must  always  abide,  though  the  accessories  m:iy  greatly 
change.  Surely  there  must  be  prayer,  and  praite;  and  even  preaching  must  in 
some  shape  last.  "  Till  He  come  "  again,  too,  tlie  sacramental  commemoration  of 
the  Great  Sacrifice,  and  the  feeding  upoti  it  by  faith,  is  appointed  to  continue. 
3'et  it  is  rather  doctrine  than  ritual  that  is  pointed  to  in  the  text.  (A.  K.  H.  Boijd, 
D.D.)  Belirjion  illuatratcd  7tiidcr  tlie  form  of  a  hiiililiiii]  .-—I.  The  foundatio.v. 
Christianity  is  threefold.  Its  doctrines  are  the  walls  which  enclose  and  preserve 
the  interior  parts  of  the  buihiing,  its  duties  are  the  beams  and  rafters  which  keep 
its  several  parts  together,  and  are  its  strength  and  firmness.  Its  privihges  are  the 
furniture  placed  in  this  edifice.  Now,  Christ  is  undoubtedly  the  foundation  of  each. 
1.  As  to  doctrines,  whether  they  concern  our  fall  or  our  recovery,  a  state  of  grace 
here  or  of  glory  hereafter,  certain  it  is,  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  them  all— not  only 
is  He  the  centre  in  whicli  all  the  lines  of  doctrine  meet,  but  also  the  fountain  from 
whence  they  flow.  So  is  He  also  the  one  source  of  all  !-piritual  illumination. 
From  Him  all  the  sacred  penmen  derived  their  instruction,  and  from  Him  we  must 
receive  the  ability  to  understand  what  they  have  revealed.  So  that  whoever 
would  build  up  the  walls  of  Christian  doctrine  must  be  careful  to  erect  them  on 
Christ,  his  Prophet.  2.  But  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  Christian  privileges,  i.e., 
the  blessings  procured  by  Him  for  men,  and  bestowed  upon  all  true  believers,  as 
the  pardon  of  sin,  the  favour  of  God,  adoption,  the  indwelling  of  His  Spirit,  the 
resurrection  of  tlie  body,  and  everlasting  life.  Whosoever,  theiefin'e,  woidd  enjoy 
these  blessings  must  build  all  his  confub  nee  and  hope  respecting  them  on  Christ; 
and  they  who  look  for  them  in  any  other  way  build  ujion  the  sand.  3.  The  duties 
of  Christianity  can  (mly  be  built  on  the  same  Eock  of  Ages.  And  here  I  refer  to  a 
right  temper,  as  well  as  a  regular  behaviour  ;  a  pure  heart,  as  well  »s  a  holy  life. 
Now  Christ's  laws  enjoin  all  this,  and  His  Spirit  inspires  it ;  from  His  love  it  springs, 
and  to  His  glory  it  is  directed.  It  derives  all  its  value  from  His  grace,  and 
depends  for  acceptance  upon  His  mediation.  II.  Its  scpkiistkuctuke  (ver.  12). 
Wliat  a  glorious  temple  must  that  be  which  is  raised  upon  a  solid  rock  with  such 
costly,  splendid,  and  durable  materials  as  "  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones  "  ! 
And  what  a  glorious  spiritual  temple  must  that  be  which  is  built  on  "  the  Rock  of 
Ages  "  ;  of  no  worse  materials  than  fauh,  love,  and  good  works  !  1.  We  must  build 
faith  upon  Christ,  or  we  must  build  upon  Him  by  faitli.  Is  Christ  "  a  Teacher  sent 
from  God,"  He  the  High  Piiest  of  our  ijrofessit)n.  He  our  King?  Then  we  must 
believe  in  Him.  receiving  His  doctrines,  relying  on  His  promises,  and  subjectiug 
our  hearts  and  lives  to  Him.  2.  This  faith  must  be  followed  by  love.  (1)  The 
love  of  God,  which,  as  a  fruit  of  faith,  must  be  built  upon  Christ,  is  not  merely  a 
high  esteem  of  Him,  nor  a  desire  after  Him  as  our  chief  good,  but  also  a  com- 
placency and  delight  of  soul  in  Him  as  our  Father  and  our  Friend,  who,  in  and 
through  Jesus  Christ,  is  l>ecome  our  portion  in  time  and  eternity.  (2)  And  as  this 
love  is  in  union  with  the  love  of  our  neighbour  which  is  a  resemblance  of  God's 
love  to  mauldnd.  3.  With  great  propriety  are  good  works  compared  to  precious 
stones,  whether  we  regard  their  real  worth  or  apparent  beauty.  Valuable  and 
costly  in  themselves,  they  shall  adorn  the  crowns  and  beautify  the  robes  of  the 
folL'wers  of  Jesus  in  that  day  when  God  shall  amply  reward  even  "  a  cup  of  cold 
water  "  given  in  the  nume  of  Christ.  Real  good  works  spiing  from  living  faith  and 
the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  the  heart ;  they  are  done  in  obedience  to  the  Divine 
will,  and  with  a  view  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  lience,  be  they  ever  so  insit;niticant 
as  to  the  outward  act,  they  are  truly  precious  in  His  sight.  4.  But,  alas  !  many  begin  to 
build  with  gold,  etc.,  but  by  and  liy  build  with  no  better  materials  than  wood,  &c. 
Others  never  make  use  of  anything  better  than  sapless,  combn.stible  wood ;  the  best 
modes  of  worship  and  religious  duties,  where  the  Spirit  of  Gorl  is  wanting,  are  no 
better  than  mere  hay  ;  and  the  best  systems  of  doctrine,  where  the  gospel  does  not 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

come  with  power,  are  of  no  more  use  than  dry  straw.  III.  The  issue  of  all  (ver.  13). 
"Every  man's  -work  shall  be  made  manifest"  (Eccles.  xii.  14;  Matt.  x.  2G),  "for 
the  day  shall  declare  it."  1.  The  day  of  trial  here  will  generally  discover  what 
character  we  possess,  and  if  our  religion  is  laiilt  up  of  nothing  better  than  "  wood," 
&c.,  it  will  be  consumed  and  vanish.  2.  The  day  of  death  shall  prove  a  man's 
faith  and  piety,  as  a  furnace  tries  the  metals,  and  those  who  are  mere  dross  shall 
be  burnt  up  by  it.  3.  The  day  of  judgment  (Mai.  iv.  1 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10).  {J.  Benson.) 
Building  for  eternity  : — I.  All  Chbistian  men  buii.d  for  eternity  tipon  one  and 
THE  SAME  FOUNDATION  (ver.  11).  1.  Sin  had  laid  the  world  in  a  state  of  ruin  ;  and 
if  another  temple  could  be  constructed  it  must  have  a  foundation  firmer  and 
broader  than  that  which  fallen  nature  could  furnish.  Human  sagacity  might 
suggest  penitence,  reformation,  suffering.  But  none  of  those,  nor  all  united,  could 
answer  the  purpose.  2.  When  the  incompetency  of  the  law  had  been  demonstrated, 
God  "  laid  in  Zion  a  foundation";  and  "he  that  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be 
confounded.''  As  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  the  universal  temple  of  God,  so  is  He 
also  the  foundation  of  each  believer.  It  matters  not  in  what  clime  they  have  fixed 
their  dwelling,  &c.  In  Christ  they  are  one,  and  on  Him,  as  their  common  support, 
they  repose.  II.  Christian  men  greatly  differ  in  the  materials  which  they  use 
IN  THE  ERFCTioN  OF  THE  BUILDING.  1.  Some  build  "gold,  silver,  and  precious 
stones."  The  superstructure  which  tbey  rear  is  of  a  costly  and  glorious  character. 
The  materials  are  emblematical  of  preciousness,  jjurity,  solidity,  and  iDermanency. 
There  are  some  characters  formed  of  elements  as  pure  and  indestructible  as  the 
principles  upon  which  they  are  reared.  2.  There  are  others  who  build  on  the  same 
foundation  "  wood,  hay,  and  stubble";  materials  which  are  perishable,  corrupt, 
and  comparatively  worthless.      III.    There    will   be   a    period    in  which  these 

MATERIALS    SHALL    BE    REVEALED   IN    THEIR    TRUE    NATURE,  AND  TRIED    BY  THE  SEVEREST 

TEST  (ver.  13).  The  day  referred  to  is  clearly  the  day  of  judgment.  Independent 
of  revelation,  we  have  ruany  evidences  confirmatory  of  this  truth.  1.  Analogy. 
Ever>  thing  here  tends  to  a  final  close.  The  universe  itself  is  marching  on  towards 
dissolution.  2.  The  aspirations  and  the  forebodings  of  humanity.  The  moral 
character  of  God.  There  must  be  another  day  in  which  that  which  is  now  wrong 
and  imperfect  shall  be  rectified  and  completed.     IV.  The  building  constructed 

OP   PURE     MATERIALS     WILL     ABIDE     THE     TE.-^T,     AND     THE     BUILDER     BE     RECOMPENSED 

(ver.  14).  1.  The  work  of  the  wise  builder  is  indestructible.  As  it  regards — (1) 
Himself:  his  sentiments,  feelings,  spirit  are  in  harmony  with  the  laws  of 
heaven.  (2)  Others  :  the  doctrines,  &c.,  are  right  and  Scriptural.  As  a  necessary 
consequence,  the  fabric  erected  of  such  materials  cannot  but  abide.  Having  been 
erected  on  the  same  principles  which  have  the  throne  of  the  Eternal,  their  period 
of  duration  will  be  analogous.  2.  The  builder  s-hall  be  rewarded.  His  reward  will 
be  a  reward  of — (1)  Grateful  recollection.  (2)  Inward  satisfaction.  (3)  Remuner- 
ative labour.  (4)  Public  approval.  (5)  Divine  recompen.-e.  3.  The  reward  shall 
be  in  proportion  to  the  work  done.  "Every  man  shall  receive  according  to  his 
own  labour."  Heaven  will  be  what  we  make  it  on  earth.  V.  The  building  con- 
structed  OF   PERISHABLE     MATERIALS     SHALL     BE     CONSUMED — THE    BUILDER    SUSTAIN 

LOSS,  BUT  WITH  DIFFICULTY  SAVED  (ver.  15).  The  very  idea  of  erecting  "  wood, 
hay,  and  stubble  "  upon  an  everlasting  foundation  wds  highly  imprudent.  What 
could  be  more  incongruous,  or  more  indicative  of  misplaced  labour  ?  However, 
such  a  building  cannot  stand  ;  the  investigations  of  the  last  day  are  more  than  it 
can  bear.  1.  As  a  consequence  "  he  shall  suffer  loss  " — (1)  Of  labour.  AH  that 
he  has  done,  with  one  exception,  has  been  done  in  vain.  (2)  Of  inward  satisfac- 
tion. He  might  have  reared  a  durable  building ;  but  he  wasted  his  time  and 
energy  in  another  way.  (3)  Of  hope.  He  expected  his  labour  to  be  accepted  by 
his  Judge  and  rewarded  accordingly.  He  is  now  stripped  of  all  such  anticipations. 
(4)  Of  reward.  A  reward  can  never  be  given  but  in  connection  with  service 
rendered.  This  loss  will  be  everlasting  in  its  effects;  it  shall  be  a  detriment  to 
hirn  to  all  eternity.  2.  He  himself  shall  be  saved.  The  groundwork  abides  upon 
■which  he  has  been  erecting,  and,  in  virture  of  this,  he  is  safe.  (D.  Evans.) 
Life  as.  a  structure  : — I.  A  foundation  laid.  1.  The  idea  is  the  radical  one  that  no 
one  can  begin  to  live  rightly  and  well  just  as  he  is.  Sin  has  touched  and  tainted 
the  deepest  things  in  us.  We  cannot  even  begin.  And  this  is  not  only  the  Bible 
teaching,  but  the  conviction  of  almost  the  whole  world.  2.  Immense  numbers  of 
men  are  busy  in  the  vain  attempt  to  lay  a  foundation  of  their  own.  And  as  builders 
drive  in  piles  into  the  marshy  ground,  and  throw  in  vast  loads  of  earth  and 
stones,  making  a  foundation  on  which  they  rear  their  house  to  last  for  its  century 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  2G3 

or  two,  so  men  in  imagination  carry  out  of  themselves  their  good  deeds,  suffering?:, 
penitence,  recognitions  of  Divine  mercy,  &c.,  to  lay  down  as  a  basis  on  which  they 
may  raise  the  structure  of  hope  and  happiness.  Vain  toils  !  The  gulf  is  too  deep 
and  the  materials  have  no  real  strength  or  worth.  3.  God,  looking  down  says,  iu 
condemnation,  yet  pity,  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion,"  &c.  Jesus  Christ,  then,  is  the 
foundation.  The  needed  work  is  done.  "It  is  finished."  The  gospel  is  a 
message,  far  more  than  an  argument;  an  announcement  of  work  done,  rather  tlian 
a  discussion  as  to  the  way  of  doing  it.  On  this  we  rest.  Tlie  foundation  of  God 
standeth  sure.  We  are  safe,  we  are  strong,  if  we  build  on  that.  There  are  many 
mysteries  yet  unsolved,  but  this  is  clear,  that  God  has  laid  the  foundation.  II. 
There  is  a  building  to  be  raised.  A  foundation  without  a  building  is  a  solecism. 
1.  After  laying  the  foundation  God  tells  us  that  we  maij  build  a  house,  and  oiujht 
to  build  a  temple.  "  Wood  "  was  used  for  the  posts  and  doors;  "hay,"  or  dried 
grass  mixed  with  mud,  for  the  walls,  and  "  stubble"  or  straw  for  the  roof.  These 
are  never  used  for  teinjiles.  The  temples  were  built  of  "  precious  stones,"  such  as 
granite  and  marble,  and  they  were  adorned  with  "  gold  and  silver."  God  stands 
close  by  the  foundation  He  has  laid,  waiting  for  the  builders  to  come.  Come,  be  a 
builder.  Put  your  trust  in  Christ.  Faith  in  Him  is  the  first  stone  laid  on  the 
foundation,  and  without  it  no  other  can  be  there.  A  man  may  be,  according  to 
the  human  judgment,  great,  and  good,  and  happy,  but  if  he  does  not  believe  in 
God's  chosen  foundation,  his  life  is  essentially  defective,  and  must  collnpse 
in  the  end.  2.  But  the  apostle  is  speaking  to  those  who  have  begun,  and  in 
effect  says,  "Having  begun,  go  on.  Build  diligently,  tliat  you  may  have  a 
completed  structure — carefully,  that  it  may  be  composed  of  tlie  proper  materials." 
There  is  a  certain  kind  of  Christian  teaching  and  writing  which  condenses  every- 
thing iu  Christian  life  and  experience  into  faith :  "  only  believe.  That  is 
all."  No,  says  the  apostle,  that  is  not  all.  Lay  the  first  stone  securely  on 
the  foundation  which  is  laid,  then  add  another,  and  another.  Act  by  act, 
day  after  day,  let  the  temple  grow.  Iu  the  compass  of  tbree  verses  four  several 
times  the  apostle  mentions  a  man's  work.  Lay  the  i^recious  stones  one  upon 
another.  Bring  in  the  gold  and  silver  for  the  enrichment  and  adorning  of  this 
living  temple.  (1)  And  beware  lest  unwittingly  you  should  be  usin^  the  wood 
and  the  hay  and  the  stubble,  which  must  perish  at  last.  A  man,  €.(].,  comes  to 
Christ,  he  yields  to  Him,  is  pardoned,  renewed,  and  rejoices  for  a  while  in  his 
complete  salvation.  For  years  he  keeps  his  place  and  builds  on.  But  what  is  his 
building?  "Wood,  hay,  stubble,"  low  views,  superficial  op'nions,  evil  tempers, 
worldly  habits — just  such  things  as  irreligious  men  are  building  into  their  lives. 
Then  let  us  be  careful  to  build  with  the  right  materials,  and  all  the  more  be- 
cause the  wrong  ones  are  so  rife  and  so  near.  Errors  of  every  kind,  but  especially 
religious  errors,  are  very  abundant,  some  of  them  looking  quite  like  truth.  We 
shall  build  them  up  into  the  system  of  our  faith  ere  ever  we  are  aware, 
if  we  do  not  give  earnest  heed.  Vices  also  abound,  and  some  of  them  are 
so  fair.  And  a  multitude  of  things  are  around  us  which  cannot  be  called  either 
errors  or  vices,  which  yet  will  make  very  indifferent  materials — wavs  of  thinking, 
speaking,  acting  ;  the  spirit  of  the  place.  (2)  But  let  no  man  be  discouraged,  as 
though  there  were  but  little  chance  of  being  able  to  build  up  his  life  witliout  large 
intermixture  of  such  ini'crior  stuff.  Good  materials  are  available —truth,  virtue, 
strength,  wisdom  and  love.  If  we  ask  them  they  will  be  given  to  us.  God  has 
taken  care  for  this.  He  has  filled  His  Book  with  truth.  He  has  filled  His  provi- 
dence with  moral  helps.  If  we  diligently  study  the  one  and  live  faithfully  amid 
the  scenes  of  the  other,  He  will  till  us  with  His  grace  and  salvation  day  by  day,  so 
that  we  shall  grow  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord.  III.  There  is  a  time  given 
TO  FINISH  the  Work.  And  when  the  limit  of  that  time  shall  come,  not  one  stone 
more  can  be  laid.  "  I  must  work  the  work  of  Him  that  sent  me  while  it  is  day," 
&c.  And  no  man  can  tell  when  the  night  shall  come.  Look  at  the  tombstones  in 
a  graveyard.  You  will  see  every  age  rt  corded  there,  and  remember,  as  you  read, 
that  every  name  recorded  is  the  name  of  a  builder  who,  in  the  day  given  to  him, 
began  and  finished  a  building  that  will  be  tried  by  fire.  1.  Here  is  a  stone  that 
tells  that  an  infant  was  born,  and  after  wrestling  with  mortality  but  for  a  few  days, 
died  and  was  buried.  But  that  little  history  was  the  building  of  a  temple,  and 
when  it  was  finished  the  angels  carried  it  away.  2.  Here  is  a  stone  that  marks  the 
resting-place  of  a  little  worker.  Mere  shapings  and  scantlings  of  work  there  were — 
a  little  serious  thought,  a  little  faith  and  love,  some  tiny  steps  of  followinij;  after 
the  great  Master :  nothing,  as  some  would  say,  to  make  a  finished  life.     You  are 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 


mistaken.  That  little  workman  will  never  need  to  be  ashnmed.  He  has  finislied 
a  temple  life.  3.  This  is  a  maiden's  name.  She  was  looking  to  the  bridal-day, 
and  death  came  unbidden,  but  not  unwelcome,  for  He  led  her  up  to  the  higher 
espous^ils  of  heaven.  Father,  mother,  lover  have  written  on  the  stone  that  "her 
sun  went  down  while  it  was  yet  day."  But  the  angels  have  written  "eventide  "; 
the  Saviour  has  written  "  finished."  4.  Here  lies  a  merchant  who  was  in  the  full 
stretch  of  his  powers.  His  name  was  a  synonym  for  truth  and  houour,  and  all 
around  are  the  beginnings  he  had  made.  Kothing  was  finished.  Yes,  all  is 
finished,  and  he  lies  here.  5.  And  now  we  come  to  the  grave  of  the  old,  old  pilgrim. 
The  shock  of  corn  seemed  more  than  ripe.  He  was  blind,  deaf,  in  pain,  helpless. 
Would  it  not  have  been  better  that  he  had  gone  some  years  sooner?  No,  no.  It 
was  the  right  time.  He  needed  all  his  days  and  all  his  experiences  to  finish  the 
temple.  IV.  The  fike  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is.  Our 
day  is  now.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  "is  coming.  Then  our  day  will  begin  once 
more  beyond,  to  have  no  more  ending.  But  there  must  be  judgment  before  glory. 
The  apostle  brings  out  this  idea  with  truthful  and  unsparing  severity.  Ag^in,  and 
again,  and  again  he  mentions  "  the  fire  "  !  and  how  shall  I  dare  try,  with  my  mis- 
leading instincts,  to  quench  God's  holy  fires?  They  will  burn  all  the  same,  and  be 
the  more  consuming  the  less  men  expect  them.  1.  God  resolves  to  take  us  through 
that  last  ordeal,  sparing  nothing  that  will  burn,  and  bringing  us  out,  if  need  be, 
with  nothing  left  to  us  of  all  our  sore  labour  under  the  sun,  that  we  ourselves  may 
be  saved — saved  so  as  by  fire.  And  wliich  is  best  ?  Our  poor  liuman  shrinking 
and  longing,  or  God's  holy  will?  For  would  you  have  "  the  wood,  the  hay,  the 
stubble,"  yonder  as  well  as  here — calcined  and  hardened  and  preserved  by  those 
fires  which  were  too  feeble  to  consume  them  ?  Better  stand  at  last  in  his  full  and 
complete  salvation,  than  in  any  respect  or  for  any  length  oi  time  come  short  of  it. 
Day  of  God  !  Day  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  with  awful  yet  with  loving  desire  we 
would  look  on  to  thee  !  The  Lord  grant  to  us  that  we  (whatever  may  come  of 
many  of  our  works),  that  we  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  on  that  day.  2.  But  let 
■us,  on  the  other  hand,  remember  that  nothing  in  us,  which  is  truly  Christian,  can 
fall  in  those  flames  at  last.  And  a  little  of  these  things  is  just  as  indestructible  as 
much.  Good  is  gold  always,  and  will  pass  through  any  fires.  If  it  is  mingled  with 
alloy  the  fire  will  be  its  salvation.  And  you  do  not  know  how  the  little  services 
you  are  rendering  will  expand  into  nobleness,  when  the  spirit  and  principle  of 
them  are  known  and  declared.  Not  one  precious  stone  which  you  put  into  your 
life  will  ever  crumble,  not  one  particle  of  g'dd  or  silver  can  perish.  He  whom  you 
serve  will  gather  up  all  the  fragments  so  that  nothing  shall  be  lost.  (A.  Bah'ifjli, 
D.D.)  Oil  the  Rock  : — One  day  a  female  friend  called  on  the  late  Piev.  William 
Evans,  a  pious  minister  in  England,  ami  a=:ked  how  he  felt  himself.  "  I  am  weak- 
ness itself,"  he  replied  ;  "  but  I  am  on  the  Rock.  I  do  not  experience  those  trans- 
ports which  some  have  expressed  in  the  view  of  death  ;  but  my  dependence  is  on 
the  mercy  of  God  in  Clirist.  Here  my  religion  began,  and  here  it  must  end." 
A  false  foundation  : — One  was  once  brought,  in  the  course  of  providence,  into  the 
company  of  a  young  lady  who  was  just  recovering  from  a  dangerous  illness. 
Speaking  of  her  illness,  among  other  things,  she  said,  "  At  one  time  I  sent  for  my 
honoured  parents,  and  beloved  brothers  and  sisters,  and  took,  as  I  thought,  my 
last  farewell  of  them.  Both  the  physicians  had  given  me  up,  and  my  friends 
expected  to  see  me  no  more."  "  We  seldom  meet  with  a  person,"  said  the  other, 
"  who  has  been  so  near  to  death  as  you  have  been.  Pray  tell  me  what  were  ynur 
feelings  when  you  were  on  the  verge  of  eternity."  "I  was  happy,"  she  replied. 
"  And  will  you  i^lease  to  tell  me  what  were  your  prospects?  "  "I  hoped  to  go  to 
heaven,  of  course."  "  Had  you  no  doubts,  no  fears,  no  suspicions?"  "None." 
"Pei haps  almost  all  hope  to  go  to  heaven;  but  I  fear,"  said  the  young  man, 
"  there  are  many  who  have  no  good  foundation  for  their  hope :  prny,  on  whnt  was 
your  liope  founded  ?  "  "  Founded  !  "  she  replied  :  "  why,  I  have  never  injured  any 
person,  and  I  had  endeavoured  to  do  all  the  good  in  my  power,  ^^'as  not  this 
sufficient?"  "It  is  a  delightful  reflection,"  said  the  student,  "that  you  have 
never  injured  any  person,  and  it  is  still  more  delightful  to  think  that  you  have 
done  all  the  good  in  your  power  ;  but  this  is  a  poor  foundation  for  a  sinner  to  rest 
upon.  Was  this  the  foundation  of  your  hope  ?  "  She  seemed  quite  astonished  at 
the  question,  and  eagerly  inquired,  "  Was  not  this  sufficient?  "  The  student  did 
not  give  a  direct  answer ;  but  observed,  "  I  am  very  thankful  that  you  did  not  die." 
"What!  do  you  think  I  should  not  have  gone  to  heaven?"  "lam  sure  you 
could  not  in  the  way  you  mentioned.     Do  you  perceive  that,  according  to  your  plan, 


cnAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  2G5 

YOU  were  going  to  heaven  witbout  Christ? — a  thing  which  no  sinner  has  done  since 
Adam  fell,  and  which  no  sinner  will  be  able  to  do  while  the  world  stands.  Be  vei'y 
thankful,  dear  Miss,  that  you  did  not  go  out  of  life  resting  on  this  delusive  founda- 
tion :  for  had  you  done  so,  the  moment  that  you  entered  eternity,  it  would  have 
given  way,  and  you  would  have  fallen  through  it  into  the  bottomless  pit."  God 
carried  home  this  word  to  her  soul :  light  broke  in  upon  her  miml.  From  that  day 
a  decided  change  took  i^lace  in  the  young  lady's  views  ;  and  a  corresponding  holi- 
ness, and  love,  and  zeal,  and  usefulness,  have  adorned  her  life.  (Scripture  Doc- 
trines Illustrated.)  Admonitions  to  ministers  and  conprefidtions : — I.  To 
MixisTEEs  (ver.  11).  1.  Ministers  are  to  preach  as  the  foundation — Christ. 
Kecollect  what  Paul's  own  Christianity  was :  a  few  facts  respecting  his  lledeemer's 
life,  a  few  of  his  Master's  prt^cep^s  out  of  which  he  educed  all  Ch'istian 
principles,  and  on  whi^-h  he  built  all  that  noble  superstructure — his  Epistles, 
liemeuiber  how  he  suras  all  up  (Phil.  iii.  10).  His  life,  death,  and  resurrection, 
working  daily  in  us,  "  being  made  manifest  in  our  body."  Christianity  is  Chri-t ; 
understand  Him,  breathe  His  spirit,  comprehend  His  mind;  Christianity  is  a  life, 
a  spirit.  Let  st  If  die  with  Christ,  and  with  Him  rise  to  a  life  of  holiness,  and  then 
you  need  not  care  what  discussions  may  arise ;  you  stand  upon  a  rock.  2.  On  this 
foundation  we  are  to  build  the  superstructure.  Christianity  is  a  fe^v  living  preg- 
nant principles,  and  on  these  j'ou  may  construct  various  buildings.  Christianity 
is  cajiable  of  endless  application  to  different  circumstances,  ages  and  intellects. 
Now  in  the  words  of  ver.  12,  observe  that  there  are  not  six  kinds  of  superstructure, 
but  two  :  gold,  silver  and  precious  stones,  the  materials  of  the  temple ;  wood, 
hay  and  stubble,  of  a  cottage ;  but  in  these  buildings  the  materials  of  each  are  of 
various  degrees  of  excellence,  and  the  latter,  good,  bad  and  iudifJerent.  Now  what 
do  thtse  symbolise  ?  Perhaps  doctrines  or  systems;  but  more  probibly  pv'rsons. 
Some  of  straw,  utterly  wonhless;  some  of  silver,  sound,  good,  but  not  brilliant 
men ;  some  of  gold,  characters  true  to  the  very  centre ;  some  of  precious  stones, 
men  in  whom  gifts  are  so  richly  mingled  with  useful  qualities  that  they  are  as 
jewels  in  the  Kedeemer's  crown.  And  such  was  the  author  of  this  Ei)istle.  3. 
Now  there  follows  from  all  this  the  doctrine  of  the  rewardableness  of  work.  All 
were  one,  on  the  one  foundation  ;  yet  they  were  not  one,  in  such  a  sense  that  all 
their  work  was  equally  valuable,  tor,  "every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward 
according  to  his  labour."  Therefore,  Christian  men,  work  on — your  work  is  not  in 
vain.  A  cup  of  cold  water,  given  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  shall  not  lose  its 
reward.  4.  There  is  also  here  a  distinction  between  the  truth  of  work  and  its 
sincerity.  In  that  day  nothing  shall  stand  but  what  is  true  ;  but  the  sincere 
worker,  even  of  untrue  work,  shall  be  saved  (ver.  15).  Sincerity  shall  save  him 
in  that  day,  but  it  cannot  accredit  his  work.  But  what  is  this  day  ?  Generally 
speaking,  time  ;  more  particularly  the  trial  day,  which  every  advent  is,  and  especi- 
ally the  last.  Nothing  gilded  or  varnished  will  remain  ;  for  just  as  fire  burns  straw 
so  must  all  that  is  not  based  on  the  truth  perish.  Then  elaborate  systems  of 
theology  shall  be  tried  and  found  worthless.  Then  many  a  Church  order, 
elaborately  contrived,  shall  be  found  something  unnecessarily  added  to  the  founda- 
tion, and  overlying  it.  And  then  many  a  minister,  who  has  prided  himself  on  the 
number  of  his  li-teners,  will  be  stripped  of  his  vain-glory,  if  that  which  seems  to 
be  souls  won  for  God,  turns  out  to  be  only  hearts  won  for  self.  II.  To  conoreoa- 
TiONS.  1.  A  warning  against  all  ministers  who  should  so  teach  as  to  split  the 
Church  into  divisions  (ver.  21).  2.  A  warning  against  sectarianism,  on  the  ground 
of  Christian  liberty  (ver.  21).  Man  enters  this  world,  finding  him.self  in  the  midst 
of  mighty  forces  of  which  he  seems  the  sport  and  prey.  Bat  soon  Christianity 
reveals  to  him  God's  will,  which  makes  these  things  co-operate  for  his  good.  And 
so  he  learns  his  own  free-will,  and  uses  them  as  the  sailor  does  the  winds,  which 
as  he  uses  them  becume  his  enemies  or  his  friends.  Then  it  is  that  he  is 
emancipated  from  the  iron  bondiige  to  circumstances:  then  all  things  are  his — 
this  marvellous  life,  so  full  of  endless  meaning,  so  pregnant  with  infinite  oppor- 
tunities. Still  more  death,  which  seems  to  come  like  a  tyrant,  to  lead  him  to 
higher  life.  Paul  is  his,  to  teach  him  freedom.  Apollos  his,  to  animate  him  with 
his  eloquence.  Cephas  his,  to  fire  him  with  his  courage.  Every  author  hi^,  to 
impart  to  him  his  treasures.  3.  St.  Paul  refers  all  this  to  the  universal  law  of 
sacrifice  :  all  things  are  ours  on  this  condition — that  we  are  Christ's.  The  law 
which  made  Christ  God's  has  made  us  Chiist's.  {F.  W.  Robei'tson,  IM.A.)  Clirist 
the  onlij  foundation  : — First,  therefore.  He  is  to  be  laid  down  as  the  only  lo'indation 
in  respect  of  knowledge  and  instruction.     Secondly,  we  must  pr?ach  Christ  the 


2C6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

foundation  of  all  strength  and  power,  from  whom  we  receive  all  abiUty  to  do  any- 
thing that  is  good.  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengthens  me" 
(Phil.  iv.  3).  Thirdly,  Christ  is  preached  as  a  foundation  when  He  is  exalted  in 
our  ministry  to  be  the  Head  of  the  Chuich  and  He  that  governeth  all  things. 
Fourthly,  Christ  is  to  be  set  up  the  only  foundation  in  respect  of  mediation  and 
intercession  with  God.  Fifthly,  from  this  floweth  another  necessary  way  of  preach- 
ing Christ  a  foundation,  viz.  of  acceptation  of  our  persons  and  duties.  Sixthly, 
Christ  is  to  be  preached  as  the  foundation  of  all  fulness  for  all  our  necessities  and 
spiritual  wants.  Two  or  three  particulars  more  we  are  to  instance  in  by  which  it 
may  appear  in  what  Christ  is  laid  a  foundation.  Seventhly,  He  is  to  be  preached 
as  the  Fountain  of  all  the  happiness,  joy,  and  spiritual  content  the  godly  hearer 
can  have.  Ei.'hthly,  Christ  is  to  be  preached  as  tlie  Person  with  whom  we  are  to 
close  in  all  ordinances.  Lastly,  we  are  to  i^reach  Christ,  not  only  as  the  founda- 
tion of  our  approaches  to  God,  but  of  all  God's  gracious  actions  and  visitations  to 
US.  In  the  next  place  let  us  consider  the  reasons  why  we  ministers  are  to 
lay  no  other  foundation  but  Christ :  to  make  Him  all  in  all.  First,  it  is  the  main 
end  and  scope  of  the  Scri|itures  only  to  exalt  Christ,  and  the  end  of  the  ministry 
should  be  the  same  with  the  end  of  the  Scriptures.  Secondly,  as  the  Scripture,  so 
God's  great  purpose  and  counsel  from  all  eternity  was,  to  set  up  Christ  and  to  have 
Him  glorified.  Thirdly,  we  must  preach  Christ  the  foundation,  because  in  Him 
there  is  such  a  treasure  of  the  riches  of  God's  grace  and  God's  love.  Fourthly, 
therefore  are  we  to  exnlt  Christ  in  our  ministry,  to  lay  Him  the  foundirtion, 
because  in  heaven,  though  Christ  wi!l  then  lay  down  the  exercise  of  His  mediatory 
kingdom,  yet  the  glory  and  honour  must  be  given  unto  Him  for  ever.  Fifthly,  the 
necessity  of  preaching  Christ  the  foundation  ariseth  from  the  ignorance  of  people 
who  do  grossly  err  about  Christ  both  doctrinally  and  practically.  Sixthly,  the 
necessity  aiipeareth  because  of  the  subtilty  and  enmity  of  Satan,  who  has  con- 
tinually sel  liimself  against  Christ  and  His  Church.  Seventhly,  we  have  the  more 
need  to  exalt  Christ  because  there  is  proneuess  in  every  man  to  trust  to  his  own 
work.     {A.  Burgess.) 

Vers.  12-l.T.  Now  if  any  man  build  on  this  foundation  gold,  silver,  precious 
stones,  wood,  hay,  stubble.  —  Vlits.-iic  hiiihiings  cnnl  thfir  inatcriuls  : — In  such  cities 
as  Ephesus,  where  this  letter  was  written,  or  Corinth,  to  which  it  was  addressed, 
there  was  a  signal  difference  (far  greater  than  m  modern  European  cities) 
between  the  gorgeous  splendour  of  the  great  public  buildings  and  the  meanness 
and  squalor  of  th(jse  streets  where  the  poor  and  profligate  resided.  The  former 
were  constructed  of  marble  and  granite  ;  the  capitils  of  their  colamns  and  their 
roofs  were  richly  decorated  with  silver  and  gold ;  the  latter  were  mean  structures, 
run  up  with  boards  for  walls,  with  straw  in  the  interstices  and  thatch  on  the  top. 
This  is  the  contrast  on  which  St.  Paul  siezes,  .  .  .  not,  as  sometimes  the  passage 
is  treated,  as  though  the  picture  presented  were  that  of  a  dunghill  of  straw  and 
sticks,  with  jewels,  such  as  diamonds  and  emeralds,  among  the  rubbish.  He 
then  points  out  that  a  day  will  Cdme  when  the  fire  will  burn  up  those  wretched 
edifices  of  wood  and  straw,  and  leave  unharmed  in  their  glorious  beauty  those 
that  were  raised  of  marble  and  granite  and  decorated  with  gold  and  silver,  as  the 
temples  of  Corinth  itself  survived  the  conflagration  of  Mummius,  which  burnt 
the  hovels  around.     (Dean  Hmcson.)  Tlie  2)eris}iahle  from  the  imperishuhle  : — 

One  man  writes  a  big  book  about  baptism,  and  says  it  means  "  immersion,"  and 
winds  up  by  thanking  God  that,  whatever  other  men  have  thought  fit  to  believe, 
he  has  had  grace  enough  to  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  Christ !  Another  man 
writes  another  big  book  and  says  it  is  not  immersion,  and  thanks  God,  if  he  has 
only  been  sprinkled,  he  is  not  so  unciiaritable  as  some  people  !  And  then  they 
read  each  others'  books,  and  "  vain  janglings  "  follow,  as  the  apostle  calls  them, 
"  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  railings,  evil  surmisings,  and  perverse  disputings." 
"  Stubble  !  "  Every  inch  of  it.  For  all  purposes  of  profit  to  the  kingdom  of 
Christ — worthless.  The  fire  sha'l  consume  their  books  and  the  injury  will  be,  not 
to  Christ,  depend  upon  it,  but  to  them-elves.  "  If  any  man's  work  shall  be 
burned  he  shall  suffer  loss,"  etc.  I  was  asked  if  I  thought  Eoman  Catholics 
would  be  saved.  "Saved!"  Assuredly,  if  they  believe  Christ  died  to  save  them. 
"But  they  practise  auricular  confession;  they  offer  prayers  for  the  dead;  they 
celebrate  the  mass;  they  invoke  the  saints;  they  pay  homage  to  the  Pope." 
Undoubtedly  ;  and  as  we  believe,  unhappily  and  unlawfully,  they  do.  But  if  they 
believe  in  Christ,  is  all  this  to  impeiil  their  salvation?     Is  not  this  the  "wood, 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  COraNTIIIANS.  267 

hay,  and  stubble"  of  their  false  systems  in  GoJ's  estimation,  and  useless  for 
every  jiurpose  of  progress  or  consolidation  in  the  operations  of  the  Church  ? 
These,  with  other  phases  of  error — some  of  them  peculiar  to  Protestantism — the 
"fire"  will  reveal;  and  they  shall  perish,  and  their  removal  will  prove  them  to 
have  been  human  in  their  origin,  and  innovations  upon  the  truth  of  God.  But 
the  "  truth,"  and  the  one  embodiment  of  that  truth  as  it  shall  be  seen  in  a 
purified  and  finished  Church,  shall  remain  unmoved.  Gold,  silver,  precious 
stones !  Faith,  love,  zeal !  No  fire  shall  effect  these.  They  are  invulnerable. 
The  removing  of  those  things  that  are  shaken  as  of  things  tliat  are  maile  shall 
prove  the  strength  and  solidity  of  those  things  which  could  be  shaken  and  which 
shall  remain.  "  Therefore,  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  removed,  let  us 
have  grace  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear  : 
for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  (.S*.  Ilolin.'s.)  The  doctrine  and  triitJis  of  Christ 
are  very  preciotis  and  excellent: — To  open  the  doctrine,  let  us  consider.  What  is 
implied  in  this  when  the  truths  of  Christ  are  thus  called  gold  and  precious  stones  ? 
First,  the  preoiousness  of  them  is  hereby  declared.  They  ought  to  be  esteemed 
and  desired  by  us  as  much  as  the  covetous  man  desires  his  gold  and  silver.  This 
made  the  holy  mariyrs  willingly  die  for  it ;  they  thought  it  more  precious  than 
life.  The  apostle  calls  it  "that  good  thing  committed  to  thee."  "To  you  that 
believe  Christ  is  precious"  (1  Pet.  ii.  7).  Secondly,  it  doth  denote  the  rarity  of  it. 
It  is  hardly  and  difficultly  obtained.  Gold  and  silver  is  not  so  common  as  the 
stones  of  the  street.  There  are  but  few  mines  of  gold  to  the  moimtains  of  earth. 
And  thus  for  the  most  part  the  Churches  of  God  have  been  so  corrupted  with 
errors  that  very  little  gold  did  appear.  It  was  a  rare  thing  to  have  any  one 
truth  of  God  made  known.  In  the  Old  Testament,  under  many  kings,  idolatry  and 
supeistition  had  so  prevailed  that  the  book  of  the  law  of  God  in  Josiah's  time  was 
a  rare  thing;  and  in  Asa's  time  "they  had  been  without  the  law  and  a  teaching 
prophet  for  a  long  while"  (2  Chron.  xv.  3).  So  that  it  is  not  so  easy  a  matter  to 
obtain  the  truth,  that  is  found  out  with  much  i)r;iyer,  humility,  holiness  (jf  life, 
and  industiious  using  of  all  means  appointed  by  God.  So  that  the  Scripture  is 
the  mine  where  all  the  gold  and  silver  is  ;  there  we  must  dig,  thence  we  must 
replenish  ourselves.  Thirdly,  there  is  implied  the  durableness  Hud  constancy  of  it. 
Gold  will  not  melt  aw-ay  in  the  lire  or  be  consumed  as  hay  and  stubble  will.  So 
that  the  truths  of  God  are  so  constant  and  abiding  that  when  a  man  comes  to 
be  aftiicted,  to  be  persecuted,  to  be  undone  for  the  truth  of  God,  this  will  abide. 
Fourthly,  the  truths  of  Christ  are  compared  to  gold  and  silver  because  of  the 
solidity  and  ponderosity  of  them  ;  they  are  weighty  and  heavy ;  whereas  errors 
are  compared  to  hay  and  stubble;  what  is  lighter  than  these?  Whatsoever 
opinion  then  is  accompanied  with  vanity,  levity,  and  emptiness,  it  is  not  solid, 
grave,  and  substantial ;  refuse  that.  Fifthly,  they  are  compared  to  gold  because 
of  the  purity  and  sincerity  of  them.  Tne  truths  of  God,  they  have  an  holy 
simplicity  and  sincerity,  and  therefore  false  teachers  are  said  to  corrupt  the  pure 
Word  of  God,  as  hucksters  do  their  wine  (2  Cor.  ii.).  David  compareth  God's 
Word  to  "pure  gold,  even  seven  times  refined"  (Psa.  xix.).  And  hereby  it 
becomes  a  very  dangerous  sin  for  any  to  counterfeit  it  or  corrupt  it.  Sixthly,  it  is 
compared  to  gold  for  the  efficacy  and  choice  virtue  thereof.  Seventhly,  they  are 
compared  to  gold  and  silver  for  the  usefulness  and  j^rofitableness  to  all  things. 
Many  outward  comforts  in  this  world  may  be  had  for  gold  and  silver ;  you  may 
have  friends,  food,  raiment.  The  truth  of  justification  by  faith  in  Christ,  is  not 
that  more  worth  than  the  gold  of  Ophir  ?  What  precious  and  powerful  opera- 
tions hath  it  upon  the  hearts  of  the  ungodly?  Eightliiy,  the  truths  of  Christ  are 
compared  to  gold  and  precious  stones  because  they  are  able  to  enrich  a  man  with 
all  graces.  In  the  second  place,  to  build  gold  and  precious  stones  on  this  founda- 
tion is  not  only  to  preach  iround  and  pure  matter,  but  this  matter  in  a  pure  and 
exact  way.  First,  in  preaching  of  them  after  ScripLire  authoritj',  when  they  are 
conveyed  unto  you,  as  having  the  stamp  and  authority  of  God.  Secondly,  it  is  to 
preach  them  with  Scripture  gravity  and  solidity.  As  the  oracles  of  God  (1  Pet. 
iv.  11).  Tliirdly,  they  are  to  be  preached  with  Scripture  simplicity  in  respect  oi 
aims  and  ends.  For  though  a  man  should  build  gold  and  silver,  yet  if  it  be  for 
human  glory  and  earthly  greatness  he  builds  hay  and  stubble,  though  this  be  known 
to  God  only.  But  this  fire  will  dis>-over  the  secrets  of  men's  hearts.  With  what 
delight  and  holy  covetousness  you  should  receive  the  truths  of  Christ ;  they  are  no 
less  woith  than  gold,  than  precious  stones.  The  tabernacle  was  covered  all  over 
with  gold,  and  they  brought  precious  stones  to  it ;  and  thus  is  the  Church  of  God 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

still  to  be  built  (Eev.  xxi.  19).  (A.  Burpess.)  The  losses  of  the  saved: — 1.  You 
all  hope  in  smiie  way  to  be  saved  at  last.  The  mercy  of  God  is  so  all  but 
exbaustless ;  He  has  such  a  marvellous  variety  of  saving  contrivances ;  and  the 
thought  of  being  shut  out  for  ever  in  hell  is  so  horrible,  no  wonder  that  you  hope 
to  be  eventually  saved.  But  hopes  amid  carelessness,  worldliness,  or  sin  are  no 
good  sign,  for  they  are  hindrances  to  salvation,  and  to  that  fear  with  which  the 
apostle  tells  us  to  work  it  out.  But  be  it  as  we  wish,  viz.,  that  these  hopes  will 
not  imperil,  but  secure,  our  salvation — that  will  be  gain  indeed;  but  be  it  as 
we  wish,  that  this  hope  will  not,  by  the  mercy  of  Cxod,  wreck  the  salvation  of  any 
one,  it  will  also  be  infinite,  eternal  loss  ;  for  it  will  be  a  loss  of  that  measure  of 
the  capacity  of  the  infinite  love  of  God,  which  the  soul  might  have  gained,  but 
would  not.  2.  Here  we  are  in  the  province,  not  of  God's  mercy  only,  but  of  His 
justice.  It  is  by  His  mercy  in  Christ  tbat  we  are  saved  at  all ;  but  when  we  have 
been  saved,  the  reward  is  according  to  our  works.  What,  then,  I  wish  you  to 
dwell  upon  is  not  the  risk  of  hell,  which  a  careless  or  worldly  ambitious  life 
involves,  but  the  certain  sufferings  of  the  day  of  judgment  to  some  who  shall  be 
saved,  and  the  irremediable  loss  which  they  have  brought  upon  themselves.  3. 
And  this  pain  and  loss  will  not  come  to  us  through  sins  which  separate  men  from 
Christ.  Day  by  day,  and  year  by  year,  men  will  have  gone  on,  laying  tier  after  tier 
of  their  spiritual  building,  which,  on  account  of  their  real  belief  and  trust  in  Christ, 
they  thought  enduring.  They  built  on  and  on  ;  whether  they  had,  from  time  to 
time,  mii?givings  is  not  said.  But  if  they  had  they  stifled  them.  For  they  builJed 
on  unto  the  end.  And  they  must  all  the  while  have  been  earnest  in  their  way ; 
perhaps  they  were  praised,  and  the  praise  blinded  them  the  more.  Some  of  them 
ni«y  "have  left  names  behind  them."  Oh,  if  the  departed  still  know  of  what 
passes  on  this  our  earth,  what  a  hideous  mockery  must  that  posthumous  fame  be 
when  the  temple  has  collapsed  in  ashes.  A  life-long  labour  perished!  It  is 
piteous,  even  when  the  temporal  end,  for  which  a  man  has  toiled  all  his  life, 
crashes  at  last.  But  remediless !  And  for  eternity !  Plainly,  there  must  have 
been  self-deceit  about  it.  For  not  without  a  man's  own  will  and  his  own  fault 
would  God  have  allowed  such  an  one  to  remain  so  deceived  to  the  end.  4.  What, 
then,  are  things  which  shall  not  be  burned — gold,  silver,  costly  stones,  which 
represent  something  costly  and  something  very  pure  ?  They  are  of  different 
values,  but  all  agree  in  this,  that  they  are  pure.  All  done  for  Christ,  from  the  cup 
of  cold  water  to  the  martyr's  chariot  of  fire,  have  their  several  values  ;  but  all  spring 
from  the  one  pure  motive,  love  of  Him.  What  else  can  we  even  imagine  that 
God  will  reward?  Why  should  we  look  hereafter  for  a  second  reward  from  God 
for  doing  what  our  own  natural  dispositions  prompted  us  to  do,  and  which  brought 
their  own  reward  ?  True,  all  things,  even  eating  and  drinking,  if  done  to  the 
glory  of  God,  have  their  eternal  recompense,  bt  cause  in  each  one  of  these 
ordinary  things  we  may  please  God  and  gain  greater  grace  and  larger  capaciousness 
for  His  infinite  love.  But  what  so  common  as  to  have  mixed  motives  for  our 
actions,  or,  rather,  what  so  rare  as  to  have  any  one  motive  for  any  one  action, 
unless,  indeed,  it  be  a  lower  one?  5.  But  the  day  of  judgment  must  clear  up  all 
this,  and  then,  as  shall  be  the  issue,  so  "  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God." 
And  since  nothing  can  receive  praise  from  God  which  is  not  more  or  less  purely 
done  for  God,  then  the  day  of  judgment  will,  I  fear,  to  very  many  of  the  saved, 
who  now  stand  well  with  themselves,  be  a  terrible  discovery,  how  very  little,  in 
their  whole  lives,  they  have  really  done  for  love  of  God.  And  this  is  what  the 
ai^ostle  means  by  those  things  which  shall  be  burned  up.  Things  they  are  of 
different  degrees  of  lightness,  by  which  different  minds  imposed  upon  themselves, 
as  though  they  were  of  value  when  they  were  of  none.  But  the  most  plausible 
will  not  leave  a  rack  behind,  more  than  the  most  openly  worthless.  6.  Nothing 
but  a  continued  active  habit  of  directing  our  actions  to  God,  such  as  results  from 
offering  them  to  God,  with  continuous  prayer  for  grace,  will  rescue  some  fragments 
of  our  acts  from  the  unclean  contact  of  our  besetting  faults.  (E.  B.  Piisey,  D.D.) 
Loss  throihih  little  sirs  : — You  know  well  what  would  become  of  a  house  of  wood 
or  of  a  rick  if  fire  was  kindled  around  it,  on  however  good  and  solid  a  foundation 
of  stone  it  might  be  raised.  The  foundation  upon  which  it  was  built  would  not  save 
it.  So  then  there  are  works,  done  by  those  who  do  not  yet  forsake  Christ,  which 
shall  not  stand  in  the  fire  of  the  great  day.  What  are  they,  then  ?  Are  they  great, 
deadly  sins,  such  as  the  apostle  elsewhere  speaks  of,  "Adultery,  fornication, 
uncleanness,  hatred,  drunkenness,  revelling,  and  such  like"?  No.  Such  works 
are   not   and   cannot   be   built  upon  the  loundatiou  ;   they,  as  far  as  in  us  lies, 


CHAP.  Ill]  J.   COIilNTIIIANS.  269 

destroy  the  foundation,  and  the  soul  itself.  They  who  do  these  things  do  not 
build  upon  "the  llock  which  is  Ciu-ist";  they  "build  their  house  on  the  sand; 
Rnd  the  ruin  of  that  house,"  our  Lord  says,  "  is  great."  What,  then,  are  these 
things  done  by  a  Christian  which  bring  upon  him  such  terrible  loss  for  eternity? 
They  are  heaps  of  little  sins  ;  little  self-indulgences  against  the  law  and  will  and 
mind  of  God,  which  do  not  extinguish  the  love  of  God  in  the  heart,  yet  chill  it 
exceedingly;  little  vanities  ;  little  envies ;  little  self-seekings  or  selfishnesses  ;  little 
detractions  of  a  neighbour;  little  unseriousnesses ;  little  conteniptuousnesses  ; 
idle  imaginings ;  petty  angers ;  little  deceitfulnesses  or  self-praise.  Sins  they 
are  of  which  people  make  very  little,  because  one  by  one  they  think  them  little 
sins,  but  which,  weighed  together,  become  very  heavy.  Tliese  encrust  the  soul,  as 
it  were,  with  habits  of  mind,  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  with  which  they  cannot 
enter  heaven.  In  heaven  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  thought  of  vain-glory;  no 
petty  repugnance  or  mislike  of  one  another ;  no  suspicion  ;  no  comparison  of 
ourselves  with  others ;  no  discontent ;  no  repining ;  no  thought  that  we  are  not 
cared  for  enough  or  loved  enough;  no  grudge;  no  remembuince  of  uiikindness. 
And  if  all  these  things  must  be  left  and  laid  aside  at  the  very  portals  of  heaven  ; 
if  none  of  these  things  can  stand  the  fire  of  the  day  of  judgment;  if  the  slightest 
feeling  of  unlove  would  be  a  dark  spot,  seen  through  the  whole  brilliancy  of 
heaven  and  unbearable  in  its  transparent  purity  and  brightness  ;  what  are  any  of  us 
doing  if  we  are  not  using  our  utmost  strength,  all  the  power  of  our  souls,  to  lay 
them  aside  now?  (Ibid.)  Every  man's  work  shall  be  .  .  .  revealed  by  fire; 
and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is. — The  rcrcldtion  and 
test  of  fire : — The  nature  of  every  one's  work  or  superstructure  shall  sooner  or 
later  be  known  ;  for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  shall  dawn  in  a  flood  of  fire.  The 
house  of  gold  and  silver  shall  be  lit  up  by  its  dazzling  brilliancy  ;  but  the  house 
of  wood  and  thatch  shall  be  burnt  up.  And  not  only  so,  but  whereas  the  builder 
whose  house  is  consumed  will  lose  his  reward,  having  nothing  to  sbow,  and  though 
he  himself,  as  having  built  on  a  true  foundation,  will  be  saved,  yet  he  will  come 
out  singed  and  scorched  as  by  an  escape  out  of  a  burning  ruin.  It  is  possible 
that  this  whole  image  may  have  been  suggested  or  illustrated  by  the  conflagration 
of  Corinth  under  Mummius;  the  stately  temples  standing  amidst  the  universal 
destruction   of  the   meaner   buildings.       (Dean   Stanlei/.)  I'hat   all  errors  in 

religion,  though  not  jundamcntal,  are  no  better  than  hay  and  stubble  : — Consider, 
first,  though  all  errors  in  opinion  and  religion  have  no  better  a  name  and  no 
better  a  nature,  yet  those  that  build  them  do  not  think  so.  They  judge  what  they 
build  gold  and  silver ;  they  think  their  monsters  beautiful  and  comely.  The  false 
prophets  in  the  Old  Testament,  they  would  presumptuously  call  their  dreams  and 
imaginations  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Secondly,  when  the  apostle  calls  these  errors 
hay  and  stubble,  he  doth  not  speak  of  fundamental  errors  neither,  but  such  as  are 
consistent  with  and  built  on  the  true  foundation.  They  do  not  damn  the  author 
of  them,  but  they  make  his  salvation  difficult.  "  He  shall  be  saved,  but  by  fire." 
So  that  as  all  sins  are  not  alike,  so  neither  are  all  errors.  As  in  sickness  some 
are  mortal  and  deprive  of  life  immediately,  others  are  not  so.  In  the  second 
place,  let  us  consider  why  the  apostle  calls  errors  by  such  names^wood,  hay,  and 
stubble.  First,  because  of  the  vileness  and  contemj)tibleness  of  them.  Men,  if 
they  understand  the  Scripture  and  walk  by  that  rule,  would  no  more  regard  them 
than  the  straw  under  their  feet.  Secondly,  it  is  compared  to  hay  and  stubble  for 
the  levity  and  uncertainty  of  it.  Now  the  lightness  and  uncertainty  appeareth  in 
three  things.  It  cannot  abide  the  touchstone;  it  cannot  endure  to  be  tried. 
Straw  cannot  endure  the  fire.  Thirdly,  errors  are  compared  to  hay  and  stubble 
for  the  uselessness  and  unprofitableness  of  them.  (1)  They  do  not  truly  inform 
and  enlighten  the  mind.  (2)  The  truths  of  Christ  are  profitable  to  sauctification 
and  holiness.  "  Sanctify  them  by  Thy  truth"  (Johnxiv.).  (3)  They  are  unprofitable 
for  any  sound  comfort  and  joy.  "  That  we  through  the  comfort  of  the  Scriptures 
might  have  hope"  (Rom.  xv.  4).  (4)  They  are  not  profitable  for  duration  or  con- 
tinuance. This  straw  will  not  keep  otf  the  rain  of  God's  tempests.  To  show  the  folly 
either  of  i^uch  teachers  or  hearers  that  dote  on  errors,  that  admire  hay  and  stubble, 
as  if  it  were  g  'Id  and  precious  stones.  Oh,  try  and  prove  things  by  the  Word  ere 
you  rejoice  or  boast  in  them  !  ^Yhat  makes  a  Church  truly  glorious,  even  when  it 
is  pure  from  errors  and  heresies  ?  A  Church  embracing  the  truth  is  like  a  goodly 
edifice  of  all  beautiful  excellencies ;  but  where  errors  are  there  is  dishonour  to  it. 
In  all  the  matters  of  religion,  see  what  solidity  and  profit  there  is  in  the  thing 
thou  believest.     (A.  Burgess.)        That  all  the  ways  and  ivorks  of  wickedness,  though 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

actpd  in  never  so  secret  a  manner,  shall  he  made  manifest : — I.  We  shall  show  what 
KIND  OF  HIDDEN  WICKEDNESS  SHALL  BE  MADK  MANIFEST.  Fii'st,  all  the  secict  and  hidden 
thoughts,  affections,  and  purposes  of  the  heart,  God  will  one  day  make  manifest  to 
the  whule  world.  That  as  there  are  a  world  of  flies  and  motes  m  the  air  which  we 
never  see  till  the  sunbeams  arise,  so  there  are  thousands  of  proud,  unclean,  covetous, 
and  malicious  thoughts  and  purposes  lodging  in  men's  hearts  which  the  world 
never  knows,  but  God  will  one  day  have  heaven  and  earth  take  notice  of  them. 
Oh,  then,  what  a  curb  should  this  be  to  thy  heart,  to  thy  thoughts  !  Secondly, 
all  the  impure  and  unclean  works  of  the  flesh  committed  in  secret,  these  also  shall 
be  made  manifest.  Thirdly,  the  hid  ien  works  of  thieving  and  stealing  and 
nujustly  taking  away  of  other  men's  goods  will  one  day  be  manifest.  Fourthly, 
there  is  a  hidden  work  of  unrighteousness  which  is  not  plain  stealing,  but  it  is 
crafty  and  artificial  cosening  in  thy  trading  and  commerce  with  others.  Fifthly, 
carnal  and  worldly  policy  to  have  earthly  greatness  and  power  end  honour  in  the 
world  :  this  is  a  very  deep  and  secret  work,  but  God  will  manifest  it.  Sixthly, 
dissimulations  and  iuconstaneies   in   matter  of  religion.     II.  In   the  next  place, 

CONSIDER    THE    AGGRAVATION    OF    THOSE    SINS    THAT     ARE     SECRET     AND     HIDDEN.        1.     It 

argueth  a  man  hath  more  consciousness  to  himself  that  he  doth  not  well,  therefore 
he  would  not  have  the  world  know.     2.  This  secret  sinning  puts  far  more  lesp  'Ct 
and  fear  upon  men  than  God.     3.  The  more  secret  any  wickedness  is,  it  argueth 
the  heart  is  more  studious  and  industrious  about  it,  how  to  contrive  it,  how  to  bring 
it  about.     Take  heed  of  secret  hidden  sins,  God  will  one  day  manifest  what  thou 
hast  been.     (Ibid.)        That  all  the  hidden  and  secret  icays  of  taUe  doctrines  God  will 
one  day   mal;e  manifrst : — I.    God  will   manifest   all   thdse   hidden  causes  and 
ENDS  OF  thy  false  DOCTRINES.     Now  the  ScriiDture  givfs  these  causes.     1.  Pride 
and  self-conceit,  or  overweening  of  thy  own  ahilitif-s  and  sufficiency;  such  a  man 
is  in  the  highway  to  all  errors  :  "For  the  humble  and  meek  God  will  teach"  (Psa. 
XXV.).     The  valleys  are  f  luitful  when  the  high  mountains  are  barren.     2.  Ignorance 
and  weakness  of  judgment.     And  truly  this  is  the  most  innocent  cause  of  errors 
when  men,  through  ignorance  and  weakness,  go  in  a  false  way ;  yet  this  doth  not 
excuse  (2  Pet.  iii.  16).     3.  Hyi-iocrisy.     The  Scripture  braudeth  that  for  a  heavy 
cause  sometimes  of  the  errors  in  religion.     4.  Ambition  and  affectation  of  high 
places  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  to  be  ab^ve  others.     This  hath  made  men  build 
hav  and   stubble.     -5.  Discontents  and   impatieucies  at  some  things  which  have 
fallen  out  in  the  Church  hath  been  a  great  cause  to  make  divisions  and  to  sow 
tares  amongst  the  w!  eat.     6.  Envy  and  sinful  emulation  to  the  gifts  and  a'-ilities 
of  others  that   have  been  above  them.     This  hath  made  men   bring   in  strange 
doctrines.     So  then,  as  some  sharp  thorny  bu-hes  liave  pleasant  blossoms  on  them, 
so  many  specious  and  fair  opinions  that  are  set  out  with  much  glory  may  yet  grow 
upon  such  thorny  and  corrupt  causes.     7.  A  contemplative  delight  in  a  mau's  own 
notions  and  conceptions  he  hath.     This  hath  caused  more  errors  than  anything, 
especially   in   learned  men.     II.  The   nature   of  every  man's  doctrine,  and,  if 
false,  then  the  mask  will    be    pulled   off.       It   will   appear  counteifeit  coin, 
and   you   know   to   be   guilty  of   that   is   a   capital  crime.      God's  authority  and 
stamp  will  not  be  found  on  it.     Kehoboam,  when  the  golden  vessels  were  taken  out 
of  the  Temple,  he  put  brass  ones  in   the  stead.     III.  God  will   manifest  every 
man's  work  in  the  cunning  subtilty  he  hath  managed  it  with.     For  the  Scrip- 
ture Sfieaks  of  the  crafty  ways  men  use  that  they  do  adulterate  the  Word  of  God. 
For — 1.  Before  hearers  are  publicly  piepared  for   them,   they  go   privately  and 
secretly  vent  th  ir  wares.     They  are  said  to  creep  into  houses  (2  Tim.  iii.).     They 
are  the  moles  that  creep  un''er  ground,  whereas  Christ  said  He  taught  nothing 
but  what  He  did  publicly  ;  all  did  hear.     2.  Tlieir  craft  is  seen  in  mingling  some 
tiuths  with  their  error,  that  while  we  take  one  we  may  swallow  down  the  other. 
3.  This  craft  is  seen  either  in  sweet  and  winning  words,  full  of  love  and  kindness,- 
or  else  in  pretence  to  deep  and  sublime  mysteiies.     4.  Tlieir  circumspection  to 
observe  the  fit  seasons  to  disseminate  their  errors.     Thus,  while  all  were  asleep, 
tares  were  sown  upon  the   fittest   subjects — women,  as  being  more   affectionate. 
"  They  lead  captive  silly  women  "  (2   I  im.  iii.  6).     Take  we  heed  how  we  build,  and 
that  is  by  avoiding  the  cau>es  of  error,  pride,  ambition,  envy,  discontent.     Alas ! 
thou  hast  cause  enough  to  be  humbled ;  the  moiv  thou  knowest,  thou  wilt  s  <?  thy 
ignorance  the  more.     A  poor  man  thinketh  a  little  sum  of  money  great  treasur.  s. 
(ibid.)         TJtat    God   hath    His    time   lolien   He    ivill    discover    the   en'urs  of  ■w.i'ii's 
doctrines: — First,  in  that  the  Scripture  calls  the  time  of  manifestation  a  "day," 
wherein  is  light  and  the  sunbeams ;  it  doth  excellently  imply  that  all  the  while 


CH.u>.  III.]  I.   CORiyTHIANS.  271 

there  are  coriuptions  in  doctrine  and  worship  that  time  is  a  time  of  darkness.  Let 
them  never  so  mncb  rejoice  in  tliem,  and  count  them  happy  times,  yet  the  Scrip- 
ture calls  them  dark  times.  Secondly,  there  are  no  foolish  builders  that  thus 
deform  God's  temple  but  they  are  by  God's  jiermission ;  in  His  wrath  and  anger, 
because  men  have  abused  His  truth  and  waxed  wanton  under  it,  therefore  hath 
He  sent  the  spirit  of  delusion  and  errors  amongst  men  (2  Thess.  ii.  10).  Thirdly, 
as  the  corrupt  errors  of  men  came  from  God's  anger,  so  in  mercy  He  hath 
appointed  times  wherein  He  will  purge  and  take  away  their  dross.  Fourthly,  this 
day  of  Ciod's  revealing  may  be  a  long  while  as  to  our  expectation.  You  may  see 
only  chaff  and  no  wheat ;  and  this  may  be  a  long  while,  so  that  the  ungodly  do 
even  languish  under  their  expectations.  These  things  thus  explained,  let  us 
consider  the  reasons  why  God  will  have  a  day  to  declare  men's  works  in  matter  of 
false  doctrines.  And  tirst,  because  the  truth  of  God  is  dear  and  precious  to  him. 
Christ  Him-^elf  makes  it  one  main  reason  why  He  came  into  the  world  to  bear 
witness  to  God's  truth.  Secondly,  it  is  necessary  there  should  be  a  time,  because 
of  the  people  who  belong  to  God's  grace,  that  they  may  see  their  errors  and  bewail 
tbem  ;  that  they  may  redeem  the  time  by  pulling  down  their  hay  and  stubble  and 
building  gold  and  silver.  Lastly,  in  respect  of  men  hardened  in  their  errors,  that 
their  obstinacy  may  appear  the  more  ;  that  when  they  will  not  see,  though  the  day 
appear,  who  then  can  justify  them?  To  embrace  those  days  of  light  and  revelation 
which  G'd  brings  into  the  world.  (Ibid.)  That  God  u.seth  to  brini/ people  out  of 
errors  ami  false  icays  hij  Ilis  Word  and  afllictioiis  : — To  understand  this,  consider 
that  though  the  Word  and  aillictions  both  help  to  bring  a  man  out  of  false  ways, 
yet  far  differently.  For,  first,  the  ^Yord  of  God  is  of  itself  sufficient,  in  a  way  of 
light,  to  inform  and  instruct,  and  hath  threatenings  also  to  be  like  a  goad  in  the 
side ;  but  afflictions  of  themselves  do  not  inform,  do  not  teach.  God's  Word  is  able 
to  reduce  without  affliction^,  but  afflictions  cannot  do  anything  without  God's 
Word.  Secondly,  there  is  a  difference  between  the  Word  and  afflictions,  because 
though  afflictions  have  a  voice  as  well  as  the  Word,  and  the  rod  speaks  as  well  as 
God's  \\'ord,  yet  the  Word  of  God  doth  it  distir.ctly  and  plainly,  afflictions  in  a 
general  manner.  Thirdly,  though  the  Word  of  God  be  tbus  only  able  to  instruct 
and  convince,  being  a  perfect  rule,  yet  that  doth  not  exclude  other  helps,  especially 
the  ministry  ;  for  ministers  are  called  the  lights  and  guides.  Let  us  see  how  God 
by  the  Word  reduceth  the  wandering  sheep.  First,  the  Word  of  God  is  insti  umental 
to  open  the  eye-,  to  enlighten  the  dark  understanding.  Secondly,  the  Word  of  God 
is  fire  to  try  men's  works,  because  it  containeth  all  matter  nece^sary  to  salvation. 
Thirdly,  the  Word  of  God  will  be  a  fire  to  try,  because  it  doth  direct  t)  all  those 
means  whereby  we  may  come  out  of  all  errors.  But  you  will  s^y,  "  How  is  God's 
Word  a  fire?  How  doth  that  reveal?"  Answer  1.  The  defect  is  not  in  the 
Scripture,  but  in  men  themselves.  The  owl  and  bat  are  made  blinder  by  the  sun- 
beams, not  through  any  defect  in  the  sun.  Secondly,  men  swallow  down  first  the 
sweet  poison  of  errors  from  false  teachnrs,  and  then  they  think  every  jilace  in  the 
Scripture  makes  for  them.  Thirdly,  they  do  not  attend  to  the  whole  Scripture. 
Lastly,  it  is  not  enough  to  have  Scripture,  to  have  many  texts,  but  we  are  also  to 
make  use  of  tliose  helps  for  the  understanding  of  them  which  God  hath 
appointed.  2.  Afflictions  are  God's  fire ;  they  will  discover  men's  works  by 
preparation  and  fitting  the  heart  to  receive.  (Ibid.)  The  test  of  Cliristian 
teaching :  —  Many  of  us  have  watched  that  fascinating  but  awful  sight — the 
progress  of  a  great  fire.  We  have  marked  how  the  devouring  element  masters 
tirst  one  and  then  another  department  of  the  building  which  is  its  victim ; 
but  especially  we  have  noted  what  it  consumes  and  what  it  is  forced  to  -spare, 
the  resistless  force  with  which  it  sweeps  through  and  shrivels  up  all  the 
slighter  materials,  and  only  pauses  before  tiie  solid  barriers  of  stone  or  iron,  thus 
trying  before  our  very  eyes  the  builders' work  of  what  sort  it  is.  Now  of  whom 
was  the  apostle  thinking  when  he  wrote  the  warning  words  about  the  spiritual 
builder  who  employed  wood,  and  hay,  and  stubble  in  his  work?  The  eager 
adherents  of  ApoUos  bad  been  p  iwerfully  impressed  by  the  brilliant  Alexandrian, 
by  his  knowledge  of  what  was  being  said  and  thought  in  the  Greek  world ;  by  his 
skill  in  setting  out  what  he  had  to  say  to  the  very  best  advantage ;  they  were,  after 
the  manner  of  disciples,  more  eager  to  imitate  their  mast'  r"s  methods  than  careful 
to  be  true  to  the  end  he  had  in  view.  "  Take  care,"  St.  Paul  seems  to  say  to  the 
young  men  wlio  were  trading  on  the  great  name  and  authority  of  Apollos — •"  take 
care  wbat  you  are  doing  with  those  souls  at  Corinth.  Are  you  only  interesting  and 
amusing  them  for  a  few  of  the  passing  days  of  time,  or  are  you  building  up  in  them 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

a  faith  ^Yhich  will  enable  them  to  pass  death  and  eternity  ?  AYhat  are  the  materials 
of  the  structures  within  those  souls  which  you  are  raising  ?  Are  they  the  gold,  the 
silver,  the  precious  stones  of  the  Apostolic  faith  ?  No  doubt  they  are  ;  but  do  they 
not  also  include  materials  of  a  different  kind — less  valuable,  less  durable — wood, 
hay,  and  stubble  ?  If  this  be  so,  a  time  is  coming  when  all  tlie  precious  and 
■worthless  alike  will  be  submitted  to  a  serious  test.  "  The  fire  shall  try  every  man's 
work  of  what  sort  it  is."  But  He  who  at  the  end  will  judge  us  once  for  all  is  now 
and  always  judging  us,  and  His  perpetual  presence  among  us  as  our  Judge, 
constantly  probing,  trying,  saving  us,  is  revealed  by  events  and  circumstances 
■which  have  on  our  snuls  the  effects  of  fire — they  burn  up  that  which  is  worthless, 
they  leave  that  wliich  is  solid  unscathed.  There  is  the  searching,  testing  power  of 
a  new  and  lesponsible  position,  of  a  situation  forcing  its  occupant  to  make  it 
a  critical  choice,  or  to  witlistand  a  strong  pressure.  Such  a  new  position  discovers 
and  burns  up  all  that  is  weak  in  a  man's  faith  and  character.  History  is  strewn 
with  illustrations  of  this  tiuth.  The  virtuous,  though  weak,  emperor,  who  was 
floated  to  power  on  the  surf  of  revolution,  is  by  no  means  the  only  man  of  whom 
it  might  be  said  that  all  would  have  judged  him  capable  of  ruling  others  if  only  he 
had  never  been  a  ruler.  How  often  does  early  manhood  open  with  so  much  that 
seems  promising — with  intelligence,  courage,  attention  to  duty,  unselfisbness,  what 
looks  like  high  principle — and  then  the  man  is  put  into  a  position  of  authority — it 
is  the  fire  that  tests  the  work  which  he  has  done  in  his  character.  Sudienly  he 
betrays  some  one  defect  which  ruins  everything :  it  may  be  vanity,  it  may  be  envy, 
it  may  be  a  shadow  of  untrtatlifnlness,  it  may  be  some  lower  fierce  passion  which 
emei'ges  suddenly  as  if  unbidden  from  the  depths  of  the  soul,  and  wins  over  him 
a  fatal  mastery.  All  is  good  is  turned  to  ill,  all  is  distorted,  discoloured ;  he  mii^ht 
have  died  a  young  man  amid  general  lamentations  that  so  promising  a  life  had 
been  cut  short.  He  does  die  as  did  Nero  or  Henry  Tudor,  amid  the  loudly- 
expressed  or  the  muttered  thanksgiving  of  his  generation  that  be  has  left  the 
■world.  The  fact  was,  that  the  position  in  which  he  found  himself  exposed  him 
to  a  press'ire  which  his  character  could  not  bear.  You  remember  how  the  old  Tay 
Bridge,  before  that  fatal  winter  night,  was  believed  to  be  equal  to  its  purpose.  It 
needed,  no  doubt,  a  mighty  impact,  a  terrific  rush  of  wind  from  one  particular 
quarter,  in  order  to  show  that  the  genius  and  audacity  of  men  had  presumed  too 
largely  on  the  forbearance  of  the  elements.  But  the  moment  came.  We  many 
of  us  remember  something  of  the  sens"  of  horror  which  the  tragical  catastrophe 
left  on  the  public  mind  ;  the  gradual  disappearance  of  the  last  train  as  it  moved 
on  its  wonted  way  on  into  darkness,  the  suddenly  observed  dislocation  and  flickering 
of  the  distant  lights,  the  faint  sound  as  of  a  crash  rising  for  a  moment  even  over 
the  din  of  the  storm,  and  then  the  utter  darkness  as  all,  train  and  bridge,  together 
sank  into  the  gulph  of  waters  beneath,  and  one  moment  of  supreme  and  unimagin- 
able agony  was  followed  by  the  silence  of  death.  And  we  see  these  truths  at  work 
in  associated  as  well  as  in  individual  human  life.  Any  one  will  recall  the  names 
of  empires  ■>vhich  have  appeared  to  possess  the  elements  of  unconquerable  strength 
until  they  have  been  suhjected  to  the  test  of  new  conditions — the  empire  of  the 
Great  Alexander,  the  empire  of  Attila  the  Hun,  the  empire  of  the  first  Napoleon. 
Alexander  subdued  all  the  nations  which  spread  from  the  Adriatic  to  the  Indies. 
No  sooner  had  he  passed  away  than  the  unity  of  his  work  was  shattered  by  the 
ambition  of  three  generals.  Attila's  kingdom  at  one  time  reached  from  the  Volga 
to  the  Loire ;  the  vast  host  at  his  disposal  was  attended  by  a  bevy  of  subject  kings 
and  chiefs  :  the  emperors  of  the  East  and  West  were  both  his  obsequious  tributaries ; 
and  the  men  of  his  day  expressed  the  terror  which  his  ai^parently  boundless  power 
inspired  when  they  named  him  "  the  scourge  of  God."  Yet  he  had  scarcely  been 
discovered  dead  on  his  couch  after  a  drunken  revel,  when  his  sons,  greedy  for 
high  place,  turned  their  arms  against  each  other,  and  so  withm  some  fifteen  years 
the  Huns  had  sunk  to  be  the  dependents  and  tributaries  of  the  very  race  which  but 
now  they  had  ruled.  And  there  is  Attila's  great  counterpart  in  modern  Europe — • 
Napoleon.  His  vast,  motley  hosts  swept  along  over  much  the  same  ground  as 
Attila's  though  in  an  opposite  direction.  Like  Attila's,  they  passed  over  ancient  and 
prostrate  thrones  ;  like  his,  too,  they  went  on  the  errand  of  an  insatiable  ambition; 
but  before  he  died,  as  we  all  know,  Napoleon's  work  had  been  tested  with  a  severity 
which  revealed  its  weakness,  and  left  behind  it  nothing  but  a  million  of  tombs  and 
the  dying  echoes  of  a  vast  catastrophe.  And  as  with  Slates,  so  with  particular 
branches  of  the  Christian  Church.  A  Church  may  be,  to  all  nppearances,  highly 
favoured  ;  it  niiiy  have  leaders  conspicuous  for  holiness  or  learning  ;  it  may  reckon 


CHAP.  III.]  /.   CORINTHIANS.  273 

its  multitudes  of  devout  communicants,  its  fiourishiug  missions  at  home  and  abroad, 
and  its  many  works  of  benevolence  and  mercy  ;  and  yet  it  may  have  admitted  to 
its  bosom  some  fulse  principles,  whether  of  faith  or  morals,  which  will  find  it  out 
in  tlie  day  of  trial.  In  the  early  centuries  no  Cliurcli  was  more  highly  favoured 
than  tliat  of  Northern  Africa.  It  had,  it  is  said,  almost  innumerable  Churches, 
which  produced  saints  and  martyrs ;  its  intellectual  and  practical  activity  was 
tested  by  the  long  series  of  Councils  of  Carthage  ;  it  was  the  first  Cburch,  so  far  as 
we  know,  certainly  it  was  earlier  than  any  in  Italy,  to  translate  the  New  Testament 
Scriptures  into  the  languages  of  the  West;  it  held  its  own  in  debn  e  with  the 
greatest  Churches  of  Euiope,  and  with  Rome  itself ;  but  the  day  c^  trial  came 
on  it  with  the  invasion  of  the  Vandals,  as  Augustine  lay  dying  in  Hippo.  It  came 
again,  and  more  decisively,  with  the  Moslem  conquest.  There  are  Churches  in  the 
East  which  have  suffered  as  much  as  or  more  tlian  the  Church  of  Northern  Africa 
— Churches  which  have  never  ceased  suffering,  yet  which  in  their  weakness  are 
still  instinct  with  life  and  hope ;  but  the  Cliurch  of  Cyprian  and  Augustine 
perished  out  right.  We  may  guess  at  the  cause — we  cannot  determine  ;  it  may 
have  been  a  general  lax  morality  among  its  people  ;  it  may  have  been  a  widespread 
spirit  of  paradox  among  its  teachers  ;  it  may  have  been  some  far-reaching  weakness 
or  corruption  which  the  day  of  account  will  alone  reveal.  But  there  is  the  fact. 
No  Church  in  primitive  Christendom  stood  higher  than  the  Church  of  Africa :  none 
has  ever  so  utterly  disappeared.  Let  us  of  the  Church  of  to-day  be  not  high- 
minded,  but  fear;  for  if  prominence  and  success  do  not  discover  what  is  weak 
in  faith  and  character,  there  is  an  agent  who  comes  to  all  sooner  or  later,  and  who 
will  surely  do  so  — thf^re  is  the  fire,  the  searching,  testing  power  of  deep  affliction. 
M.iny  a  creed  that  will  do  for  the  sunny  days  of  life  will  not  serve  us  in  its  deep 
shadows,  much  less  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  The  truths  which 
strengthen  and  brace  character,  and  enable  it  to  pass  unscathed,  like  the  three 
holy  childten  through  the  fiery  furnace  of  deeji  sorrow,  are  the  great  certainties 
which  were  ever  to  the  front  in  the  apostle's  teaching  about  God  and  men,  about 
life  tind  death,  about  sin  and  redem]ition,  about  nature  and  grace,  and,  above  all, 
about  the  boundless  power  and  love  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  God.  {Canon Liddoii.) 
Two  hitildcr.f  o)i  one  foundation  : — In  the  vivid  imagination  of  the  apostle  two 
workmen  are  building  side  by  side.  One  builds  a  palace,  the  other  a  hovel.  The 
materials  which  one  uses  are  gold  and  silver  for  decoration  ;  and  for  solidity  costly 
stones — not  diamonds,  emeralds,  &c.,  but  valuable  building  material,  such  as 
marbles,  gianites,  and  alabaster.  The  other  employs  timber,  dry  reeds,  straw. 
Suddenly  there  plays  around  both  buildings  the  fire  of  the  Lord  coming  to  judg- 
ment. The  marbles  gleam  the  whiter,  and  the  gold  and  the  silver  flash  the  more 
resplendently ;  but  the  straw  hovel  goes  up  in  a  liare  !  The  one  man  gets  wages 
for  work  that  lasts,  the  other  man  gets  no  pay  for  what  perishes.  He  is  dragged 
through  the  smoke,  saved  hj  a  hair's  breath,  but  sees  all  his  toil  lying  there  in  white 
ashes  at  his  feet.  It  is  a  grim  picture.  Note — I.  The  two  builders  and  their 
WORK.  1.  The  wood,  &c.,  are  clearly  not  heresies,  for  the  builder  who  uses  them 
is  on  the  foundation,  and  had  they  been  so  Paul  would  have  found  sharper  words 
of  condemnation.  They  are  misplaced  learning  ;  speculation  ;  preaching  one's 
self  ;  talking  about  temporary,  trivial  things  ;  dealing  with  the  externals  of 
Christianity,  and  with  its  morals  apart  from  that  one  motive  of  love  to  a  dying 
Saviour  which  makes  morality  a  reality.  All  that  kind  of  teaching,  however  it  may 
be  admired,  and  thought  to  be  "  eloquent,"  "original,"  and  "  on  a  level  with  the 
growing  culture  of  the  age,"  and  so  on,  is  flimsy  stuff  to  build  upon  the  foundation 
of  a  crucified  Saviour.  There  is  no  solidity  in  such  work.  It  will  not  stand  the 
stress  of  a  gale  of  wind  while  it  is  being  built,  nor  keep  out  the  weather  ;  and 
it  will  blaze  at  last  like  a  thatched  roof  when  "  that  day  "  puts  a  match  to  it. 
The  solid  teaching  is  the  proclamation  of  Christ  and  His  great  salvation.  On  that 
rock-fact  we  calmly  repose.  In  that  great  truth  are  wrapped  np,  as  the  plant 
in  the  seed,  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowdedge.  So  let  all  teachers  take 
the  warning  that  well-meaning  men,  building  on  the  foundation,  may,  if  they 
do  not  take  care,  be  building  with  rubbish  instead  of  uith  the  indestructible  truths 
of  God's  Word ;  and  see  to  it  that  they  do  not  carry  chaff  in  their  seed-baskets,  but 
only  the  pure  seed  of  the  Word  of  God.  2.  But  the  principle  may  be  extended  to 
the  whole  Christian  life.  The  life  of  a  Christian  man  is  a  buihiing,  suggesting 
slow  and  continuous  progress  and  a  homogeneous  result.  It  is  possible  for  two 
men,  both  of  them  being  Christians,  to  be  building  two  very  different  structures  in 
their  lives.  Many  a  true  follower  of  Christ  may  pile  much  upon  the  foundation 
VOL.    I.  18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  hi. 

vvhiili  is  unworthy  of  it.  As  you  may  see  in  the  wretched  huts  in  which  wandering 
Arabs  lionse  amongst  the  ruins  of  s<.me  historical  city,  that  half  a  man's  house 
shall  be  of  fluted  marble  and  the  other  half  shall  be  of  crumbling  clay,  so,  alas! 
many  Christian  men  and  women  are  building  their  lives.  With  what  are  you 
building?  and  what  are  you  building?  A  palace,  a  temple,  a  shop,  a  place  of 
sinful  amusement,  a  prison — which?  ^Ye  build  inconsistently,  and  in  our  own 
persons  combine  these  two  builders.  Look,  then,  for  yourselves  into  your  building, 
and  see  how  much,  and  what,  of  it  is  likely  to  la^t,  and  how  much  of  it  is  sure  to 
be  burned  uj)  when  the  fire  comes.  II.  The  twofold  effects  or  the  one  fire. 
The  day  is  the  day  when  Christ  shall  come.  And  the  fire  is  but  the  symbol  that 
always  attends  the  Divine  appearance.  1.  When  Christ  comes  to  judge,  light 
comes  with  Him,  and  the  light  pours  in  ujjon  the  actions  of  men  and  reveals  them 
for  what  they  are.  The  builders  have  been  working,  as  you  see  builders  sometimes 
nowadays  night-work,  with  some  more  or  less  sufficient  illumination.  The  day 
dawns,  and  the  bailding  stands  out  disclosed  in  all  its  beauty  or  deformity.  Its 
true  proportions  are  manifest  at  last.  And  how  many  surprises  there  will  be. 
Many  a  man  who  thought  that  he  was  building  gold,  &c.,  will  find  out  that  he  was 
pleasing  himself,  and  not  preaching  his  Master  ;  that  he  was  talking  about  trivial, 
transitory  things,  and  not  about  eternal  truths  that  nourish  and  save  men's  souls, 
"Lord!  Lord!  have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy  name?  And  He  shall  say  unto 
them,  I  never  knew  you  "  !  Many  an  humble  and  t  mid  builder  who  did  not  know 
what  he  was  doing  will  see  that  he  has  built  gold,  &c.,  according  to  that  blessed 
word,  "  Lord  !  when  saw  we  Thee  ...  in  prison  and  visited  Thee  ?  And  He  shall 
answer,"  etc.  One  of  the  most  precious  diamonds  in  Europe,  that  blazes  now  in 
a  king's  crown,  lay  on  a  stall  in  a  piazza  at  Rome  for  month^^,  labelled,  "  Kock 
crystal,  price  one  franc."  And  many  of  the  most  noble  dteds  that  ever  were  done 
on  earth  have  been  j)assed  unrecognised  by  the  crowd  that  beheld  them,  and 
forgotten  except  by  Him.  2.  Not  only  is  there  this  revealing  process  suggested, 
but  the  one  class  of  service,  teaching,  life,  is  glorified  by  the  fire,  and  the  other  is 
burned  up.  The  gold,  tScc,  are  glorified  because  revealed,  and  heightened  in  beauty 
bj'  being  brought  into  contact  with  Christ  Himself,  as  a  fair  jewel  is  fairer  for  its 
setting,  and  flashes  in  the  suushine.  And,  on  the  other  side,  how  much  of  all  our 
lives  will  be  crushed  into  nonentity,  made  as  if  it  had  never  been  at  all,  by  the 
simple  revelation  of  Christ !  The  selfish,  God-forgetting  deeds,  the  lust,  the  greed, 
will  all  vanish  and  go  up  in  foul-smelling  smoke.  And  what  is  left  will  be  all  holy 
desires,  self-saciificing  service,  devout  aspirations,  and  jDure  Christlike  character. 
III.  The  twofold  effects  on  the  buildehs.  1.  The  one  gets  the  consequences 
of  his  services.  We  do  not  need  to  shrink  from  admitting  the  idea  of  a  reward. 
Christ  perpetually  speaks  to  us  about  heaven  as  being,  in  a  very  deep  sense,  a 
reward  ;  not  because  men  deserve  heaven,  but  because  the  heaven  which  they  get 
only  by  His  merits  and  through  faith  in  Him,  is  given  in  the  measure  of  their 
capacity,  which  depends  on  their  character,  and  is  largely  determined  by  their 
habitual  conduct.  2.  The  inconsistent  Christian's  inconsistencies  shall  be  burned 
up.  Thank  God  for  that  !  What  belter  could  happen  to  them  or  for  him  ? 
Instead  of  the  hovels  he  may  build  a  j^alace.  The  fire  of  London  finished  the 
jilague,  and  statelier  streets  took  the  place  of  the  fetid  alleys.  But  still  that 
imperfect  Christian  "  shall  suffer  loss" — the  loss  of  what  he  might  have  gained. 
He  shall  lose  remembrances  which  are  true  wealth.  He  shall  lose,  in  that  he  will 
stand  further  from  the  Lord,  and  possess,  because  he  can  contain,  less  of  His  glory. 
His  crown  is  far  less  resjlendeiit  than  the  others.  His  seat  at  Christ's  table  in  the 
kingdom  is  far  lower.  His  heaven  is  narrower  and  less  radiant.  These  two  are 
like  two  vessels,  one  of  which  comes  into  harbour  with  a  rich  freight  and  flj'ing 
colours,  and  is  welcomed  with  tumult  of  acclaim.  The  other  strikes  on  the  bar. 
"  Some  on  boards,  and  some  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship,  all  come  safe  to  land." 
But  ship  and  cargo,  and  profit  of  the  venture,  are  all  lost.  "  He  shall  suffer  loss, 
but  he  himself  shall  be  saved."      {A.   JMaclaren,  D.D.)  Good  qualities  seen 

in  The  .fiery  day : — The  best  qualities  of  the  Christian — patience,  gentleness,  and 
forgiveness  of  injuries — are  written  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart  of  a  Christian, 
out  of  the  sight  of  the  world,  and  come  only  to  be  seen  in  the  day  of  fiery  affliction 
and  trial,  just  as  words  written  with  invisible  ink  come  only  to  be  read  when 
submitted  to  the  heat  of  the  fire.       {T.  H.  Leary,  D.C.L.)  Severely  tested:— 

Call  it  by  what  name  you  jilease — dream,  vision,  or  reveiie — we  found  ourselves  in 
a  large  room,  the  walls  of  which  were  concealed  by  well-packed  shelves  of  books, 
from  the  ponderous  folio  to  the  minute  thirty-two-mo,  and  in  all  the  variety  of 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS. 


dress  which  a  skiU'ul  handicraft  could  devise.     While  cursorily  gazing  on  these 
intellectual  stores,  our  attention  was  arrested  by  the  entrance  of  two  personages 
of  mild   and  venerable  aspect,  who  very  courteously  introduced  themselves,  and 
stated  the  object  of  their  visit.     They  bore  the  significant  names  of  Time   and 
Posterity,  and  intimated  tliat  they  had  come  to  pay  their  semi-centennial  visit,  to 
weigh  the  merits  of  authors,  and  determine  their  destiny.     The  task  seemed  to  us 
an  herculean  one,  where  the  volumes  were  numbered  by  thousands ;  and  we  were 
curious  to  know  by  what  process  they  were  to  ascertain  the  character  of  so  many 
candidates  for  fame.      We  might,  however,    have    spai'ed   our  surprise,   had  we 
reflected  that   Time  was   a   gentleman  who   had   seen  much   of  the   world,  and 
professed  great  experience,  and  Posterity  was  no  less  distinguished  for  the  solidity 
of  his  judgment.     They  were  well  prepared  for  an  expeditious  performance  of  their 
work,  and,  in  truth,  we  felt  no  small  degree  of  horror  in  witnessing  the  results  of 
their  essay.     By  the  way,  we  should  have  mentioned  that  they  were  j)rovided  with 
a  capacious  crucible,  under  which  was  burning  a  large  and  steady  flame.     Into 
it  volume  after   volume   was  thrown,  and   the   ordeal   through  which  they  had 
to  pass  was  one  of  fire.     "Goodly  vohnues,  these,"  said  Time,  taking  up  a  brace 
of  octavos  on  metaphysics,  "  let  us  test  their  quality."     Placed  in  the  crucible, 
they  were  instantly  converted  into  cinders.     "  Dust  and  ashes,"  said  Posterity. 
This  was  the  doom  of  many  an  ostentatious  volume,  whose  promising  title  availed 
as  little  as  its  interior  embellishments.     Time  rather  solilo(iuised  than  addressed 
Posterity,  while  subjecting  volume  after  volume.     He  would  remark,  "  Deadborn 
this;  its  claims  for  perpetuity  died  amidst  the  types."     "An  old  heresy  under  the 
slight  disguise  of  a  new  dress."     "  Nonsense,  fustian,  bombast."     A  whole  row  of 
poets  succeeded  each  other  in  their  descent  into  the  heated  crucible,  with  no  more 
sympathy  on  the  part  of  the  executioner  than  a  contemptuous  exclamation.    What 
is  called  "  light  literature  "  coidd  scarcely  be  kept  in  the  crucible  long  enough  to  be 
converted  into  thin  smoke.    Whole  tons  of  periodicals  and  reviews  shared  the  same 
fate.    Occasionally  we  observed  an  unscorched  leaf  or  two  remained  in  the  crucible, 
which  Posterity  carefully  gathered  and  deposited  in  his  portefeuille.     At  intervals, 
a  whole  volume  would  escape — this,  however,  was  very  rare ;  for  in  the  instances 
in  which  they   preserved  their  original  shape,  large  portions  of  these  fortunate 
volumes  were  burned  out.     For  the  most  part,  the  large  books  fared  wor.-e  than 
the  s^maller  ones,  from  which  we  were  led  to  infer  that  facility  in  writing  was  quite 
a  different  thing  from  ability,  and  that  a  lumbering  ship  may  be  dashed  on  the 
rocks  over  which  a  small  boat  may  safely  ride.     Whole  piles  of  periodicals  (our  own 
did  not  entirely  escape)  were  soon  converted  into  ashes.     "  Fabrications,"  said 
Time,  as  he  hurled  volume  alter  volume  of  history  into  the  crucible.     Some  leaves, 
however,  of  most  of  them  escaped,  out  of  which  Posterity  remarked  he  would  make 
up  a  small  volume  of  true  history  worthy  of  preservation.     Many  books  of  religious 
controversy,  and  many  more  of  world  y  controversies  on  all  subjects  went  in  with 
the  ominously  expressed  doom,  "Dust  and  ashes,"  and  so  they  came  out.     We 
perceived  a  most  offensive  efduvium  arise'as  certain  "Philosophical  Disquisitions," 
and  "Light  of  Reason  "  were  submitted  to  the  fiery  test.     Thus  went  forward  the 
process,  the  further  details  of  which  might  be  tedious  to  enumerate,  and  in  a  very 
brief  time  the  great  library  had  so  far  disappeared  that  Posterity  carried  off  what 
was  left  in  a  sm  tU  but  beautiful  cabinet,  made  of  enduring  materials.     (Presby- 
terian.)        If  any  man's  work  abide  ...  lie  shall  receive  a  reward — Siirvessful 
and  un>^iiccessfitl  buililers  :■ — I.  The  successfol  builder.     1.   His  work.     (1)  Well 
founded.     (2)  Well  built.     2.  Its  durability.     (1)  It  stands  the  test  of  time.     (2) 
Of  investigation.     (3)  Of  fire.     3.  His  reward.     (1)  In  the  successful  issue  of  his 
toil.     (2)  In  the  approbation  of  God.     (3)  In  the  abundant  recompense.     II.  The 
FOOLISH  BuiLBER.     1.  Hls   foUy.     (1)   He   had   a  right   foundation.     (2)  Selected 
corruptible  materials.     2.  His  loss.     (1)  His  work  consumed.      (2)  His  labour  lost. 
(3)  His  reward  forfeited.     3.  His  narrow  escape.     Saved — yet  so  as  by  fire.     {J. 
Lyth,  D.IK)         GoiVs  truths  are  of  a  durable  nature,  notwithstanding  trial: — First, 
there  are  Divine  truths,  such  as  are  revealed  in  God's  W^ord,  most  of  which  human 
reason  could  not  comprehend;  but,  as  Zacchseus,  of  a  low  stature,  got  up  into  the 
tree  to  see  Jesus,  so  reason,  being  too  low,  must  ascend  uji  into  the  Scripture  to 
behold  these  truths.     Now  these  are  more  certain  and  durable  th;in  those  natural 
truths.     Secondly,  this  good  building   of  truth  doth  not  only  abide  the  fire,  but 
desireth  the  fire  ;  it  is  willing  to  come  to  the  touchstone.     Thirdly,  the  truths  of 
God,  built  by  a  spiritual  builder,  do  not  only  abide  the  fiery  trial,  but  they  grew 
more  illustrious  and  glorious  thereby.     All  the  heresies  and  persecutions  that  ever 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

have  been  were  like  the  waters  to  the  ark,  they  lifted  it  higher  to  heaven.  The 
truth  about  grace  had  not  been  so  clear  bad  not  Pelagius  nlaintain^d  free-will. 
The  Divine  nature  of  Christ  had  not  been  so  fully  evidenced  out  of  Scripture  had 
not  the  Ariians  opposed  it.  But  for  the  doubt  of  Thomas  Christ's  resurrection 
was  more  confirmed  unto  us.  Fourthly,  not  only  the  truths  of  God  in  their  nature, 
but  also  in  the  proper  and  genuine  effects  upcm  the  hearers,  they  also  abide  and  will 
endure  the  trial.  (.4.  Bnrriesa. )  If  any  man's  work  shall  toe  tourned,  he  shall  suffer 
loss  :  but  he  himself  shall  toe  saved ;  yet  so  as  toy  fire. — That  every  man  ivill  he 
altogether  a  loser  in  any  irror  cr  false  icay  that  he  liath  maintained ;  lie  shall  suffer 
loss: — In  the  first  place  we  shall  show  wherein  they  shall  be  losers.  First,  if  they 
thought  by  erroneous  ways  to  better  themselves  in  an  outward  condition  in  this 
world,  in  this  they  are  sure  to  lose.  Oh,  that  this  were  well  thought  of  by  those  who 
think  to  better  themselves  by  those  ways  that  are  not  of  God !  Secondly,  if  they  looked 
for  outward  honour  and  dignify,  to  be  applauded  and  esteemed,  this  also  they  shall 
be  losers  in.  For  by  the  judgment  of  those  Churches  or  persons  that  are  oithodox 
they  shall  fall  fiom  all  that  repute  and  esteem  they  had.  Thirdly,  they  lose  all 
their  ministerial  labour  and  study  thty  used  in  building  such  stubble.  And  truly 
this  loss  should  much  affect  every  man  whether  miuisti  r  or  private  Christian. 
The  wise  man  observeth  great  vanity  in  all  worldly  labour,  but  especially  in 
matters  of  religion  ;  to  labour  in  vain,  there  to  lose  all  thy  nights  and  thy  days, 
and  thy  study,  and  thy  pains,  is  beyond  expression  miserable.  Fourthly,  they  will 
lose  their  inward  peace  and  comfort  of  conscience.  Fifthly,  they  lose,  though  not 
the  total  seed  of  grace,  yet  the  degree  and  fervency  of  it ;  yea,  in  regard  of  outward 
appearance  all  seemeth  to  be  lost.  They  have  not  that  tenderness,  that  strictness 
they  once  had.  Yea,  lastly,  men  lose  their  parts  and  gifts ;  they  have  not  that 
clearness  and  soundness  of  understanding  as  they  had.  (Ibid.)  Unit  every  godly 
man,  though  never  so  eminent,  yet  is  witli  diffienlty  saved  : — Now  the  grounds  of 
these  truths  are — First,  from  the  exactness  and  strictness  that  is  in  the  way 
to  heaven.  Secondly,  the  difficulty  doth  appear  from  that  remainder  and  relic 
or  corruption  that  is  in  every  man,  which  is  in  danger  to  break  out.  Thirdly, 
there  are  many  afflictions  and  tribulations  which  God  brings  on  His  people,  and 
they  do  much  endanger.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  lG-23.  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  dwelleth  in  you? — The  two  temples :  —Two  points  comprehend  the  apostle's 
teaching  in  this  chapter.  1.  The  foundation  of  Christian  life  and  doctrine  (ver.  11), 
2.  The  form  of  Christian  life  and  doutiine  built  thereon.  It  is  to  be  worthy  of  the 
foundation  (vers.  10,  12,  &c.).  Christian  teachers  have  a  covenant  engagement — 
to  eiect  a  temple  on  a  previously  laid  foundation.  According  to  a  specification, 
they  are  to  use  "  gold,"  &c.  Paul's  complaint  is,  that  they  nppear  not  to  have 
known  the  terms  of  their  contract  (text),  and  lience  had  departed  from  the  true 
foundation,  and  consequently  had  developed  a  form  of  Christian  life  contrary  to 
the  form  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  Note — I.  The  Divine  dwelling.  1.  The  Chris- 
tian heart  under  the  figure  of  a  "  temple  "  points  back  to  God's  visible  dwelling- 
place  in  .Jerusalem.  (1)  The  former  temple  whs  the  dwelling-place  of  Triuity.  In 
the  holy  of  holies  the  cloud  was  the  luemorial  of  the  enduring  mercy  of  the 
Father  ;  in  the  outer  courts  the  sacrifices  typified  the  atonement  of  the  Son,  while 
the  incense  pointed  to  the  sweet  infiiience  of  the  Spirit.  (2)  The  former  temple 
was  the  treasury  of  sarred  truth.  All  that  S3  nibolised  the  religious  life  of  the  Jews 
was  kept  in  the  ancient  temple — Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  indicating  the  perpetual 
freshness  of  the  go>pel ;  the  golden  pot  of  manna,  in.iicating  the  nourishing  pro- 
parties  of  the  gospel  ;  the  original  copy  of  the  law  of  Moses,  indicating  that  the 
gospel  is  our  directory.  The  gospel  rod  of  God's  strength  is  treasured  uf)  in  the 
Christian  heart.  The  gospel  food  of  God's  providing  for  tiie  wilderness  is  received 
into  the  soul.  The  gospel,  the  perfect  law,  is  hidden  in  the  secret  places  of  the 
heart.  "  Thy  statutes  have  been  my  songs  in  the  house  of  my  pilgrimage,"  &e. 
(3)  The  former  temple  was  but  a  partial  revelation  of  the  Divine  glory.  Sin 
explains  all  that  earlier  worship;  sin,  too,  explains  all  our  later  worship.  And  not 
till  sin  is  destroyed  will  the  Christian  heart  be  a  perfect  temple,  and  full  revelation 
of  the  glory  of  God.  2.  Compare  the  Christian  heart  with  the  future,  or  heavenly 
temple.  (1)  The  central  figure  in  the  heavenly  temple  is  Christ.  The  Lamb  is 
in  tlie  midst  of  the  throne,  is  the  chief  subject  of  their  soug,  "Worthy  is  the 
Lamb."  He  is  the  object  of  their  highest  worship,  "  They  cast  their  crowns  at  His 
feet.''     "  Know  ye  not  that  je  are  the  temple  of  God?  "     Jesus  "  in  the  midst"  of 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  27'. 

the  throne  of  your  affections ;  Jesus  the  object  of  your  worship.  (2)  In  that 
heavenly  temple  "  thei'e  shall  be  no  more  curse  "  (Rev.  xxii.  3) ;  so  in  the  Chris- 
tian heart  "  there  is  now  no  condemnation  "  (Rom.  viii.  1).  (3)  In  tlie  heavenly 
temple  tliere  is  no  p!irticular  spot  consecrated  for  worship  (Rev.  xxi.  22),  no  set 
times,  but  it  is  all  temple  ;  so  also  in  the  human  heart  (John  iv.  21).  Everyplace, 
season,  faculty  consecrated  to  worship.  II.  The  Divine  indvvklling.  from  the 
figure  of  the  temple  the  apostle  passes  to  the  life  of  it,  that  which  gives  it  its 
vitality.  Observe  the  various  methods  of  the  Spirit's  manifestations  in  the  Chris- 
tian heart.  1.  He  is  tlie  Spirit  of  the  new  birth  (John  iii.  (5).  2.  To  the  worker 
in  the  Kingdom  of  God  He  is  the  Spirit  of  new  strength  (Eph.  iii.  16,  i.  17,  18). 
o.  To  the  broken-hearted  He  is  the  Spirit,  the  Comforter.  He  is  the  Spiiit  to 
seal  the  covenant  of  the  soul  with  its  God  (2  Cor.  i.  22).  5.  He  dwells  in  us — (1) 
Through  faith.  (2)  By  prayer.  "  The  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities."  (3)  By 
obedience  to  the  Divine  will,  "  He  makes  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good 
pleasure."  (4)  By  the  assurance  of  faith,  "  the  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  wiih 
our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God."  (5)  By  fruit-bearing,  "the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,"  etc.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  oneness  of  the  Christian 
Church.  Paul  in  the  last  chapter  complained  of  divisions.  In  this  he  speaks  of 
them  all  as  built  on  one  fouiKlation,  and  growing  up  into  one  temple,  having  one 
source  of  life,  &c.  2.  Its  sacredne-s  (ver.  17).  (D.  Y.  Carrie.)  Temples  of  God  : 
— I.  EvEEY  Christian  is  a  dweli.ixg-place  for  God.  That  God  dwells  in  us  is 
only  possible  from  His  dwelling  in  Chri&t,  through  whom  we  touch  Hiin.  II. 
Christians,  as  temples,  are  to  be  manifestors  of  God.  The  meaning  of 
temple  is  that  there  the  indwelling  Deity  shall  manifest  Himself.  God  dwelling  in 
our  hearts  reveals  Himself — 1.  To  us  ourselves.  2.  To  others  around  lis  by  our 
conduct.  III.  Christians,  as  tejiples,  should  be  places  of  sacrifice.  What  is  a 
temjile  without  worship  '?  \Yhat  is  worship  without  sacrifice  ?  IV.  Christians,  as 
TEMPLES,  are  TO  BE  HOLY.  Holiness  is  separation  to  God's  service — dedication. 
The  idols  of  covetousness,  idolatry,  intolerance,  drunkenness,  &c.  When  God 
enters,  all  Dagons  fall  to  the  ground  maimed  and  destroyed.  {A.  MacJaren,  D.D.) 
God's  spiritudl  temple  : — The  ancient  temple  was  not  more  glorious  and  admirable 
to  the  human  eye  than  such  societies  should  be  to  the  eye  of  faith.  And  learned 
men  think  that  latter  part  of  Ezekiel's  prophecy,  though  very  obscure,  concerning 
the  measuring  of  the  temple,  is  nothing  but  the  promise  of  the  building  of  the 
Church  in  the  New  Testament  in  an  heavenly  and  gloiious  manner,  iirst,  the 
materials  for  the  temple  were  to  be  polisbed  and  fitted  by  art  ere  they  could  be 
made  part  of  the  building.  We  of  ourselves  have  not  faith,  have  not  preparedness 
for  such  Churfh  duties,  till  God  doth  enable  us.  Look  we,  therefore,  how  we  come 
into  the  Church  of  God '?  How  is  it  brought  about  that  we  are  so  ?  If  there  be 
nothing  but  nature  and  custom,  or  because  we  are  born  in  such  places.  Thus  it  is 
here,  whatsoever  our  societies  and  meetings  are  in  reference  to  God  it  is  wholly  of 
His  making.  Secondly,  the  materials  of  the  temple  were  very  excellent  and 
precious,  of  gold  and  silver,  etc.,  not  hay  and  stubble.  The  best  stone,  the  best 
wood  that  would  not  putrify,  and  all  things  were  covered  over  with  gold,  and  the 
gold  was  to  be  pure  gild ;  even  the  vpry  snuffers  were  to  be  of  gold.  Kow  what;  did 
this  represent,  but  to  show  what  kiu'i  of  peo])le  those  shouhl  be  who  were  of  the 
Church  of  God?  Thirdly,  the  temple  was  full  of  external  glory.  A  magnificent 
place,  admired  by  heathens.  Now  the  glory  of  Christians  is  likewise  great,  but  in  a 
spiritual  and  heavenly  way.  The  Church  is  all  glorious  within  (Psa.  xlv.  13).  The 
gospel  that  is  i^reached  is  styled  a  glorious  gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  11)  ;  and  the  Spirit  of 
God  the  Spirit  of  glory  (1  Pet.  iv.  14).  It  is  promised  that  the  glory  of  the  second 
temple  should  far  exceed  that  of  the  first  (Hag.  ii.  9).  Now  hnw  was  that  made 
good?  not  in  any  outward  glory,  but  because  Cliiist  in  a  si)iritual  manner  did 
reform  all  those  corrupt  doctrines,  and  did  sit  as  a  refiner  to  purify  the  sons  of 
Levi.  This  was  glory  to  have  the  spiritual  worship  of  God.  Fouithly,  the  temple 
was  in  a  peculiar  manner  holy  in  re.-pect  of  other  buildings.  Now  when  we  say  it 
was  holy,  we  do  not  mean  an  holiness  inherent,  as  anj^els  and  men  are  holy,  but  of 
dedication  and  consecration,  a  relative  holim  ss,  being  set  a[»art  by  God's  special 
command  to  such  a  use.  Fifthly,  because  of  this  relative  holiness  it  was  a  capital 
crime  to  defile  this  temple.  There  were  porters  set  at  the  gate  to  keep  out  all 
unclean  things  (2  Chron.  sxiii.  19).  Lastly,  that  which  was  the  glory  of  the 
temple  and  the  life  of  it  was  God's  gracious  presence.  {A.  Burges-'.)  The 
Divine  Spirit  dwelliiici  in  the  Church : — I.  That  the  Spirit  of  God  is  God.  II. 
That  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  His  Church,      And  now  to   open   this   let 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

us  consider — First,  what  the  phrase  to  dwell  iu  the  Church  implieth.  Xow  this 
j)hrase,  to  have  the  Spirit  dwell  in  us,  denoteth — First,  the  propriety  that  it 
hath  to  us,  that  we  are  His  possession,  as  an  house  is  a  man's  own,  where 
He  is  Lord  and  Master.  And  this  is  wortby  of  consideration,  that  we  who  once 
were  the  devil's,  he  dwelt  in  us,  he  ruleth  in  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient 
(Eph.  ii.),  have  now  him  expelled  from  us,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  taken  us  for 
His  possession.  So  that  herein  is  a  wonderful  change  when  the  Spirit  of  God 
comes  and  takes  possession  of  a  people  who  before  were  captives  to  Satan,  and 
led  aside  according  to  his  will  (2  Tim.  ii.  20).  Secondly,  when  it  is  said  the  Spirit 
of  God  dwells  in  a  people,  it  supposeth  that  He  doth  fashion  and  prepare  them  for 
Himself.  For  every  lodging  is  not  fit  for  so  noble  a  guest,  but  as  great  men  carry 
their  rich  furniture  with  them  to  have  convenient  lodgings,  so  also  doth  the  Spirit 
of  God  raise  up  a  people  by  illumination  and  sanctification  to  be  a  fit  habitation 
for  Him.  Thirdly,  when  it  is  said  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  us,  it  denoteth  the 
familiarity  and  condescending  communion  that  God  vouchsafeth  unto  His  children. 
Fourthly,  in  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  said  to  dwell,  it  denoteth  a  permanent  and 
constant  abode  in  His  people.  For  this  you  must  know,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  many 
times  working  where  yet  He  doth  not  dwell.  There  is  a  great  difference  between 
transient  motions  and  constant  mansions  of  God's  Spirit.  Fifthly,  the  Spirit 
dwelling  in  us  doth  denote  the  intimateness  and  inward  efficacy  it  hath.  It  doth 
not  only  dwell  with  us,  but  in  us,  which  denoteth  great  intimateness.  III.  Now  let 
us  proceed  to  show  how  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  His  Church.  Now 
several  ways  we  may  consider  of  the  Spirit's  dwelling  in  the  people  of  God.  First, 
there  is  an  essential  dwelling,  or  a  gracious  dwelling,  by  a  special  manifestation  of 
more  peculiar  favours ;  we  do  not  spCfik  here  of  an  essential  dwelling,  for  so  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  everywhere  (Fsa.  cxxxix.  7).  Secondly,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
said  to  dwell  in  His  Church,  it  may  not  only  be  understood  of  the  gracious  effects 
thereof,  but  also  of  His  person  likewise.  Lastly,  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  two  ways 
in  His  Church — 1.  In  respect  of  wonderful  and  miraculous  operations.  2.  In 
respect  of  saving  and  sanctifying  gi-aces.     IV.  In  the  next  place,  let  us  consider 

THE    SPECIAL    WOKKS    A\D    EFFECTS    OF    God'S     SpIKIT    IN    HiS     ChUKCH.         But    tO    the 

particulars.  First,  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  us  after  a  saving  manner  in  the 
general,  by  way  of  sanctification  of  the  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  even  the  whole  man 
(1  Thess.  5).  But  more  particularly,  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  a  saving  manner. 
First,  by  illumination,  and  oijening  of  the  dark  mind  of  every  man.  Secondly,  the 
Spirit  of  God  quickens  and  reviveth  those  graces  that  by  regeneration  were  infused 
to  us.  Thirdly,  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  enable  us  to  kill  and  mortify  sin  (Eom.  viii.). 
Fourthly,  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  bestow  a  filial  and  ingenuous  spirit  upon  believers, 
whereby  they  are  cariied  out  uj^on  evangelical  and  gospel  grounds  in  their 
obedience  to  God.  Fifthly,  the  Spirit  of  God  works  comfort  and  joy  in  the  hearts 
of  the  godly.  Hence  He  is  called  the  Comforter  (John  xv.  26).  Sixthly,  that  we 
may  have  this  boldness  and  joy.  The  Spirit  of  God  hath  another  effect,  which  is, 
to  witness  and  seal  unto  our  spirits  that  we  are  the  children  of  God,  Seventhly, 
tlie  Spirit  of  God  worketli  wonderful  support,  and  even  glorious  rejoicing,  in  all 
afflictions  and  tribulations.  Lastly,  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  work  the  prayers  of 
God's  people.  {Ibid.)  The  believer  a  temple  of  God  : — Consider — I.  The  people 
OF  God  indwelt  by  God.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  dwelLth  in  you."  1.  We  must 
accept  that  as  literally  true.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  a  person,  the  attributes 
of  personality  are  ascribed  to  Him.  TJi3  Old  Testament  prepared  for  this 
teaching.  "I  will  jiut  My  Spirit  within  you."  Then,  in  the  New  Testament, 
our  Lord  says,  "  I  will  pray  the  Father,"  etc.  As  God  the  Father  pardons 
sin,  and  God  the  Son  atoned  for  sin,  God  the  Spirit  dwells  in  us  to  cleanse 
from  sin.  2.  This  is  granted  to  the  lowliest  spiritual  condition.  Indeed,  "  if  any 
man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of  His."  Many  spiritual  blessings  we 
have  to  wait  and  even  strive  for,  but  this  is  given  at  the  beginning.  "  I  dwell  with 
him  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,"  and  that  is  the  first  stage  of  Chris- 
tian life.  3.  This  rein-esents  a  jjermanent  state.  God  comes  not  to  tarry  for 
a  nicht,  but  "This  is  My  rest  for  ever,  here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it." 
What  a  vision  all  this  gives  of  infinite  condescension.  II.  This  indwelling  makes 
each  op  God's  people  a  temple.  That  implies — 1.  Divine  consecration.  Other 
buildings  mif.'ht  be  put  to  other  use,  but  everything  under  the  shadow  of  the 
shekinah  was  inscribed  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord."  And  that  is  the  Divine emblein 
of  the  redeemed  man  ;  he  is  to  be  amongst  men  like  a  church  in  a  city,  the  mirth- 
ful tide  may  beat  against  its  gates,  and  the  stream  of  business  ever  pass  its  doors, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  272 

but  it  were  pollution  for  either  to  cross  its  threshold,  it  and  all  within  are  God's. 
The  less  distinction  we  make  between  the  Church  and  the  world  the  further  we  go 
from  God's  purpose  concerning  us.  2.  Divine  testimony.  For  the  temple  stands 
amid  the  din  and  strife  of  the  streets  a  silent  witness  for  God.  Such  is  the  Chris- 
tian amongst  men  ;  he  is  a  church  in  the  world.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  be  is  none  of  His,"  and  do  you  think  He  can  dwell  in  a  soul  and  the  world 
not  know  it !  3.  Divine  revealinjrs.  God  in  the  soul.  "What  spiritual  visions, 
what  views  of  the  King,  what  subtle  voices,  what  inward  brightness  does  it  not 
suggest !  "  The  King's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within."  And  if  He  be  there,  the 
angels,  His  attendants,  are  there ;  angels  of  holy  thought  and  affection  and  desire, 
making  sacred  melody,  and  reverently  listening  lor  their  Lord's  will.  IH.  Thk  tact 
OF  THIS  INDWELLING  IS  OFTEN  FoiuiOTTEN  BY  God's  PEOPLE.  How  often  do  we  need  the 
Divine  appeal,  "  Know  ye  not,"  &c.  For  exumple — 1.  When  we  doubt  the  Divine 
care.  "  What !  know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God  ?  "  Will  He  not  care 
for  His  own ;  will  He  dwell  amid  our  needs  and  not  meet  them  ?  2.  When  we 
mourn  an  absent  God.  "  Know  ye  not,"  &c.  He  has  not  gone.  He  is  in  your  soul, 
you  carry  within  you  the  "  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  Only 
unmourned  sin  has  hindered  His  manifestation,  and  that  hindrance  can  be 
removed  and  the  shining  of  His  face  appear  again.  3.  Wlien  we  shrink  from 
setting  holy  example.  4.  When  we  make  light  of  sin.  (C.  New.)  Humanity  the 
temple  of  God : — Let  us  look  at  man  as — I.  A  Divine  temple.  A  temple  is  a 
special — 1.  Eesidenre  of  God.  God  is  in  all  material  objects,  but  especially  in 
moral  minds.  2.  Manifestation  of  God.  God  is  seen  everywhere,  but  never  so 
fully  as  in  the  mind  of  man.  "  We  are  all  His  offspring."  3.  Meeting  place  with 
God.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  specially  such.  "  There  will  I  commune  with 
thee."  Man  can  meet  God  in  nature,  but  not  so  fully  and  consciously  as  in  mind. 
II.  As  a  Divine  temple  that  might  be  DESTnovED.  The  destruction  of  a  temple 
does  not  mean  the  destruction  of  all  its  parts,  but  the  destruction  of  its  use.  Aian 
might  live  for  ever  and  yet  be  destroyed  as  the  special  residence,  manifestation,  and 
meeting-place  of  God.  But  this  destruction  is  not  by  God.  "  It  any  »««»."  Alas! 
men  are  destroying  this  temple — their  natures.     An  awful  work  this  !     HI.  As  the 

DESTROYER   OF    THAT    WHICH    WILL    BE    DESTROYED   BY    GoD    HiMSELF.       Destroy,  if  not 

his  existence,  all  that  makes  existence  worth  having,  or  even  tolerable.  (7>.  Thomas, 
D.D.)  The  Christian  Church  the  temple  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  .•—I.  The  CiiRis- 
TiAN  Church  is  God's  temple.  1.  The  temple  of  God  is  a  phrase  used  to  signify 
something  dedicated  to  Jehovah,  whether  a  material  or  a  spiritual  building.  (1) 
The  temple  in  Jerusalem.  (2)  The  human  nature  of  Christ  (John  ii.  l'.)-22  ;  Col. 
ii.  9).  (3)  Heaven  (Eev.  vii.  ir>).  (4)  The  Christian  Cluuch.  This  is  the  spiritual 
house  of  God,  composed  of  all  faithful  souls.  2.  In  writing  to  the  Church  at 
Corinth,  the  apostle  remembered  the  pride  that  city  had  in  its  temples  whose  glory 
fired  all  its  people  with  delight.  All  of  this  grandeur  was  displayed  for  what?  For 
senseless  idols  who  could  hear  no  prayer  nor  impart  any  blessing.  The  gospel  came 
to  destroy  all  false  systems  of  religion,  and  to  build  up  a  more  glorious  temple  of 
God  than  any  heathen  or  Jewish  temple  ever  was  before.  3.  Now,  if  the  Christians 
in  Corinth  lost  much  delight  and  cherished  associations  in  forsaking  their  temples, 
if  the  Jewish  converts,  too,  lost  all  their  pride  in  the  glory  departed  from  their 
temple,  the  apostle's  argument  is  that  God  hath  His  own  glorious  temple  still  on 
earth.  4.  Although  this  glorious  work  is  sometimes  invisible  to  man's  eye,  yet  it 
is  all  comprehended  by  the  Divine  mind,  and  is  daily  extending  in  the  world.  5. 
Now  this  good  work  is  God's  and  not  man's.  Human  skill  may  rear  classic 
temples,  but  no  powerless  than  Divine  can  take  a  rough  block  of  human  sinfulness, 
purify  it  from  its  defilements,  and  gloriously  prepare  and  polish  it  for  some  fitting 
place  in  the  spiritual  temple  f.f  the  living  God.  II.  The  holy  Spirit  dwells  in 
the  Christian  temple.  Heathen  classics  believed  that  their  divinities  resided  in 
their  temples.  Advancing  a  step  nearer  truth,  some  of  the  wise  men  of  old  tanght 
that  a  good  man  himself  was  a  temple  in  which  the  divinity  dwelt.  Now  these 
were  glimmerings  of  Divine  truth.  1.  It  might  well  be  argued  that  to  dwell  in  any 
place  denotes  a  living  being  and  a  distinct  personality.  M:in's  soul  dwells  in  his 
body,  and  this  constitutes  him  a  real  living  person  ;  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  the 
Christian  soul,  and  animates  by  Divine  power  all  the  living  Church.  2.  God  clearly 
taught  this  truth  to  the  Hebrew  Church  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-28),  though  its  fulness  of 
blessing  was  only  bestowed  in  Christian  days.  If  any  man  of  rank  or  power  sat 
down  familiarly  in  some  poor  cottage  how  the  world  would  marvel !  Especially  if 
in  his  condescension  he  bestowed  on  it  some  of  his  own  treasures  as  gilts  of  his 


\ 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iir. 


power.  How  much  morb,  then,  ought  we  to  be  astonished  and  dehghted  that  God, 
the  Eternal  Spirit,  visits  earth's  dwellings  of  dust.  3.  But  the  intidel  theories  of 
the  day  banish  God  from  all  His  own  works.  Yet  if  I  behold  some  great  building, 
I  naturally  inquire  who  was  the  architect,  and  who  dwells  or  acts  there?  Apply 
this  illustration — (1)  To  creation.  Will  any  man,  then,  tell  me  that  this  glorious 
temple  is  the  mere  work  of  chance,  that  no  Almighty  Spirit  regulates  or  minds  it  ? 
(2)  To  a  living  Church.  Can  it  be  possible  that  this  is  no  work  of  God  ?  Has  not 
God's  Spirit  dwelt  in  it,  creating  its  life,  diffusing  its  light,  and  ccnunamiing  its 
heavenly  power,  love,  peace,  and  joy,  and  making  it  the  centre  of  rich  blessing, 
humanity,  charity,  and  civilisation  to  the  world  ?  (3)  To  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling 
in  the  Christian  soul.  III.  The  obligations  and  blessings  of  thesk  important 
TRUTHS.  1.  As  you  are  bought  with  tbe  price  of  Christ's  blood,  and  sealed  as  His 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  you  are  called  to  glorify  Him  both  in  body  and  soul.  As 
Christians  are  God's  temple  collectively  as  "  tbe  body  of  Christ,"  and  individually 
as  "  members  of  Christ,"  how  then  ought  they  to  live  in  holiness,  peace,  and  love  ! 
2.  Who  can  tell  the  invaluable  blessings  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  tlui-:  dwelling 
in  the  heart?  In  short,  they  are  Divine  light,  guidance,  help,  and  comfort.  (•/.  G. 
AiKjley,  M.  A .)  The  house  heautiful : — Taking  the  idea  of  the  text  and  looking  upon 
the  "  human  form  divine  "  as  the  "  house  beautiful,"  we  would  remark  that — I.  'The 
HOUSE  SHOULD  GIVE  SIGNS  OF  ITS  suPEEioR  OCCUPANT.  We  judge  of  the  inmate  liy  the 
residence.  If  everything  around  is  disorderly,  we  attribute  it  to  the  character  of 
the  tenant.  If  tbe  paths  are  clean  and  the  flower-beds  are  trimmed,  we  know  that 
there  is  taste  and  cultivation  of  the  spirit  of  beauty  on  the  part  of  the  occupier. 
So  we  judge  regarding  the  human  house.  Sin  makes  its  marks  upon  the  counten- 
ance. Care  traces  its  wrinkles  on  the  face.  The  house  should  be — 1.  Kept  clean. 
Sanctifi'-ation  is  spiritual  cleanliness.  Christ  will  cleanse.  And  the  soul  made 
pure  will  manifest  that  purity  in  the  outer  life.  The  light  of  God  in  the  soul  will 
illumine  the  darkness  around.  2.  Well  furnished.  The  Christian  needs  to  be 
ready  to  account  for  his  faith.  He  must  be  furnished  for  every  good  word  and 
work.  His  mind  should  be  stored  only  with  remembrance-pictures  upon  which 
he  can   look  with   tranquility   and   deliglit.     II.  We   are    not   freeholders   or 

ABSOLUTE     POSSESSORS     OF     THAT     HOUSE — WE     ONLY   HAVE    IT    ON   LEASE.        It    is    but    a 

temporary  temple.  The  beams  and  rafters  will  be  taken  down,  and  the  tenant 
will  depart.  III.  The  tenant  is  more  precious  than  the  house  he  lives  in. 
The  soul  is  of  infinitely  more  worth  than  the  body.  Fair  thougli  the  house  may 
be,  more  beautiful  still  is  the  tenant,  radiant  with  the  love  that  God  bestows. 
{Homiletic  Moutltly.)  The  nature  and  ojjices  of  the  Holy  Sjy'irit: — I.  His  per- 
sonality. To  dwell  in  a  temple  is  a  personal  act.  W^e  understand  by  person  a 
distinct,  subsistent,  intelligent  being,  as  distinguished  from  a  mere  property  or 
attribute.  It  is  quite  necessary  to  draw  this  distinction,  otherwise  we  might 
imagine  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be  nothing  but  a  Divine  power,  virtue,  or  efficacy, 
resident  in  God,  or  derived  from  God.  There  are,  certainh%  attributed  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  faculties  and  operations  which  can  only  be  attiibuted  to  a  person,  and  not 
to  a  quality.  He  po=sess;es  understanding,  "The  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  vea, 
the  deep  things  of  God."  AlTtctions  are  ascribed  to  Him,  wlien  we  are  bidden 
not  to  grieve  Him,  and  when  the  Israelites  are  said  to  have  l^rovok^'d  Him.  He 
teaches  men ;  guides  them  into  all  truth  ;  can  be  blasphemed,  and  Christians  are 
baptized  into  His  name  equally  with  that  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  whose 
personality  are  not  disputed.  II.  His  divinity.  If  it  be  a  personal  act  to  dwell 
in  a  temple,  there  must,  it  would  seem,  be  Deity  in  the  person  who,  by  His 
indwelling,  makes  the  temple  the  temple  of  God.  But  we  have  clear  evidence  in 
abundance  that  He  must  be  actually  God.  What  inhtrent  property  and  perfei-tion 
of  tbe  Divine  nature  is  there  which  is  not  attributed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  Wliat 
operation  is  there,  transcending  that  of  a  finite  and  created  thing,  which  the  Spirit 
is  not  said  to  perform  ?  III.  His  offices.  If  the  residence  of  the  Sjiirit  in  a 
man  convert  him  into  the  tenjjjle  of  God,  it  is  evident  that  the  Spirit  must  be  a 
renewing  and  sanctifying  agent.  Man  being  naturally  inhabited  only  by  what  is 
evil,  therefore  a  work  of  regeneration  must  be  effected  ere  he  can  be  dwelt  in  by 
One  infinitely  holy.  Here  we  may  observe  that  the  office  of  the  Spirit,  in  the 
economy  of  redemption,  is  a  fresh  pi'oof  of  His  Divinity.  ]\Ian  having  been  "  born 
in  sin,  and  shapen  in  iniquity,"  it  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  effect  such  a 
change  that  the  sinner  may  be  described  as  born  again,  and  made  a  new  man  in 
Christ  Jesus.  It  were  even  nothing  that  Christ  bore  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on 
the  tree,  if  there  were  no  supernatural  agency  to  apply  to  ourselves  the  expiatory 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  COmXTHIAKS.  281 


virtue  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  It  is  the  ofBce  of  the  Spirit  to  translate  us  from  the 
kingdom  of  Satan  to  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son;  and  having  once  made  us 
fellow- citizens  with  the  saints,  He  equips  us  for  spiritual  contiict,  enables  us  for 
ever}'  spiritual  duty,  and  fiuiiishes  us  with  every  spiritual  consolation.  Indeed,  it 
were  little  to  be  brought  within  the  circle  of  the  family  nf  God,  if  we  were  not  also 
kept  in  it  by  the  power  through  which  we  were  first  introduced.  But  this  power 
never  deserts  those  who  give  themselves  to  its  guidance.  (if.  Melvill,  11. D.) 
The  Spirit's  dweUing  : — I.  The  fact.  "  Ye  are  the  temple,"  &c.  In  three  ways — 
1.  By  building.  No  one  is  by  nature  a  temple.  The  Holy  Ghost  quarries  the 
stones,  shapes  the  pillars,  constructs  the  edifice.  2.  By  furnishing.  He  supplies 
the  good  thoughts,  good  motives,  good  principles,  which  actuate  the  Christian's 
life.  3.  By  inhabiting.  The_  Spirit  does  not  build  a  house  for  the  devil's  home. 
It  is  for  Himself.  II.  The  infekences.  It  is  implied  that  there  should  be,  if 
we  wish  the  Spirit  to  continue — 1.  Fitness.  The  house  must  be  kept  in  such  a 
condition  as  is  suitable  for  His  presence.  2.  Supremacy.  God  cannot  share  the 
kingdom.  3.  Unanimity.  How  can  two  dwell  together,  except  they  be  agreed  ? 
(/).  Tliomo!;,  D.D.)  The  iiuluelliiici  of  the  Hohj  Spirit: — This  indwelling  is  a 
profound  mystery,  but  it  is  the  characteristic  glory  of  the  Christian  dispensation. 
Our  Lord  distinguishes  between  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  before  and  after 
Pentecost:  "  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you."  Once  He  came  upon 
them,  now  He  is  in  them.  And  where  the  Spirit  dwells  is  holy  gi-ound.  Of  that 
indwelling  the  temple  of  Solomon  gives  us  a  prophetic  glimpse.  There  shone  a 
heavenly  light,  the  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit  who  was  to  dwell  in  every  true 
Christian,  not  as  a  passing  visitor,  but  as  a  perpetual ;  -est.  And  where  He  comes, 
He  brings  a  new  nature  and  capacities.  He  gives  a  new  direction  to  the  heart  and 
will.  He  opens  the  understanding,  and  bestows  a  new  power  for  holiness  and  for 
service.  This  indwelling  is  here  set  forth  as  an  antidote.  I.  To  party  spirit. 
1.  The  love  of  faction  which  marked  the  politics  of  Corinth  had  cr.'pt  into  their 
religion.  They  nursed  a  temper  of  bitterness  which  hindered  true  work  for  God, 
injured  their  inner  life,  and  grieved  the  Holy  Spirit.  Therefore  St.  Paul  asks  with 
surprise,  "  Know  ye  not,"  &c.  Their  lack  of  charity  helped  to  destroy  the  Church 
of  God.  It  broke  up  its  unity,  it  killed  its  spirituality.  It  provoked  God  to  judge 
them.  It  was  a  desecration  which  the  Holy  God  could  not  ignore.  2.  The  bane 
of  the  Church  still  is  its  unhappy  divisions.  Still  Christian  scorns  Christian  in 
proportion  as  the  differences  which  divide  them  are  trivial  and  unimportant.  If 
the  remembrance  of  our  great  mission  fail  to  move  us,  at  least  let  the  fact  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  us  do  so.  If  Moses  appealed  to  the  striving  Israelites, 
"Sirs,  ye  are  brethren,"  may  not  we  appeal,  "Sirs,  know  ye  not  tliat  ye  are  a 
temple  of  God,"  &c.  II.  To  disloyalty  to  God.  1.  Some  of  the  Christians  at 
Corinth  knew  well  the  freedom  of  Clirist's  gospel.  But  there  was  a  danger  lest 
they  should  grow  proud  of  their  light  and  their  liberty,  and  despise  every  barrier 
between  themselves  and  sin.  Therefore  St.  Paul  sternly  calls  them  to  a  life  of 
separation  from  all  evil  (2  Cor.  vi.  14-lG).  2.  The  warning  is  not  unneeded  by 
English  Christians.  There  are  forces  at  work  in  society  not  unlike  tliose  at 
Corinth.  Our  charity  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  indiiference.  A  feeble  and  un- 
certain grasp  of  truth  leads  too  often  to  acquiescence  in  a  policy  or  in  prictices 
which  the  conscience  condemns.  When  we  are  tempted  to  take  as  our  friend  the 
godless,  simply  because  they  are  clever  or  rich  ;  when  we  are  invited  to  put  our 
hands  to  any  work  upon  which  we  cannot  ask  the  blessing  of  God,  or  to  join  any 
association  which  may  make  money  at  the  cost  of  the  character  or  the  we.lbeing 
of  our  fellow-men — let  us  remember  that  to  touch  the  unclean  thing  is  to  defile 
that  temple  and  to  grieve  the  indwelling  Spirit.  III.  To  impuehy.  In  the  foul 
atmosphere  of  that  heathen  city  the  Christians  were  exposed  to  fearful  temptations, 
and  needed  an  adequate  motive  and  a  superhuman  power,  if  they  were  to  keep 
themselves  pure.  And  such  they  had  (chap.  vi.  19,  20).  There  are  symptoms  in 
the  social  life  of  England  which  cannot  but  excite  the  anxitty  of  every  one  who 
loves  his  country  and  is  loyal  to  God.  1.  If  our  literature  is  free  from  the  coarse- 
ness of  earlier  centuries,  it  is  too  often  pervaded  by  a  subtle  taint  which  poisons 
almost  imperceptibly  the  imagination  of  its  readers;  while  the  silent  and  deadly 
effect  of  the  publication  in  our  newspapers  of  things  of  which  it  is  a  shame  even 
to  sjjeak  in  secret,  has  corrupted  the  purity  of  thousands  of  souls.  2.  The  fashion 
of  treating  marriage  flippantly,  and  the  fact  that  leading  reviews  insert  articles 
which  deliberately  question  its  sanctity,  tend  to  strike  at  the  very  root  of  morality 
and  home  life.     3.  The  growing  luxury  which  has  accompanied  the  accumulation 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi 

of  wealth,  brings  with  it  its  own  Nemesis  in  the  relaxing  of  our  moral  fibre.  4. 
And,  while  rejoicing  in  every  honest  attempt  to  remove  all  the  disabilities  under 
which  women  have  suffered,  I  venture  to  think  that  tlie  tendency  to  destroy  the 
distinction  between  the  sexes  must  help,  in  the  long  run,  to  rob  a  woman's  life 
of  those  graces  which  have  been  the  secret  of  her  highest  influence,  and  her  most 
invulnerable  shield.  Now  to  us,  exposed  to  these  dangers,  the  fact  of  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  once  realised,  becomes  a  great  safeguard,  and  a 
mighty  incentive  to  a  pure  and  self-restrained  life.  (F.  J.  Cltevasse,  M.A.) 
The  imhccUing  of  the  Spirit : — He,  uncreated  love,  pours  out  into  our  souls  all  our 
power  of  Divine  love  for  Him  and  for  each  other.  He,  uncreated  wisdom,  orders 
o  'r  thoughts  secretly.  He,  uncreated  truth,  dissipates  from  our  mind  the  mist 
which  we  have  gathered  round  ourselves.  He,  uncreated  strength,  instrengthens 
us  to  bear  or  to  overcome  all  evil,  and  to  will  mightily  all  good.  He,  uncreated 
holiness,  cleanses  by  His  presence  an  habitation  fcr  Himself,  and  hallows  by  His 
abiding  the  dwelling-place,  which  He  has  repaired,  that  He  might  enter  in ;  which 
He  has  enlarged,  that  it  mi^dit  contain  Him.  He  Himself,  within  us,  informs  our 
memory  that  we  may  remember  Him,  enlightens  our  minds  that  we  may  know 
Him,  moves  our  wills  that  we  may  choose  Him  and  obey  Him.  He  Himself, 
within  us,  quickens  our  diligence  that  we  may  seek  Him,  gives  us  wisdom  that  we 
may  find  Him,  perseverance  that  we  may  attain  unto  Him.  Nor  is  it  our  spiritual 
nature  only  which  He  so  hallows.  "  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  temples 
of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Yes,  these  poor  bodies,  which  hunger  and  thirst,  are  heavy 
and  weary ;  which  shall  return  to  corruption,  which  shall  be  subject  to  the 
dishonour  of  the  grave — these  God  has  chosen  to  be  His  dwelling-place  ;  within 
these  He  is  forming  that  glorious  body  which  shall  be  after  the  resurrection  ;  with 
these  He  unites  Himself  now,  that  they  may  be  full  of  His  glory  hereafter.  They 
shall  shine  above  the  glory  of  the  sun,  because  they  shall  be  filled  with  the  light  of 
His  divinity.  They  shall  know  no  decay ;  for  He  shall  be  their  immortality. 
They  shall  know  no  weariness  ;  for  He  shall  be  their  life.  They  shall  know  no 
suffering ;  for  they  shall  be  made  impassible,  since  He  is  not  subject  to  suffering. 
They  shall  obey,  unhindering,  every  motion  of  His  will,  for  they  shall  be  sj)iritual 
through  His  indwelling  Spirit.  How,  then,  should  we  reverence  this  our  mysterious 
being.  How  should  we  reverently  use  the  eyes;  how  Iseep  them  from  all  wrong 
use  and  all  unlawful  sight,  which  are,  tlirough  the  light  of  God,  to  see  God  I  How 
should  we  keep  the  tongue  from  evil  words,  which,  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  is 
endlessly  to  sing  the  new  song  !  How  should  we  guard  the  heart  from  evil 
affections,  which  God  has  claimed  as  His  own,  and  bidden  us  to  give  it  wholly  to 
Him ;  the  soul  which  is  capacious  enough  to  "  contain  God,"  yet  not  large  enough 
to  contain  the  world  and  God !  {E.  B.  Piisey,  D.D.)  If  any  man  defile  the  temple 
of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy  .  .  .  which  temple  ye  are. — Tlie  huiiKni  goul  God's 
truest  temple  : — I.  The  human  sotl  Gon's  tiiukst  temple.  This  truth  expresses 
one  of  the  great  changes  introduced  by  Christianity.  Why  has  Christianity 
abolished  the  one  local  house  and  consecrated  man  himself  as  the  dwelling-place 
of  God?  Because — 1.  God  is  equally  present  everywhere.  Though  recognised  in 
Judaism,  this  never  broke  fortli  into  its  wonderful  glory  until  Christ  appeared. 
Men  feared  God,  and  the  shadow  of  that  fear  led  them  to  fancy  Him  faraway.  The 
whole  tendency  of  Christ's  life  was  to  wear  down  the  barrier  between  God  and  man. 
He  showed  that  nature  was  but  the  living  woik  of  an  ever-present  Father.  But 
although  equally  present,  God  is  not  equally  manifested  everywhere.  Thus  God  is 
revealed  in  His  worship,  but  who  sees  Him  ?  Not  the  careless  or  the  carnal ;  but 
to  holy  men  spiritunl  emotion  has  hallowed  strange  places,  and  made  them 
temples.  To  Jacob,  the  stones  became  a  temple.  To  Peter,  the  mountain  where 
Christ's  glory  shone  became  the  Holy  Mount.  Nathaniel  would  never  j)mes  the  fig- 
tree  without  feeling  it  to  be  a  place  of  prayer.  Perhaps  we  all  have  our  holy  places  ; 
the  chamber  where  we  first  really  prayed,  &c.  These  are  our  earthly  temples, 
because  there  God  has  been  most  clearly  manifested  to  us.  2.  God  is  most  clearly 
manif<'sted  in  humanity.  Christ,  pre-eminently,  was  the  glorious  temple  in 
■which  God  dwelt,  and  through  whom  the  Divine  glory  was  revealed  to  the  world. 
There  was  the  h<  ly  of  h(dies ;  there  the  altar  which  made  every  other  altar  fire 
grow  pale  and  expire.  II.  The  manxek  of  realising  this.  Through  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Spirit  (ver.  16).  Assuming  that,  how  may  we  attain  more 
of  the  full  presence  of  God  in  our  souls?  In  man  there  is  a  trinity  of  power,  and 
in  order  to  become  a  temple  all  these  must  be  consecrated.  1.  Intellect  to  realise 
God's  presence.     To  awaken  the  soul  to  energy  you  must  think  on  Him.     Go, 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  283 

then,  and  stretch  every  faculty  of  your  souls  to  realise  His  glory  and  His  presence. 
2.  Emotion.  Thought  is  vain  apart  from  this.  3.  Action.  Tlioutj;ht  and  feeling 
are  both  vain  without  this.  Work  from  your  emotion,  and  ultimately  you  may  do 
all  from  it.  Thus  man  becomes  a  temple  of  God — intellect  the  holy  place  ;  the 
heart's  emotions  the  altar  of  sacrifice;  the  actions  of  life  the  levelation  of  both. 
III.  The  results  of  the  realisation.  1.  God  manifested  to  the  world.  They 
say  our  temples  are  being  deserted  ;  that  the  young  and  the  labourer  are  going 
away.  Is  not  tliis  because  we  are  not  temples?  It  is  vain  to  build  stone  temples 
to  God  unless  we  become  His  living  ones.  2.  Elevation  of  life  above  the  sinful, 
trifling,  earthly.  His  is  no  vain  life  who  has,  through  the  Spirit,  become  a 
temple  of  Jehovah  !  In  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  there  was  a  veil ;  at  the  death  of 
Christ  that  veil  was  rent.  In  the  temple  of  every  human  heart  there  hangs  a  veil; 
death  will  rend  it,  and  will  reveal  either  the  glorious  image  of  the  Father,  or  the 
image  of  the  demon-god  for  which  it  has  lived.  (K.  L.Hull,  B.A.)  Defiling  the 
tenijde  of  God  : — Why  false  doctiines  are  a  defiling.  First,  from  the  pure  nature  of 
God's  truth,  and  His  worshii),  which  falsehoods  do  stain  and  take  away  the  glory 
of.  Oh,  then,  how  humble,  tender,  and  careful  ought  men  to  be !  Are  the  truths 
and  ordinances  of  God  by  institution,  and  in  their  original  so  pure?  Come  not,  then, 
with  thy  foul  bands  to  handle  such  precious  things.  Secondly,  they  are  called 
denlements  and  pollutions,  because  the  truths  and  Church  of  God  are  not  only 
pure,  but  dedicated  and  appropriated  to  Him,  as  the  only  object.  Thirdly,  errors 
and  heresies  may  well  be  called  defilements,  because  they  are  a  disease,  and  so 
spread  over  the  Church.  Fourthly,  they  are  defilements,  because  they  pollute  the 
conscience,  mind,  and  heart,  and  whole  life  of  a  man.  Hence  you  have  that 
phrase,  "Men  of  corrupt  minds"  (1  Tim.  vi.  5;  2  Tim.  iii.  8).  Lastly, 
Corrupt  doctrines  are  called  detileinents,  to  show  how  loathsome  and  abominable 
they  should  be  to  us.  We  have  despatched  the  sin  supposed,  we  come  to  the 
punisliment  proposed — "  Him  sball  God  destroy."  Let  us  consider  the  aggrava- 
tion of  this  destruction.  First,  it  is  an  eternal  destruction  ;  a  destruction  that  is 
always  destroying,  and  yet  the  party  is  not  extinguished.  Secondly,  it  is  a 
universal  destruction  in  a  moral  sense.  There  is  not  tlie  least  mixture  of  any  joy, 
of  any  hope.  Thirdly,  it  is  an  inevitable  destruction.  God  will  destroy  ;  who  can 
stop  God's  hand?  {A.  Burgess.)  The  mijsiical  temple  : — There  was,  under  the 
law — 1.  The  outwai'd  court,  where  the  people  did  stand,  and  the  inner  temple,  into 
which  none  but  the  priests  did  enter.  So  with  a  Christian  ;  there  is  the  outward 
temple  of  his  body  (chap.  vi.  19),  and  the  holy  of  holies,  his  soul,  where  none  but 
Christ  our  High  Priest  must  come.  I.  The  EESEiiBLAMCES  between  a  believer's 
SOUL  AND  A  temple.  1.  All  the  materials  were  fitted  for  the  building  of  the 
temple :  the  timber  was  to  be  sawn,  the  stones  to  be  hewn  and  polished.  So  by 
nature  we  are  not  qualified  for  a  temple,  we  are  unhewn  and  unpolished.  So  far 
from  preparing  ourselves  for  a  temple,  we  indispose  ourselves ;  but  God  hews  us  by 
His  propliets  (Hos.  ii.  5),  and  cuts  and  carves  us  by  ai'flicti  ^ns,  and  so  makes  us 
meet  for  a  spiritual  temple.  2.  The  temple  was  very  magnificent  (1  Kings  vi.  32). 
So  the  soul  of  a  believer  is  an  illustiious  temple.  God  Himself  brings  His  glory 
into  it  (Psa.  xlv.  13).  Christ  never  admired  the  goodly  stones  of  the  visible,  but 
admired  the  glory  of  the  spiritual  temple  (1  Pet.  iii.  4).  3.  The  temple  was  a 
place  set  apart  for  God's  peculiar  worship  ;  it  was  separated  from  all  other  places. 
So  a  bel  ever's  heart  is  consecrated  ground,  and  set  apart  for  God's  service 
(Psa.  iv.  3 ;  cxix.  38).  4.  The  temple  was  a  place  of  God's  special  presence :  He 
did  there  command  His  blessings.  So  in  a  spiritual  heart  God  wonderfully 
manifests  His  presence  :  there  He  gives  forth  the  influences  of  His  grace,  the 
communicati"DS  of  His  love.  5.  The  temple  w'as  adorned  with  curious  pictures  ; 
so  the  tunple  of  the  heart  hath  God's  image  in  it  (Col.  iii.  10) ;  is  drawn  by  the 
pencil  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  6.  The  temple  had  a  tire  burning  on  the  altar ;  so  a 
believer's  heart  is  the  altar  on  which  there  is  a  sacred  fire  still  burning 
(Rom.  xii.  13;  Psa.  cxix.  97).  7.  The  temple,  being  an  hallowed  place,  was  to  be 
kept  clean  (2  Chron.  xxix.  15 ;  xxiii.  3).  So  must  this  (2  Chron.  vii.  1).  II. 
This  Divine  temple  of  the  soul  differs  from  other  temples,  anu  hath  a 
TRANSCENDENT  EXCELLENCY  ABOVE  THEM.  1.  Other  material  temples,  though  of  a 
beautiful  structure,  yet  have  no  life  in  them;  but  a  believer  is  a  living  temple 
(1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Hypocrites  who  have  only  a  name  to  live  (Eev.  iii.  1),  sri  not 
temples,  but  tombs.  2.  This  is  an  heavenly  temple  ;  other  temples  are  constituted 
of  earthly  materials.  The  believer's  soul  was  breathed  from  heaven,  and  that 
which  is  in  heaven  is  to  be  found  in  Him.   In  heaven  there  is — (1)  Light  (Col.  i.  12), 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

so  in  a  saint  there  is  the  light  of  knowledge  (Eph.  v.  8).  (2)  Love  (1  John  iv.  7), 
so  a  saint's  heart  is  a  temple  of  love  (John  xxi.  15).  (3)  Joy  (Matt.  xxv.  23),  so  a 
saint  hath  joy  in  believing  (Eom.  xv.  13).  3.  He  is  an  everlasting  temple;  other 
temples  are  of  a  perishable  nature.  God  will  not  demolish  His  own  temple.  Christ's 
blood  cements  all  the  stones  together,  and  as  long  as  the  foundation  and  cement 
hold,  so  long  this  temple  shall  last,  and  that  is  for  ever.  III.  Uses.  1.  Of 
information.  (1)  See  the  difference  between  the  godly  and  the  wicked  :  the  heart 
of  the  godly  is  a  temple ;  the  heart  of  the  wicked  is  a  cage  of  unclean  birds 
(Rev.  xviii.  2).  (2)  See  wherein  a  great  part  of  the  nation's  safety  lies  ;  namely,  in 
having  store  of  these  spiritual  temples.  In  ancient  times  temples  were  places  of 
safety.  The  saints  are  England's  sanctuaries.  (3)  If  the  saints  are  the  temples  of 
God,  then  how  dangerous  is  it  for  any  to  abuse  and  injure  them  !  2.  Of  examina- 
tion. All  God's  temples  are  made  in  some  measure  like  Him.  (1)  God  is  a  spirit. 
Are  we  spiritual?  f2)  God  is  pure.  Have  we  holy  and  chaste  alfectious?  (3) 
God  is  merciful.  Wiiat  shall  we  say  to  them  who  have  no  mercy?  3.  Of  exhort i- 
tiou.  You  who  are  the  temples  of  God.  (1)  Do  not  defile  God's  temple  (ver.  17). 
(ft)  By  intermixing  with  the  wicked.  Bad  company  is  defiling  (chap.  v.  9).  (b) 
By  uncleanness.  This  sin  defiles  both  the  outward  temple  and  the  inner,  (c)  By 
error.  Heresies  are  as  the  leprosy,  which  defiled  the  house  in  which  it  was 
(Lev.  xiv.  39).  (2)  Be  as  temples,  (a)  Do  temple  work.  Offer  up  spiritual 
sacrifices  (1  Pet.  ii.  5) — of  prayer;  of  a  broken  heart  (Psa.  li.  17);  of  praise 
(Psa.  1.  23).  (b)  Study  temple  purity.  The  temple  was  very  holy.  So  Christians. 
Holiness  beautifies  God's  temples,  and  is  the  cherisher  of  a  Christian's  peace.  4. 
Of  consolation.  (1)  Such  as  are  God's  spiritual  temples  shall  have  much  of  God's 
company  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).  (2)  Such  as  are  gracious  temples  shall  one  day  be 
glorious    temples.       (T.    Watson.)  The    holiness   of  GocVs   temple: — Take    the 

figure  in  connection  with  aay  of  the  kiuds  of  habitation  spoken  of  in  Scripture 
—1.  The  home.  2.  The  tent.  3.  The  palace.  4.  The  temple — it  exhibits  a 
most  comforting  truth  to  us.  To  be  God's  home  or  dwelling,  His  tent  or 
tabernacle.  His  royal  palace.  His  chosen  temple,  of  which  that  on  Moriah 
was  a  mere  shadow,  how  solemn  the  admonition  as  to  personal  holiness 
conveyed  to  us  by  this !  In  God's  temple  there  is  the  blood,  the  fire,  the  smoke, 
the  water,  the  lamps,  the  iucense,  the  shewbread,  the  cherubim,  the  glory 
— all  consecrated  things,  and  all  pertaining  to  what  is  heavenly  !  I.  What 
INTIMACY  WITH  GoD.  Acquaintauceship  with  Him  who  has  made  our  heart  His 
home  is  the  least  which  could  be  expected.  He  must  be  no  stianger  to  us.  There 
must  not  merely  be  reconciliation — for  that  may  consist  with  some  degree  of 
distance — but  intimacy,  peaceful  friendship,  loving  acquaintanceship.  If  God 
be  our  inmate,  how  intimate  ought  we  to  be  with  Him  in  all  respects  !  Of  an  old 
Scotch  minister  it  is  said  (as  the  finishing  stroke  in  his  character),  "He  was  one 
very  intimate  with  God."  So  let  it  be  said  of  us.  II.  What  calmness  of  spirit. 
In  all  false  religion  there  is  excitement,  in  true  religion  calmness.  Man  is  never 
more  truly  and  deeply  calm  than  when  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  tendency 
of  much  that  is  called  religion  in  our  day  is  to  agitation,  bustle,  noise,  unnatural 
fervour.  God  keeps  His  temple  in  perfect  peace.  III.  What  solemnity  of  soul. 
If  God  be  inhabiting  us  as  His  temple  we  ou„'ht  surely  to  be  solemn  men — called 
to  a  solemn  life,  speaking  solemn  words,  manifesting  a  solemn  deportment.  Should 
the  world's  rude  laughter  echo  through  the  aisles  of  the  Divine  temple  ?  or  its 
uproarious  mirth  ring  through  the  holy  of  holies  ?  IV.  What  eecollectedness 
OF  thought  and  feeling.  With  God  dwelling  in  us,  shall  we  allow  wandering 
thoughts  or  forgetf ulness  of  the  Divine  presence  to  prevail.  Let  us  gather  up  our 
thoughts  and  keep  them  gathered.  V.  What  spikituality  and  unwokldliness. 
"  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  who  worship  Him  must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and 
in  truth."  We  need  the  spiritual  heart,  shutting  out  the  world  from  a  shrine  which 
Jehovah  has  entered  and  made  His  own.  If  we  are  temples  of  the  holy  Ghost,  and 
if  His  temples  are  holy,  then  are  not  such  things  as  the  following  shut  out  ? — 1. 
Vauity.  How  inconsistent !  2.  Pleasure.  Can  a  lover  of  pleasure  be  a  temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  ?  3.  Politics.  What  have  the  poor  party  politics  of  this  world  to 
do  with  the  worship  of  this  glorious  temple  ?  Can  the  smoke  and  dust  of  the  world 
commingle  witli  the  incense  of  the  golden  altar  ?  4.  Covetousness.  Absorption 
even  in  lawful  bu->iness  is  inconsistent  with  our  being  temples  of  God.  Let  us  not 
grieve  that  Spirit  whose  temple  we  are.  Let  us  allow  Him  to  fill  us  wholly,  and  to 
cast  out  all  that  is  uubefittiug  the  holiu'ss  and  glory  of  His  habitation. 


CHAP.  III.]  L   CORINTHIANS.  285 


Vers.  18-20.  Let  no  man  deceive  himself.  If  any  man  .  .  .  seemeth  to  be  wise 
in  tliis  world,  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he  may  be  wise. — How  to  avoid  self-decep- 
tion : — I.  The  d.\ngkk.  1.  Is  coinmnn.  2.  Arises  out  of  ignorance  and  self-conceit. 
3.  Leads  to  the  most  disastrous  results.  II.  How  to  avoid  it.  1.  Distrust  youi'self. 
2.  Distrust  the  wisdom  of  this  world.  3.  Be  content  to  be  thought  a  fool,  that 
you  may  be  enlightened  with  tlie  wisdom  that  cometh  from  above.  (J.  Lyth,D.D.) 
Self-deceit : — We  abhor  the  character  of  one  who  deceives  us  by  fair  promises  in 
our  ordinary  intercourse  with  the  world ;  but  we  are  not  equally  prepared  against 
those  specious  delusions  which  are  cherished  in  our  own  breast.  It  will  require 
all  the  aids  of  a  power  from  above  to  detect  the  specious  illusions  which  are  inter- 
woven with  the  history  of  man.  I.  The  general  causes  of  self-deceit.  Had 
human  nature  retained  its  original  innocence  the  love  of  truth  would  have  been 
its  unvaried  feature.  But  — we  are  fallen.  The  faculties  of  the  mind  are  blinded 
by  prejudice.  1.  Hence  the  treachery  of  the  heart  is  one  of  the  first  causes  of 
self-deceit.  The  enemy  in  our  own  bosom  deludes  us  into  a  secret  approbation 
of  our  vices,  and  flatters  us  with  the  hope  of  eluding  any  future  punishment,  or 
of  avoiding  a  rigorous  investigation  of  our  past  lives.  2.  Another  cause  of  self- 
deceit  is  an  inordinate  love  of  pleasure.  When  we  rather  seek  to  be  amused  than 
to  be  imi:)roved,  we  can  have  no  leisure  for  the  scrutiny  of  thought  or  a  proper 
inquiry  into  our  own  character  and  conduct.  3.  Another  fruitful  source  of  self- 
deceit  is  thinking  too  highly  of  ourselves.  Flattery  blinds  the  eye  of  the  judgment, 
and  prevents  our  discovering  the  errors  which  we  constantly  indulge.  We  cry 
peace  to  our  souls  when  there  is  no  peace  ;  and  we  drearn  of  security  amidst  the 
most  formidable  enemies.  4.  We  are  further  exposed  to  the  danger  of  self-deceit 
by  making  too  light  of  sin.  He  who  lessens  the  claims  of  virtue  must  be  a  stranger 
to  the  purifying  influence  of  sanctifying  grace — no  error  will  so  effectually  delude 
us  into  a  fatal  indifference  to  our  own  security,  o.  A  conformity  to  the  world  in 
our  manners,  maxims,  and  pursuits,  is  another  prolific  source  of  self-deceit.  This 
is  not  the  school  wherein  we  shall  learn  to  obey  the  strictness  of  our  holy  religion. 
Outward  appearances  are  more  studied  than  inward  piety  in  this  region  of  gaiety, 
business,  and  perpetual  delusion.  6.  Again  a  levity  of  temper  that  precludes 
thought  is  another  common  occasion  of  self-deceit.  The  mind  requires  a  discipline 
no  less  regular  than  the  body.  7.  Again,  this  fatal  delusion  may  be  often  ascribed 
to  ignorance  of  our  fallen  condition  by  nature  and  practice.  Men  who  are  unac- 
quainted with  the  depravity  of  their  own  hearts  and  tlie  depth  of  iniqnity  within, 
are  not  aware  of  the  imposing  forms  which  even  their  vices  will  assume.  8. 
Another  way  in  which  we  deceive  ourselves  is  in  calling  vices  by  the  name  of 
virtues.  Thus  the  miser  veils  his  avarice  under  the  name  of  prudence.  9.  Many 
are  also  deceiving  themselves  by  mistaking  a  theoretical  acquaintance  with  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  for  the  power  of  vital  godliness.     II.  The  extreme  danger 

OF  BEING    lulled  IN  A  STATE  OF    CARN.\L    SECURITY   THROUGH    THE    IMPOSING  INFLUENCE 

OF  SELF-DECEIT.  The  principal  evil  is  that  whilst  we  are  entertaining  a  liigh  opinion 
of  our  own  goodness,  we  are  taking  no  pains  to  avoid  the  dangers  which  are  coming 
on  us.  We  are  also  apt  to  think  every  man  our  enemy  who  tells  us  the  truth.  In 
the  hurry  of  business,  or  in  a  vortex  of  pleasure,  we  have  no  inclination  to  pause 
and  consider  the  end  of  our  ways.  No  dangers  cm  be  so  great  as  those  which  we 
take  no  pains  to  avoid.  They  come  on  us  in  a  way  utterly  unexpected.  The  danger 
of  carnal  security  is  great,  because  we  are  hereby  led  to  neglect  the  remedy  provided 
in  the  gospel.    Man  has  too  much  at  stake  to  trifle,  securely,  with  his  chief  interest. 

III.  The  BEST  MEANS  TO  AVOID  THE  DANGERS  OF  SELF-DECEIT,  WITH  THE  BENEFITS 
ATTENDANT     ON    A    PROPER     KNOWLEDGE     OF     OURSELVES.        1.     The    first    Step    in     this 

important  business  will  be  to  maintain  a  holy  jealousy  over  our  own  hearts.  To 
avoid  self-deceit  we  must  beware  of  self-love,  and  be  on  our  guard  against  the 
natural  proneness  of  our  deceitful  hearts  to  excuse  our  errors  and  extenuate  our 
vices.  We  must  judge  of  our  own  conduct  not  by  the  partial  opinion  of  our  friends, 
but  by  the  frequent  declarations  of  our  enemies.  We  must  not  merely  compare 
our  conduct  with  others,  but  reflect  on  what  it  ought  to  be  when  compared  with 
what  it  is.  2.  The  benefits  attendant  on  a  proper  knowledge  of  ourselves  will  be 
humility,  under  a  consciousness  of  our  guilt,  and  depravity;  caution,  under  a  due 
impression  of  our  weakness  ;  a  constant  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace,  from 
a  view  of  the  blessings  annexed  to  them  ;  and  an  anxious  solicitude  to  have  a  well- 
grounded  interest  in  Christ,  from  a  thorough  persuasion  of  the  dangers  that  await 
us.  {J.  Grose,  A.M.)  0)i  deccivinii  ourselves  : — That  men  should  deceive  them- 
selves, and  still  more,  that  they  should  use  means  for  that  purpose,  we  should 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  hi. 

believe  to  have  been  impossible  were  it  not  a  fact  of  daily  observation.  Several 
causes  lead  to  this  irrational  aud  dangerous  practice.  The  first  and  most  powerful 
is  an  inordinate  love  of  ourselves.  Pride  also  often  lends  its  aid  to  our  seltishufss. 
It  inspires  a  contempt  of  other  men  and  too  high  an  opinion  of  our  own  rights. 
The  desire  to  maintain  our  own  esteem  contributes  to  our  self-deception.  We  have 
a  desire  of  the  approbation  of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  feel  mortified  when  this 
approbation  is  withdrawn.  But  to  appear  worthless  in  our  own  eyes  deprives  us 
not  only  of  the  pleasure  of  conscience,  but  inflicts  the  stings  of  remorse.  Such 
mortifying  sentiments  must  be  banished,  aud  our  self-esteem  in  some  whj  must  be 
regained.  H^■nce  guilty  men  have  recourse  to  the  artifices  of  self-defeit.  Let  us 
guard  [igainst  the  influence  of  principles  which  lead  to  so  fatal  a  conclusion.  And 
for  this  purp'  se  let  us  proceed  to  consider  some  of  those  cases  in  which  self-deceit 
is  most  frequently  practised.  I.  The  first  of  these  to  which  I  request  your  attention 
is  that  in  which  ouk  sins  are  mingled  with  sojie  appaeent  good.  Whence,  for 
example,  is  profusion  called  generosity,  vanity  and  folly  a  high  and  liberal  sjDirit  ? 
while,  on  tlie  other  hand,  the  most  narrow  selfishness  is  called  prudence;  avarice, 
frugality;  the  exclusive  puisuit  of  gain,  diligent  and  honest  industry  ?  Whence 
are  fraud  and  low  cunning  sometimes  boasted  of  as  the  achievement  of  superior 
talent;  and  crimes  fitted  only  to  inspire  the  deepest  disgust  are  openly  related  in 
expectation  of  applause?  Whence  is  it  that  restlessness  and  discontent  are  con- 
founded with  the  desire  of  improvement — subtiltv  called  depth — audacious  and 
hasty  decisions,  clear  and  prompt  judgments  ?  Whence  also  do  you  find  blind  and 
intemperate  zeal  confounded  with  a  supreme  love  of  God  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
insensibility  and  indifference  are  honoured  with  the  names  of  liberality  and  rational 
religion  ?  Whence  arise  thepe  and  such-like  dangerous  perversions  of  judgment,  but 
from  that  fat  il  self-deceit — that  unfairness  of  mind  and  subservience  of  the  under- 
standing and  the  conscience  to  our  passions  and  indulgences  which  are  so  often 
to  be  seen  in  the  judt;men  s  and  conduct  of  men  ?  II.  Another  case  in  which 
self-deceit  is  apt  to  be  pi<  c  Ised  is  that  in  which  we  judge  of  those  duties  or 

indulgences,    'THE    PROPER   BOUNDS     Of   WHICH     CANNOT    BE    PRFCISELY    DKFINED.       No 

duty  is  more  obligati  ry  upon  Christians  than  the  relief  of  persons  in  d  stress  ;  but 
you  cannot  lay  down,  either  for  yourselves  or  others,  the  time,  the  occasion,  and 
the  extent  in  which  that  relief  is  in  every  case  to  bn  given.  Here,  then,  is  a  wide 
field  for  a  dishonest  mind  to  indulge  its  propensities,  and  to  deceive  itself  in  the 
formation  of  its  judgments.  Similar  observations  may  be  made  on  the  nejjlect  of 
personal  devotion.  Are  there  not  many  who  never  employ  a  portion  of  tln-ir  time 
in  serious  meditation  or  private  prater?  Deeply  engaged  in  the  toils  and  pursuits 
of  business,  they  find  many  excuses  for  their  negligence.  The  fit  season,  they  say, 
is  frequently  interrupted  by  unexpected  occurrences.  At  length  a  habit  of  procras- 
tination is  formed.  The  proper  season  no  longer  reminds  us  of  our  sacrc'i  duties. 
The  world  now  occupies  our  thoughts  and  our  inclinations.  A  similar  process  of 
self-deception  often  takes  place  in  reference  to  pursuits  and  indulgence^  which  may 
be  innocent  in  themselves,  but  wh'cli,  in  special  circumstances,  or  when  frequently 
repeated,  become  dangerous  and  guilty.  Under  this  class  may  be  ranked  the  undue 
pursuit  of  the  amusements,  and  wh.at  are  called  the  pleasures,  of  life.  They  may 
interfere  with  that  time  which  belonged  to  importaiit  objects:  they  may  pioduce 
sucli  elTects  on  your  temper  and  state  of  mind  as  to  unlit  you  for  those  i-pecial 
duties  to  \ihich  you  are  dedicated  :  or  they  may  be  unsuitable  to  your  circumstances 
and  condition  in  life;  and  may  associate  with  you  ideas  and  feehngs  which  are 
injuiious  to  your  character  and  usefulness.  III.  Men  are  specially  liable  to  self- 
df'ceit  in  those  cases  wuere  they  are  led  to  consider  and  estimate  their  own 
GENERAL  CHARACTER.  It  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  we  form  just  notions 
of  ourselves.  This  would  save  us  from  many  unwise  and  ruinous  undertakings, 
and  from  do'ng  much  injury  both  to  ourselves  and  to  our  fellow-creatures.  The 
knowledge  of  ourselves  would  also  render  us  humble  and  mild  in  our  iutfrcourse 
with  one  another,  modest  in  our  judgments,  diligent  in  the  means  of  knowl- dge 
and  improvement.  But  I  pass  from  minor  considerations  to  the  higher  concerns 
of  the  soul  aud  our  eternal  well-being.  The  foundation  of  Chri-tianity  is  laid 
in  a  just  sense  of  our  ignorance,  sinfulness,  and  lost  estate;  and  till  this  be  in 
some  degree  known  ami  felt,  we  cannot  justly  estimate  the  salvation  of  the  gospel. 
How  important,  then,  is  it  for  us  to  guard  against  that  self-deceit  which  conceals 
from  us  I  he  knowledge  of  our  own  character,  Hud  prevents  us  from  seeking  recon- 
ciliation with  God  aud  rising  to  that  holiness  without  which  no  man  shall  se  ■  the 
Lord.   Behold  a  man  retired  into  his  closet  with  the  professed  design  of  considering 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  287 

his  ways  and  iuquiriug  into  the  nature  of  his  character.  How  astonishing,  then, 
is  it  to  behold  this  same  man  using  every  means  to  defeat  the  object  of  his  iuquiry. 
By  some  sophistical  aigument  he  finds  that  his  sins  are  not  so  bad  nor  so  dangerous 
as  they  have  been  commonly  represented;  or  he  discovers  that  in  the  case  of 
persons  like  him  sueh  sins  are  attended  with  many  circumstances  of  ijalliation  ; 
they  are  young,  and  cannot  be  expected  to  have  all  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of  age  ; 
or  they  are  aged,  and  being  long  accustomed  to  such  indulgences,  it  would  be 
daug-rous,  perhaps  death  at  their  time  of  life,  to  reform  :  or  they  find  that  they 
are  peculiarly  exposed  to  temptation,  from  the  nature  of  their  occupations  and  the 
persons  with  whom  they  are  obliged  to  associate ;  other  men  are  not  better  than 
they,  but  only  not  so  much  exposed  to  temptation.  They  rise  from  their  medita- 
tions more  hardened  and  ignorant  of  themselves  than  before.  IV.  Similar  causes 
will  lead  men  to  deceive  theiu selves  in  judging  of  theik  state  of  favour  with 
God  Axn  their  pkospkct  of  fdtctre  happiness.  \Ye  have  seen  the  manner  in 
which  sinful  men  deceive  themselves  into  false  conceptions  of  their  general 
character :  they  have  only  to  carry  their  self-complacency  one  step  farther,  and  to 
fix  on  some  tests  of  an  interest  in  Christ  which  are  agreeable  to  their  own  inclina- 
tion-!, in  order  to  persuade  themselves  that  thej'  are  in  a  state  of  favour  with  God 
and  stcure  of  future  happiness.  How  niiiny,  for  example,  satisfy  themselves 
with  a  splendul  profession !  Another  class  of  self-deceivers  lull  themselves  into  a 
fatal  security  by  the  general  decency  of  their  lives;  while  no  action,  pursuit,  or 
plan,  has  ever  proceeded  from  Christian  ])rinciples.  Did  not  the  Pharisee  vvhoca 
our  Lord  contrasts  with  the  humble  publican  thus  deceive  himself '!  But  not  to 
men  professing  some  regard  for  religion  is  this  self-deceit  confined.  Strange  as  it 
may  seem,  there  are  men  utterly  void  of  the  Christian  profession  who  assure 
themselves  of  heaven.  Their  vices  have  laid  asleep  their  conscience.  Their  sense 
of  good  and  evil  is  lost,  and  they  see  not  the  gulf  which  lies  before  them.  V.  Let 
me  beseech  you,  then,  to  guard  against  an  evil  so  subtile,  so  daxgeho-s,  and 
TO  WHICH  WK  are  SO  PERPETUALLY  EXPOSED.  Watch,  then,  ovcr  yourselves;  i  i  piire 
often  into  the  state  of  your  principles  and  lives  ;  and  bring  them  to  tlie  icst  of 
the  law  and  the  testimony.  Turn  not  away  from  the  consideration  of  your  errors 
and  sins — bear  to  look  at  them  as  they  are.  Though  to  probe  the  wound  may 
be  painful,  thus  only  can  it  be  cured.  But  even  in  self-examinaiion  we  are  in 
danger  of  deceiving  ourselves.  Lay  therefore  your  hearts  before  God.  (S. 
MacGill,  n.D.)  Human  wisdom  in  opposition  to  the  Divine:—!.  Human 
WISDOM.  1.  Is  more  seeming  than  real.  2.  Is  mixed  with  much  of  error.  3. 
Busies  itself  with  matters  of  temporary  importance.  4.  Excludes  those  that  are 
of  higher  moment,  or  else  judges  them  by  false  standard-*.  II.  To  attain  to 
Drv'iNE  WISDOM.  A  man  must — 1.  Acknowledge  his  own  ignorance.  2.  Become  a  fool 
in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  '6.  Submit  his  reason  to  the  teaching  of  Divine  wisdom. 
{■J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  fl'orldly  u-isilom: — The  wisdom  here  referred  to  is  what  Paul 

calls  elsewhere  "  fleshly  wisdom,"  the  "  wisdom  of  the  world,''  or  of  the  age 
(chap.  i.  20).  It  may  be  regarded  as  mere  intellectual  kn>>wledge  applied  to 
secular  and  selfish  ends,  however  vast  and  varied  its  attainments.  I.  It  is  self- 
deluding.  "  Let  no  man  deceive  himself.  If  any  man  among  you  seemeth  to  be 
wise  in  this  world,"  &c.  This  worldly  wisdom  deceives  a  man,  intsrauch  as — 1.  It 
leads  h'm  to  overrate  the  vakie  of  his  attainments.  He  imagines  that  this  kind  of 
knowUdL;e,  "  wisdom,"  is  everything  for  a  man.  Hence  the  enthusiastic  promotion 
of  schools  and  colleges.  But  all  such  knowledge  is  of  no  value  to  m^n  as  man, 
and  beycmd  his  brief  and  uncertain  earthly  life.  2.  It  leads  him  to  overrate  his 
own  importance.  He  is  "  vainly  puffed  by  his  earthly  mind  "  (Col.  ii.  18).  Such 
a  man  imagines  himself  to  be  very  great,  he  becomes  a  priggish  pedant,  he  "  struts 
and  stares  and  a'  that."  II.  It  is  spiritually  worthless.  A  man  with  this 
■worldly  wisdom  must  "  become  a  fool  that  he  may  be  wise."  Two  things  are  here 
implied.  1.  That  with  all  his  wisdom  he  is  already  really  a  "  fool,"  for  he  looks 
for  happiness  where  it  is  not  to  be  found.  Happiness  does  not  spring  from  a  man's 
brain,  but  from  his  heart;  not  from  his  ideas,  but  from  his  affections.  2.  He  is  a 
"  fool  "  because  he  piitctically  ignores  the  chief  good,  wliich  is  love  for,  resemblance 
to,  and  fellowship  with  God.  Hence  •'  the  wi-dom  of  this  world  is  foolishness 
with  God."  The  most  illustrious  scholar,  saae,  orator,  who  is  considered  by  him- 
self and  his  contemporaries  to  be  a  man  of  w.onderful  wisdom,  to  the  eye  of  God  is 
a  fool.  III.  It  is  ultimately  confounding.  "  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own 
craftiness."  It  must  confound  a  man  sooner  or  later  either — 1.  Here  in  his 
conversion,  or  2.  Yonder  in  his  retribution.    (£>.  Thomas,  D.D.)         Human  wisdom 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

a  hindrance  to  the  tlnncia  of  Christ : — Now  the  holy  and  heavenly  things  of  Christ 
may  be  reduced  unto  three  heads.  In  all  these  you  shall  see  a  man  with  no  more 
than  the  natural  human  wisdom  to  be  the  greatest  adversary  thereunto ;  yea,  and 
the  more  parts,  and  the  more  wisdom  he  hath,  the  more  indisfjosed  he  is  to  receive 
or  believe  supernatural  truths.  We  must  not  understand  to  believe,  but  believe  to 
understand.  I.  Let  us  consider  what  an  enemy  to  the  docteine  delivered  the 
FLESHLY,  HUMAN  WISDOM  OF  A  MAN  IS.  First,  tliis  humau  wisdom  puiTeth  a  man  up 
with  pride,  that  he  will  not  entertain  such  Divine  mysteries.  And  this  swelling  or 
puffing  up  is  immediately  contrary  to  an  act  of  faith  ;  for  faith  hath  an  obediential 
assent,  namely,  because  God  saith  it,  let  my  understanding  cavil  and  argue  never 
so  plausibly.  So  that  faith  is  a  kind  of  mental  martyrdom,  it  puts  to  death  those 
lofty  thoughts  men  naturally  have.  Secondly,  human  wisdom  as  it  doth  immediately 
oppose  faith  in  its  obediential  assent,  so  also  humility  which  is  the  instrumental 
grace  to  receive  all  the  mysteries  of  Christ.  Humility  is  not  only  a  grace  itself, 
but  a  vessel  to  receive  other  graces  (Psa.  xxv.  9 ;  Matt.  xi.  25).  The  valleys  they 
receive  the  drops  of  heaven,  and  are  more  fruitful  than  the  mountains,  though 
high  but  barren.  So  that  human  wisdom  is  as  great  an  hindrance  as  humility  is  a 
furthertince.  Thirdly,  human  conceited  wisdom  must  needs  hinder  the  entertain- 
ment of  Christ's  truth,  because  it  sets  itself  on  the  thione  to  be  judge,  and  to 
determine  truth  or  falsehood  according  to  her  own  principles.  It  makes  weights 
and  a  standard  of  its  own,  and  will  weigh  even  what  God  and  the  Scripture  saith 
by  its  own  self.  It  is  true  a  man's  reason  or  wisdom  may  be  considered  two  ways — 
(1)  As  corrupt  and  darkened  through  original  sin  ;  and  in  this  respect  only  we 
speak  of  it,  as  such  an  adversary  to  the  mysteries  of  religion.  (2)  As  enlightened 
and  sanctified  by  the  Word  and  the  Spitit  of  God.  Now,  in  this  latter  respect, 
though  it  be  not  a  judge,  but  is  to  be  judged,  yet  it  is  an  excellent  instrument  to 
faith.  When  faith  had  first  laid  its  foundation,  then  reason  is  wonderful  serviceable 
for  the  confirmation  of  Divine  truths.  Fourthly,  human  wisdom  is  such  an  opposite 
to  heavenly  truth,  because  of  its  subtilty  to  find  out  cavils  and  excogitate  arguments 
against  the  truth.  Lastly,  the  more  wisdom  and  knowledge  men  have  the  more 
busy  the  devil  is  to  make  them  on  his  side.  The  doctrine  observed  is,  that 
human  and  earthly  wisdom  is  a  great  enemy  to  the  things  of  God.  II.  The  next 
thing  in  order  is  the  maxnek  of  declaration  and  publication  of  it  in  the 
Scripture.  And  here  we  shall  fiud  worldly  wisdom  to  be  a  great  adversary  ;  but  I 
shall  instance  in  one  thing  only  about  that,  and  that  is,  the  simplicity  and  plain- 
ness of  the  style.  That  whereas  there  are  two  things  that  are  exceeding  apt  to  take 
with  the  world ;  the  one  with  rational  men,  the  other  with  affectionate  men.  The 
Scripture  seemeth  to  be  furnished  with  neither.  For  with  rational  men  strong 
demonstrations  and  scientifical  probations  prevail  exceedingly.  Now,  many  times 
men  of  strong  reason  are  no  ways  rhetorical,  as  the  earth,  where  mines  of  gold  are, 
is  barren  of  grass  and  flowers.  This  the  Scripture  hath  not,  for  that  dictateth,  not 
argueth,  which  is  indeed  most  suitable  to  the  Divine  Scripture.  Some,  then,  look 
for  learned  demonstrations ;  others  are  ravished  with  the  sweet  music  of  human 
rhetoric.  It  was  the  sa.ying  of  an  atheistical  critic,  that  he  esteemed  one  of  Pindar's 
odes  before  all  David's  psalms.  Thus  you  see,  as  it  was  with  Christ  Himself, 
many  looked  for  an  outward  stately,  pompous  Messiah  ;  and  because  He  came  not  in 
that  outward  way  He  was  a  stumbling-block  to  many.  First,  for  learned  men  who 
expect  demonstration,  consider,  that  it  being  the  Word  of  the  most  High  God,  it 
is  most  decent  and  graceful  that  there  should  no  other  argument  be  used  bnt 
authority.  All  scientifical  demonstrations  are  far  inferior  to  Divine  authority. 
Secondly,  while  learned  men  seek  for  such  rational  deaionstrations,  let  them  take 
heed  lest  while  they  seek  for  reason  they  1(  se  faith.  There  is  greater  reason  to 
believe  the  Scripture  than  to  assent  to  any  demonstration.  So  that  though  faith  be 
not  reason,  yet  there  is  the  greatest  reason  for  faith.  And  for  those  who  look  for 
rhetorical  flourishes  and  fanciful  expressions  let  them  consider.  Some  places 
of  Scripture  have  strong  and  masculine  eloquence;  not  indeed  that  light  and 
meretricious  habit  of  human  oratory,  but  a  grave,  matron-like  clothing :  such  is 
the  prophecy  of  Isaiah  and  other  places.  If  we  have  a  jewel  or  jDrecious  pearl  its 
own  native  lustre  is  better  than  any  painting  of  it.  So  Divine  matter  the  more 
plain  and  clear  it  is  the  more  admirable  it  is.  It  is  the  matter,  not  the  words  that 
do  convince  and  convert.  Words  may  please  the  fancy,  but  it  is  matter  that 
woundeth  the   heart.      III.  The   third  remaineth,  and   that   is,  earthly  wisdom 

IS  A  GREAT   enemy    TO    THOSE    SPIRITUAL   AND    PRACTICAL    DUTIES    THAT    GoD   REQUIRETH 

OF  US.     Practical  godliness  hath  a  great  deal  of  seeming  foolishness  in  the  eyes 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  289 

of  tlie   worlil.      1.   The  whole  doctrine  of  self-denial  is  a  very  foolish  thinj?  to 
carnal  wisdom.     2.   The  duty  of  faith  in  relying  upon  Christ  only,  and  renouncing 
our  own  riulitcousness,  is  the  t'reat  gospel  command,  yet  nothing  is  more  foolish 
and  absurd  to  human  reason  tlian  this.     All  the  philosophers  thought  of  no  other 
righteousness  but  that  of  works.   3.  The  duties  of  humility  and  meekness,  especially 
forbt  aring  of  one  another  and  loving  our  enemies,  is  esteemed  high  folly  in  worldly 
men's  esteem.    The  heathens  thoughtita  very  justifiable  thing  to  nate  their  enemies. 
(A.  Buriiess.)         Scripture  ivisdom  excels  speculative  wisdom  :  —Let  us  show  wherein 
the  faitii  of  a  Christian,  commanded  by  tlie  Scripture,  doth  far  surpass  all  human 
knowledge  and  science  which  men  by  nature  do  glory  in.     First,  faith  d"th  surpass 
all  human  sciences  in  the   dignity  of  the   subject.     The  matter  about  wiiich  a 
Christian's  faith  is  exercised   doth  far   transcend   all   that  about  which  human 
knowledge  doth  exercise  itself ;  for  the  highest  that  they  could  reach  unto  is  only 
to  the  knowledge  of  i».itural  effects  produced  by  natural  causes.     And  if  any  could 
prove  these  by  the  former,  this  they  called  a  demonstration,  though  some  men  say 
no  man  ever  yet  gave  a  demonstration.     So,  then,  all  the  excellent  wisdom  of  the. 
world  hath  been  only  to  consider  the  nature  of  sublunary  things  ;  and  if  they  did 
arise  to  consider  of  a  God,  the  Maker  of  these,  it  was  in  a  very  uncertain,  doubtful 
way.     This  is  all  our  human  wisdom  can  help  us  to,  but  now  by  faith  we  have  the 
supernatural  mysteries  of  salvation  revealed  unto  us.     The  Sciipture  tells  us  of  a 
God  in  Christ  re(^onciling  man  to  Himself;  of  man's  original  misery;  of  Christ  the 
Medial  tor.    Alas  !  how  poor  and  contemptible  are  the  hi^'liest  notious  even  of  Plato, 
thoug.i  called  Divine,  when  you  come  and  resid  Paul!    Secondly,  faith  differs  from 
all  their  human  science  in  respect  of  the  excellency  of  the  end;  for  the  end  of  all 
Scripture  wisdom  is  to  bring  us  to  eternal  life  (2  Tim.  iii.  15  ;  John  xx.  31).    There 
was  never  any  human  knowledge  could  teach  a  man  to  be  eternally  happy.    Plato's 
divinity  and  Aristotle's  morality,  though  they  have  the  words  of  happiness  and 
have  large  discourses  about  it,  yet  wanted  the  thing  itself.     Thirdly,  faith  doth 
surpass  all  Imman  knowledge  in  its  certainty  and  infallibility  ;  for  the  object  of 
faith  being  God's  testimony  and  His  Divine  authority,  it  is  as  impossible  for  faith 
to  be  deceived  as  it  is  for  God  to  lie.     Hence  it  is  called  the  full  assurance  of 
hope  (Heb.  x.  22).     And  we  believe,  therefore  we  speak  (2  Cor.  iv.  13).     How  could 
the  holy  martyrs  witness  those  Divine  truths  even  to  death,  had  they  not  been 
possessed  with  sure  knowledge  of  them  ?     Fourthly,  faith  doth  more  establish  and 
quiet  the  heart  of  men  than  all  human  wisdom.     Solomon  oljserveth  a  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit  even  in  all  human  knowledge ;  but  now  faith  doth  satisfy  the 
soul  (Heb.  xi.  1).     Oh,  the  anxiety  and  perplexities  that  mere  human  knowledge 
hath  cast  men  into !     Lastly,  the  Christian  faith  is  above  all  philosophical  know- 
ledge, because  of  the  strong  and  mighty  effects  it  hath  to  convert  the  heart  and 
reform  the  life  (Acts  xv.  9).     Never  aid  human  knowledge  make  such  wonderful 
converts,  and  work  so  great  a  reformation  as  the  Christian  faith  had  done.     In  the 
next  place,  the  moral  or  practical  wisdom  of  the  world  cometh  far  short  of  Scripture 
wisdom  ;  for — First,  the  most  knowing  men  were  ignorant  of  original  sin,  which  yet 
is  the  fountain  of  our  calamity.    Secondly,  all  human  wisdom  and  prudence  knoweth 
not  how  to  mortify  and  forsake  sin  upon  true  grounds,  because  they  were  ignorant 
of  God's  Spirit.     Thirdly,  all  earthly  prudence  cometh  short  of  this  wisdom,  because 
it  is  circumscribed  within  the  bounds  of  this  world  and  this  life.     It  looketh  out  no 
further,  whereas  the  Scripture  piveth  directions  for  the  norld  to  come  and  for 
eternity.     (Ibid.)         Tliat  true  Cltristian  irisdoiii  is  notliiiui  hut  folly  in  the  irorhVs 
account: — I.  For  the  things  to  be  bet.ievet),  thei'e  are  these  seeming   follies — 
First,   the   very  way  of   Christianity,  that  it  is  not  a  knowledge  but   believing. 
Secondly,  the  matter  believed,  tiiat  hath  appeared  a  great  folly  to  the  wisdom 
of  the  world  is,  that  God  should  be  made  man,  that  He  should  die — be  crucified — 
and  by  this  means  work  salvation  for  the  poor  sinner.     Thirdly,  the  manner  of 
propagating  and  sj^reading  this  faith  through  the  whole  world  was  very  contemptible 
and  foolish  in  the  world's  account,  though  mighty  powerful  and   confounding  the 
wise  things  of  the  world.     II.  The  matter  of  a  Christian's  hope,  that  also  is 
VERY  FOOLISH.     A  man  must  be  the  world's  fool  that   doth  part  with  all  for  this 
hope,  even  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  to  eternal  glory.    III.  The  duties  required 
BY    Christ,  and   all    that    practical  way  of   godliness  which    He    enjoineth, 
CARRiETH  WITH  IT  A  GREAT  SHOW  OF  FOLLY.      First,    Christ  requireth   of   all   His 
disciples  to  live  contrary  to  the  wicked  ways  of  the  world.     Secondly,  it  is  a  f"lly 
in  the  world  to  be  so  fervent,  zealous,  and  active  in  matters  of  religion.     Thirdly, 
that  i^art  of  Christianity  seemeth  a  foolish  thing,  which  presseth  the  life  of  faith 
VOL.   I.  19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

and  not  of  sense.  Lastly,  to  acknowledge  Christ  and  His  ways,  though  to  our 
outward  undoing.  This  seemeth  great  folly.  (Ibid.)  Tliat  only  in  tlie  Church  of 
God,  or  in  Christianity  is  true  u-isdom : — That,  therefore,  only  true  wisdom  is  in 
the  Church  of  God  appeareth  several  ways — First,  here  we  have  the  only  rule  of 
wisdom  which  is  the  Scriptures;  so  that  all  people  without  this  sit  in  daikness, 
and  want  the  star  to  bring  them  to  Christ  or  happiness.  Secondly,  only  in  the 
Church  is  true  wisdom,  because  this  cometh  from  God  above  and  is  by  Divine 
infusion  into  us.  Thirdly,  in  Christianity  there  is  only  true  wisdom,  because  there 
is  only  true  godliness  (Prov.  i.  7).  Fourthly,  Christianity  teacheth  the  true  wisdom, 
because  that  only  instructeth  about  the  true  and  proper  end  of  all  our  actions, 
which  is  happiness.  How  did  the  wise  men  of  the  woi'ld  stagger  up  and  down  like 
giddy  men  in  this  point ;  or,  like  the  blind  Sodomites,  went  groping  up  and  down 
for  the  door  and  could  not  rind  it.  They  knew  not  where  or  what  blessedness  was. 
And,  in  Christianity  we  have  not  only  the  true  end  propounded,  but  the  right 
means  also  whereby  we  may  attain  it.  For  prudence  lieth  in  the  choosing  of  fit 
and  conducible  means  to  such  an  end;  as  in  any  art  no  man  can  by  his  art 
produce  artificial  operations  without  fit  tools.  Fifthly,  by  Christianity  we  are  only 
taught  to  avoid  that  which  causeth  repentance  and  grief  of  mind  after  it  is  done. 
Oh,  then,  what  happy  wisdom  is  it  so  to  live  and  so  to  do,  that  a  man  afterwards 
shall  have  no  cause  to  roar  out  for  the  guilt  upon  him,  that  in  the  time  of  sickness 
and  hour  of  death  thou  mayest  not  cry  out.  Oh,  foolish  and  wretched  man  that  I 
am  !  Oh,  that  I  had  been  wiser,  but  now  I  fear  it  is  too  late  !  Sixthly,  Chrittianity 
teacheth  this  wisdom,  not  so  much  to  regard  the  present  as  to  provide  for  the 
future,  to  remember  our  latter  end,  to  provide  for  eternity.  Seventhly,  herein  doth 
Christianity  teach  us  true  wisdom,  because  thereby  we  are  enabled  to  improve  the 
seasons  and  opportuuitiesof  grace.  It  is  accounted  a  great  piece  of  worldly  wisdom 
to  know  the  fit  seasons  of  buying  and  selling.  Figiuhly,  Christian  wisdom  is  seen 
in  caution  and  circumsj)ection,  to  refuse  all  the  snares  and  temptations  of  sio,  and 
to  find  out  all  the  devil's  methods  and  suuLilties ;  for  there  are  the  depths  of  Satan 
and  the  devices  of  Satan,  and  sin  hath  its  pleasant  baits  and  charms.  Ninthly, 
herein  Christianity  giveth  wisdom,  because  it  helps  to  conquer  and  overcome  all 
unruly  passions  which,  while  they  rage,  bereave  us  of  all  wisdom.  Lastly,  it  is 
excellent  to  instruct  us  to  bear  alfiictions  and  how  to  abound.  Only  by  that  we  can 
tell  how  to  be  rich  and  how  to  be  poor.     (Ibid.)         The  folly  of  iLkdom  : — I.  Even 

TRUTH    OR    TRUE    KNOWLEDGE    BECOMES    FOLLY,    IF    EMPLOYED     TO     ACCOMPLISH    AN    END 

FOR  WHICH  IT  IS  NOT  ADAPTED.  If  a  man  attempts  to  mnke  nipn  holy  or  happy  ;  if 
he  undertakes  to  convert  the  world  by  mathematics,  or  metaphysics,  or  moral 
philosoiihy  he  is  foolish,  and  his  wisdom,  as  a  means  to  that  end,  is  folly.  He 
must  renounce  all  dependence  on  those  means  if  he  would  accomplish  that  end. 
II.  Much  that  passes  for  wisdom  among  men  is  in  itself,  and  not  merely  as 
A  means  to  an  end — foolishness.  Both  these  ideas  are  evidently  cnmiDrehended 
in  the  apostle's  statement.  He  means  to  say  that  human  knowledge  is  entirely 
inadequate  to  save  men,  because  that  end  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the  gospel. 
And  he  means  also  to  brand  as  folly  the  speculations  of  men  about  "  the  deep 
things  of  Go  J."  (C.  Hodye,  D.D.)  For  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  foolishness 
with  God. — Tlie  irisdom  of  this  icorld: — By  this,  so  called  by  an  Hebraism  for 
"  worldly  wisdom,"  is  taken  in  Scripture  for — 1.  That  sort  of  wisdom  that  consists 
in  speculation  called  philosophy  which,  as  Stoicism,  Epicureanism,  &c.,  was 
professed  for  the  grand  rule  of  life  and  certain  guide  to  happiness.  But  its 
utter  insufficienc.y  is  expressed  in  Col.  ii.  8  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  20;  1  Cor.  i.  21.  It  is  a 
wisdom  making  men  accurately  and  laboriously  ignorant  of  what  they  were  most 
concerned  to  know.  2.  The  policy  which  consists  in  a  certain  dexteritv  or  art  of 
managing  business  for  a  man's  secular  advantage.  This  is  the  wisdom  here 
intended  in  the  text;  namely,  that  practical  cunning  that  shows  itself  in  political 
matters,  and  has  in  it  really  the  mystery  of  a  trade  or  craft.  So  that  God  is  said 
to  "  take  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness."  Note— I.  Its  rules  or  principles. 
1.  That  a  man  must  maintain  a  continued  course  of  dissimulation  and  profess 
himself  to  be  what  he  is  not,  and  employ  all  the  art  and  industry  imnginable  to 
make  good  the  disguise.  This  dissimulation  is  the  very  groundwork  of  all  worldly 
policy.  In  the  language  of  the  Scripture  it  is  "  damnable  hypocri^-y  "  ;  but  of  those 
who  neither  believe  Scrii^ture  nor  damnation  it  is  voted  wisdom.  It  is  looked  upon 
as  weakness  and  unfitness  for  business  for  a  man  to  be  so  open  as  really  to  think 
what  he  says,  and  when  he  makes  any  promise,  to  have  the  leas*  intention  of 
performing  it.     2.  That  conscience  and  religion  ought  to  lay  no   restraint  upon 


CHAP,  iir.]  /.  CORINTHIANS.  291 

men  wlieu  it  lies  opposite  to  their  interest.  The  great  patron  of  this  tribe, 
Machiavelli,  laid  down  this  for  a  master  rule  in  his  poHtical  scheme,  That  the 
show  of  rehgion  was  helpful  to  the  politician,  but  the  reality  of  it  hurtful  and 
pernicious.  3.  That  a  man  ought  to  make  himself,  and  not  the  public,  the  chief, 
if  not  the  sole  eud  of  all  his  actions.  He  is  to  bo  his  own  ceutie  and  circumference 
too,  and  is  not  only  not  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  but  to  account  none  for 
his  neighbour  but  himself.  The  general  interest  of  the  nation  is  to  be  nothing  to 
him,  but  only  that  portion  of  it  that  he  either  does  or  would  possess.  It  is  not  the 
rain  that  waters  the  whole  earth,  but  that  which  falls  into  his  own  cistern  that 
must  relieve  him  :  not  the  common,  but  the  enclosure  that  must  make  him  rich. 
Let  the  public  sink  or  swim,  so  long  as  he  can  hold  up  his  head  above  wnter  ;  let 
the  ship  be  cast  away,  if  he  may  but  have  the  benefit  of  the  wreck.  4.  That  in 
showing  kindness,  or  doing  favours,  no  respect  at  all  is  to  be  had  to  friendship, 
gratitude,  or  seni-e  of  honour;  but  that  such  favours  are  to  be  done  only  to  the 
rich  or  potent,  from  whom  a  man  may  receive  a  further  advantnge,  or  to  his 
enemies,  from  whom  he  may  otherwise  fear  a  mischief.  Our  politician  having 
baffled  his  greater  conscience  must  not  be  nonplussed  with  inferior  obligations  ; 
and  having  leaped  over  such  mountains,  at  length  poorly  lie  down  before  a  mole- 
hill;  but  he  must  add  peifection  to  perfection;  and  being  past  grace,  endeavour, 
if  need  be,  to  be  past  shame  too ;  and  accordingly,  he  looks  upon  friendship, 
gratitude,  and  sense  of  honour,  as  terms  of  art  to  amuse  and  impose  upon  weak, 
undesigning  minds.  II.  The  folly  of  these  principles  in  relation  to  God. 
Foolishness,  being  properly  a  man's  deviation  from  right  reason  in  point  of  practice, 
must  needs  consist  in — 1.  His  pitching  upon  such  an  end  as  is  unsuitable  to  his 
condition.  "  The  wisdom  of  this  world  "  looks  no  farther  than  this  world,  and  if 
it  makes  a  man  rich,  potent,  and  honourable  it  has  its  ends  and  his  done  its 
utmost.  But  now  that  a  man  cannot  rationally  make  these  things  his  end  will 
appear  from  these  two  considerations — (1)  That  they  reach  not  the  measure  of  his 
duration  or  being  ;  the  perpetuity  of  which  surviving  this  mortal  state  must  needs 
render  a  man  infinitely  miserable  and  forlorn,  if  he  has  no  other  comforts  but  whnt 
he  must  leave  behind  him  in  tliis.  For  nothing  can  make  a  man  happy,  but  that 
which  shall  last  as  long  as  he  lasts.  And  all  these  enjoyments  are  much  too  short 
for  an  immortal  soul  to  stretch  itself  upon,  which  shall  persist  in  being,  not  only 
when  profit,  pleasure,  and  honour,  but  when  time  itself  shall  be  no  more.  (2)  They 
fill  not  the  measure  of  his  desires.  The  foundation  of  all  man's  nnhappiness  here 
is  the  great  disproportion  between  his  enjoyments  and  his  appetites.  Let  a  man 
have  never  so  much,  lie  is  still  desiring  something  or  other  more.  Alexander  was 
much  troubled  that  there  were  no  more  worlds  for  him  to  disturb ;  and,  in  this 
respect,  every  man  living  has  a  soul  as  great  as  Alexander ;  and  put  under  the 
same  circumstances  would  own  the  very  same  dissatisfactions.  Now  in  spiritual 
natures,  so  much  as  there  is  of  desii-e,  so  much  there  is  also  of  capacity  to  receive. 
Man  seems  as  boundless  in  his  desires  as  God  is  in  His  being ;  and  therefore 
nothing  but  God  Himself  can  satisfy  him.  And  then  in  all  these  worldly  things 
that  a  man  pursues  with  such  eagerness,  he  finds  not  half  the  jjleasure  in  the 
possession  of  them  that  he  proposed  to  himself  in  the  expectation.  2.  His  pitch- 
ing upon  means  for  the  acquisition  of  these  enjoyments,  that  are  no  ways  fit  to 
acquire  them,  and  that  upon  a  double  account.  (1)  That  tliey  are  in  themselves 
unable  and  insufficient  for  them.  Let  politicians  contrive  as  accurately,  and 
pursue  as  diligently  as  possible  ;  yet  still  the  success  of  all  depends  upon  the  favour 
of  an  overruling  hand  (Deut.  viii*  18 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  30).  And  so  upon  full  trial  of  all 
the  courses  that  policy  could  eitlier  devise  or  practise,  the  most  experienced  masters 
of  it  have  been  often  forced  to  sit  down  with  that  complaint  of  the  disciples,  "  We 
have  toiled  all  night,  and  have  caught  nothing."  For  do  we  not  sometimes  see 
that  traitors  can  be  out  of  favour,  and  knaves  be  beggars,  and  lose  their  estates, 
and  be  stripped  of  their  offices,  as  well  as  honester  men?  (2)  That  they  are 
frequently  opposite  to  the  accomplishment  of  such  ends  ;  nothing  Leing  more  usual 
than  for  these  unchristian  fishers  of  men  to  be  fatally  caught  in  their  own  nets ; 
for  does  not  the  text  expressly  say,  that  "  God  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  crafti- 
ness"? Haman  wanted  nothing  to  complete  his  greatness  but  a  gallows  upon 
which  to  hang  iVIordecai ;  but  it  mattered  not  for  whom  he  provided  the  gallows, 
when  Providence  designe«l  the  rope  for  him.  {R.  South,  IJ.D.)  That  all  the 
admired  wisdom  of  a  mere  worldly  man  is  nothing  but  contemptihle  folly  before 
God: — The  world's  wise  man  is  God's  fool.  I  shall  first  begin  with  that  active 
foolishness,  demonstrating  by  several  particulars,  that  all  worldly  wisdom  is  mere 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hi, 

folly.  First,  that  is  abundantly  seen  in  all  that  idolatry  and  superstition  which  the 
wisest  of  men  are  prone  unto,  and  wherein  they  do  greatly  applaud  themselves. 
Secondly,  worldly  wisdom  is  mere  foolishness,  because  such  men  contrive  and  plot 
and  think  to  accomplish  all  their  counsels  by  their  own  strength  and  way.  Now 
this  is  a  very  foolish  thing,  for  the  thoughts  of  a  man  are  in  some  respect  from 
man,  but  the  ordering  and  disposing  of  all  things  is  from  God  (Jer.  x.  23).  Thirdly, 
all  worldly  wisdom  is  folly,  be>'ause  it  is  only  attentive  to  get  the  good  things  of 
this  world,  and  never  looketh  to  the  world  to  come.  Give  them  the  pleasures,  the 
profits,  the  contents  of  this  world,  and  they  never  regard  the  world  to  come.  Oh, 
foolish  men  and  unwise  !  Will  thy  wealth  avail  thee  in  the  day  of  God's  wrath  ? 
Fourthly,  they  are  actively  foolish,  because  they  are  conceited  of  this  wisdom  and 
boast  of  it.  Fifthly,  it  must  needs  be  folly,  because  it  is  directly  contrary  unto  God 
and  His  ways,  which  are  only  wise  (Rom.  viii.  7).  Sixthly,  all  human  and  earthly 
wisdom  is  foolishness,  because  it  makes  a  man  a  sad  loser  in  the  latter  end.  To  pull 
off  that  mask  or  painting  which  is  put  up)on  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  Is  he  not  a 
fool  that  leaveth  a  treasure  of  gold  for  coals?  Is  not  he  a  fool  that  forsaketh  a 
fountain  to  go  to  a  broken  cistern  ?  Is  not  he  a  fool  that  would  be  in  great  pomp 
and  honour  lor  one  day  to  be  a  perpetual  tormented  slave  for  ever  after  ?  Yet  thus 
foolish  and  unwise  are  all  wicked  men.  Pray,  then,  for  wisdom  from  above.  You 
have  heard  that  this  worldly  wisdom  is  foolishness  actively.  I  shall  now  proceed 
to  show  its  foolishness  passively,  such  which  God  turneth  to  folly ;  so  that  there 
are  no  men  whom  God  doth  more  set  Himself  against  than  such  proud,  worldly 
wise  men.  First,  therefore,  God  makes  this  wisdom  foolishness  in  a  passive  sense, 
in  that  He  did  not  vouchsafe  to  use  it  as  an  instrument  to  propagate  the  gospel. 
Secondly,  herein  God  makes  it  foolishness,  that  as  He  doth  not  use  it  for  the 
enlargement  of  His  gospel,  so  He  taketh  very  few  of  such  men  to  bestow  on  them 
spiritual  and  soul-saving  graces.  Thirdly,  herein  also  God  will  make  it  appear  to 
be  folly,  in  that  He  takes  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  and  makes  them  confound 
the  wise  things.  Fourthly,  herein  doth  God  make  the  wisdom  of  the  world  foolish- 
ness, because  all  that  wise  men  do  is  a  vain  work.  They  are  not  able  to  accom^^lish 
their  ends,  especially  those  which  are  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  root- 
ing out  His  Church  and  people.  Fifthly,  God  makes  the  wisdom  of  the  world 
foolishness,  because  what  they  work  is  not  only  a  vain  work  but  a  deceitful  work. 
So  that  the  wisdom  of  man  njust  needs  be  made  great  folly,  when  it  shall  be  forced 
to  bring  about  those  things  which  it  hates  so  much.  Sixthly,  herein  the  wisdom  of 
the  world  is  made  foolishness,  because  it  doth  not  only  work  a  vain  deceitful  work 
but  also  a  destructive  one  to  itself ;  so  that  all  the  wisdom  they  have  is  only  to 
destroy  themselves.  Thus,  like  fools,  they  run  their  swords  in  their  own  bowels. 
Seventhly,  the  wisdom  of  the  world  becometh  foolishness,  because  God  many  times 
infatuateth  and  blasteth  the  parts  and  abilities  of  the  wise  men  of  the  world.  He 
takes  away  their  understanding  from  them.  That  as  we  read  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
God  bereaved  him  of  his  wisdom  and  judgment  so  that  he  became  like  a  beast. 
Eighthly,  herein  God  doth  also  make  their  wisdom  folly,  because  by  their  pride  and 
haughtiness  they  undo  themselves.  God  lets  them  prosper,  and  the  wisdom  of  the 
world  seemeth  to  tiourish  a  great  while,  but  it  is  that  their  destruction  may  be  the 
greater.  Use — 1.  How  vain  a  thing  to  trust  in  human  policy  and  worldly  wisdom. 
2.  To  judge  that  wisdom  which  the  wise  God  judgeth  so.  (A.  Bnrctess.)  The 
icisdonioftJiis  world  is — I.  Foolish,  because — 1.  Fallible.  2.  Partial.  3.  Shortsighted. 
4.  Often  built  on  false  premises.  5.  The  mere  offspring  of  reason.  II.  Vain.  Often — ■ 
1.  Exploded  by  time.  2.  Exposed  by  revelation.  3.  Overruled  and  confounded  by 
Divine  providence.  4.  Fully  dissipated  by  the  light  of  eternity.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
The  V)lsd())ii  of  the  world  : — -Wisdom  is  justly  considered  as  the  guide  of  conduct.  If 
one  shall  mistake  that  for  wisdom  which  at  bottom  is  mere  folly,  such  a  mistake 
will  pervert  the  fiist  principles  of  conduct,  and  be  perpetually  misleading  a  man 
through  the  whole  of  life.  I.  Let  us  consider  the  natdke  of  that  wisdom  which  is 
REPROBATED  IN  THE  TEXT  AS  FOOLISHNESS  WITH  GoD.  It  is  stvlcd  the  wisdom  of  this 
world  ;  that  is,  the  wisdom  which  is  most  current  in  this  world.  Its  first  and  most 
noted  distinction  is,  that  its  pursuits  are  confined  entirely  to  the  temporal  advan- 
tages of  the  world.  Spiritual  blessings  or  moral  improvements  the  man  of  this 
spirit  rejects  as  a  sort  of  airy  unsubstantial  enjoyments  ;  he  reckons  the  only  solid 
goods,  the  posse^sinn  of  riches  and  power,  together  with  the  pleasures  which 
opulent  I'auk  or  station  can  procure.  In  pursuit  of  these  favourite  ends  he  is  not 
in  the  least  scrupulous  as  to  his  choice  of  means.  If  he  prefer  those  which  are 
the  fairest,  it  is  not  because  they  ave  fair,  but  because  they  seem  to  him  most  likely 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   COniNTIIIANS.  293 

to  prove  successful.  He  is  sensible  tliat  it  is  for  his  interest  to  preserve  decorums, 
and  to  stand  well  in  the  public  opinion.  He  is,  for  the  most  part,  conip  sed  in  his 
manners  and  decent  in  Ijis  vices.  Let  me  here  remark  in  passing,  that  this 
character  is  less  likely  to  be  reformed  than  that  of  those  men  given  to  pleasure. 
With  tliem  vice  breaks  forth  in  occasional  fits  and  starts  ;  with  the  other,  it  grows 
up  into  a  hardened  and  confirmid  principle.  In  the  mi'fst  of  tlie  gross  irregu- 
larities of  pleasure,  circumstances  oft^'n  force  remorse  on  the  sinner's  mind.  But 
the  cool  and  temperate  plan  of  iniquity  on  which  the  man  of  worldly  wisdom  pro- 
ceeds allows  the  voice  of  conscience  to  be  longer  silent.  The  man  of  the  world  is 
always  a  man  of  selfish  and  contracted  disposition.  Friends,  country, duty,  honour,  all 
disappear  frum  his  view,  when  his  own  interest  is  in  question.  The  more  thoroughly 
that  the  spirit  of  the  world  has  taken  possession  of  him  the  circle  of  his  affections 
becomes  always  tlie  narrower.  Candour,  oj)enness,  and  simplicity  of  manners  are 
ridiculed  by  the  man  of  this  description,  as  implying  mere  ignorance  of  the  world. 
Art  and  address  are  the  qualities  on  which  he  values  himself.  For  the  most 
l^art  he  would  choose  to  supplant  a  rival  by  intrigue  rather  than  to  overcome  him 
by  fair  opposition.  Indeed,  what  men  call  policy  and  knowledge  of  the  world  is 
commonly  no  other  thing  than  dissimulation  and  insincerity.  I  have  dwelt  the 
more  fully  on  the  delineation  of  this  character  tliat  each  of  us  might  learn  whether 
there  be  any  feature  in  it  that  applies  to  hinrself.  Let  me  now  ask  whether  such  a 
character  as  I  have  described  be  in  any  respect  an  amiable  one?  Is  the  man  of  the 
world— polished,  and  plausible,  and  courtly,  as  in  his  behaviour  he  may  he — one 
whom  you  would  choose  for  a  companion  and  bosom  friend?  Of  what  real  value, 
then,  let  me  ask,  is  that  boasted  wisdom  of  the  world  whiidi  can  neither  conciliate 
love,  nor  produce  trust,  nor  command  inward  respect  ?  At  the  same  time,  I  admit 
that  the  man  of  the  world  may  be  a  man  of  very  considerable  abilities.  You  see  in 
this  instance  that  the  most  distinguished  human  abilities,  when  they  are  separated 
from  virtue  and  moral  worth,  los?  their  chief  eminence  and  lustre,  and  are  deprived 
of  all  valuable  efheacy.  They  dwindle  into  despicable  talents  which  have  no  power 
to  ensure  the  respect  of  mankind.  Having  now  considered  the  nature  and  effect  of 
worldly  wisdom  with  respect  to  men  let  us  inquire — II.  How  it  stands  with  respect 
TO  God.  It  is  said  in  the  text  to  be  foolishness  with  God.  It  is  so  in  three  respects. 
1.  It  is  contemptible  in  God's  sight.  Pleased  and  satisfied  as  the  wise  man  of  the 
world  may  be  with  himself,  and  honoured  as  he  may  fancy  himself  to  be  by  the 
multitude,  let  him  be  mortified  with  reflecting  that,  in  the  eye  of  Him  who  is  the 
Supreme  Judge  of  all  worth,  his  character  is  mean  and  wret'died.  That  which 
God  declai'es  Himself  to  love  and  honour  is  truth  in  the  ir.waid  parts;  the  fair, 
sincere,  and  candid  mind.  But  it  is  not  only  from  the  declarations  of  the  Scripture, 
but  from  the  whole  course  of  Providence,  that  we  learn  the  contempt  in  wliich  God 
holds  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  Who  were  they  on  whom  were  conferred  the 
highest  marks  of  distinction  which  ever  honoured  man,  He  singled  out  to  be  the  com- 
panions of  Christ,  the  workers  of  miracles,  the  publishers  of  everlasting  happiness 
to  mankind?  Were  they  the  wise  men  of  the  world,  the  refined,  and  the  political, 
who  were  employed  as  the  instruments  of  God  on  this  great  occasion  ?  No  ;  He 
chose  a  few  plain,  simple,  undesigning  men.  To  this  day  God  in  the  course  of  His 
Providence  bestows  those  external  advantages  which  the  men  of  the  world  so 
earnestly  pursue  with  apparent  disregard  of  worldly  wisdom.  He  allo\\s  no 
fixed  connection  to  subsist  between  an  artful,  political  conduct,  and  richps,  reputa- 
tion, or  honours  ;  He  does  not  always  give  the  race  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to 
the  strong,  nor  riches  to  men  of  understanding;  but,  on  tlie  contrary,  scatters  the 
advantHges  of  fortune  with  a  promiscuous  hand;  and  often  allows  them  to  be 
attained  by  the  vilest  and  lowest  of  men,  who  neither  by  worldly  wisdom,  nor  any 
other  talent  whatever,  had  the  smallest  title  to  deserve  them,  2.  The  wisdom  of 
the  world  is  foolishness  with  God,  because  it  is  baffled  by  Him.  Some  triumphs  He 
has  occasionally  allowed  it  to  gdn  in  order  to  carry  on  some  special  jjurpose  that 
His  Providence  had  in  view.  It  is  true  that  the  justice  of  heaven  is  not,  in  the 
present  state,  fully  manifested,  by  rendering  to  every  man  accordmg  to  his  deeds. 
But  I  believe  it  will  be  found  by  attentive  observers  that  there  are  two  cases  in 
which,  perhaps  more  than  in  any  other,  the  Divine  government  has,  throughout  all 
ages,  rendered  itself  apparent  and  sensible  to  men.  These  are  humbling  the  high 
imaginations  of  the  proud,  and  taking  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness.  As  He  will 
not  permit  any  greatness  to  lift  itself  up  against  His  posver,  so  neither  will  He 
permit  any  art  to  prevail  against  His  counsels.  While  the  crafty  project  many  a 
distant  plan,  and  wind  their  way  most  cunningly,  as  th  y  think,  to  success,  how 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

often  does  the  Almighty,  by  means  of  some  shght  and  seemingly  conthigent  event, 
stop  the  wheel  at  once  from  farther  motion,  and  leave  them  to  the  bitterness  of 
humbling  disai^pointment  (Psa.  ii.  4,  5).  3.  The  wisdom  of  the  world  is  foolishness 
with  God  ;  because,  though  it  should  be  allowed  by  Providence  to  run,  without 
disturbance,  its  fullest  career,  and  to  compass  successfully  whatever  it  had  projected, 
yet  it  can  produce  nothing  in  the  issue  worthy  of  the  pursuit  of  a  truly  wise  man. 
It  is  a  wisdom  which  over-reaches  and  counteracts  itself ;  and  instead  of  expected 
happiness  ends  in  misery.  If  the  existence  of  another  world  be  admitted,  can  he  be 
accounted  wise  who  frames  his  conduct  solely  with  a  view  to  this  woild,  and 
beyond  it  has  nothing  to  look  for  but  punishment  ?  For  what  is  the  amount  of  all 
that  this  wise  man  hath  gained,  or  can  gain,  after  all  the  toil  he  has  undergone, 
and  all  the  sacrifices  he  has  made  in  order  to  attain  success  ?  But  how  is  all  this 
success  enjoyed  ?  With  a  mind  often  ill  at  ease ;  with  a  character  dubious  at  the  best, 
suspected  by  the  world  in  general,  seen  through  by  the  judicious  and  discerning. 
For  the  man  of  the  world  flatters  himself  in  vain,  if  he  imagines  that  by  the 
plausible  appearances  of  his  behaviour  he  can  thoroughly  conceal  from  the  world 
what  he  is,  and  keep  them  ignorant  of  the  hollow  principles  upon  which  he  has 
acted.  He  finds  himself  embarrassed  with  cares  and  fears.  He  is  sensible  that  by 
many  he  is  envied  and  hated  ;  and  though  surrounded  by  low  flatterers  is  conscious 
that  he  is  destitute  of  real  friends.  Compute  now,  0  wise  man,  as  thou  art!  what 
thou  hast  acquired  by  all  thy  selfish  and  intricate  wisdom,  by  all  thy  refined  and 
double  conduct,  thy  dark  and  designing  policy?  Canst  thou  say  that  thy  mind  is 
satisfied  with  thy  past  tenour  of  conduct  ?  Are  thy  days  more  cheerful  and  gay,  or 
are  thy  nights  more  calm  and  free  of  care  than  those  of  the  plain  and  upright  man 
whom  thou  hast  so  often  treated  with  scorn?  From  what  has  been  said  of  the 
nature  and  the  effects  of  worldly  wisdom  you  will  now  judge  how  justly  it  is  termed 
foolishness  with  God.  Opposite  to  it  stands  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above,  which 
is  described  by  an  apostle  as  good,  peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated,  full 
of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrisy  (James  iii.  15, 17). 
This,  and  this  only,  is  that  real  wisdom  which  it  is  both  our  duty  and  our  interest 
to  cultivate.  It  carries  every  character  of  being  far  superior  to  the  wisdom  of  the 
world.  It  is  masculine  and  generous  ;  it  is  magnanimous  and  brave  ;  it  is  uniform 
and  consistent.  The  wise  man  of  the  world  is  obliged  to  shape  his  course  accord- 
ing to  the  changing  occurrences  of  the  world  ;  he  is  unsteady  and  perplexed.  But 
the  wise  man  in  God's  sight  mov-es  in  a  higher  sphere.  His  integrity  du-ects  his 
course  without  perplexity  or  trouble.  {H.  Blair,  D.D.)  Taketh  the  wise  in  their 
own  craftiness. — Tliat  God  dcliglits  to  take  the  earthly  icisevien  of  the  ivurld  in  their 
own  craft : — These  sjiidersare  hung  in  their  own  webs  (see  Isa.  xix.  13).  Now  many 
ways  doth  God  take  the  wise  ones  of  the  world.  First,  in  dissipating  their  counsels 
that  they  cannot  attain  their  ends.  They  attempt  again  and  again,  and  are  always 
repul  sed.  Secondly,  God  when  He  doth  ruin  them  He  doth  it  no  other  way  but  by  their 
own  wisdom,  by  their  own  ciaft.  And  this  is  the  greatest  conquest  that  can  be,  when 
God  overcometh  them  by  their  own  weajDon,  as  it  was  said  of  Goliath's  sword. 
None  like  that,  because  by  that  he  cut  off  Goliath's  head,  whose  sword  it  was.  So 
there  are  no  jirovidences  of  God  so  glorious  as  those  which  make  the  very  craft  and 
wisdom  wicked  men  have  to  bring  about  their  confusion.  Thirdly,  He  takes  the 
wise  men  of  the  world  so  that  they  are  entangled  in  their  own  counsels,  and  are 
brought  to  such  snares  that  they  cannot  go  forward  or  backward.  There  is  no  great 
wit  without  some  mixture  of  madness.  I  might  instance  in  more  particulars,  but 
the  next  words  will  have  tlie  same  occasion  ;  I  come  to  answer  an  objection.  How 
is  this  true,  you  will  say,  that  God  taketh  the  wise  in  their  craft?  And  doth  not 
the  experience  of  all  ages,  both  in  profane  and  sacred  histories,  show  that  earthl^^ 
crafty,  and  wicked  policy  hath  accomjilished  many  destructive  things,  and  that  to 
God's  own  Church  and  people  ?  All  this  must  be  granted,  and  yet  the  observation 
is  true.  First,  this  is  many  times  done,  and  we,  through  our  ignorance,  take  no 
notice  tbereof.  Secondly,  we  limit  God  to  time  and  places  and  persons ;  and  so 
because  He  doth  nut  at  such  a  time,  in  such  a  way,  as  we  think,  therefore  we  are 
apt  to  think  God  hatli  forsaken  the  earth,  and  regards  not  what  is  done  below. 
Thirdly,  if  God  let  worldly  wisdom  prevail  and  prosper  awhile,  it  is  that  the  over- 
throw and  confusion  of  it  may  be  greater.  As  Pharaoh  was  suffered  to  go  into  the 
sea,  and  the  waters  did  not  immediately  overflow.  Come  we,  then,  to  show  the 
ground  why  God  doth  thus  delight  to  infatuate  and  blast  all  earthly  wisdom. 
First,  it  is  that  hereby  His  sovereignty  and  ruling  power  may  be  the  more  manifest. 
Secondly,  God  doth  it  hereby  to  vindicate  His  own  glory  and  cause  and  name  ;  for 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  295 

all  the  worldly  ■wisdom  that  ever  was,  hath  either  mediately  or  immediately  set 
against  God.  1.  How  secure  the  people  and  Churcli  of  God  may  be.  2.  Not  to 
fear  anything  but  God,  for  He  is  the  only  wise  God.  {A.  Ilurrjes.t.)  The  Lord 
knowetii  the  thoughts  of  the  wise,  that  they  are  vain. — lltat  the  chiefest  and 
hcst  thoKjihts  of  the  wisest  men  are  rain  : — We  may  consider  man  in  a  three- 
fold capacity.  1.  Politic^,  as  a  political  creature  endued  with  civil  wisdom,  and  so 
is  part  of  a  society,  and  thus  his  thoughts  are  vain.  2.  Ethics,  as  he  is  to  wallc 
according  to  the  rules  of  reason,  which  sound  and  rectified  nature  doth  guide  a 
man  in,  and  thus  he  is  vain.  3.  Theology,  as  he  is  to  look  up  to  heaven,  to  obey 
God,  and  to  aim  at  supernatural  happiness.  And  in  this  sense  especially  he  is  a 
most  vain,  empty  man  ;  and  to  this  the  apostle  relateth.  Let  us  consider  in 
what  sense  the  Scripture  uselh  the  word  vain.  1.  That  is  said  to  be  vain  which  is 
empty  and  void  of  that  worth  and  excellency  which  ought  to  bo  within.  Thus  a 
fool  is  called  often  a  vain  person  because  he  is  empty  of  that  solid  judgment  and 
reason  which  ought  to  be  in  a  man.  Hence  foolish  persons  are  compared  to  empty 
straws  that  are  blown  up  and  down  with  every  wind,  because  they  have  no  weiglit 
in  them.  2.  That  is  said  to  be  vanity  which  seemeth  to  have  great  happiness  and 
content  in  it,  but  indeed  it  is  the  clean  contrary.  A  vain  thing  is  that  which  hath 
a  goodly  appearance,  but  inwardly  hath  no  profit.  Thus  it  is  with  the  best  and 
choicest  thoughts  and  projects  of  the  wisest  men  ;  they  have  a  goodly  lustre.  You 
would  think  such  wise  men  could  not  but  be  happy ;  their  expectations  are 
raised,  but  the  issue  doth  deceive  them.  3.  Vanity  in  the  Scripture  is 
often  applied  to  a  lie.  Every  man  speaks  vanity  to  his  neighbour,  that  is  a  lie 
(Psa.  sii.  2).  They  are  full  of  falsehood  and  dissimulation;  tliere  is  no  truth  or 
sincerity  in  men,  as  David  complaineth  (Psa.  xii.).  4.  Vanity  is  often  in  Scripture 
used  for  that  which  is  unprofitable,  without  any  benefit  or  success.  Hence  is  that 
phrase.  To  labour  in  vain.  Oh,  this  is  a  sad  thing  to  consider,  when  thou  art 
dying,  I  Jiave  lived  in  vain,  laboured  in  vain,  thought  in  vain,  spoke  in  vain  ;  I 
have  no  true  good  abiding  by  me  of  all  that  ever  I  did.  5.  Vanity  is  often  used 
for  that  which  is  unstable,  uncertain,  and  fading.  And  thus  the  thoughts  of  wise 
men  are  vain,  subject  to  changes,  contradictions,  and  at  last  vanish  into  nothing. 
G.  They  are  vain  because  they  work  nothing  but  vain  and  absurd  things.  What 
do  vain  thoughts  produce  but  vain  words,  vain  gestures,  vain  attire  and  fashions, 
vain  discourse  in  communication,  vain  opinions,  and  a  vain  worshijo.  Out  of  the 
heart  proceed  evil  thoutrhts  (Matt.  xv.  19).  They  are  the  first  sparks  that  fly  out  of 
this  forge,  and  from  these  vain  thoughts  cometh  all  the  vanity  that  is  in  men's 
words,  gestures,  apparel,  yea,  and  their  i-eligion.  Lastly,  they  are  vain  because 
they  are  wholly  wicked.  Use  of  instruction :  1.  That  God  doth  not  only  take 
notice  of  vain  actions,  but  vain  thoughts.  2.  Are  all  our  thoughts  vain  ?  Learn, 
then,  Scripture  wisdom,  get  Scripture  thoughts.     (Ibid.) 

Yet.  21-23.  Therefore  let  no  man  glory  in  man. — That  it  h  a  great  sin  to  glory 
in  men  .-—This  sin  is  not  often  preached  upon,  yet  no  question  political  and  civil 
idolatry,  making  men  as  gods  to  us,  hath  done  a  great  deal  of  hurt,  as  well  as 
religious  idolatry.  Now  these  ways  we  glory  in  men.  1.  When  we  join  them  with 
Christ  as  mediators,  and  make  them  co-partuers,  as  it  were,  in  spiritunl  effects  as 
weU  as  temporal.  This  is  to  glory  in  men,  even  blasphemously.  2.  We  glory  in 
men  when  we  make  our  own,  or  other  good  works  meritorious,  and  our  suti'eriugs 
satisfactoiy  unto  God.  This  Pharisee  is  a  greater  enemy  to  Christ,  and  further  off 
from  the  kingdom  of  heaven  than  many  publicans.  3.  We  glory  in  men  when  we 
rejoice  in  their  favour,  and  are  more  glad  of  that  than  we  are  of  God's  favour. 
4.  We  glory  in  men  when  we  desire  to  please  them,  and  to  accommodate  ourselves 
to  their  humours  more  than  to  please  God,  and  to  walk  according  to  His  will. 
This  sinful  pleasing  of  men  is  not  consistent  with  a  servant  of  Christ's  (Gal.  i.  10  ; 
1  Cor.  vii.  13).  5.  We,  then,  glory  in  men  when  we  put  our  trust  and  confidence  in 
them,  resting  and  hoping  in  them,  and  not  depending  on  God  only.  As  the  ground 
of  Divine  faith  must  be  some  Divine  testimony  and  authority,  so  the  motive  of  a 
Divine  hope  must  be  only  the  promise  and  power  of  God.  It  is  a  sin  that  all  are 
very  2irone  unto,  to  trust  in  earthly  power  and  greatness,  and  not  to  eye  God  above 
all.  Lastly,  we  glory  in  men  when  we  boast  in  anything  that  is  human  or  earthly, 
anything  that  belongs  to  man.  Thus  to  boast  of  beauty,  apparel,  riches,  nobility, 
parts,  and  learning;  all  this  is  a  vain  and  sinful  boiisting  (1  Tim.  vi.  15  ;  Jer.  ix. 
23,  24).  In  the  next  place,  we  are  not  to  gloiy  iu  the  doctors  and  t<-achers  we 
have,  which  we  do — 1.  When  we  are  affected  more  with  their  parts,  and  gifts,  and 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

earning,  than  with  the  powerful  demonstration  of  God's  Spirit  in  them,  and  by 
them.  2.  Tlien  we  glory  in  men  when  we  rest  on  the  ministry  and  their  labours, 
thinking  it  enough  to  enjoy  them,  but  never  look  up  to  God  for  success  and  a 
blessing.  What  is  Paul  or  Apollos  but  ministeis  by  whom  ye  believe  ?  at  the  fifth 
verse.  Therefore  the  piincipal  work  is  from  God.  3.  Then  we  glory  in  men  when 
we  have  the  persons  of  some  teachers  in  such  admiration,  thatwliatsoever  they  say 
or  maintain,  without  any  search  or  dispute,  we  believe.  The  disciples  of  13erea 
are  commended  for  their  noble  disposition,  that  they  would  search  the  Scriptures, 
whether  the  things  were  so  or  not  (Acts  xvii.  11).  4.  Then  we  glory  in  men  when 
we  prefer  one  before  the  other,  so  as  to  make  differences  and  schisms  in  the 
Church.  He  that  glorieih  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord.  Yea,  saith  Paul,  "  God  for- 
bid I  should  glory  in  anything  save  in  the  Cross  of  Christ  "  (Gal.  vi.  14).  (Ihld.) 
For  3.11  tilings  are  yours. — All  things  are  yours  : — The  one  theme  of  the  beginning 
of  this  Epistle  is  man's  glorying,  lost  through  sin  and  recovered  in  Christ.  In 
chap.  i.  Paul  brings  the  human  race  with  its  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  strength 
into  the  presence  of  the  Cross,  and  shows  that  its  boosting  was  vain,  and  bids  them 
take  salvation  as  the  free  gift  of  God,  and  give  to  Him  alone  the  glory.  But  he  is 
careful  to  add  that  man's  ground  of  boasting  is  restored  to  himself:  "Let  him 
glory."  Whereas  before  he  had  denied  everything  to  human  nature,  now  he  cries, 
"All  things  are  yours."  Retrieved  in  Christ,  the  Church  has  an  unlimited  pre- 
rogative. I.  The  prerogatives  of  Christ's  people  are  based  upon  thkie  rela- 
tion TO  Him.  "All  things  are  yours"  because  "  ye  are  of  Christ."  1.  The  union 
between  Christ  and  His  people  gives  the  highest  illustration  of  our  text.  Whatever 
belongs  to  the  Eedeemer  belongs  to  the  redeemed.  But  this  requires  to  be  csire- 
fully  guarded.  (1)  These  words  apply  only  to  the  mystical  company  of  the 
faithful,  who  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith  and  have  become  one  Spirit  with  Him. 
The  spiritual  body  of  Christ  is  distinguished  both  fiom  tlie  race  and  from  the 
individuals  of  whom  it  is  composed.  And  it  is  of  the  whole  company  that  Paul 
speaks,  not  any  separate  member.  It  was  for  that  mystical  fellowship  that  our 
Lord  prayed  in  words  that  give  Paul  his  argument.  "  Holy  Father,  keep  through 
Thine  own  name  those,"  &c.  (2)  Now  to  this  body  united  to  Himself  Christ  gives 
an  unlimited  interest  in  all  His  prerogatives.  "  All  Mine  are  Thine  and  Thine  are 
Mine,"  and  for  these  He  prays  that  "  the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  Me  may 
be  in  them,"  etc.  (John  xvii.).  The  answer  to  this  is  our  text.  As  the  husband 
and  wife  are  one  flesh  and  have  all  things  common,  so  Christ  and  His  Church  have 
one  Spirit,  &c.  2.  Our  possession  of  all  things  in  Christ  may  be  referred  to  the 
mediatorial  sui^rem^cy  of  the  Head  of  the  Church,  making  all  things  contribute  to 
our  welfare.  (1)  When  the  apostle  dilates  upon  the  lordship  of  Christ  he  brings 
all  the  powers  of  the  universe  under  His  sway ;  sometimes  to  magnify  Christ's 
glory,  but  oftener  to  set  forth  the  absoluteness  of  His  supremacy  over  ail  things  for 
the  Church.  He  governs  the  principalities  and  powers  of  the  other  world  for  the 
accomplishment  of  His  designs  in  this,  and  they  become  ministering  spirits  to  the 
heirs  of  salvation.  The  hosts  of  evil  with  their  prince  are  governed  for  our  ad- 
vantage. Tlie  world,  with  all  things  present,  is  under  His  sway  for  the  well-being 
of  His  Church.  This  is  the  key  to  all  history,  and  Christ's  mysterious  but  most 
certain  sway  is  bringing  polities,  science,  civilisation,  into  subordination  to  the 
spread  of  His  kingdom.  (2)  He  is  also  the  Head  of  a  visible  community  which  is 
governed  for  the  salvation  of  its  spiritual  members.  "  Paul,  Apollos,  and  Cephas  " 
— the  organised  ministry  of  the  visible  Church  is  the  servant  of  the  Church  in- 
visible. Tlie  order  has  been  inverted.  The  saints  have  been  brouglit  into  bondage 
to  the  Church  instead  of  the  Church  being  the  servant  of  the  saints  ;  and  this  error 
has  produced  a  sad  reaction— the  visible  Church  has  been  sundered  from  its  close 
connection  with  the  Church  invisible.  But  let  both  grow  together.  Believers 
are  of  Christ,  not  of  the  Church  ;  but  calling  Him  Lord  they  rejoice  in  the  order 
and  service  of  His  Church  as  a  rich  inheritance.  3.  All  who  are  Christ's  have 
such  a  jilace  in  His  heart,  and  such  an  interest  in  His  resources,  that  in  virtue 
of  His  special  favour  they  possess  all  things.  (1)  "All  things  are  yours  "  is  the 
charter  of  personal  prerogative.  Christ  is  the  personal  Friend  of  those  vvho  love 
Him,  and  gives  the  treasures  of  His  grace  to  every  individual  believer.  "  What- 
soever ye  shall  ask  in  My  name  I  will  do  it."  (2)  But  here  is  a  necessary 
limitation  which  only  seems  to  restrict  th«  privilege — the  Redeemer  reserves  to 
Himself  the  decision  how  much  of  the  all  things  shall  be  imparted,  when  the  gift 
shall  be  bestowed  and  when  desired.  The  spiritual  position  He  is  more  willing 
to  give  than  we  are  to    ask :  our  other  portion  may  be  more  slowly  bestowed ; 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  297 


reserved  from  us  tliongli  our  own,  for  reasons  the  wisclom  of  which  we  cannot 
always  understand.     II.    The  apostle  blends  the  high  statement  of  Christian 

PIUVILEGES   WITH    THE    PRACTICAL    EXUOUTATION    TO    BEJOICE    IN    THEM.       1.     The  Start- 

ing-point  of  this  exhibition  is  tlie  warning  to  glory  is  uotliing  but  our  inheritance 
in'Christ.  Once  before  he  had  uttered  it  to  claim  for  the  crucified  Redeemer  His 
sole  honour  ;  now  he  repeats  it  to  claim  for  the  Christian  inheritance  its  rights. 
The  Son  receives  us  into  His  Father's  house  ;  and  to  each  one  He  says,  "  All  that 
I  have  is  thine."  Henceforth  we  are  servants  to  none  but  Himself  in  God.  This 
leaves  no  room  for  self-complacency,  for  all  is  of  Christ.  2.  Paul  literally  brings 
the  whole  compass  of  things  into  the  believer's  inheritance.  (1)  Life  is  ours.  In 
its  deepest  meaning  none  live  but  those  who  are  in  Christ.  We  know,  indeed, 
that  our  hfe  in  the  flesh  will  cease  ;  but  it  is  our  own  while  it  lasts,  to  be  spent 
in  the  care  of  our  souls  and  in  the  discharge  of  our  duties ;  and  then  we  shall 
pass  into  more  abundant  life.  (2)  Things  present,  (a)  The  creaturely  world. 
Ho  long  as  we  are  of  the  world,  the  world  is  our  master ;  but  when  we  become 
Christ's  free  men,  the  whole  economy  of  the  creature  pays  us  tribute.  But 
possessing  all  things  we  must  show  that  we  are  really  masters  of  the  creature,  by 
our  temperate,  tbankful,  and  spiritual  use  of  all  things,  (h)  All  the  events  that 
make  up  the  course  of  this  world.  Not  that  Christ  gives  us  control  of  passing 
affairs.  He  keeps  the  direction  of  our  lives  in  His  own  hands,  and  does  not 
always  admit  us  into  the  reasons  of  His  dealings.  But  He  sanctions  our  freedom 
of  action,  allows  large  latitude  to  our  prayers,  gives  us  the  discretion  to  make  all 
events  contribute  to  our  welfare,  and  causes  all  things  to  work  together  for  our 
good.  (3)  Death  and  things  to  come.  Christ  has  the  keys  of  the  other  world, 
and  our  eternal  destiny  is  in  His  ever  faithful  hands.  {«)  Death,  the  last  enemy, 
is  translated  into  a  ministering  angel,  (h)  Things  to  come— the  disembodied 
waiting  for  the  great  day,  the  day  itself,  the  resurrection,  &c.  3.  Let  us  hear 
the  apostle's  exhortation,'  not  expressed,  but  pervading  the  whole  passage— "  He 
that  glorielh,  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord."  (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  All  things 
are  ours: — It  expresses  richness— this  "All  things  are  yours";  a  broad  and 
confident  hold  on  life  :  a  large  liberty  of  mind.  To  have  "  all  things  ours  "  ;  to 
have,  as  it  were,  the  freedom  of  the  universe ;  to  feel  nowhere  hemmed  in,  excludeil, 
limited,  whether  in  the  sphere  of  truth  or  of  sympathy,  is  a  magnificent  prospect,  a 
splendid  promise.  To  a  great  extent,  we  are  compelled  to  acknowledge,  our  primary 
needs  are  needs  of  limitation  and  restraint,  and  Christianity  presents  itself  as 
limiting  and  restraining.  We  come  out  to  make  our  way  in  the  world  with  good 
intentions,  and  around  us  there  are  ringing  in  our  ears  numberless  voices  — theories 
of  life— denunciations— schemes  —hopes — fears — doctrines— denials — doubts,  and 
we  feel  anything  but  the  consciousness  that  "  all  things  are  ours."  Ws  feel  no 
sense  of  mastery,  only  of  bewilderment.  To  be  free — to  give  our  sympathies  on  all 
sides — to  trust  all  voices  alike,  is  to  leave  our  moorings,  to  be  free  to  wander  on  a 
shoreless  sea.  Or  again,  careless  indiscriminate  sympathy,  fellowship  wi^h  human 
life  in  all  its  forms,  may  present  itself  to  us  as  an  ideal  of  conduct,  "  Homo  sum, 
humani  nil  a  me  alieuum  puto."  But  there  is  that  at  once  must  give  us  pause. 
For  humanity  as  it  is  is  a  strangely  mixed  thing.  To  say  that  my  pulses  beat  in 
sympathy  with  all  that  is  human  is  to  state  a  fact  of  my  bt-ing,  but  it  is  a  fact 
suggestive  as  much  of  horror  as  of  self-congratulation.  For  it  means  that  there  is 
no  disordered  jjassion,  however  vile,  of  which  I  cannot  trace  at  least  in  some 
horrible  moment  the  capacity  in  my  own  blood  ;  no  craft,  no  guile  to  which  I 
can  claim  to  be  by  nature  utterly  a  stranger.  Thus  out  of  the  surging  sea  of 
conflicting  theories — out  of  the  seething  of  this  common  manhood  which  I  cannot 
trust — out  of  this  indiscriminate  life  which  might  indeed  master  me,  but  which 
certainly  I  do  not  master — in  which  certainly  "  all  things  are  not  mine,"  I  look  up 
for  some  Hand  from  above  to  lift,  some  Voice  to  guide,  some  standard  and  criterion 
of  life.  And  lo  !  there  is  One  who  knows  life's  secret.  One  who  loves  my  humanity, 
who  believes  in  its  capacities  as  none  else  ever  did,  and  vet  distrusts  its  impulses. 
One  who  in  our  flesh,  "in  the  likeness  of  flesh,  of  sin,"  yet  restores  life;  sums  it 
into  Himself,  and  claims  to  pur^e  it  and  to  reconstruct  it.  I  come  to  Him — I  will 
be  taught  by  Him.  I  would  have  the  key  to  life — I  would  feel  myself  under  His 
instruction.  He  turns  upon  me,  He  speaks  to  me.  But  it  is  not  first  of  freedom. 
A  secure  life — a  strong  life,  that  is  the  first  thing.  It  must  be  strong  before  it  ean 
be  free — strong  at  the  centre  ere  it  can  be  free  at  the  circumference,  and  to  make  it 
Btrong  there  must  be  concentration,  and  that  means  for  the  moment  mutilation — 
the  cutting  off  of  occasions  of  sin,  of  whatever  hinders  the  progress  of  the  true  self. 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

If  there  is  a  theory  which  puzzles  me,  which  I  cannot  refute,  which  perhaps  has 
some  attraction  for  me,  yet  seems  to  militate  against  my  spiritual  growth,  which  is 
to  go — the  spiritual  growth  or  the  intellectual  ?  "  "  Thv  intellectual  interest,"  the 
answer  of  Christ  seems  to  come,  "  is  not  thy  primary  self.  Behind  thine  intellect 
is  thy  will — tliy  spirit.  The  centre  of  thy  being  where  conscience  speaks,  where 
will  acts,  where  prayer  rises  and  God  is  known — that  is  thyself.  It  conditions  all 
else.  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness — at  all  costs,  limit 
thyself  as  you  mayest  to  do  so."  Thus  the  first  claim  of  Christ  is  a  claim  upon  us 
for  concentration  of  faculties  upon  the  pursuit  of  holiness.  All  things  are  yours ; 
but  not  till  ye  are  Christ's,  then,  as  Christ  is  God's.  But  so,  if  in  blind  surrender 
the  sacrifice  has  been  made  and  remade  and  made  for  ever, — is  the  reward  sure. 
What  is  tliis  vaunt  of  the  Christian  life  ?  In  what  sense  does  the  "  slave  of  Jesus 
Christ "  find  that  "  all  things  are  his  "?  1.  He  finds  it  first  in  the  moral  sphere. 
Self  has  been  cut  at  the  roots,  and  it  is  selfishness  wliich  is  the  source  of  narrow- 
ness, the  impoverishment  of  life.  Party  spirit  (that  is  St.  Paul's  point)  narrows 
your  privileges.  To  make  one  great  teacher  of  the  Church  your  patron  in  such 
sense  as  that  you  exult  exclusively  in  what  he  taught,  exalt  his  special  adherents 
and  depreciate  the  work  of  others,  is  to  narrow  your  Christian  heritage.  Yours  is 
not  whfit  one  teacher  only  was  given  to  teach,  but  what  all  were  given.  All  are 
yours,  whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas.  Argument,  it  has  been  said,  is  often 
most  effective  when  it  is  most  one-sided.  The  Christian  Church  in  like  manner 
may  gain  a  certain  sort  of  effectiveness  by  ignoring  half  her  mission,  and  dealing 
with  half  human  nature,  but  "  all  things  are  ours."  The  heritage  is  not  nreant  to  be 
impoverished  and  narrowed  into  ever  closer  channels  as  it  comes  down  the  ages. 
Meant  for  Catholic  humanity,  it  remains  in  its  Catholicity.  We  believe  in  one 
holy  Catholic  Church,  one  in  its  Divine  authority,  one  in  the  truth  it  teaches  in 
common,  one  iu  the  grace  which  flows  in  its  channels  and  makes  its  inner  life  the 
same,  oue  in  its  common  organisation,  one  in  its  sacred  books,  and  to  no  part  of 
that  one  whole  do  I  limit  my  faith.  By  no  corporate  self-assertion  would  I  have  a 
part  of  that  society  strive  to  be  the  whole.  "  All  things  are  ours."  2.  But  it  is  not 
only  within  the  area  of  the  Christian  Church  that  the  S[iirit  of  Christ,  by  cutting 
the  roots  of  self-assertion,  realises  in  us  the  richness  of  our  heritage.  "  Not  only 
Paul,  and  Apollos,  and  Cephas,"  but  the  world,  the  Kooftoc,  is  ours.  The  Christian 
realises  his  freedom  in  all  truth,  his  kinship  with  all  nature.  It  is  not  only  that 
the  good  man  is  at  peace  with  nature,  that  he  is  in  league  with  the  slaves  of  the 
field  and  the  beasts  of  the  land  are  at  peace  with  him  ;  there  is  a  deep  ground  for 
such  kinship.  He  has  learned  to  recognise  in  Christ  (in  the  latter  days  Incarnate) 
the  eternal  Word  of  God,  the  expression  and  counterpart  of  his  being.  His  media- 
tion in  grace  is  based  upon  an  unceasing  mediation  in  nature.  "  Through  Him  all 
things  were  made."  "Without  Him  was  not  anything  made."  "Whatever  has 
been  made,  in  Him  was  lifp."  And  as  the  Christian  must  lay  his  claim  to  be 
utterly  at  home  in  the  modern  scientific  conception  of  nature,  so  must  he  also  be  in 
the  world  of  universal  humanity.  The  great  Greek  theologians  of  the  epoch  of  the 
great  general  councils  never  let  their  students  forget  the  largeness  of  the  Christian 
claim.  God's  special  dealings  with  the  Jews  (St.  Athanasius  reminds  us)  are  given 
only  to  prevent  us  forgetting  His  universal  providence  in  all  history  and  nature. 
For  He  who  came  into  our  territory  (lie  tells  us)  in  the  Incarnation,  came  not  as  a 
stranger  nor  as  having  been  far  off  before.  Fw  no  part  of  creation  had  ever  been 
left  void  of  Him.  He  had  filled  all  things  through  all.  He  was  through  ail  the 
ages  "  coming  into  the  world."  He  was  the  light  which  lighteneth  every  man — the 
same  Jesus  Christ.  "  Dream  not,"  says  St.  Justin  (meeting  a  difficulty  by  anticipa- 
tion), in  his  apolo?y  to  the  heathen,  "  that  persons  who  lived  more  than  a  century 
and  a  half  ago,  before  Christ  was  born  in  the  flesh,  escape  His  judgment.  For  we 
have  been  taught  "  (it  is  not  a  private  oi)iuion  of  his  own)  "  and  have  explained 
before  that  He  is  the  Logos,  in  which  the  whole  race  of  man  shared.  And  those 
who  lived  with  reason  up  to  their  lights,  are  Cliristians  even  though  they  are 
reckoned  Atheists  among  men,  as  among  the  Greeks  were  Socrates  and  Heracleitus, 
and  among  the  Barbaiians  Abraham  and  Elijah,  and  many  others,  and  those  who 
lived  of  old  without  reason,  were  ever  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  the  murderers  of 
those  who  lived  with  reason.  But  thej^  who  lived  or  live  with  reason  (i.e.,  up  to 
their  lights)  are  Christians  and  can  live  without  fear."  It  ought  to  have  been  the 
instinct  of  Christianity  always  to  recognise  this.  Christianity  supersedes  all  other 
religions  not  by  excluding  but  by  including.  In  part  indeed  they  reiDresent 
merely  man's  bewilderment  and  ugly  perversions  of  the  truth.     But  in  part  they 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  299 

also  represent  that  natural  revelation  of  God  wliicli  is  involved  in  the  light  shining 
in  darkness,  so  that  the  darkness  could  not  suppre-s  it.  Everywhere  there  was 
something  of  a  witness  to  God.  And  Christian  faith  stands  to  all  other  teachings, 
as  that  which  supersedes  them,  by  contnining  and  elevating  the  truih  they  taught, 
and  illuminating  and  satisfying  the  human  need  that  they  expressed.  They  become 
foes  only  when  they  become  rivals,  as  even  the  good  may  ever  be  the  enemy  of  the 
best,  as  the  twilight  is  darkness  by  comparison  with  the  sunlight.  "  There  are 
many  noble  things,"  says  Origen,  "  in  the  Ora  -les  by  those  not  of  Christ's  part,  but 
with  us  only  ai"e  their  Oracles  complete  and  pure."  3.  All  things  are  yours — "  Life 
and  death,"  the  world  of  human  nature.  It  is  the  privilege  of  Christian  faith  to 
give  us  the  freest  access  to  human  hearts.  For  the  wants  that  Christ  came  to  evoke 
and  to  satisfy  belong  to  man,  as  man,  to  men  equally  in  every  age  and  in  every 
class.  The  capacity  for  prayer,  the  sense  of  sin,  the  need  of  pardon,  the  reality  anil 
force  of  temptation,  the  vicissitudes  of  spiritual  feeling,  the  moral  discouragements 
and  encouragements  of  life,  the  moral  perplexities  from  conflicting  duties— these 
things  belong  to  people  of  utterly  difiereut  positions  in  life  and  with  scarcely  any 
reference  to  degrees  of  education.  4.  "  All  things  are  ours,  whether  things  present 
or  things  to  come."  The  great  poet  of  human  nature  in  our  time  constantly  gives 
expression  to  the  conviction  that  the  problems  of  human  character  demand  an 
immortality  for  their  solution.  Human  characters  he  feels,  in  proportion  to  their 
worth,  need  an  environment  to  develop  them  larger  than  this  world  ;  need  a  vaster 
field  to  work  out  their  issues.  "  On  the  earth  the  broken  arcs:  in  the  heaven  the 
perfect  round."  "God's  task  to  make  the  heavenly  period — perfect  the  earthen. " 
Now  this  conviction  of  immortality  in  which  the  Christian  lives  gives  him  a  lever- 
age for  action,  and  makes  him  the  minister  of  hope.  He  can  believe  in  the  small 
begmnings  who  believes  in  imnrortal  growth.  He  can  believe  in  the  perfect  victory 
for  all  who  do  not  finally  and  obstinately  cling  by  choice  to  evil.  He  again  has  a 
rational  doctrine  to  hold  out  to  man  of  human  perfection — a  doctrine  rational 
because  it  takes  account  of  experience.  Make  this  world  the  only  sphere  of  progress, 
obliterate  from  men's  eyes  what  we  heard  of  last  week  as  "  the  world  as  little  like 
Whitechapel  as  possible,"  in  which,  "  after  death  men  shall  wake  up,"  and  you 
certainly  have  no  rational  doctrine  of  hope  to  present  to  mankind.  Where  is  the 
experience  that  justifies  us  in  expecting  that  the  progress  of  knowledge  and  civilisa- 
tion really  means  for  "  the  sacririced  classes  "  the  progress  of  hap  liness.  Does  not 
experience  rather  give  us  a  doctrine  that  nations  have  their  periods  of  climax,  and 
then  their  periods  of  decay  ?  and  is  there  any  real  ground  for  believing  the  later 
period  for  a  iDarticular  race,  happier  than  the  earlier  ?  Or  have  great  social  convul- 
sions (though  they  have  t  lught  great  lessons  to  humanity  at  large)  been  (except 
under  ceitain  conditions  not  now  existing  in  England)  productive  of  happiness  to 
the  nations  who  were  the  subjects  of  them?  Does  civilisation  or  knowledge  any 
way  tend  to  minimise  the  seltishness  which  is  the  root  of  all  social  evils?  Behind 
the  veil,  under  the  feet  of  the  great  Heail  of  a  redeeming  humanity,  the  Christian 
knows  that  ttie  race  of  man  who  will  consent  to  have  God  when  He  is  offered  them 
in  His  love,  is  being  gathered  into  an  ever  developing  perfection.  (C.  Gore,  M.A.) 
C7(r/.s'<'s  servants  lonU  of  all : — I  How  Christ's  servants  are  men's  lords.  "  Paul, 
ApoUos,  Cephas  "  were  all  lights  kindled  at  the  central  Light,  and  therefore  shining. 
Each  was  but  a  part  of  the  mighty  whole,  a  little  segment  of  the  circle — 

«'  They  are  but  broken  lights  of  Thee. 
And  Thou,  0  Lord  !  art  more  than  they." 

And  in  the  measure,  therefore,  in  which  men  adhere  to  Christ,  and  have  taken 
Him  for  theirs  ;  in  that  measure  are  they  delivered  from  all  undue  dependence  on, 
still  more,  all  slavish  submission,  to  any  single  individual  teacher  or  aspect  of  truth. 
If  Christ  be  our  Master,  if  we  take  our  creed  from  Him,  if  we  accept  His  words  and 
His  revelation  of  the'Father  as  our  faith  and  our  objective  religion,  then  all  the 
slnA-ery  to  favourite  names,  all  the  taking  of  truth  second-hand  from  lips  that  we 
honour,  all  the  partisanship  for  one  against  another  which  has  been  the  shame  and 
the  ruin  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  is  working  untold  mischiefs  in  it  to-day,  are 
ended  at  once.  "One  is  your  Master,  even  Clirist."  "  Call  no  man  Eabbi  !  upon 
earth";  but  bow  before  Him,  the  incarnate  and  the  personal  Truth.  And  in  like 
manner  they  who  are  Christ's  are  delivered  from  all  temptations  to  make  men's 
maxims  and  practices  and  approbation  the  law  of  their  conduct.  "  They  say. 
What  say  they  ?    Let  them  say."     The  envoy  of  some  foreign  power  cares  very 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  in. 

little  what  the  iuhabitants  of  the  land  to  which  he  is  ambassador  may  think  of  him 
and  his  doings ;  it  is  his  sovereign's  good  opinion  that  he  seeks  to  secure.  The 
soldier's  reward  is  his  commander's  praise,  the  slave's  joy  is  the  master's  smile, 
and  for  us  it  ought  to  be  the  law  of  our  lives,  and  in  the  measure  in  which  we 
belong  to  Christ  really  it  will  be  the  law  of  our  lives,  that  "  we  labour  that  whether 
present  or  absent  we  may  be  pleasing  to  Him."  II.  Christ's  servants  are  the 
LORDS  OF  THE  WORLD.  That  23lirase  is  u^ed  here,  no  doubt,  as  meaning  the  external 
material  universe.  He  owns  the  world  who  turns  it  to  the  highest  use  of  growing 
his  soul  by  it.  If  I  look  out  upon  a  fair  landscape,  and  the  man  that  draws  the 
rents  of  it  is  standing  by  my  side,  and  I  suck  more  sweetness  and  deeper  impulses 
and  larger  and  loftier  thoughts  out  of  it  thrtn  he  does,  it  belongs  to  me  far  more 
than  it  does  to  him.  The  world  is  his  who  from  it  has  learned  to  despise  it,  to 
know  himself  and  to  know  God.  He  owns  the  world  who  uses  it  as  the  arena,  or 
wrestling  ground,  on  which,  by  labour,  he  may  gain  strength,  and  in  which  he  may 
do  service.  Antagonism  helps  to  develop  muscle,  and  the  best  use  of  the  outward 
frame  of  things  is  that  we  shall  take  it  as  the  field  upon  which  we  can  serve  God. 
III.  Christian  men  who  belong  to  Jesus  Christ  are  the  lords  and  masters  op 
■"  life  and  death."  1.  The  true  ownersliip  of  life  depends  upon  self-control,  and 
self-control  depends  upon  letting  Jesus  Christ  govern  us  wholly.  So  the  measure 
in  which  it  is  true  of  me  that  "  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  "  is  the 
measure  in  which  our  lower  life  of  sense  really  belongs  to  us,  and  ministers  to  our 
highest  good.  2.  Animals  expire  ;  a  Christian  man  may  yield  his  soul  to  his 
Saviour,  who  is  the  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  of  the  living.  If  thus  we  feel  our 
dependence  upon  Him,  and  yield  up  our  wills  to  Him,  and  can  say,  "Living  or 
dying  we  are  tbe  Lord's,"  then  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  Death,  too,  will  be  our 
servant,  and  that  our  wills  will  be  concerned  even  in  passing  out  of  life.  Still 
more,  if  you  and  I  belong  to  Jesus  Christ,  then  Death  is  our  fellow-servant  who 
comes  to  call  us  out  of  this  ill-lighted  workshop  into  the  presence  of  the  King.  IV. 
Christ's  servants  are  the  lords  of  time  and  eternity,  "  things  present  or  things 
to  come."  1.  The  whole  mass  of  "  things  present,"  including  all  the  events  and 
circumstances  of  our  lives,  over  these  we  may  exercise  supreme  control.  If  we  are 
bowing  in  humble  submission  to  Jesus  Christ,  they  will  all  subserve  our  highest 
gond.  The  howling  tempests  of  winter  and  its  white  snows,  the  sharp  winds  of 
spring  and  its  bursting  sunshine ;  the  calm,  steady  heat  of  June  and  the  mellowing 
days  of  August,  all  serve  to  ripen  the  grain.  And  so  all  "  things  present,"  the  light 
and  the  dark,  the  hopes  fulfilled  and  the  hopes  disappointed,  the  gains  and  the 
losses,  the  prayers  answered  and  the  prayers  unanswered,  they  will  all  be  recognised 
if  we  have  the  wisdom  that  comes  from  submission  to  Jesus  Christ's  will  as  being 
ours,  and  ministeiing  to  our  highest  blessing.  We  shall  be  their  lords,  too,  inas- 
uiuoh  as  we  shall  be  able  to  control  them.  We  need  not  be  like  the  mosses  in  the 
stream,  that  lie  whichever  way  the  current  sets,  nor  like  some  poor  little  sailing 
boat  that  is  at  the  mercy  of  the  winds  and  the  waves,  but  may  carry  an  inward 
impulse  like  some  great  ocean-going  steamer,  the  throb  of  whose  power  shall  drive 
us  straight  forward  on  our  course,  what  ever  beats  against  us.  That  we  may  have 
this  inward  power  and  mastery  over  things  present  and  not  to  be  shaped  and 
moulded  and  made  by  them,  let  us  yield  ourselves  to  Christ,  and  He  will  help  us 
to  rule  them.  2.  And  then,  all  "  things  to  come  "  ;  the  dim,  vague  future  shall  be 
for  each  of  us  like  some  sunlit  ocean  stretching  shoreless  to  the  horizon  ;  every 
little  ripple  flashing  with  its  own  bright  sunshine,  and  all  bearing  us  onwards  to 
the  great  throne  that  stands  on  the  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
That  all  things  are  for  the  spiritual  good  and  advantage  of  the  godly  man  : — I.  In  how 

MANY  RESPECTS  AT;L  THINGS  MAY  BE  SAID  TO  BE  THE    GODLY  MAN's,  BOTH  IN  THE  ChDRCH 

AND  THE  WORLD.  And  first,  thus,  in  that  there  is  nothing  which  would  be  for 
their  good  that  God  denieth  them.  Whatsoever  is  in  all  the  world,  if  it  be  good 
for  the  godly  man,  he  shall  have  it  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).  There  is  no  man  that 
feareth  God,  though  he  may  say,  I  want  riches,  I  want  health,  I  am  without  this 
or  that,  that  can  bay  he  is  without  Chiist,  and  justification,  and  the  covenant  of 
grace.  2.  There  is  a  limited  good,  that  which  in  itself  is  good,  but  doth  not 
make  good  those  that  have  it,  yea,  it  may  be  turned  to  evil.  As  wine  is  good, 
but  give  it  to  the  feverish  man  you  hurt  him.  And  thus  it  is  with  all  the 
temporal  good  things  of  the  world;  they  do  not  make  the  possessors  good,  yea, 
thny  may  be  turned  to  sin,  and  increase  thy  corruption.  And  then  it  is  no  wonder 
if  God,  out  of  His  love  to  thee,  withhold  these  things  from  thee.  If  they  were  as 
necessary  and  as  good  as  Christ  is,  and  heaven  is,  thou  wert  sure  to  have  them 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   COIUNTHIANS.  301 

(Rom.  viii.  32).  Now  tliis  very  particular  should  rebuke  all  the  winJs  and  waves 
of  fears  and  discoutent  witliin  thee.  Art  thou  repining  thou  hast  not  this,  thou 
hast  not  that  ?  Oh,  look  !  Hast  thou  godliness  ?  Hast  thou  the  fear  of  God  in  thy 
heart,  then  thou  hast  all  things,  because  there  is  nothing  that  is  good  for  thee 
that  God  keeps  from  thee?  Secondly,  a  godly  man  may  be  said  to  have  all  things, 
because  lie  hath  a  right  and  a  claim  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  wherein  is  a  deed 
of  gift  of  all  things  both  spiritual  and  temporal.  Therefore  godliness  is  said  to 
have  the  promise  of  this  life  and  the  life  to  come  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  All  heavenly 
and  earthly  things  are  by  promise  made  to  the  godly,  only  heavenly  things  abso- 
lutely, earthly  things  conditionally  and  with  subordination.  So,  then,  it  is  with 
thee,  as  some  man,  who  hath  all  his  estate  lying  in  bonds  and  covenants,  though 
for  the  present  he  cannot  command  such  a  sum  of  monev,  yet  he  is  rich  in  bonds. 
Thirdly,  all  things  are  the  godly  man's  because  he  halh  God  for  his  God,  who  hath 
all  things.  He  that  hath  the  sun  hath  the  light  of  all  the  stars ;  he  that  hath 
the  ocean  hath  all  the  streams.  Hence  our  happiness  is  said  to  be  in  this  if  we 
have  the  Lord  for  our  God.  David,  in  all  his  exigencies,  supported  himself  with 
this,  that  God  was  his  portion  and  his  inheritance.  Though  a  child  hath  not 
money  and  raiment  at  his  command,  yet  because  he  hath  a  rich  father,  who  can 
procure  all  these  things,  therefore  he  may  be  well  said  to  have  them  all.  Fourthly, 
a  godly  man  may  be  said  to  have  all  things  because  godliness  worketh  such  an 
holy  contentation  and  sati>faction  of  spirit,  that  in  what  estate  he  is,  he  is  as 
well  pleased  as  if  he  had  all  things,  as  if  he  had  the  whole  world  (1  Tim.  vi.  6). 
Thus  all  things  are  theirs,  because  through  contentation  they  have  all  things. 
Fifthly,  all  things  are  the  godly  man's  because  they  were  made  finaliter  for  him. 
They  are  all  for  his  spiritual  use.  Every  gift  is  given  to  profit  withal  (chap.  xii. 
7).  II.  Let  us  now  consider  why  God  should  mark  all  heavenly  and  eakthlt 
THINGS  FOK  THE  GODLY.  First,  we  need  not  wonder  at  it,  if  we  consider  that  Christ 
Himself  took  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  did  undergo  that  shameful  death,  and 
those  terrible  conilicts  with  God's  wrath  for  His  Church,  He  gave  Himself  for 
His  Church.  So  that  Christ  being  theirs,  no  wonder  if  all  things  else  be  tlieirs. 
If  ever  God  would  have  denied  anything,  would  have  withheld  anything,  it  would 
have  been  His  only  Son,  in  whom  He  was  so  well  pleased.  Secondly,  because 
all  things  in  the  world  are  ordered  by  His  providence  only;  but  the  whole  work 
of  God  about  His  children  is  the  effect  of  His  predestination.  III.  Having 
asserted  a  comfortable  doctrine  out  of  these  words  for  the  godly,  we  i^roceed  to 
make  sohe  objections  or  doubts  about  it,  P'irst,  the  doubt  may  be.  How  are 
all  things  the  godly  man's  for  his  use  and  spiritual  edification,  when  many  times 
we  see  the  godly  man  gets  no  good  by  tliese  ?  To  answer  this,  first,  we  must 
distinguish  between  God's  intention  in  giving  these,  and  the  godly  man's  actual 
improvement  of  them  to  that  end.  When  the  apostle  saith,  "  All  things  are 
yours,"  his  meaning  is,  on  God's  part.  His  love  is  so  great  that  for  the  godly 
only  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  were  created.  If  so  be,  therefore,  at  any 
time  these  things  turn  to  thy  hurt,  blame  thyself.  The  physician  will  tell  the 
patient  sometimes,  all  these  potions  and  all  these  cordials,  they  are  yours;  you 
are  to  take  them  ;  yen  may  expect  much  good  and  ease  by  them.  But  if  the 
patient  be  wilful,  and  disorder  himself,  it  is  his  fault,  not  the  physician's,  that  they 
do  hurt.  Therefore,  secondly,  the  godly  man,  through  his  weakness  and  sinfulness, 
not  walking  up  to  God's  order,  may  make  that  a  hindrance  which  God  intended  a 
furtherance.  Thirdly,  though  the  godly  may  for  a  while  make  these  things 
against  their  end,  and  not  for  it,  yet  this  will  not  be  always.  Fourthly,  when  we 
say  all  things  are  the  godly  man's,  you  must  take  them  in  their  collective  co- 
operation, as  Eom.  viii.,  "All  things  work  together."  The  nest  doubt  is.  If  all 
things  be  the  godly's,  why,  then,  are  they  so  uncomfortable,  so  dejected,  com- 
plaining of  wants,  as  if  nothing  were  theirs  ?  Answer :  It  is  true  it  should  be  so, 
but  we  are  weak  in  faith,  we  do  not  live  upon  Scripture  principles  and  privileges. 
It  is  by  faith  only.  A  quiet  resting  and  reposing  of  the  soul  upon  God's  promise 
puts  us  into  the  possession  of  all  these  things.  Secondly,  as  they  want  faith,  so  a 
heavenly  prudence  and  skill  how  to  improve  them  spiritually.  Though  all  things 
be  for  their  good,  yet  they  must  have  wisdom  to  know  how  to  use  all  things. 
What  is  a  fountain  sealed  up,  or  a  book  that  cannot  be  read,  though  it  hath  never 
such  admirable  matter  ?  Thus  are  all  things,  though  never  so  useful,  if  thou  hast 
not  Christian  wisdom.  There  is  no  condition,  affliction,  or  event,  but  thou  mayest 
say,  if  I  had  heavenly  wisdom  I  miglit  make  excellent  use  of  it.  The  last  doubt  is. 
How  are  all  things  the  godly  man's,  seeing  for  the  most  part  they  are  most  wanting, 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

they  are  in  the  greatest  necessities  ?  AnsA-er — 1.  This  place  doth  not  so  much 
speak  of  the  possession  of  all  things  as  tbe  spiritual  setviceableness  of  them. 
Those  things  \\hich  they  have  no  possession  of  may  yet  serve  for  their  soul's  good. 

2.  If  the  godly  have  not  all  things  they  would,  that  want  is  good  for  them.  The 
want  of  any  outward  mercies  may  sometimes  be  better  than  the  having  of  them. 

3.  Thou  hast  what  is  best  for  thi-e,  and  that  according  to  the  wise  God's  ordering. 
Let  this  silence  thee  alwa\s.  (A.  Burge~s.)  All  tilings  are  yourg  : — You  re- 
membtr  the  fable  of  the  bcHutitul  fairy  who  always  appeared  to  turn  evil  into 
goi'd,  and  you  have  sometimes  wished  it  true.  Paul  believed  that  Jesus  had 
power  to  make  everything  that  happened  turn  out  for  the  best  welfare  of  His 
people.  The  apostle  seems  to  say,  "  If  j'ou  serve  God,  everything  in  the  world 
.shall  minister  to  you  as  much  as  if  it  were  really  y^ur  own."  God  did  not  make 
you  for  the  eaith  ;  He  made  the  eartli  for  you.  As  a  father  values  his  children 
more  than  the  house  he  has  built  for  them,  so  the  Lord  values  you  more  than  the 
woild  in  which  you  live.  Do  not  think  you  are  of  secondary  importance,  created 
only  as  an  offsh  ot  of  the  earth,  to  grind  away  at  your  labour  and  care  and  pain 
for  a  number  of  years,  and  then  die.  No  ;  the  apostle  believed  that  God  made 
eveiyihing  for  us,  and  that  as  workmen  are  employed  to  construct  a  beautiful 
palace,  so  God  emj)loys  the  earth  and  life  and  death,  and  all  things  as  workers 
Hnd  mateiials  to  build  us.  Wliat  more  comforting  doctrine  can  you  imagine? 
Every  tribulation,  and  all  onr  worries,  crosses,  and  losses  are  as  wurkinen  governed 
by  the  Lord  for  the  good  of  His  people.  (IV.  Bir:h.)  Owned,  hut  not  explured: — 
"  A  dear  uncle  of  mine,  an  Indian  chaplain,  made  the  acquaintance,  at  Singapore, 
in  1852,  of  a  Christian  widow  lady,  who  told  him  her  story.  In  1848  her  husband's 
death  bad  left  her,  at  Manilla,  in  mitch  reduced  circumstances.  She  owned  a 
little  land  in  Australin,  and  shtt  now  asked  an  Australian  friend  to  sell  it.  He  did 
his  besi  ;  bur  one  barren  little  field  he  could  not  sell,  and  the  widow  seemed  the 
poorer  for  such  a  possession.  Then,  in  1851,  };old  was  di^cove^ed  in  Anstrnlia;  a 
mine  was  fouid  in  that  rou^h  field  ;  and  the  wido^v  was  secured  for  life  from 
poverty.  What  was,  and  had  been,  her  position?  In  respect  of  provision,  she 
had  owned  every  nugget,  "all  the  fulness"  of  the  field,  all  along.  In  respect 
of  fruition,  she  had  it  all  to  discover;  it  was  all  new  wealth.  So  with 
you,  so  with  me,  in  Jesus  Ciirist.  We  have  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit — in 
Him.  Have  we  ccmie  to  have  it  — in  us?  If  not,  let  us  be  animated  by 
the  fact  that  the  g.  Id  is  in  the  field,  is  on  the  property."  [H.  C.  G.  Moule.) 
All  tldvfis  are  youn:  when  you  are  CJinst's  : — A  great  gulf  is  fixed  bet .v ten  God  and 
man  by  sin.  The  Bible  reveals  a  chain  depending  Irom  the  throne  of  God  stretch- 
ing across  the  void  and  holding  up  the  dis  ocated  world.  I.  Chhist  is  God's  :  that  is 
the  highest  link.  The  Creator  rejoices  in  all  His  works,  but  He  has  a  special  and 
peculiar  interest  in  man.  1.  W'hen  the  woik  of  creation,  as  to  its  bulk,  was  nearly 
done,  the  Creator  was  nut  yet  satisfied.  He  foU'  d  no  point  of  sympathetic  contact 
between  Himself,  a  spirit,  and  the  material  world  whi.  h  He  had  m..de.  Then  was 
held  that  council  in  which  huruanity  was  planned.  "Let  us  make  man  in  our  own 
image."  Allied  to  God  by  an  intelligent  mind  and  an  immortal  spirit,  yet  wedded  to 
matter  by  his  body,  man  was  added  to  the  upper  edge  of  creation,  a  link  of  com- 
munion between  the  Maker  and  His  work.  2.  Tiie  mastery  of  the  fall  came  on  and 
the  connecting  link  was  l.roken.  But  Satan  was  not  permitted  to  triumi  h.  When 
the  creaiue  called  into  being  as  a  son  Iihs  bi  come  an  alien,  where  shah  God  now  find 
a  man,  h  ly  as  Himself,  to  be  His  comi^anion  and  reciprocate  His  love?  3.  Here 
is  the  uystery  revealed:  Christ  is  Gou's.  "Behold  the  man"!  He  dwells  in 
the  boS'  m  of  the  Father,  and  yet  is  bound  in  brotherhood  to  the  human  family. 
This  is  the  flan  of  redemption.  The  Father  cometh  to  no  man;  no  mm  cometh 
to  the  Falher  but  by  Him.  The  Father's  delight  in  the  Son  incamate  (Psa.  xlii. ; 
Matt.  iii.  17)  is  the  uppermost  link  of  the  chain  whereon  all  our  hope  for  eternity 
hnngs.  How  strong  and  sure  it  is!  Satan  tried  in  the  wilderness  to  s  parate 
between  this  M^n  and  God,  as  in  the  garden  he  had  separated  between  the 
first  man  and  God.  The  Tempted  tiiumihed  and  the  tempter  fled.  II.  Ye 
AEE  Chkisi's  :  the  next  link.  It  is  not  that  He  is  your  portion,  but  thtit  ye  are 
HU.  In  actual  experience,  however,  the  union  is  mutual.  The  vine  holds  the 
branch,  and  the  branch  hobis  the  vine.  "  My  beloved  i-;  mine" — there  lies  my 
l^resent  happiness  ;  but  "I  am  His" — there  lies  my  eveilasting  safetv.  A  very 
slight  temptation  may  break  asunder  ^our  love  to  Christ;  but  all  the  powers  of 
darkness  i-annot  overcome  His  love  to  you.  Who  shall  sepniate?  A  Pritish  subject 
may  be  safe  although  sunoinded  by  enemies  in  a  distant  land,  and  his  conhdence 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  303 

in  bis  queen  may  rebuke  tlie  feeble  faith  of  a  Christian.  Note — 1.  How  He  obtains 
His  propertj'.  (1)  By  tlie  sovereign  gift  of  God.  "  Thine  they  were,  and  Thou 
gavest  them  Me"  (John  xvii.).  (2)  By  the  price  of  His  own  blood.  Ye  are  not 
your  own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price.  (3)  By  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
God  the  Father  gives  you  to  Christ,  and  you  give  yourselves.  This  latter  is  the 
affect  of  the  Spirit  working  repentance  and  faith  in  a  human  heart.  2.  How  He 
•will  use  His  property.  (1)  As  objects  to  exercise  His  kindness  on.  The  good  delight 
in  doing  good.  Christ  in  giving  grace  to  His  people  is  getting  delight  for  Himself. 
(2)  As  servants  to  do  His  work.  He  desires  your  service  and  deserves  it.  To  work 
willingly  is  a  mark  of  a  true  disciple.  (3)  As  living  epistles  in  which  the  world  may 
read  the  riches  of  His  grace.  (4)  For  company  at  His  coming,  and  for  portion  ever- 
more, ni.  All  things  are  yours  :  the  lowest  link.  All  tbe  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily  has  been  treasured  up  in  Christ  expressly  that  it  may  be  within  the  reach  of  His 
people.  1 .  The  ministry.  The  full-bodied  doctrinal  teaching  of  Paul,  the  melting  and 
arousing  eloquence  of  ApoUos,  and  the  abrupt,  tiery  energy  of  Peter— all  are  gladly 
recognised  as  a  wisely  mingled  provision  from  the  hand  of  that  Father  who  paints 
the  rose  and  the  violet  of  different  hues  but  equal  loveliness.  But,  besides  the 
bounty  of  the  Giver,  the  liberty  of  the  receivers  also  is  signalised  in  this  text. 
Paul  and  Apollos  and  Cephas  are  yours — not  ye  theirs.  In  Eome  the  ministers 
have  the  peox^le ;  here  the  people  have  the  ministers.  The  ministry  is  an  article  in 
the  inventory  of  a  Christian's  goods.  They  are  the  Lord's  gifts  to  the  heirs,  not  lords 
over  the  heritage.  2.  "  The  world."  The  world,  under  direction  of  its  god,  wars 
against  the  soul.  But  our  Father  in  heaven  holds  that  enemy  and  compels  it,  in  His 
own  time  and  way,  to  serve  His  sons.  3.  "  Life."  The  natural  life  is  indeed  corrupt, 
but  over  its  corrupt  root  the  new  nature  is  engrafted,  and  so  this  lower  earthly  life 
becomes  the  root  of  a  spiritual  life  in  heaven.  4.  "  Death."  Through  Christ  it  is 
only  the  dark,  narrow  door  in  the  partition  wall  between  time  and  eternity,  through 
which  the  children  are  led  from  the  place  of  exile  into  the  mansions  of  the  Father's 
house.  5.  "  Things  present  or  things  to  come."  AH  things  are  yours  in  virtue  of 
your  union  to  Christ,  whether  they  lie  within  the  horizon  of  time  or  beyond  it  in  the 
unseen  eternity.  We  have  reached  now  those  things  that  no  ear  hath  heard,  and 
no  tongue  can  tell.  I  once  heard  a  father  tell  that  when  he  removed  his  family  to 
a  new  and  ampler  resilience  his  youngest  son,  yet  a  lisping  infant,  ran  round  every 
room  and  scanned  every  article  with  ecstacy,  calling  out  in  childish  wonder  at  every 
new  sight,  "Is  this  ours,  father?  and  is  this  ours?"  The  child  did  not  say 
"  yours  "  ;  and  the  father  was  not  offended  with  the  freedom.  The  infant's  confi- 
dence in  appropriating  as  his  own  all  that  his  father  had  was  an  important  element 
in  his  satisfaction.  Such,  I  suppose,  will  be  the  surprise  and  joy  and  appropria- 
ting confidence  with  which  the  child  of  our  Father's  family  will  count  all  his  own 
when  he  enters  the  infinite  of  things  to  come.  {IV.  Arnot,  D.D.)  All  thinris 
ours: — "  Ail  things  mine  ?  Oh,  how  delightful  that  would  be  if  only  it  were  true  !  " 
But  it  is  true.  "  All  things  mine  that  I  may  make  them  Christ's  ?  But  that  is 
hardly  so  delightful  as  having  all  things  for  my  own."  It  is  more  delightful.  Nay, 
to  give  all  to  Christ  is  the  only  way  to  make  all  things  yours.  So  we  miglit  talk  on 
this  wonderful  passage,  finding  much  that  seems  incredible,  but  nothing  so 
incredible  as  the  assurance  that  all  things  are  ours.  Even  this  incredible  asser- 
tion, however,  may  grow  creiiible  to  you  if  only  you  approach  it  from  the  apostle's 
point  of  view.  I.  All  things  are  YonEs.  1.  All  ministers  are  yours.  "  Oh,  yes," 
j'ou  say,  "that  is  true  enough;  but  what  are  we  the  richer  for  that?  "  But  I  am 
by  no  means  sure  that  all  mmisters  are  yours.  I  am  quite  sure  that,  if  they  are, 
you  are  much  the  richer  for  it.  1.  St.  Paul's  general  principle  is  that  the  teachers  are 
for  the  Church,  not  the  Church  for  the  teachers.  But  the  intention  of  God  is  one 
thing  and  the  intention  of  the  Church,  as  shown  by  its  conduct,  is  often  another. 
(1)  God  intended  eloquent  Apollos,  learned  Paul,  and  sagacious  and  enthusiastic 
Peter  for  the  Church  at  Corinth  ;  but  some  said,  "  We  are  of  Ai^ollos."  They  were 
charmed  with  the  eloquence  of  the  mighty  expositor  of  Scripture,  but  they  did  not 
care  for  the  learned  Paul  or  the  plain  Peter.  Others  attached  themselves  to  Paul, 
but  thought  Apollos  too  rhetorical  and  Peter  too  rustic,  &c.  Thus  this  ancient 
Church  flung  away  t\vo-thirds  of  its  treasure.  (2)  All  the  ministers  of  the  Church 
universal  are  yours  in  the  design  and  intention  of  God  ;  but  do  you  permit  them 
all  to  be  yours?  What,  all  the  miniiJters  of  the  Apostolic,  Patriotic,  Medifeval, 
Roman,  Episcopal,  Presbyterian,  d-c,  branches  of  the  one  Catholic  Chuich  ?  All  are 
yours,  and  yet  how  few  of  them  are  youi  s  !  2.  But  here  you  may  object :  "  We  have 
neither  the  means  nor  the  opportunity  of  learning  from  many  of  Christ's  ministers." 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

But  do  you  learn  as  much,  and  from  as  many  of  them,  as  you  miglit  ?  Do  you 
study  the  apostolic  preachers  with  the  devotion  they  deserve  ?  When  wise  and  holy 
men  of  other  communions  than  your  own  publish  a  volume  of  choice  discourses, 
do  you  take  as  much  pains  to  get  it  as  you  take  for  the  last  new  novel,  and  read  it 
■with  even  as  much  interest  as  you  bestow  on  your  daily  newspaper  ?  There  are 
those  in  our  Churches  who  so  attach  themselves  to  one  minister  that,  like  the 
Corinthians,  they  care  to  hear  no  one  but  him.  Now  I  do  not  say  that  if  you  find 
a  minister  who  can  most  effectually  touch  the  springs  of  spiritual  thought  and 
emotion  within  you  you  are  not  to  love  and  to  addict  yourselves  to  his  ministry  ; 
but  I  do  say  that  if  you  so  addict  yourselves  to  one  that  you  can  hear  no  other 
you  are  fhugingc  away  the  greater  part  of  your  spiritual  heritage.  But  not  only  all 
ministers,  "all  things"  are  yours,  in  precisely  the  same  sense,  viz.,  to  use  and  to 
profit  by.  2.  The  world.  If  a  deed  of  gift  were  placed  in  your  hand  which  made 
over  a  whole  country,  or  even  a  whole  cosmos  to  you  as  your  private  estate,  you 
might  be  the  worse  and  poorer  for  it.  So  vast  an  estate  would  entail  responsibili- 
ties under  which  the  strongest  and  wisest  must  faint.  If  you  cared  only  to  make  a 
personal  and  selfish  use  of  it,  and  if  your  possession  of  it  robbed  you  of  all  stimulus 
to  labour,  to  mental  and  moral  culture,  you  would  simply  sink  into  the  most 
astounding  sot  and  sinner  under  heaven.  Property  is  what  we  can  appropriate. 
And  what  in  the  world  is  there  of  which,  with  due  pains  and  trouble,  you  cannot 
get  the  best  it  has  to  give  ?  The  splendour  of  sunrise  and  sunset,  the  glory  of 
the  seasons,  the  beauty  of  flower  and  herb  and  spreading  tree,  the  starry  canopy  of 
heaven,  do  they  not  become  yours  in  proportion  as  you  have  power  to  appropriate 
their  teaching,  their  value?  Any  house  or  piece  of  land  that  you  have  bought  you  may 
lose  by  a  thousand  accidents,  and  at  tlie  best  you  will  soon  have  to  leave  it  behind 
you  ;  but  the  culture  wrought  into  your  very  spirit  by  your  love  and  admiration  of 
the  natural  world,  this  will  never  leave  you.  3.  What  is  there  in  all  the  forms  and 
varieties  of  human  life  which  you  may  not  so  observe  as  to  learn  its  highest  lessons, 
as  to  work  the  very  essence  of  it  into  the  very  substance  of  your  mind  ?  What  have 
men  ever  done,  what  great  and  noble  thoughts  have  they  uttered,  of  which  you  may 
not  so  read  as  to  make  all  that  is  so  permanently  valuable  in  them  your  own  ?  Christ 
has  thrown  open  to  you  the  whole  domain  of  history  and  of  human  life ;  and  it  rests 
with  you  to  determine  how  far  you  will  go  up  into  it  and  possess  yourselves  of  it. 
4.  And  He  has  made  "death"  your  friend  and  servant;  for  if  you  believe  in  Him 
what  is  death  to  you,  or  to  those  whom  you  love,  but  a  transition  to  more  life  and 
fuller  ?  5.  So  with  "  things  present,"  with  which  we  are  so  seldom  content,  and 
"  things  to  come  "  which  we  are  so  apt  to  feai'.  All  are  yours  in  proportion  as  you 
make  them  yours.  II.  All  aee  touks  because  you  ake  Cheist's,  and  that  you  may 
MAKE  THEM  Cheist's  AND  God's.  Nav,  ws  Can  only  make  all  things  ours  as  we  give 
them  all  to  Christ  and  God.  1.  All  ministers  are  yours  ;  but  when  do  you  make 
them  all  yours  in  fact?  Only  when  you  make  the  best  use  of  the  best  that  is  in 
them,  and  suffer  it  to  minister  to  your  highest  and  most  enduring  welfare.  And 
when  you  do  that,  do  you  not  both  take  them  as  God's  gift  to  you  and  give  them 
back  to  Him?  2.  And  in  the  same  way  you  make  "  life  "  yours,  viz.,  as  you  yield 
to  its  nolder  influences  and  suffer  them  to  mould  and  reform  you.  That  is  to  say, 
all  life  becomes  yours  as  you  give  your  personal  life  to  God.  3.  So,  again,  with 
death.  Only  those  who  believe  that  Christ  has  overcome  the  sharpness  and  taken 
away  the  sting  of  death,  only  those  know  that  death  is  a  minister  of  God  for 
their  good.  And  who  are  these  but  those  for  whom  to  live  is  Christ  and  to  die  gain? 
Who  but  those  for  whom  to  depart  is  to  be  with  the  Lord  ?  Death  is  ours  only  as 
we  are  Christ's  and  God's.  4.  And  only  on  the  same  terms  are  things  present  ours 
and  things  to  come.  {S.  Co.r,D.D.)  The  Cliristian\-:po!<'<e>:sions  : — I.  The  geneeal 
SCOPE  OF  the  declaeation.  Of  cour^^e  all  things  are  not  the  Christian's  in  the  sense 
of  actual  right  or  control.  A  man  possesses  that  which  he  turns  to  his  own  account. 
A  miser,  though  abounding  in  wealth,  is  a  very  poor  man  ;  although  he  has  all 
things  he  possesses  nothing.  So  all  things  in  creation  and  providence  shall  as 
certainly  minister  to  the  Christian's  present  and  eternal  weltare  as  if  they  were 
absolutely  his  own.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God." 
II.  The  seveeal  paeticulaes.  1.  All  ministers  are  yours.  Whatever  their  talents, 
zeal,  piety,  fruit,  you  have  an  interest  in  them  all.  Christ  thought  of  you  when 
He  gave  some  apostles,  &a.  Feel  that  you  have  a  personal  property  in  your 
ministers,  not  only  in  their  time,  talents,  prayers,  but  also  in  their  spiritual  pros- 
perity and  their  growth  in  grace.  2.  The  world  is  yours.  The  world  is  created  for 
the  saints,  and  for  their  sakes  is  it  preserved.     It  is  a  mere  stage  of  action  for 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORIXTIIIAXS.  335 


them,  and  when  of  these  the  last  has  obtained  his  crown,  it  shall  be  burned  up, 
having  fultilled  its  mission  in  preparing  man  for  a  higher  condition  of  existence. 
The  earth  hath  God  given  to  the  children  of  men,  but  in  an  especial  sense  to  the 
redeemed.  It  belongs  uot  to  men  of  the  world  to  whom  providential  gifts  are  often 
a  ruin.  3.  Life  is  yours,  i.e.,  as  it  is  a  blessing,  as  it  serves  us  fcr  doing  the  work 
of  God.  He  lives  twice  who  lives  for  life's  great  end.  Only  use  it  rightly,  and  life 
is  yours.  4.  Death  is  yours ;  because  to  the  Christian  to  die  is  gain.  III.  The 
SOLID  GROUND  ui'ON'  WHICH  THESE  ASSURANCES  EEST :  bccause  "ye  are  Christ's." 
Ministers,  &c.,  are  not  yours  by  any  right  of  your  own,  not  yours  for  your  obedience, 
your  prayers.  And  therefore  remember  that  if  j'ou  are  not  Christ's,  then  none  of 
these  things  are  yours.  Ministers  are  not  yours,  for  they  shall  rise  as  a  testimony 
against  you  ;  nor  the  world,  for  it  is  a  master  by  whom  you  aie  held  in  bondage  ; 
nor  life,  for  its  things  are  not  blessed  to  you  ;  nor  death,  for  he  comes  as  God's 
executioner,  to  drag  you  from  your  tenacious  hold  on  things  present,  and  to  make  you 
view  your  forfeited  interest  in  all  the  joys  of  things  to  come.  Oh,  see  to  it,  then,  that 
ye  are  Christ's  by  a  good  confession,  by  a  choice  of  service,  by  faith,  by  love.  (D. 
Moore,  M.A.)  The  Cliriatinji'.i  riches  ;— I.  Whekeix  do  these  kiches  consist  ?  1.  It 
was  not  without  intention  that  the  apostle  placed  at  the  head  the  great  apostolic 
personalities.  For  the  highest  of  man's  possessions  is  man.  What  would  this  whole 
creation  be  but  for  man,  the  image  of  God  ?  (1)  But  it  is  man  who  appears  to  be 
least  of  all  ours.  How  many  a  man  would  have  given  thousands  to  rescue  the  life 
of  a  beloved  child,  or  have  cheerfully  laid  aside  his  dignities  to  lengthen  a  beloved 
partner's  life,  or  have  sacrificed  a  portion  of  our  own  life  to  redeem  that  of  a 
friend?  How  tb.en  cnn  we  say  that  men  are  ours,  if  we  cannot  hinder  their  being 
snatched  away  from  us?  (2)  It  is  true  that  what  is  earthly  and  perishable  in  man 
does  not  belong  to  us  ;  of  that  we  must  be  deprived.  But  all  that  is  imperishable 
and  holy  in  human  nature  is  ours,  and  cannot  be  snatched  from  us.  Centuries 
)>ave  passed  since  the  great  apostles  passed  away  ;  but  have  they  ceased  to  be  ours? 
The  word  of  repentance  which  they  preached,  has  it  not  awakened  us?  The 
testimony  they  bore  to  the  grace  in  Christ,  has  it  uot  converted  us?  The  example 
of  love  which  they  have  set  forth,  has  it  not  enlightened  us?  This  Paul,  this 
Peter,  &c.,  are  ours.  And  not  only  they,  but  all  who  walk  in  their  footsteps.  Yes, 
they  too  are  ours  who  seem  to  be  far  removed  from  us.  Paul  had  been  a  persecutor 
of  the  Church,  and  became  its  protector.  Peter  was  a  shaken  reed,  and  became 
like  a  rock.  Apollos  was  a  disciple  of  the  false  Greek  wisdom  (Acts  xviii.  24),  and 
became  a  scholar  of  Christ.  We  will  not  despair,  then,  of  those  whom  we  cannot 
call  ours  in  reality.  2.  All  other  created  things.  (1)  On  few  things  do  we  seem  so 
dependent.  There  is  the  lightning,  the  hailstorm,  the  flood,  the  pestilence,  war. 
These  forces,  which  neither  the  mind  nor  the  will  of  man  can  tame  or  control — are 
they  ours  ?  That  wonderful  power  that  carries  men  across  the  country,  as  on  the 
wings  of  the  wind,  that  still  more  wonderful  power  which  multiplies  thought  with 
lightning  speed  ;  that  gold  which  rules  the  hearts  of  men  ;  the  spirit  of  inquiry — 
do  these  powers  belong  to  us,  Christians?  Even  the  gentle  gifts  which  summer 
scatters  over  the  trees  and  fields,  will  not  misuse  desecrate  them,  will  not  sin  poison 
them  ?  (2)  But  we  must  not  be  misled  by  appearances.  The  apostle's  statement 
is  true.  For  can  misfortune  touch  us  when  we  know  that  all  things  work  together 
for  our  good  ?  When  we  know  that  we  are  not  the  sport  of  chance,  but  that  an 
almighty  and  all-loving  hand  sends  these  trials  to  us  ;  when  we  have  the  experience, 
too,  that  we  are  puritied  by  them  as  gold  by  the  fire  ?  It  is  true  that  the  commercial 
activiiy  of  the  day  may  serve  the  purposes  of  sin  ;  but  does  it  fail  to  serve  the  pur- 
poses of  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  It  is  true  that  a  prolific  press  forges  weapons  of 
falsehood  and  ungodliness ;  but  does  it  fail  to  forge  the  weapons  of  truth  ?  It  is 
true  that  gold  enters  many  a  house  with  a  message  of  hatred  and  hostility;  but 
does  it  cease  to  be  an  angel  of  love  and  comfort  when  we  carry  it  into  the  dwellings 
of  the  poor  and  wretched?  It  is  true  that  the  spirit  of  inquiry  kindles  a  fire-brand 
and  ca>-ts  it  into  the  very  sanctuary  of  God  ;  but  does  it  not  "also  kindle  the  flame 
of  wisdom  and  throw  light  into  the  sanctuary  of  Divine  truth  ?  3.  But,  says  the 
doubter,  there  is  one  thing  you  cannot  make  your  own.  It  is  all-embracing  time 
with  life  and  death,  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  (1)  We  will  not  dispute 
that  there  is  nothing  on  which  men  seem  so  dependent  as  time,  (u)  What  are  we 
to  say  of  life — is  this  ours  ?  We  devise  a  plan  of  life  to-day,  to-morrow  it  lies  in 
ruins  at  our  feet.  We  build  to-day  on  our  health,  to-morrow  we  are  stretched  on 
our  bed.  (h)  And  how  about  death  ?  When  we  shall  die  we  do  not  know  ;  that  we 
shall  die  is  certain.  There  are  some  who  during  life  never  cease  to  be  in  bondage 
VOL.  I.  20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

to  the  fear  of  death  (Heb.  ii.  15).  (c)  And  is  the  past  ours  ?  What  we  have  done 
we  have  done  and  cannot  recall,  (d)  And  how  can  the  present  or  the  future  belong 
to  us  ?  At  the  present  moment  is  not  the  future  dark  before  us  ?  What  will  happen 
in  the  next  hour  or  day  we  cannot  tell.  (2)  Amid  these  apparent  contradictions  we 
hold  immovably  to  the  apostle's  word  when  he  calls  tnne  ours.  («)  Of  course  the 
empty,  perishing,  earthly  life  is  not  ours.  But  what  does  this  signify  ?  On  the 
other  hand,  eternal  life,  whose  pledge  for  us  is  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  will  after 
this  life  first  attain  its  full  perfection.  This  eternal  life  is  ours,  and  death  cannot 
rob  us  of  it.  For  death  is  ours  in  Christ,  (h)  The  past,  too,  is  ours.  The  centuries 
have  swept  away  a  hundred  signs  of  human  devotion;  one  is  left,  it  is  the  Cross. 
Thousands  of  words  of  human  wisdom  ha/e  been  forgotten  ;  tlie  Word  of  God 
remains.  Names  that  once  shone  brightly  in  the  firmament  are  now  never  men- 
tioned;  one  name  remains,  it  is  the  name  Clirist.  Numberless  hopes  have  vanished 
like  the  morning  mist ;  one  hoi^e  remains,  is  ours — the  hope  of  eternal  life.  The 
past  is  ours:  all  that  is  worthy  and  imperishable  in  it.  (f)  And  therefore  are  the 
present  and  future  ours  too.  Let  men  set  up  new  signs,  the  Cross  alone  will  remain. 
Let  them  utter  wondrous  words,  they  will  all  cease  to  be  heard ;  the  Divine  Word 
will  remain.  Let  new  names  ri>^e  into  favour,  tliey  will  all  disappear  like  meteors, 
while  the  name  of  Christ  will  be  like  the  sun.  Let  new  hopes  delude  men,  our  hope 
is  an  anchor  sure  and  steadfast.  IL  Thk,  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  that  this 
MAY  EE  so.  The  natural  man  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;  therefore,  can- 
not say  "all  things  are  mine,"  but  must  rather  confess  "I  belong  to  all  things." 
The  context  shows  how  freedom  may  be  gained,  and  with  it  the  assurance  that  all 
things  are  ours.  The  apostle  is  not  addressing  the  unbelieving,  but  (ver.  16)  those 
who  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  the  condition.  The  way  to  become 
possessed  of  the  Christian's  wealth  is  the  way  of  repentance  which  leads  us  to  the 
knowledge  of  what  sin  is  before  the  Father  ;  the  way  of  faith  which  causes  us  to 
find  in  God  the  Son  reconciliation  and  redemption  from  sin  ;  the  way  of  regenera- 
tion— we  are  renewed  and  sanctified  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  (D.  Sclienkel,  D.D.) 
Christian  riches : — "  Give  me  a  great  thought,  that  I  may  live  upon  it,"  said  a 
noble  man  in  his  dying  hour  ;  but  even  in  life  there  is  often  need  of  a  great 
thought  to  expand  and  elevate  the  soul.  Such  a  thought  we  have  in  our  text.  I. 
The  world  has  often  used  these  words  to  deck  out  a  gospel  of  the  flesh.  Do 
we  not  hear  men  calling  out,  "All  is  yours  "?  Lordship  over  the  earth  is  yours; 
therefore  seize,  rule,  and  enjoy.  And  because  all  is  yours,  ye  must  all  equally  rule 
and  enjoy ;  therefore  demolish  the  old  distinction  between  masters  and  servants, 
rich  and  poor.  We  know,  indeed,  that  in  the  early  Apostolic  Church  there  was  a 
short  time  when  the  word,  "  All  is  youts,"  was  quite  literally  fulfilled  (Acts  ii.  44), 
but  this  state  of  matters  had  of  necessity  very  soon  to  disapi^ear.  The  providence 
of  God  is  not  uniform,  and  in  different  ways  will  lead  different  men,  setting  some 
as  stewards  over  much,  others  as  stewards  over  little.  But — II.  The  highest  good 
IS  COJIMON  to  all.  In  the  sense  of  faith,  and  hope,  and  love,  we  say  with  the 
apostle,  "All  is  yours;  for  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  What  can  be 
more  my  own  than  what  I  possess  in  best  thoughts  and  feelings  ?  Name  anything 
in  the  whole  world,  and  I  ask  whether  it  is  not  mine  if  it  may  serve  my  inner  man 
and  serve  me  for  growth  in  wisdom  and  grace.  Wert  thou  ever  so  poor,  art  thou 
Christ's,  then  the  whole  world  must  serve  thee,  for  Christ  is  God's  ;  but  wert  thou 
so  rich  that  thou  wouldst  have  to  pull  down  thy  barns  and  build  greater,  &c.,  the 
days  of  thy  riches  are  soon  numbered.  Here,  however,  are  riches  which  moth  and 
rust  cannot  corrupt  and  which  ciinnot  be  counted.  "All  is  yours."  1.  Paul, 
Apollos,  and  Cephas  belong  to  thee,  with  their  varying  gifts.  For  thee  the  evan- 
gelists write,  apostles  preach,  the  sacred  poets  unfold  the  depths  of  their  soul.  For 
thee  is  the  exhortation  and  the  promise.  2.  The  world.  Yes,  nut  only  the  kingdom 
of  grace,  but  also  the  kingdom  of  nature,  and  the  lilies  of  the  field  and  the  birds  of 
the  air  reveal  to  thee  the  glory  of  God.  3.  Lite  or  death.  How  poor  would  we  be 
if  death,  too,  did  not  belong  to  us.  The  gospel  of  the  fiesh  leads  its  adherents  up 
to  the  gates  of  death,  and  just  there  death,  as  it  were,  calls  out,  "Nothing  is 
yours!  "  But  art  thou  Christ's,  then  "  to  die  is  gain."  4.  And  whosoever  can 
speak  thus  can  also  say,  "  things  present  or  things  to  come."  Many  perhaps  will 
say,  "Yes,  no  doubt  the  present  is  ours — these  misfortunes  and  sutferings — but 
where  are  our  joy  and  peace?  "  But  art  thou  Christ's,  then  these  times  contain  a 
great  wealth  of  Divine  exhortations,  warnings,  appeals,  which  also  belong  to  thee 
for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  instruction  in  righteousness.  And  if  thou  yieldest  to 
these,  then  also  the  great  word  belongs  to  thee :  "  We  are  saved  by  hope,"  hope  in 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  307 

the  blighter  morning  of  eternitj',  when  all  the  children  of  God  will  reap  with  joy, 
for  they  bring  in  the  fruits  of  righteousness.     III.  If  the  Loud  is  to  be  able  to 

GIVE    us  ALL,  THEN  MUST   WE    BE    ABLE    TO    GIVE    THE    LOED   ALL.      "  Lord,  We  have  left 

all  and  followed  Thee."  Luther  sang,  "  Everything  may  go.  .  .  .  To  us  the 
crown  remaineth."  This  we  too  must  learn  if  we  would  obtain  the  promise.  Let 
all  go  that  is  now  thine  own;  the  earthly,  selfish  desires  which  hold  thee  back, 
because  thou  thyself  holdest  them  so  fast ;  and  many  a  thing  whioh,  though  it  has 
had  a  noble  origin,  yet  turns  thee  from  the  riches  of  God,  if  thou  wilt  hold  it  fast 
against  the  will  of  God.  Let  go,  therefore,  the  vain  dreams  of  a  happiness  which 
knows  neither  sufferings  nor  the  cross.  Perhaps  thou  hast  tliysclf  already 
experienced  the  disappointments  of  this  life.  There  were  perhaps  some  dear  ones 
whom  thou  couldst  truly  call  thine  own  I  The  grave  covers  them,  and  why  wilt 
thou  still  cling  to  the  earthly  possession  ?  In  the  name  of  Jesus,  let  it  go.  For  in 
Him  we  know  that  we  should  not  seek  the  living  among  the  dead  ;  we  know  that 
what  is  sown  in  corruption  will  be  raised  in  incorriiption,  etc.  And  the  better  we 
learn  to  say  from  the  heart,  "  Let  everything  go,  to  us  the  crown  rfiiiaineth,"  the 
freer,  the  more  joyous,  the  richer  will  we  be.  1^'or  then  that  dies  in  us  which  ought 
to  die,  and  then  that  lives  in  us  which  ought  to  live.  And  then  we  feel  that  all  is 
ours.      {Bp.  3Iartemcn.)  The    CJiristian's    heritage: — I.  The  believeb  may  be 

SAID  TO  POSSESS  ALL  THINGS  IN  GoD.  1.  The  mind  of  a  great  author  is  more 
precious  than  his  books,  of  a  great  artist  than  his  pictures.  To  have  the  mind  is 
better  than  to  have  merely  the  products  of  that  mind.  Give  the  fountain,  and  you 
virtually  have  the  streams.  But  no  earthly  or  finite  mind  can  transfer  its  gifts  to 
another.  Eut  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we  may  become  sharers  of  the  Infinite  Mind 
from  which  all  that  is  true  and  good  and  fair  in  the  universe  proceeds.  As  really 
as  true,  or  noble,  or  holy  thoughts  become  a  portion  of  the  mind  which  apprt-hends 
Ihem,  does  God  communicate  Himself  through  the  spirit  of  the  believer.  2.  The 
happiness  of  this  mysterious  nature  of  ours  is  never  to  be  found  merely  in  the 
possession  of  God's  gifts  ;  the  soul  can  find  its  true  satisfaction  only  in  rising 
beyond  the  gitts,  and  claiming  the  Giver  as  its  own.  When  you  covet  t'e  friendship 
or  love  of  a  fellow-man,  it  does  not  satisfj'  you  that  he  bestows  upon  you  only  out- 
ward gifts  ;  unless  the  man  give  you  himself,  the  rest  are  but  woithless  boons.  So 
the  wealth  of  worMs  would  be,  to  the  heart  longing  after  Deity,  a  miserable  substi- 
tute for  one  look  of  love  from  the  Great  Father's  eye.  3.  Now,  admitting  the  truth 
of  the  thought  that  God  is  the  portion  of  the  soul,  then  the  argument  of  the  text 
becomes  obvious  and  conclusive.  As  the  st-attered  rays  of  light  are  all  included  in 
the  focus,  as  the  fountain  contains  the  streams,  so  all  finite  and  created  good  is 
contained  in  Him  who  is  the  Supreme  Good  ;  all  earthly  excellence  is  but  the  partial 
emanation,  the  more  or  less  brii^ht  reflection  of  the  Great  Original.  Tije  man  who 
is  in  possession  of  some  great  masterpiece  need  not  envy  others  who  have  only 
casts  or  copies  of  it.  II.  Some  of  the  special  blessings  here  enumerated.  1. 
"The  woild  is  yours."  Not,  obviously,  in  the  literal  sense.  This  eaith  is  not 
the  exclusive  property  of  the  good.  It  is  not  their  Master,  but  another  who,  dis- 
playing "all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them,"  said,  "  All  these 
will  I  give  thee  if  tnou  wilt  full  down  and  worship  me."  As  often  as  otherwise  the 
rich  in  faith  are  poor  in  this  world's  possessions.  The  b^st  of  the  sons  of  men 
"  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head  "  ;  and  even  this  last  resting-place  the  haii'l  of 
charity  bestowed.  But  the  world  belongs  to  the  Christian  in  that  he  only  has  a 
legitimate  title  to  the  benefits  and  blessings  he  enjoys  in  it.  This  earth  was  not 
meant  to  be  the  home  of  evil.  (1)  Even  mute  and  material  things,  the  laws  and 
agencies  of  nature,  have  in  them  something  that  asseits  their  Divine  origin,  and 
proclaims  that  wrong  is  done  to  them  when  forced  into  the  service  of  sin.  If, 
therefore,  you  are  living  a  sinful  life,  you  are  out  of  harmony  with  the  world  in 
which  you  live.  You  are  an  intruder  on  its  soil,  a  misa[ipropriator  of  its  benefits,  a 
usurper  and  perverter  of  iis  laws.  And  so  long  as  you  continue  in  estrangement 
from  God,  it  is  as  if  His  sun  were  unwilling  to  shine  upon  you,  and  His  air  to 
inspire  you,  and  the  fruits  of  His  earth  to  nourish  you,  and  that  earth  itself  to  hold 
you,  and  as  if  "the  whole  crea  ion,"  weary  of  a  bondage  so  degrading,  were 
"  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain."  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  let  vour  soul  lie  brought 
back  into  living  union  with  the  Father  of  spirits  through  His  Son,  and  thencefor- 
ward the  world  will  become  yours,  because  you  are  God's.  In  harmony  with  the 
Great  Centre,  you  will  be  in  harmony  with  all  things  in  His  universe.  Nature  will 
serve  him  who  serves  her  God.  The  earih  will  be  fulfilling  its  pioper  function  in 
yielding  you  bread,  and  the  heavens  in  shedding  their  sweet  influences  en  your  path. 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

You  will  be  able  to  claim  a  peculiar  property  in  the  works  of  your  Father's  hand, 
and  the  bounties  of  your  Father's  providence.  You  will  have  served  yourself  heir 
to  Him  who  is  the  Universal  Proprietor,  and  become  "  heir  of  God,  and  Joint  heir 
with  Christ."  And  so  "  the  world  "  and  the  fulness  thereof  will  become  "  yours," 
because  "ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  2.  "Life  is  yours."  (1)  Of 
course,  considered  as  mere  exi'-tence  or  duration  of  being,  "life"  cannot  be  regarded 
as  the  peculiar  property  of  the  Christian.  For  though  it  is  true  that  religion  is 
really  conducive  to  health  and  longevity,  and  that,  in  absence  of  its  restraints, 
vicious  excess  often  impairs  the  health  and  shortens  life,  yet  it  is  not  always  the 
holiest  men  who  live  the  longest.  (2)  But  if  tbe  good  do  not  live  longer,  they  live 
more  in  tlie  same  space  of  time  than  other  men.  Life  is  to  be  reckoned  not  only 
extensively,  but  also  intensively.  An  oak  lives  for  centuries ;  but  who  would 
exchange  for  it  a  single  dav  of  the  existence  of  a  living,  conscious,  thinking  man  ? 
The  briefest  life  of  rationality,  again,  has  more  of  real  life  in  it  than  the  longest  of 
a  mere  animal.  And,  amnigst  rational  beings,  that  life  is  longest,  whether  brief  or 
protracted  its  outward  term,  into  which  the  largest  amount  of  mental  and  moral 
activity  is  condensed.  "We  live  in  deeds,  not  years;  in  thoughts,  not  breaths," 
&c.  But  if  so,  it  is  only  the  man  who  lives  to  God  who  can  really  be  said  to  live  at 
all.  For  in  him  alone  the  whole  man  lives — in  him  alone  all  the  energies  of  man's 
being  are  called  into  fullest,  noblest  activity.  The  man  who  merely  vegetates 
through  existence,  who  rises  day  by  day  only  to  eat  and  drink  and  pursue  the  same 
unreflective  round,  without  one  lofty  thought  or  pure  spiritual  emotion — surely,  to 
such  an  one,  life,  in  its  real  essence,  its  true  significance,  is  lost.  The  man  of 
property,  who  has  an  undiscovered  gold  mine  on  his  estate,  is  no  richer  for  his 
latent  wealth  ;  and  whatever  other  men  contrive  to  extract  out  of  life — as  comfort, 
honour,  knowledge,  power — they  are,  after  all,  possessors  only  of  its  surface  wealth  ; 
the  Christian  alone,  the  man  who  has  discovered  and  appropriated  its  hidden 
treasure  of  holy  thought,  feeling,  energy,  he  alone  can  be  said  to  be  its  true 
possessor.  C<mfine  a  bird  for  life  to  a  cage,  and  could  it  be  said  to  be  in  reality 
possessor  of  the  unexercised,  unenjoyed  power  to  soar  and  sweep  the  heavens? 
But  within  every  human  breast  there  are  capabilities  of  heaven,  folded  wings  of 
thought,  aspiration,  energy,  which  need  only  the  liberating  touch  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  call  forth  their  hidden  power,  and  bear  the  soul  upward  to  the  true  region 
of  its  life.  The  true  ideal  of  man's  life  is  that  of  a  heavenly  life.  To  that  man 
only  who  can  say,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ,"  can  we  say,  in  the  full  significance  of 
the  words.  Then  "  life  is  yours."  3.  "  Death  is  yours."  Outwardly,  indeed,  death 
bears  the  same  aspect  to  all.  But  yet,  whilst  of  all  other  men  it  may  be  said  that 
they  are  death's,  of  the  believer  alone  can  it  be  averred  that  death  is  his.  (1)  Sin 
renders  a  man,  in  a  sense,  the  rightful  property  of  death,  so  that,  when  the  hour 
of  dissolution  arrives,  it  is  but  the  lawful  proprietor  coming  to  claim  his  own.  In 
human  society,  a  man  by  the  commission  of  a  crime  is  by  light,  if  not  in  fact,  the 
property  of  the  law.  The  criminal  may  elude  for  a  while  the  hands  of  justice  ;  but, 
go  where  he  may,  he  has  no  right  to  liberty  or  life.  And  when  at  last,  it  may  be 
in  some  unwary  moment,  he  feels  a  stern  hand  laid  upon  his  shoulder,  and  the 
terrible  words,  "You  are  my  prisoner,"  fall  upon  his  ear,  his  guilty  freedom  is  at  an 
end.  And  though  shrinking  in  dismay  from  the  fate  that  awaits  him,  go  he  must 
with  the  officer  of  justice  to  meet  it.  Now,  similar  to  this  is  the  condition  of  the 
irreligious  man  in  relation  to  that  law  which  he  has  dishonoured,  and  that  dread 
penalty  which  he  has  incurred.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  if  you  are  Christ's,  then 
death  is  yours.  His  power  over  you  is  gone.  For  your  condition  will  be  analogous 
to  that  of  the  innocent  man  in  the  hands  of  tbe  law.  Over  him  the  law  has  no 
power.  All  its  authority,  its  sanctions,  its  penalties  are  on  his  side.  And  so,  if  ye 
be  Christ's,  the  stain  of  guilt  no  longer  rests  upon  you,  and  death  has  no  longer 
any  claim  to  your  person.  It  may  be  still  your  mysterious  fate  to  pass  into  the 
prison-house  of  the  destroyer  ;  but  He  to  whom  you  belong  will  soon  claim  you 
as  one  who,  like  Himself,  connot  be  "  holden  of  death."  And  then  when  "this 
corruptible  shall  put  on  iucorruption,  and  this  mortal  shall  put  on  immortality," 
then  shall  the  believer  discover  the  full  and  blessed  import  of  the  words,  "  Death  is 
yours."  [J.  C'lird,  D.D.)  Cliristian  dnminion  : — In  Gen.  i.  and  ii.  we  learn  that 
according  to  God's  creative  ideal,  man  was  designed  to  subject  all  tilings  to  his  own 
will,  to  have  the  power  of  enjoying  all  things.  But  the  realisation  of  that  was 
subject  to  the  condition  that  man  should  retain  the  form  and  spirit  of  that  Divine 
life  of  which  he  was  created.  Therefore  the  truth  of  the  text  is  that  when  man  is 
restored  to  his  true  character,  he  re -overs  his  original  dominion.     Now  Christ  is  the 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  COEINTHIANS.  309 


Image  of  God;  therefore  to  be  Christ's  is  to  recover  the  oriciual  character  which 
God  created  in  man.  When  it  can  he  said  of  us,  "  Ye  are  Clirist's,"  it  can  also  ba 
said,  "Ye  are  God's,"  and  "all  things  are  youis."  Now  the  two  main  charac- 
teristics in  the  Divine  life  in  Christ  are  light  in  the  understanding,  love  in  the  will 
and  the  heart.  And  we  shall  tind  that  progress  in  enlightenment,  and  sympathy 
makes  man  more  and  more  capable  of  reducing  all  things  to  His  service,  and  of 
drawing  tribute  from  all  things.  I.  The  gifts  of  mex.  1.  "  Paul,  Apollos,  and 
Cephas."  Each  had  his  own  special  power  of  setting  forth  some  aspects  of  the 
Divine  truth.  To  the  narrow-nimded  and  narrow-hearted  these  teachers  were  of  no 
service  ;  but  to  the  enlightened  and  unselllsh  man  the  jDowers  of  thought,  of  feeling, 
and  of  spirit  that  existed  in  these  men  added  to  his  inward  wealth.  2.  This  is  for 
ever  the  case.  Our  abiliiy  to  make  use,  for  our  own  good,  of  the  splendid  gifts  of 
other  men  depends  ui^on  our  own  state  of  heart  and  mind.  For  instance,  the  soul 
of  a  gi'eat  poet  is  a  mine  of  mental  and  of  moral  wealth  to  those  who  can  make 
him  their  own  ;  but  the  coarse,  the  unintellectual  man  cannot  grasp  its  treasures. 
M'hen  Paul's  body  was  bound  by  Nero  at  Rome,  the  apostle  was  nut  possessed  by 
the  brutal  emperor  who  could  not  enter  into  his  ideas  ;  but  the  humblest  Christian 
slave  in  Nero's  household  was  able  to  make  the  genius  of  the  great  apostle  contribute 
to  the  inward  wealth  of  his  own  soul.  II.  The  world.  1.  The  material  form  of 
the  world  becomes  ours  not  by  virtue  of  our  externnl  position  but  of  our  inward 
state  of  heart  and  mind.  The  man  of  cultured  mind  and  heart,  who  knows  the 
inward  life  and  the  hidden  history  of  the  world,  who  looks  at  and  loves  the  glorious 
landscape,  who  sees  every  where  the  signs  of  God's  wisdom  and  power,  who  sees  the 
beauty  of  His  works  ;  and  above  all  he  who  knows  how  to  appreciate  the  greatest  of 
all — the  moral  nature  of  man — is  more  truly  the  owner  of  wide  provinces  of  the 
world  than  a  king  dark  in  mind  and  debased  in  heart.  2.  So  the  wealth  of  the 
world  does  not  belong  to  a  man  really  until  he  has  become  renewed  in  mind  and  in 
heart.  The  narrow-minded,  narrow-hearted  churl  may  have  countless  hoards,  but 
he  is  not  the  master  of  his  money,  but  his  money  is  the  master  of  the  man.  3.  The 
callings,  the  social  intercourse  of  the  world,  do  not  really  belong  to  us  in  the  sense 
of  doing  us  any  good  until  we  are  renewed  in  heart  and  mind.  A  selfish,  Christless 
man  may  have  a  large  practice,  a  lucrative  business,  a  high  social  position,  but  he 
cannot  derive  from  them  any  rich  inward  happiness  ;  but  the  man  who  is  animated 
by  the  spirit  of  Christ,  finds  in  doing  his  every-day  duty  a  resource  that  gives 
strength  and  satisfaction  to  the  whole  being,  and  he  can  say,  "  Mv  me  it  is  to  do  the 
will  of  Him  that  sent  me  and  to  finish  His  work."  III.  Life.  The  desire  tor  life 
is  innate  in  man.  How  shall  I  see  life  ?  is  the  cry  of  the  young  human  heart. 
The  only  answer  is,  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  have  it  more 
abundantly."  Mere  animal  existence  is  not  the  all  of  life.  The  enlightening  of 
the  mind  by  the  rays,  and  the  enlargement  of  the  heart  by  the  ardour  of  that  fire 
of  love  that  came  down  on  Pentecost  give  the  fulness  of  life.  Sensual  and  worldly 
life  as  old  age  creeps  upon  us,  becomes  a  burden,  not  a  treasure.  But  if  we  are 
animated  by  the  spirit  of  Christ  we  have  an  nndecaying  life  that  we  realise  day  by 
day  more  and  more  our  own  possession.  There  are  other  masters  who  wish  to 
supersede  Christ,  that  tell  us  of  life  sensual  and  of  life  intellectual,  but  they 
admit  that  the  life  of  which  they  speak  is  not  to  be  our  own,  and  that  it  is  to 
become  the  spoil  of  the  grave.  Christ  alone  rescues  our  life  from  corruption  and 
makes  it  ours,  ours  for  ever.  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  alone  hast  the 
M'ords  of  eternal  life."  IV.  Death.  If  we  are  living  worldly,  sensual,  thoughtless 
lives,  then  death  is  not  our  possession  but  our  enemy  ;  but  if  we  are  deadt^ning  the 
lower  life  and  giving  ourselves  to  the  life  of  the  spirit  in  Christ  day  by  day,  then 
death  is  ours.  As  the  exile  welcomes  the  white-winged  ship  that  is  to  bear  him 
away  from  the  strange  land  of  his  sojourn  where  he  cannot  find  lasting  rest,  and  to 
take  him  across  the  storm-tossed  waves  of  the  ocean  to  the  calm  shores  where 
stands  the  home  of  his  inheritance,  so  is  the  approach  of  death  to  those  who  are  in 
Christ.  As  is  the  opening  of  the  door  to  the  guest  that  has  long  been  wearily 
waiting  in  the  ante-rocm  of  tli>^  outward  existence  to  be  usheted  into  the  presence- 
chamber  where  he  shail  "  see  the  king  in  his  beauty,"  and  find  the  bounty  of  his 
favour,  so  is  the  approach  of  death  to  those  who  have  been  all  through  their  life 
straining  the  gaze  of  the  soul  to  catch  the  vision  of  the  higher  life.  (Dean 
Jildicards.)  A    Christian''s  portion  : — I.    All   things   are    yolks.       1.    "  Paul, 

Apollos,  Cephas."  Therefore  Peter  is  not  the  head  of  the  Chuich.  He  is  named 
here  in  the  third  pl^ce.  Peter  is  the  Church's,  and  tlierefore  carniot  be  the  head  and 
sommander.     2.  The  world.     (1)  The   woild  natural — the  frame  of   heaven  and 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

earth.  All  things  are  made  for  man,  and  he  is  made  for  God.  They  have  their 
happiness  and  misery  together  with  men  (Rom.  viii.  21).  (2)  The  civil  world. 
The  commonwealth  is  for  the  Church.  Therefore  St.  Paul  bids  us  "  pray  for  kings 
and  princes,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  ii.  2).  Commonwealths  stand  because  the  Church  is 
mingled  with  them.  (3)  The  world  of  wicked  men,  all  their  plots,  and  the  "prince 
of  the  world  "  are  the  Church's.  He  and  all  his  instruments  are  under  the  com- 
mand of  Him  who  turns  all  his  designs  contrary  to  his  own  intention.  3.  Life. 
Why  doth  God  prolong  the  life  of  good  joastors  and  good  people,  but  that  they  may 
be  blessed  instruments  to  convey  truth  to  posterity?  (Phil.  i.  23,  24).  And  so  the 
life  of  good  magistrates  (Acts  xiii.  36).  And  then  our  own  life  is  ours,  in  order  to  a 
better  life,  which  is  the  only  life.  This  present  life  is  nothing  but  a  shadow. 
Again,  life  is  ours,  because  the  time  we  live  here  is  a  seed  time.  This  time  is  given 
us  to  do  a  great  many  good  things  in,  the  harvest  of  which  is  reserved  for  the 
world  to  come.  And  life  is  a  special  benefit,  because  by  the  advantage  of  life  we 
further  our  reckonings  after  death.  A  good  Christian,  the  longer  he  lives,  the  more 
he  soweth  to  the  Spirit.  4.  "Or  death."  Paul  joins  these  together,  for  if  life  be 
not  ours  for  good,  death  will  never  be  ours.  But  if  life  be  ours,  and  we  have  made 
a  blessed  improvement  of  it,  then  death  also  shall  be  ours  (Eev.  xiv.  13).  It  tends 
to  ourbenefit  many  ways.  (1)  It  unclothes  us  of  these  rags,  these  sick,  weak  bodies 
of  ours,  that  occasion  so  much  disquiet  to  our  souls,  and  puts  on  a  new  robe  of 
immortality,  and  garments  of  glory.  It  ends  all  that  is  ill.  (2)  It  ends  labour  in 
our  callings,  and  the  miseries  and  atHictions  that  accompany  them.  Death  is  ours 
because  it  is  our  resting-place.  (3)  It  frees  us  from  wicked  men,  and  sets  us  clear 
out  of  Satan's  reach.  (4)  It  is  a  passage  to  another  world.  It  is  the  gate  of  glory. 
Our  death  is  our  birthday.  For  when  we  die,  we  begin  to  live,  and  we  never  live 
indeed  till  we  die.  Death  is  ours  every  way.  It  is  our  greatest  friend  under  the 
mask  of  an  enen^y.  It  is  a  good  messenger ;  it  brings  good  tidings  when  it 
comes  (Eccles.  vii.  1).  It  is  the  best  physician.  It  cures  all  diseases  whatsoever  of 
soul  and  body.  And,  indeed,  death  is  the  de^ith  of  itself ;  for  after  death  there  is 
no  more  death  (Eom.  vi.  9).  5.  "  Or  things  present."  (1)  The  good  things  present 
are  ours,  for  our  comfort  in  our  pilgrimage  and  passage  towards  heaven  (Titus  i. 
15;  1  Tim.  iv.  4).  (2)  And  as  good  things,  so  ill  things.  AfBictions  are  ours, 
because  they  fit  us  for  a  happier  state  ;  they  exercise  what  is  good  in  us,  and  mortify 
what  is  ill.  6.  Things  to  come — whether  they  be  good  or  evil.  (1)  For  good. 
The  remainder  of  our  life,  that  is  ours  to  be  good  in.  Death  is  to  come,  and  that  is 
ours.  And  judgment,  that  is  ours  ;  for  our  Brother  and  Saviour  shall  be  our  judge 
(1  Cor.  vi.  2).  And  then  after  judgment  heaven  is  ours.  Indeed,  the  bestis  to  come. 
(2)  And  evil  things  to  come  are  ouis  also.  They  cannot  do  us  harm  (Eom.  viii.  35, 
38).  II.  But  we  must  understand  this  with  some  limits.  We  therefore  answer 
some  cases.  1.  It  may  seem  there  is  no  distinction  of  property  if  all  be  a  Christian's. 
If  every  Christian  may  say,  "All  is  mine,"  then  what  is  one  man's  is  another's, 
and  there  will  be  no  property.  Undoubtedly  there  is  a  distinction  of  properties  in 
the  things  of  this  life.  "All  is  ours,"  to  help  us  to  heaven  ;  in  order  to  comfort 
and  happiness.  2.  If  all  is  the  Church's,  nothing  belongs  to  the  wicked.  There- 
fore say  the  Jesuited  pHpists,  the  pope  may  excommunicate  ill  princes.  They  are 
evil  governors  ;  nothing  is  theirs,  all  is  the  Church's.  But  political  government 
is  not  founded  upon  religion,  but  upon  nature  and  free  election,  so  that  the  hpathen 
that  have  no  religion  may  yet  have  a  lawful  government  and  governors.  But  it  is 
further  objected  that  they  succeed  Chri.-t,  &c.,  and  He  was  the  Lord  of  the  world; 
and  therefore  they  may  dispossess  and  invest  whom  they  will.  But  Christ  as  man 
had  no  government  at  all  (.John  sviii.  36),  only  as  God-man,  Mediator  ;  and  so  He 
hath  no  successor.  3.  Doth  not  this  hinder  bounty  ?  It  is  mine,  and  therefore  I 
do  not  owe  any  bounty  unto  others  (1  Sam.  xxv.  11).  However  all  that  we  possess 
is  ours  in  law-,  yet  the  bonds  of  duty,  both  of  humanity  and  religion,  are  larger 
than  the  bonds  of  law.  Therefore  "  all  things  are  ours,"  not  to  possess  all  we 
have,  but  to  use  them  as  He  will  have  them  used,  that  gives  them.  4.  If  all  be 
ours,  we  niay  do  what  we  choose  in  all  things.  Not  so.  There  is  difference 
between  right,  and  the  use  of  that  right.  God's  children  have  right  to  that  which  God 
gives  them,  but  they  have  not  the  use  of  that  right  at  all  times.  Again,  though  all 
be  ours,  yet  we  have  not  a  sanctified  use,  but  by  the  Word  and  prayer  (1  Tim.  iv.  4). 
We  must  take  them  with  God's  leave.  5.  Again,  "  all  things  are  ours."  Therefore 
Iriith,  wheresoever  we  find  it,  is  ours.  {R.  Sibbe--^,  I>.D.)  Glorious  united 
property  : — I.  Chp.ist  is  God's.  1.  God's  Son.  2.  God's  image.  3.  God's  gift. 
4.  God's  great  ordinance  of  salvation.     II.  Ye  abe  Christ's.     1.  Negatively.     (1) 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  311 

You  are  not  the  devil's.  (2)  You  are  not  Moses'.  You  are  not  the  property  of  the 
law.  (8)  You  are  not  Adam's.  His  headship  was  soon  lost.  2.  Positively,  "  Ye  are 
Christ's."  His  property,  His  spouse,  His  members,  His  riches.  His  glory.  III. 
Having  Christ,  we  have  all  things.  I  remember  reading  of  a  lady  looking  over 
certain  treasures  of  the  house.  She  says,  this  is  mine,  and  tbis  is  miue,  and  this 
is  mine.  The  husband  very  pleasantly  smiled,  and  said.  Yes,  my  dear,  all  this  is 
yours,  because  you  are  mine.  Now  all  belongs  to  the  believer  that  belongs  to 
Christ,  officially,  relatively,  and  by  covenant,  and  by  mediation.  1.  All  the  fulness 
stored  up  in  the  person  of  Christ  belongs  to  His  people.  "It  hath  plensed  the 
Father  that  in  Him  all  fulness  should  dwell."  "  Of  His  fulness  we  have  received, 
and  grace  for  grace."  2.  All  the  merit  of  His  work.  3.  All  the  triumphs  of  His 
victories.  (G.  Murrell.)  A  calltothe  titmoxt  e.rjMnisii^eness  ini'eUgioiis  syiiqjathy^ — 
The  Church  has  not  always  treated  its  ministers  rightly.  The  attendants  o^ti  a 
Christian  ministry  may  be  divided  into  —1.  Those  who  esteem  the  doctrine  because 
of  the  teacher.  Paul  seems  to  have  had  those  in  his  eye  when  he  wrote  tbis 
cbapter.  This  is  a  mistake,  as  bad  as  it  is  prevalent.  2.  Those  who  esteem  the 
teacher  because  of  his  doctrines.  A  man  who  preaches  to  them,  they  feel,  is 
estimable  only  as  he  embodies  and  propounds  the  true  doctrines  of  the  gospel. 
The  impropriety  of  glorying  in  teachers,  rather  than  in  their  doctrines,  is  strikingly 
illustrated  by  three  things  in  the  text.  I.  The  universe  is  for  the  Chuech. 
"All  things" — not  some  things.  1.  The  ministry.  "  Whether  Paul,  or  Apollos." 
In  every  way  it  serves  man — intellectually,  socially,  materially.  But  its  grand  aim 
is  to  restore  the  human  spirit  to  God.  Now  this  ministry,  in  all  its  varieties,  is  the 
property  of  the  Church.  Why,  then,  should  it  glory  in  any  one  form  ?  2.  The 
world.  In  the  seuse  of  legal  possession  the  world  of  course  is  not  the  property  of 
Christians,  nor  of  others.  \et  in  the  highest  sense  it  is  the  property  of  the 
Christian.  He  feels  an  intense  sympathy  with  God  who  created  it ;  he  rejoices  in 
it  as  the  workmanship  of  a  Father's  bands,  as  the  expression  of  a  Father's  heart, 
the  revelation  of  a  Father's  wisdom  ar.d  power.  Spiritually  he  appropi-iates  the 
world  to  himself,  he  gathers  up  its  truths,  he  cherishes  its  impressions,  he  drinks 
in  its  Divine  spirit.  3.  Life.  There  are  certain  conditions  in  which  men  cannot  be 
said  to  live.  The  prisoner  under  the  seutence  of  doalh  ;  his  life  belongs  to  the 
avenging  justice  of  his  country.  There  are  others  whose  faculties  are  so  pai-alysed 
they  can  neither  speak  nor  move.  Life  is  not  theirs.  Morally  man  is  dead  in 
trespasses  and  in  sin ;  his  lite  is  not  his.  But  life  is  the  Christian's.  His  sentence 
of  death  is  removed;  his  moral  infirmities  are  healed,  and  he  is  enjoying  the  right 
of  life,  he  is  prosecuting  the  mission  of  life,  he  is  answering  the  grand  purpose  of 
life.  4.  Detith.  It  delivers  from  all  that  is  incompatible  with  our  peace,  safety, 
and  advancement ;  and  introduces  us  into  the  scenes,  the  services,  the  society  of  a 
blessed  inunortality.  It  is  ours  ;  the  last  step  in  the  pilgrima'.'e,  the  last  storm  in  the 
voyage,  the  last  blow  in  the  conflict.  5.  General  events.  "  Things  present,"  what- 
ever their  character — painful  or  jjleasant — are  ours.  "Things  to  come."  What 
things  come  to  us  in  a  day  !  What  things,  therefore,  are  to  come  in  eternity  !  II. 
The  Church  is  for  the  Redeemer.  There  are  two  very  different  senses  in  which 
Christian  men  are  Christ's.  They  are  His — 1.  By  His  relationship  to  them.  He  is 
the  Creator  of  all.  "By  Him  were  all  things  created,  visible  and  invisible,"  &g. 
He  is  the  Mediator  of  all.  "  Ye  ai-e  not  your  own  ;  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price," 
etc.  2.  By  their  plerlge  to  Him.  They  have  pledged  themselves  to  Him  as  their 
moral  Leader.  III.  The  Eedeemek  is  for  God.  Christ  is^l.  God's  Pievealer. 
He  reveals  Him — (1)  In  creation.  God's  creative  plan  was  wrought  out  by  the 
hand  of  Christ ;  He,  as  the  builder  of  the  universe,  revealed  the  mind  of  the 
infinite  Architect.  (2)  In  His  personal  ministry.  He  was  the  Image  of  the 
invisible  God,  the  biightness  of  His  Father's  glory.  2.  God's  Servant.  He  came 
here  to  work  out  God's  great  plan  of  saving  mercy.  Christ  is  God's  Kevealer  and 
Servant  in  a  sense  in  which  no  other  being  iu  the  universe  is,  and  therefore  to  Him 
men  should  give  their  undivided  attention.  Conclusion:  Learn — 1.  The  infinite 
worth  of  Christianity.  It  gives  "all  things"  to  its  true  disciples.  None  of  the 
"  all  things  "  specified  here  are  possessed  by  those  who  are  not  His  genuine 
disciples.     2.  The  contemptibleness  of  religious  sectarianism.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  "WTiether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas. — Tlic  rios2iel  ministry  as  a 
property  : — I  would  say  to  the  Church,  in  relation  to  this  property — I.  Appheciate 
it.  What  on  earth  so  valuable  as  a  true  go-pel  ministry  ?  In  it  you  have,  as  a 
rule,  the  most  richly  cultured  intellect,  the  highest  order  of  genius,  the  most  dis- 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 


interested  seivices,  the  most  sanctified  sympathies.  II.  Protect  it  from  worldly 
cares,  secular  embarrassments,  social  slanders.  Take  care  of  it — it  is  more  precious 
than  gold.  III.  Use  it.  You  have  eternal  treasures  in  these  earthly  vessels. 
Take  care,  and  get  from  them  the  "  pearl  of  great  price."  IV.  Thank  God  foe  it. 
It  is  given  to  you  in  trust.  You  must  give  an  account  at  last.  [Caleb  Morris.) 
Christ  and  thought : — The  text  must  be  regarded  as  a  warning  against-  I.  Intel- 
lectual LEVITY.  L  It  was  far  from  the  intention  of  the  apostle  in  this  Epistle  to 
speak  slightingly  of  knowledge,  or  of  those  gifted  men  who  are  its  mouthpieces. 
True,  he  sptaks  depreciatingly  of  a  certain  wisdom;  but  there  was  another  wisdom, 
on  account  of  which  he  was  prepared  to  suffer  the  loss  of  all  things.  Paul  knew 
that  Christ  had  put  us  into  a  fresh  attitude  of  reverence  towards  the  whole  intel- 
lectual world.  Christ  taught  us — (1)  Tlie  reality  of  truth.  "  What  is  truth  ?  " 
asks  the  .^cofBng  sceptic.  It  is  an  illusion  in  his  view.  Eut  when  Christ  showed 
us  the  Father,  He  taught  us  at  once  the  reality  of  truth,  and  the  truth  of  reality. 
(2)  The  supremacy  of  truth.  "  Art  Thou  a  King,  then  ?  To  this  end  was  I 
born  .  .  .  that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the  truth."  (3)  The  accessibility  of 
truth.  That  the  search  for  truth  is  not  a  vain  search.  2.  And  it  was  no  part  of 
Paul's  purpose  that  the  Corinthians  should  think  lightly  of  their  great  teachers. 
In  fact,  he  gives  those  teachers  a  very  high  j^lace.  "  The  world  "  is  unquestionably 
a  magnificent  thing,  and  the  apostle  puts  great  teachers  into  the  same  category. 
"  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,"  &c.  Intellectual  men  also  declare  the 
glory  of  God,  and  with  an  eloquence  surpassing  that  of  the  stars.  (1)  Let  us 
not,  then,  lightly  esteem  our  intellectual  teachers.  All  the  great  thinkers,  and 
writers,  and  scientists  are  ours.  A  ship  at  sea  is  directed  from  two  points  of  view — 
there  is  the  man  with  the  lead  taking  soundings  from  below,  and  there  is  the  man 
with  the  glass  taking  the  bearings  from  above  ;  so  our  race  is  indebted  for  its  guid- 
ance alike  to  the  science  which  concerns  itself  with  the  jDhysical  world  beneath  us, 
and  to  the  theology  which  contemplates  the  world  above  and  beyond  us.  And  ours 
in  this  matter  is  a  day  of  exceptionally  high  privilege.  Our  easily  accessible 
libraries  bring  all  the  gifted  teachers  close  to  us.  Do  not  neglect  or  despise  this 
splendid  privilege.  (2)  Let  us  not  despise  our  religious  teachers.  It  seems  very 
probable  that  "  the  Christ  party  "  in  Corinth  was  in  danger  of  doing  this.  This  is 
a  mistake.  Each  generation  has  its  gifted  teachers,  and  these  are  to  be  reckoned 
as  God's  choice  gifts  to  His  Church,  and  every  lowlier  teacher  who  speaks  living 
words  has  a  real  value  to  his  age.  A  while  ago  somebody  suggested,  with  a  touch 
of  scorn,  that  preachers  ought  to  be  "  paid  by  results."  "Paid  by  results  1"  How 
the  money  would  roll  in  upon  us !  To  speak  the  word,  at  a  critical  moment,  which 
shall  turn  a  faltering  young  man  or  woman  into  the  path  of  life — how  much  for 
that?  To  utter  thoughts  which  widen  and  purify  a  man's  soul,  and  which  save 
him  from  lapsing  into  a  sordid,  sensual  life — how  much  for  that  ?  To  inspire  with 
fresh  hope  one  sinking  into  grief  and  unbelief  and  despair — how  much  lor  that  ? 
No,  payment  by  results  must  be  left  to  the  great  Paymaster.  II.  Intellectual 
SERVILITY.  1.  Whilst  one  party  amongst  the  Corinthians  set  little  store  by  any  of 
the  great  teachers  of  the  Church,  the  other  three  parties  were  in  danger  of  paying 
these  teachers  exaggerated  homage.  Says  the  noble  apostle :  You  do  not  exist  for 
them ;  they  exist  for  you.  The  apcstle  lias  just  been  remarking  that  the  greatest 
sages  have  been  guilty  of  the  most  serious  errors  ;  he  then  proceeds  :  "  Therefore 
let  no  man  glory  in  men."  The  most  gifted  men  are  not  infallible,  and  conse- 
quently they  are  to  be  followed  wilh  caution.  The  greatest  teachers  are  only 
instrumental.  There  is  a  certain  respect  to  be  paid  to  the  husbandman  who  brings 
forth  j)recious  fruits,  but  we  reserve  our  full  wonder  and  reverence  for  Him  who 
alone  gives  the  increase.  There  must,  then,  be  no  servility  of  soul  in  any  of  the 
congregation  of  the  saints.  No  thinker  must  be  permitted  to  coerce  your  intellect, 
no  theologian  to  dictate  your  creed,  no  ecclesiastic  to  bind  your  conscience.  God 
endows  men  that  they  may  help  and  not  enslave  one  another.  2.  Here  is  a  lesson 
for  us  to-day.  Intellectual  men  are  very  prone  to  lord  it  over  their  less-gifted  or 
less-cultured  brethren.  Sometimes  they  turn  the  republic  of  letters  into  a  tyranny; 
sometimes  they  set  up  lordshii^  in  the  Church.  We  see  this  despotism  in  philosophy. 
We  ai'e  soon  overawed  by,  and  accept  as  gospel,  what  Carlyle  says,  or  Arnold,  or 
Buskin,  or  Huxley,  or  Spencer.  And  we  see  this  despotism  in  religion,  and  in  the 
Roman  Church  in  a  very  pronounced  form.  Now,  our  text  warns  us  against 
such  ignoble  submission.  "We  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  AVe  do  not 
stop  with  Paul,  &C,.  :  we  are  thankful  for  the  stars,  but  it  is  still  our  privilege  to 
have  access  to  the   Central  Luminary;  and  all  believeis,  even  the  humblest  of 


CHAP.  III.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  313 

them,  share  the  illumination.  It  was  given  to  tentmakers  and  fishermen  to  see 
truths  not  seen  by  prophets  and  kings;  it  was  given  to  a  peasant's  son  to  find  for 
Christendom  the  Divine  doctrine  it  had  lost ;  it  was  given  to  a  tinker  in  Bedford  to 
have  visions  of  God  as  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel  had  ;  it  was  given  to  Wesley's  "  ragged 
regiment  "  to  see  truths  of  life  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent  ;  it  was  given  to 
a  Northamptonshire  cobbler  to  seize  afresh  and  to  give  practical  efficacy  to  the 
magnificent  truth  of  the  universality  of  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ.  Evils  may 
arise  out  of  an  exaggerated  individuality,  but  the  right  of  the  individual  to  be 
taught  of  God  is  too  clear  and  too  precious  to  be  relinquished  on  any  pretence 
whatever.  III.  Intellectual  pariiality.  These  four  sects  were  mutually  exclu- 
sive, but  Paul  declares  that  all  the  great  teachers  belong  to  the  whole  Church. 
It  has  been  said  that  an  intellectual  man  ought  to  have  preferences,  but  no  exclu- 
sions ;  the  Christian  may  have  sundry  j^references,  but  he  ought  to  be  ]n-epared  to 
get  light  from  all  who  can  give  it.  He  must  recognise  the  special  truths  insisted 
upon  b}'  philosophy  on  tbe  one  side,  and  by  theology  on  the  other,  and  joyfully 
concede  the  preciousness  of  the  work  wrought  by  the  several  denominations.  Why 
should  we  shut  ourselves  up  to  one  meadow,  when  the  whole  land  is  ours  ;  to  one 
tree,  when  the  forest  is  ours  ;  to  one  constellation,  when  the  whole  firmament  is 
ours?  (W.  L.  WuUdnson.)  Or  tlie  world. — Tlic  uoild  is  i/ours: — It  is— I.  The 
Christian's  teiu'orary  lodging  place  until  God  translates  him  to  a  better 
WORLD.      This  is  the   patriarchal   view ;   they  lived  as  i:)ilgrims   and   strangers. 

II.  The  Christian's  library.  Tliere  are  the  books  of  nature — astronomy,  geology, 
&c. ;    books   of    providence — history   of    nations,   individuals — his   own    history. 

III.  The  Christian's  spiritual  mart.  He  has  much  to  do  both  with  eaith  and 
heaven.  He  is  one  of  Christ's  agents  for  extending  His  cause  and  kingdom  in  this 
world.  A  Christian  cannot  be  talkative ;  he  has  too  much  to  do.  I\' .  The 
Christian's  school-rooji.  In  this  school  he  is  taught,  especially  on  the  Lord's 
Day.  Ministers  are  teachers.  The  Spirit  instructs  by  the  Word.  Providence  is  a 
great  teacher,  so  are  children.  Christ  placed  a  child  in  the  midst  of  His  disciples 
to  teach  them  humility.  He  places  sluggards  under  the  tuition  of  the  ant ;  and 
the  ungrateful  must  take  lessons  from  the  ox  and  the  ass.  V.  The  Chrintian's 
BATTLEFIELD.  No  battlefield  in  heaven,  it  is  a  palace  ;  no  battlefield  in  hell,  it  is  a 
prison.  This  world  to  Christ  was  a  batth-field.  It  is  only  in  this  world  that 
Christians  have  to  "fight  the  good  fight  of  faith."  VI.  The  Christian's  place 
for  moral  cleansing  and  adornment.  He  who  has  to  stand  in  the  xjresence  of 
God  and  the  Lamb,  must  be  washed  and  properly  dressed.  Priests,  Levites, 
washed  in  the  laver  outside  the  holy  place,  were  robed  and  dressed  before  officiating 
in  the  presence  of  God.  "Heaven  is  a  prepared  place  for  a  prepared  people." 
There  are  no  means  of  saving,  justifying,  and  cleansing  sinners,  but  in  this  woild. 
VII.  The  Christian's  road  to  heaven.  Two  roads  in  this  world — the  broad  road 
leading  to  destruction,  the  narrow  way  that  leads  to  life  everla-ting.  Let  us  fear 
lest  we  should  miss  tlie  way.  Alongside  the  Christian's  way  there  flows  the  river 
of  life ;  be  constantly  drinking  its  waters,  and  rejoicing  you  will  go  on  your  way  to 
the  heavenly  world,  (J.  liohertson,  M.A.)  That  the  tchole  ivurld,  with  all  tltiiifjs 
therein,  is  for  tlie  spiritual  advantage  of  a  nodhj  man: — He  may  say  of  the  whole 
universe,  all  this  is  mine  for  the  advantage  of  my  soul  one  way  or  other.  Come 
we,  therefore,  to  show  in  how  many  particulars  we  may  say  the  wh  de  world  is  a 
godly  man's  ;  it  is  for  his  use — Fiist,  it  is  the  godly  man's  school  or  academy  ;  it 
is  his  study  or  library.  The  heavens  and  all  things  therein  are  so  manv  books, 
whereby  he  admireth  the  wisdom  of  God  (Eom.  1.).  Secondly,  the  world  is  a 
godly  man's,  because  everything  therein  is  given  him  for  his  necessary  use. 
Though  he  hath  not  everything,  yet  he  hath  as  much  as  is  needful  to  him.  If 
you  take  a  man  into  your  house  and  bid  him  call  for  what  he  will,  he  may  com- 
mand everything  in  the  house,  though  he  doth  not  call  for  all  things,  bat  what  is 
for  his  use — that  is,  as  if  he  had  all.  And  thus  the  whole  world  is  for  a  godly 
man.  What  wealth,  what  honours,  what  health,  is  necessary  and  needful,  he  is 
sure  to  have.  He  that  dwelleth  by  the  ocean,  he  hath  all  the  water  in  the  sea  for 
his  use,  though  it  is  not  necessary  he  should  make  use  of  it  all.  He  that  hath  the 
use  of  anything,  hath  the  thing.  Thirdly,  the  world  is  a  godly  man's,  as  his  shop 
and  place  of  service.  It  is  that  wherein  he  works  and  labouis  for  God.  It  is  the 
great  shop  for  mankind  to  do  that  work  God  hath  appointed  them.  It  is  the  great 
vineyard,  in  which  God  hath  set  every  man  to  work.  This  world  is  for  doing  ;  the 
world  to  come  for  receiving.  Fourthly,  the  world  is  a  godly  man's  inn  or  lodying- 
place.     It  is  a  provition  God  makes  for  a  season,  till  they  are  ripe  for  heaven. 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

Thus  the  godly  are  often  compared  to  pilgrims  and  strangers.  Fifthly,  the  godly 
have  the  world  as  tlie  stage  or  artillery-yard — a  place  of  exercise,  wherein  all  their 
graces  are  to  be  drawn  out  by  the  opposition  therein.  To  be  quickened  to  the 
height  of  all  thy  graces,  by  how  much  more  the  combat  and  conflict  thou  hast,  is 
exceeding  great.  The  greatness  of  the  tempest  will  discover  the  great  art  of  the 
pilot.  Sixthlyj  the  world  is  a  Rodly  man's,  because  all  things  therein  are  sanctified 
and  made  clean  to  his  use.  The  objection,  then,  is,  why  have  the  godly  the  least 
possession  of  it,  if  they  have  the  sanctified  use  of  it  ?  Doth  not  David  comjjlain 
that  wicked  men  have  the  fatness  of  the  earth  ?  To  answer  this  you  must  know 
that  even  those  wicked  men,  wlio  are  said  to  have  the  world  at  their  will,  yet  they 
have  not  the  world  indeed,  they  have  it  not  as  the  godly  men.  "  The  little  that 
the  righteous  hath,  is  better  than  great  tieasures  of  the  wicked  "  (Psa.  xxxvii.  16). 
First,  whutsoever  the  wicked  man  hath,  he  hath  it  in  wrath  ;  it  cometli  from 
God's  anger.  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  all  the  day  long.  Secondly, 
wicked  men  have  not  the  world,  because  they  are  overcome  by  it ;  the  world  hath 
them  rather.  Thirdly,  wicked  men  have  not  the  world,  because  they  do  not  own 
and  acknowledge  God  as  the  Giver  of  all;  neither  do  they  live  to  Him,  but  the 
things  of  the  world  are  instrumeuts  to  draw  out  their  lusts,  to  make  them  the 
more  wicked.  They  take  the  good  creatures  of  God,  and  abuse  them  to  wickedness. 
The  very  air,  the  very  earth,  is  weary  of  them  ;  yea,  the  timber  in  the  house,  and 
the  stones  of  the  wall  do  witness  against  tliem ;  they  are,  by  the  things  of  the 
world,  made  more  wicked.  Lastly,  they  have  not  the  world,  because  they  have 
not  an  holy  contentation  of  mind  ;  they  are  not  quiet  or  satisfied  in  their  condition. 
{A.    Burgess.)  That    godly  men   do  only   live,    or  the   godly   only  do   make  a 

spiritual  use  of  their  life  :  —  1.  That  only  godly  mex  live.  First,  the  godly  man 
only  liveth,  because  be  is  united  to  God  and  Christ,  the  fountain  of  life.  David 
doth  often  style  God  "the  fountain  of  life"  (Psa.  xxxvi.  9).  And  in  His  favour 
there  is  life.  And  in  the  i^ew  Testament,  especially  by  John,  Christ  is  made  the 
Author  of  all  life.  Secondly,  only  the  godly  man  liveth,  because  he  hath  a  spiritual 
and  a  new  life  added  to  his  animal  life.  Thirdly,  the  godly  man  only  liveth, 
because  he  only  hath  the  true  blessedness  and  comfort  of  this  life.  He  only 
hath  true  joy  and  peace  of  conscience,  and  this  only  the  Scripture  calls  life. 
Fourthly,  the  godly  only  live,  or  life  is  theirs,  because  they  only  know  how  to 
imi:)rove  the  days  of  their  life  for  God.  Fifthly,  life  is  on'y  the  godly  man's, 
because  he  hath  an  interest  in  eternal  life.  He  hath  passed  from  death  unto  life 
(John  V.  24).  He  shall  never  die  that  liveth  this  life.  Sixthly,  the  godly  man 
only  liveth,  because  he  taketh  his  life  from  God,  and  referreth  it  to  His  glory. 
"Whether  we  live,  we  live  to  the  Lord,"  said  Paul  (Rom.  xiv.  8).  Seventhly,  the 
righteous  only  live,  because  they  mortify  and  subdue  those  sins  that  kill  our  bodies, 
that  take  away  our  lives.  Lastly,  the  godly  man  only  liveth,  because,  even  in  the 
last  breathings  of  this  life, his  hopes  and  comforts  do  most  remain.  "The  righteous 
hath  hope  in  his  death"  (Prov.  xiv.  32).     And  this  hope  is  called  a  lively  hope. 

II.    How    CAN    IT    BE    SAID    THAT    THE    WICKED    DO    NOT   LIVE,    W'HEN    THEY   AKE     SAID     TO 

HAVE  THEiB  PORTION  CHIEFLY  IN  THIS  LIFE  ?  1.  They  are  dead  in  their  sins,  and 
hereby  their  faith,  their  religion,  their  Christianity  is  all  dead.  2.  They  do  not 
live,  because  they  are  in  a  condemned  estate  ;  they  are  appointed  to  wrath. 
3.  They  do  not  live,  because  all  their  time  is  lost,  so  all  the  time  of  a  man's 
unregeneracy  is  no  life.  4.  They  make  everything  an  instruuient  of  death — their 
health,  their  wealth,  their  honours,  are  all  deadly  herbs  in  the  pot;  their  tongue 
speaks  the  words  of  death  ;  their  hands  work  the  works  of  death.  {Ibid.)  The 
world  is  yours: — 1.  It  is  useful  as  well  as  curious  to  observe  under  what  different 
aspects  the  world  is  surveyed  by  different  persons.  The  jjolitician  considers  it  as 
the  scene  of  political  chauges  ;  the  soldier,  as  the  field  of  war  ;  the  man  of  busi- 
ness, as  the  place  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth  ;  the  gay  and  dissolute  estimate  it 
by  its  pleasures.  2.  But  each  of  these  estimates  is  essentially  erroneous.  The 
Word  of  God  affords  the  only  criterion  by  which  we  can  form  a  just  judgment  of 
the  world.  Instructed,  therefore,  by  the  light  of  Scripture,  the  Christian  looks 
upon  the  world  as  fallen,  and  under  a  curse  ;  but  by  the  same  Divine  light  he  dis- 
covers that  God,  in  His  great  mercy,  has  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  save  and 
raise  it.  3.  Every  Christian,  therefore,  views  the  present  world  not  merely  as  it  is 
in  itself,  but  as  it  is  connected  with  this  great  plan  of  salvation  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Its  aspect  is  thus  totally  changed  ;  it  becomes  a  school  of  discipline,  in  which  God 
places  the  heirs  of  salvation  for  their  improvement  and  growth  in  grace  ;  a  theatre 
of  instruction,  in  which  are  continually  exhibited  striking  examples  of  the  truth 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  COIilNTHIANS.  315 

and  excellencj'  of  God's  precepts,  the  vanity  of  earthly  pursuits,  and  the  folly  and 
evil  of  sin  ;  a  scene  for  the  display  of  the  bounty  and  goodness  of  God  to  those 
whom  Clirist  h;is  received  as  His  disciples.  4.  Thus  "  the  world  is  yours,"  It 
is  intended  for  your  use;  it  is  adorned  for  your  eujoyment ;  it  was  never  formed  to 
gratify  the  purposes  of  ambition,  to  satiate  the  lust  of  wealth,  to  be  a  scene  of 
dissipation  and  unhallowed  pleasure.  The  world  is  abused  whenever  it  is  used  for 
these  purposes.  But  yours  is  the  world  who  use  it  for  those  ends  for  which  its 
gracious  Creator  formed  it  ;  who  survey  its  scenery,  its  mountains,  Ac;  and  feel 
that  they  are  yours  because  they  were  made  by  your  Father.  The  world  is  yours 
who  receive  the  bounty  of  Heaven  with  a  thankful  heart,  and  employ  it,  as  God 
has  intended,  to  your  own  lawful  advantage  and  the  good  of  others.  Tlie  world  is 
yours  to  enjoy  it  with  moderation,  tliankful  for  the  conveniences  it  affoids  you 
while  a  pilyrim  and  a  stranger  in  it,  in  your  way  to  a  better  and  heavenly  country. 
The  world  is  yours  who  enjoy  the  blessing  of  God  upon  all  your  possessions  and 
occupations  in  it,  and  possess  in  your  souls  "  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth 
all  understanding."     (J.  ]'enn,  M.A.)         Chrixt  and  nature  : — I.  LiiT  ns  seek  to 

ESTABLISH    THE    TRUTH    OF   THE    TEXT — THAT    THE  WOULD  IS  OUKS.       Many  ridicule  this 

assertion.  The  conception  that  tiie  earth  was  the  centre  of  the  universe  has  been 
entirely  disproved.  Now,  man  imagines  himself  to  be  the  centre  of  the  universe 
of  things,  the  end  for  which  the  whole  creation  has  groaned  and  travailed  through 
countless  ages,  and  groans  and  travails  still.  This  view  is  declared  to  be  an  insane 
egotism.  Let  us  see.  1.  The  world  is  realised  only  in  man.  It  was  only  a  mass 
of  dark  force,  a  dance  of  atoms,  a  whirlpool  of  vibrations,  until  Adam  came.  The 
universe  is  revealed  only  in  the  sense  and  in  the  thought  of  humanity.  2.  The 
world  is  comprehended  only  by  man.  Geology  makes  the  world  of  the  past  ours  ; 
astronomy  makes  the  worlds  above  our  head  ours  ;  a  score  of  sciences  make  the 
world  at  our  feet  ours.  The  world  is  ours,  for  we  compreliend  its  laws,  perceive 
its  unity,  mark  its  developments,  rejoice  in  all  its  wonderful  movements  and  mani- 
festations. A  thing  is  pre-eminently  made  for  the  mind  which  comprehends  it. 
3.  The  world  is  claimed  only  by  man.  Man  instinctively^  acts  as  it  the  whole 
world  belonged  to  him.  Ages  ago  the  Psalmist  celebrated  the  splendid  sovereignty 
of  man  :  "  Ihou  niadest  him  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  Thy  hands  ; 
Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet."  And  the  fact  is  not  less  apparent  to-day. 
Each  living  creature  keeps  within  its  narrow  world,  but  men  with  telescope,  micro- 
scope, spectroscope,  go  forth  to  claim  the  wide  universe.  If  men  acknowledge 
that  the  material  realm  has  a  centre,  a  master,  an  end,  they  are  compelled  to 
recognise  that  humanity  alone  meets  tlie  reijuirements  of  the  case.  If  you  take 
away  man  you  must  put  what  is  inferior  in  his  place.  II.  Let  us  show  how  ix 
Christ  we  realise  our  property  in  created  things.  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things 
put  under"  man.  He  has  dropped  the  sceptre,  or  it  has  been  wrested  from  him. 
But  in  Christ  the  government  of  the  world  is  being  restored  to  us.  To  illustrate 
this,  look  at — 1.  The  Christian  creed.  (1)  About  God.  In  Egypt,  in  Greece,  in 
Rome,  the  powers  of  nature  were  regarded  hs  Divine,  and  the  God  that  is  above 
was  denied  (Job  xxxi.  2G-28).  Now,  Christianity  delivers  us  from  this  tyranny  of 
superstition,  by  making  manifest  to  us  "the  God  that  is  above. "  "  You  are  the 
world's,"  says  a  sceptical  science,  reducing  us  to  a  sad  iilolatry,  a  sad  slavery. 
The  world,  like  fire,  is  a  grand  servant,  but  a  bad  master.  "  You  are  God's,"  says; 
Christ.  He  fixes  our  eye  on  the  God  of  heaven ;  He  tells  us  that  God  made  the 
world  for  us,  that  He  rules  it  for  us,  and  just  as  we  hold  to  that  doctrine  anil  serve 
God,  so  shill  the  w-orld  be  ours,  ministering  to  our  utmost  satisfaction  of  soul  and 
sense.  (2)  About  man.  Some  of  our  teachers  love  to  exalt  nature  at  the  expense 
of  man.  They  remind  us  of  the  vastness,  force,  and  duration  of  the  universe, 
as  agiinst  our  limitation,  weakness,  and  mortality.  And  when  they  have 
done  this,  it  is  easy  to  add:  "  Y''ou  are  the  world's;  it  is  everything,  you  are 
nothing."  But  Christianity  asserts  with  mighty  emphasis  the  dignity  of  human 
nature.  There  is  an  element  in  us  that  is  not  m  the  universe  ;  an  element  vaster, 
for  it  dreams  of  infinity  ;  stronger,  for  it  for'*es  nature  to  do  its  bidding  ;  more 
abiding,  for  it  claims  immortality.  The  dignity  of  man  has  been  demonstrated 
by  the  fact  of  the  Incarnation.  God  will  see  a  sun  go  out  as  we  see  a  spark,  but 
Bethlehem  and  Calvary  declare  that  the  redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious.  2. 
Christian  character.  What  humanity  has  lost  of  authority  over  nature  through 
ignorance,  lust,  pride,  sloth,  covetousness,  violence,  cruelty,  it  shall  recover  through 
Christ  in  humility,  kindness,  wisdom,  earnestness,  truth,  and  love.  Through  right- 
eousness  shall   we   become   heirs   of   the  world.      More   righteousness,   and  our 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 


dominion  shall  extend  over  the  vast,  wild,  mysterious  forces  of  the  material  uni- 
verse ;  more  righteousnes-!,  and  the  birds  of  the  air,  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall 
become  our  loyal  subjects  as  we  do  not  now  dream  ;  more  righteousness,  and 
desert  places  shall  blossom  as  the  rose.  3.  Christian  civilisation.  (1)  How  does 
it  come  to  pass  that  science  should  have  attained  to  such  perfection  in  Christendom? 
Science  sprang  up  ages  ago  in  China,  but  it  soon  became  an  aborted,  arrested 
thing  ;  it  flashed  out  with  the  Moors,  only  to  sink  again  into  the  darkness  of 
paganism.  How  is  it  that  it  is  not  found  where  Buddhism  reigns,  or  Confucianism, 
or  Mohammedanism?  Christ  has  girded  our  scientific  men,  although  some  of 
them  know  Him  not.  The  glorious  science  which  is  making  the  world  ours,  is 
ours  because  Christ  is  ours.  (2)  How  does  it  come  to  pass  that  the  commerce, 
which  is  realising  the  riches  of  the  world,  should  have  sprung  up  and  come  to 
such  wonderful  perfection  in  Christendom?  It  is  because  Christ  has  set  up 
amongst  us  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness  that  all  things  are  being 
added  unto  us.  Conclusion — 1.  If  the  world  is  ours,  let  us  carefully  claim  it. 
Tliere  would  be  less  "godless  science  "  if  religious  people  more  directly  and  fully 
put  in  their  claim  to  nature.  If  you  notice  a  piece  of  unclaimed  ground  anywhere, 
somebody  will  shoot  his  rubbish  there ;  and  so  if  we  neglect  to  claim  nature  for 
God,  an  atheistical  science  will  soon  accumulate  its  rubljish  there.  Be  sure  you 
realise  all  that  creation  will  give  and  teaL-h.  Enjoy  all  its  physical  fruits  and 
treasures  so  far  as  they  may  be  given  unto  you.  Then,  remember  its  intellectual 
ministry.  It  is  to  enrich  thought,  to  exalt  and  expand  the  mind,  to  kmdle  the 
imagination  and  feeling.  But,  above  and  beyond  all  this,  nature  has  a  ministry  to 
our  spirit.  Our  Lord  showed  us  this.  'What  lessons  He  found  in  the  lily  and  in 
the  bird  !  &c.  "  The  world  is  ours."  It  is  a  magazine  of  instruments  for  our  ser- 
vice ;  it  is  a  school  full  of  diagrams  for  our  instruction  ;  it  is  a  sanctuary  whose 
grand  sj'mbols,  properly  interpreted,  are  sacraments  indeed.  Man  was  not  made 
for  the  world,  but  the  world  for  man,  and  we  must  be  careful  to  realise  all  the 
wealth  and  blessing  of  our  great  inheritance.  2.  Does  any  one  object,  "  But  this 
proprietorship  is  all  visionary — how  can  a  man  without  a  foot  of  land  say,  the 
world  is  mine  ?"  To  say  that  the  fields  and  hills  are  ours  only  when  we  have  cer- 
tain parchments  made  out  in  our  name,  and  locked  up  in  our  iron  safe,  that  is  the 
artificial  proprietorship.  That  is  truly  ours  which  enlarges  our  mind,  rejoices  our 
heart,  purifies  our  life.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Or  life,  or  death. — Life  and  death  are 
yours : — I.  Life  is  youks.  1.  It  is  obvious  that  St.  Paul  does  not  mean  that  any 
one  is  supreme  over  the  events  or  circumstances  of  his  life.  Save  in  so  far  as 
virtue  conducts  to  health  and  prosperity,  there  is,  in  this  sense,  but  one  end  and 
course  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  2.  St.  John  wrote  in  Patmos,  "He  hath 
made  us  kings."  This  royalty  was  uni;ouched  by  trsnsportation  and  imprisonment. 
This  is  a  sufficient  commentary  upon  the  test.  Life  is  yours  still,  whatever  its 
condition.  You  are  not  its  slave  because  it  is  adverse.  The  man  who  can  say,  "I 
have  learned  tbe  great  secret,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content " ; 
"  I  am  in  the  hand  of  God,  and  God  is  my  Father  "—is  a  king  in  reference  to  that 
life,  and  every  part  of  it.  But  this  empire  of  the  man  over  his  own  life  is  the 
privilege  of  him  alone  who  recognises  Clirist's  empire  over  him.  "  Life  is  yours, 
and  ye  are  Christ's."  Give  yourself  to  Him,  and  then  life  is  yours.  (1)  For  enjoy- 
ment. A  Christian  living  his  Christianity  is  a  happy  man.  He  has  a  sense  of 
safety,  of  indei^endence,  of  dignity,  and  of  tranquility,  in  his  life ;  and  those  two 
other  delightful  things,  the  sense  of  being  cared  for,  and  the  sense  of  having  a 
secret — "  For  the  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him  " — a  secret  of 
explanation,  and  (better  still)  of  confidence,  between  himself  and  One  "whom  to 
know  is  eternal  life  " — which  must  give  a  joy  to  the  most  sorrowful  of  his  experi- 
ences, and  fully  justify,  in  point  of  happiness,  the  apostle's  saying  to  him  "  Life  is 
yours."  (2)  For  improvement.  If  to  be  conscious  of  growth  in  anything,  know- 
ledge of  a  language,  or  skill  in  a  game,  or  insiyhfc  into  a  science,  &c.,  is  one  of  the 
purest  pleasures  of  which  this  human  nature  is  capable — what  must  it  be  to  know 
oneself  the  recipient  of  Divine  grace,  for  illimitable  progress  in  all  that  is  beautiful 
and  lovely  and  of  good  report  ?  (3)  For  communication.  Wlien  once  the  thought 
has  entered,  "  I  am  not  my  own,  I  am  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's,"  with  it  there 
comes  the  rfcoUection,  I  am  not  only  the  recipient,  I  am  also  the  transmitter  of 
life.  You  can  help  others  to  live.  Your  very  look  and  voice  mny  be  a  help  to 
them.  Your  happiness,  strength,  integrity,  loving  and  holy  influence,  may, 
through  grace,  quicken  into  newness  of  life  some  dead  soul.  II.  Death  is  toues. 
1,  ^Yllo  i-hall  echo  this?     'Who  that  has  seen  death  can  do  so  with  any  feeling  of 


CHAP,  iir.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  317 


truth?  No,  rather  we  say,  as  St.  Paul  (in  a  different  connexion)  says,  Death 
reigns.  Death  is  the  hmit  of  our  free  action,  as  well  as  the  terminus  of  our  long 
journey.  All  may  be  ours  up  to  death,  but  not  further.  2.  How  shall  we  interpret 
this  which  is  here  written  as  to  our  ownership  of  death?  (1)  Your  own  death  is 
yours,  {(i)  Death  is  the  master  of  the  fallen  being,  as  fallen.  It  makes  every 
plan  precarious.  How  soon  must  this  right  hand  lose  its  cunning !  There  is  not 
a  purchase  which  can  be  more  than  a  f<-w  years'  possession,  because  of  this  reign 
of  death  over  the  individual.  Hence  that  feverish  eagerness  in  crowding  two 
years'  work  or  ten  years'  work  into  one.  (b)  It  is  into  existences  thus  circum- 
stanced that  St.  Paul  bears  the  startling  explanation  of  the  gospel,  "  Death  is 
yours."  Instead  of  thus  cowering  and  grovelling  before  the  grim  phantom,  play 
the  man.  Death  is  yours.  Take  it  betimes  for  your  possession,  and  it  shall  be 
great  gain.  Look  to  it  as  the  goal  and  prize  of  your  being ;  expect  it  as  the  admis- 
sion into  a  presence  which  is  the  fulness  of  joy,  and  you  will  find  its  very  name 
and  nature  transfigured.  See  it  as  the  gate  of  life,  and  it  shall  be  yours,  not  you 
its,  while  you  live;  and  it  shall  be  yours,  not  you  its,  when  you  come  to  die. 
(2)  Th3  death  of  others  is  yours,  (a)  We  are  apt,  by  fallen  nature,  to  see  our- 
selves cruelly  vanquished  by  the  onslaught  of  death  upon  those  we  love.  Many 
who  could  face  their  own  death  witli  something  better  than  fortitude,  are 
yet  conquered  by  death  when  he  assails  them  through  another.  {b)  Yet  in 
Christ  we  still  own  the  dead.  They  are  ours,  not  in  hope  only  of  reunion, 
but  in  possession  too  and  fruition.  Our  richest  stores  of  all  must  surely 
be  those  which  are  the  most  safely  garnered.  Our  most  real  heirlooms  are 
the  memories  and  the  affections  of  the  dead.  Death  has  set  his  seal  upon 
them.  Wliat  they  were,  in  faith  and  patience,  in  wisdom  and  beauty,  in 
grace  and  love — that  are  they  for  ever,  that  are  they  to  us.  [Dean  Vaiinhan.) 
Christ  and  life  :— ^Ye  maintain  that  life  is  ours  as  against — I.  The  fatalist,  who 
teaches  that  we  are  the  slaves  of  time,  place,  organisation,  and  circumstance.  Our 
personal  life  is  sacrificed  to  the  exigencies  of  nature  and  humanity ;  just  as  the 
Egyptian  tyrant  made  slaves  of  the  Israelites,  and  compelled  them  to  build  the 
pyramids,  so  we  are  simply  tools  in  the  hands  of  necessity,  building  strange 
structures  which  at  Inst  are  sepulchres.  In  opposition  to  this,  the  apostle  declares 
that  "  life  is  ours  " — our  servant,  with  a  hundred  hands,  enriching  us  with 
measureless  blessings.  Christ  liberates  us  from  the  bondage  of  the  outside  world. 
Science  is  man  asserting  his  liberty  as  against  nature ;  history  is  man  asserting 
his  liberty  as  against  the  despotism  of  climate,  situation,  and  material  fortune;  and 
Christian  life  is  man  asserting  his  personal  liberty  as  against  hereditary  influences 
and  current  circumstances,  and  using  these  in  such  a  way  that  they  build  up  his 
character  in  the  full  power  and  beauty  of  righteousness.  Man  apart  from  Christ 
is  too  often  the  manifest  creature  of  circumstances — success  inflates  him  ;  failure 
crushes  him  ;  darkness  makes  a  worm  of  him  ;  and  sunshine  a  butterfly.  But  in 
Christ  life  becomes  ours,  and  we  use  it  towards  the  attainment  of  that  ideal  moral 
perfection  which  is  the  mark  of  the  prize  of  our  high  calling.  You  are  not  the 
poor  vassals  of  outside  forces,  you  are  not  sacrificed  to  the  type,  yon  are  not  insig- 
nificant as  the  coral  worm  which  builds  the  reef  and  perishes  in  the  depths,  you 
are  free  to  use  the  world,  and  to  be  served  by  it  in  tiie  very  largest  and  grandest 
sense.  The  bee  does  not  find  honey  in  every  flower,  nor  the  diver  a  gem  in  every 
shell,  but,  in  Christ  all  things  are  yours,  and  every  emotion  within,  every  action  and 
circumstance  without,  shall  strengthen  and  refine.  II.  The  pessimist,  who  holds 
that  life  is  our  foe,  that  to  live  is  a  misfortune.  It  is  little  matter  whether  you  are 
rich  or  poor  ;  life  is  weeping;  the  rich  man  wipes  his  eyes  with  a  silk,  the  poor  man 
with  a  cotton  handkerchief,  and  it  doesn't  much  matter.  It  is  little  matter  whether 
you  are  wise  or  ignorant ;  perhaps  it  is  better  to  be  ignorant,  since  he  who  increaseth 
knowledge  increaseth  sorrow.  Froude  writes  of  Carlyle,  "Every  day  he  told  me 
he  was  weary  of  life,  and  spoke  wistfully  of  the  old  Roman  method.  Increasing 
weakness  only  partially  tamed  him  into  patience,  or  reconciled  him  to  an  existence 
which,  even  at  its  best,  lie  had  more  despised  than  valued."  John  S.  Mill  says  his 
father  "  thought  human  life  a  poor  thing  at  best,  after  the  freshness  of  youth  and 
of  unsatisfied  curiosity  had  gone  by.  .  .  .  He  would  sometimes  say,  that  if  life 
were  made  what  it  might  be,  by  good  government  and  good  education,  it  would  be 
worth  having;  but  he  never  spoke  with  anything  like  enthusiasm  even  of  that  possi- 
bility." Miss  Martineau  says,  "You  will  feel  at  once  how  earnestly  I  must  be 
longing  for  death — I,  who  never  loved  life,  and  who  would  any  day  of  my  life  have 
rather  departed  than  staj'ed.     Well !  it  can  hardly  go  on  very  well  much  longer 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTItATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

now.  But  I  do  wish  it  was  permitted  to  us  to  judge  for  ourselves  a  little  how  long 
we  ought  to  carry  on  the  task  which  we  never  desired  and  could  not  refuse."  That 
is,  she  wishes  that  suicide  were  permitted.  "  The  world's  winter  is  going,  I  hope, 
but  my  everlasting  winter  has  set  in."  Thus  sadly  wrote  George  Eliot.  Now,  in 
oi^position  to  all  this,  the  text  declares  that  in  Christ  "life  is  ours."  The  New 
Testam  nt  everywhere  holds  human  life  as  a  precious  and  blessed  thing.  Not  that 
Christianity  fails  to  recognise  the  sad  element  in  human  life.  Yet,  in  face  of  a 
groaning  and  wailing  creation,  it  maintains  that  life  is  the  crowning  benediction, 
to  be  p  ized  l)y  us  all,  to  be  held  fast  ^ith  gratitude  and  wonder  and  hope.  And 
living  in  Christ  we  prove  that  life  is  a  blessing.  Christ  makes  man  to  rejoice  in 
life — 1.  By  discovering  a  grt-at  purpose  in  it — the  perfection  of  our  immortal  spirit, 
through  the  love  of  God  and  the  keeping  of  His  commandments.  Here  is  some- 
thing to  live  for.  2.  By  putting  a  great,  strength  into  it.  "  I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ,  who  strengtheneth  me."  3.  By  putting  a  great  love  into  it.  The 
great  curse  of  life  is  egotism,  selfishness.  If  our  pessimists  would  only  leave  their 
selfish  moonings  ami  lay  themselves  out  to  help,  and  bless  all  who  are  about  them, 
it  would  soon  change  iheir  philosophy.  III.  The  sensualist.  There  is  an  idea 
abroad  that  life  belongs  to  the  man  who  lives  to  the  end  of  self-indnlgence.  To  see 
the  world  of  animal  indulgence  is  spoken  of  as  "  seeing  life."  One  following  a 
course  of  licence  is  said  to  be  "  fond  of  life."  Such  life  is  called  "  fast  life,"  "  gay 
life,"  and  those  who  live  it  say  to  the  Christian,  "  You  have  some  advantage  now, 
you  have  also  great  expectaiions  beyond,  but  surely  this  life  here  and  now  is  ours." 
This  we  deny.  Life,  here  and  now,  is  ours — it  is  our  inheritance  who  walk  not 
a  ter  the  flesh,  but  after  the  spirit.  A  man  who  merely  lives  on  the  carnal  side 
misses  the  real  depth  and  fulness  of  life.  You  may  say  that  tlie  Greenlnnder  is 
alive,  and  that  he  enjoys  life  ;  but  v\h>it  a  different  thing  from  the  lite  of  Europe  ! 
And  the  spiritual  life  of  man  goes  still  beyond.  Now,  the  man  who  knows  not  this 
life,  kn^ws  not  thn  true  life  of  man — living  for  meat  and  drink  and  raiment,  he  is 
dead  while  he  liveth.  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death — the  death  even  now  of  the 
finer  faculties  of  the  living  soul.  Christ  enables  us  to  realise  life  in  all  its  fulness. 
1.  The  life  of  the  senses  is  ours  in  Christ.  He  is  "  the  Lord  of  the  body,"  and  as 
we  live  to  Him  the  sensational  life  becoujes  ours.  The  very  restraint  and  modera- 
tion which  the  Christian  creed  imposes  on  all  material  enjoyment  only  puts  us  in 
fuller  possession  of  that  enjoyment.  We  b'se  our  life  to  find  it.  2.  Christ.leaves 
us  free  to  expatiate  throtij-h  the  whole  intellectual  world.  3.  And,  most  of  all.  He 
brings  out  that  Divine  nature  of  ours  in  which  we  most  truly  and  gloriously  live. 
As  the  summer  shines  on  the  bimlscape,  and  brings  green  leaves  out  of  the  barren 
stems,  full  flowers  from  the  sleeping  bulbs,  smging  birds  from  the  silent  woods,  a 
world  of  sweet  smells  and  bright  colours  and  rich  music,  so  Christ  acts  upon 
human  nature,  realising  its  instincts,  its  faculties,  its  powers,  making  it  to  blossom 
as  the  rose,  to  stretch  its  wings  like  the  eagle,  to  thrill  with  joyouo  feeling  as  the 
harp  with  many  strings.  Our  modern  poet  tells  that  "more  life  and  fuller"  is 
what  we  most  need.  Purely  we  find  this  in  Christ.  He  came  that  we  might  have 
life,  and  that  we  might  have  it  more  abundantly.  IV.  The  ascetic,  who  denies  to 
the  Christian  the  pleasures  of  life  ;  he  considers  that  the  more  meagre,  starved, 
and  sad  our  life  is,  the  safer  and  better  it  is,  and  the  nearer  to  the  true  ideal.  Let 
us  remember  that  in  Christ  ''life  is  ours" — all  good,  bright,  glad  things.  And  life 
shall  be  ever  brighter  with  us  to  the  perfect  day.  True  life  implies  constant 
renunciation,  but  it  implies  al?o  constant  acquisition.  We  do  not  so  much  put 
a"  ay  joy  and  gladness,  as  we  keep  changing  one  joy  for  a  higher,  one  glory  for  a 
fuller,  one  gift  for  a  more  excellent  gift.  Christian  life  often  involves  self-denial  ; 
but  every  act  of  renunciation  is  followed  by  the  acquisition  of  a  strength  and 
treasure,  a  beauty  and  blessedness,  altogether  more  deep  and  precious.  (IF.  L. 
Wa/kinson.)  DeatJi  is  yours  : — Death  is  the  property  of  the  Christian — I.  As 
BRINGING  A  CONCLUSION  TO  ALL  HIS  SORROWS.  It  is,  to  the  Christian,  the  Bed  Sea, 
where  all  pursuing  enemies  ai'e  arrested  and  perish—  the  confines  of  Canaan,  where 
the  wildernei^s,  with  all  its  privations  and  perils,  terminates — the  perfect  sleep,  in 
which  the  toils  of  the  day  are  all  forgotten,  not  a  dream  even,  or  floating  reminis- 
cence, disturbing  its  composure.  II.  As  EORiiiNG  the  introduction  to  his  heavenly 
JOYS.  When  Hannil^al  was  conducting  his  troops  through  Alpine  heights,  before 
deemed  imiJassable,  and  they  were  ready  to  yield  in  despair  amid  the  snows  and 
crags  and  gulfs  which  surrounded  them,  he  found  it  sufficient  for  their  reinvigora- 
tion  to  tell  them  of  the  fertile  Itnly  they  were  triumphantly  to  subdue.  Be  the 
boundary  of    life,  then,  ever  so  steep,  frowning,   and   unpioved,  should  not  the 


CHAP.  III.]  1.   COEINTHIANS.  319 

prospect  of  Canaan  suffice  to  sustain  us  amid  all  its  wilds  and  terrors  ?     We  must 
not  judge  of  what  death  is  to  the  departing  soul  by  what  it  is  to  the  survivors. 
Elisha  prayed  that  his  servant's  eyes  might  be  opened  to  see  the  defence  by  which 
ihey  were  encompassed.     Were  a  similar  prayer  to  be  heard  on  behalf  of  Christians 
lamenting  the  departure  of  friends,  a  sight  would  be  exhibited  superior  at  once  in 
its  glory  and  its  efficacy.     III.  As  itself  contributing  to  his  pkesent  and  future 
WELL-BEING.     1.  The  Greeks  and  Bomans  had  an  adage  that  no  man  should  be 
accounted  happy  till  he  was  dead — thus  indicating  that  a  desirable  end  was  a  chief 
element  of  happiness.     But  in  the  connection  of  our  text  we  have  death  classed 
with  the  present  possessions  of  the  Christian,  subordinated  to  his  interests,  and 
enhaneing  life  itself  by  augmenting  holiness,  usefulness,  and  reward.      Paul  says 
(Acts  XX.  24),  "But  none  of  these  things  (trials,  &c.)  move  me;  neither  count  I," 
&c.     And  so  the  last  stage,  anticipated  and  realised,  gives  energy  to  prior  stages  ; 
and  life,  while  it  lasts,  is  turned  to  account,  and  rendered  moi-e  vital  and  vitalising, 
through  that  solemn  change  beheld  in  the  vista  (2  Pet.  i.  13,  etc.).     2.  Death  is 
serviceable  to  the  Christian  not  only  in  prospect,  but  also  at  the  time  it  befalls  him, 
in  affording  him  occasion  for  the  greatest  of  victories.     Thnre  is  not,  indeed,  always 
the  same  manifestation  of    triuujph  ;    but   it   comes   effectually  and  seasonably. 
"  Thanks  be  to  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory,"  &c.     In  case  entrance  to  heaven 
be  abundant,  then  indeed  is  grace  specially  magnified,  and  the  soul  in  which  it 
dwells  is  blessed  in  its  commendation.     We  have  not  many  accounts  of  death-bed 
scenes  and  experiences  in  the  New  Testament.     Still  examples  are  given  us  wiiicli 
verify  the  exclamation,  "  Mark  the  perfect  man,  and  behold  the  upright ;  for  the 
end  (if  that  man  is  peace!"     Nothing  in  all  Stephen's  foregoing  service  was  so 
serviceable  to  the  cause  of  the  gospel  as  his  martyrdom,  and  on  the  very  border  of 
sealing  his  testimony  with  his  blood  Paul  said,  "  I  am  now  i-eady  to  be  offered," 
&c.     Come,  ye  devotees  of  pleasure,  and  witness  such  spectacles  ;  and  say  if  all 
your  cravings  for  delight  can  find  anything  to  equal  this  transport!     Well  may  it 
extort  from  a  very  Balaam  the  aspiration,  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  rigbteous." 
It  will  be  eternally  good  for  the  Christian  to  have  died.     He  will  thereby  be  made 
more  like  to  the  Saviour.     Think,  too,  what  eternal  life  will  gain  by  contrast  with 
this.     Conclusion :  The  practical  lesson  of  all  is  to  make  sure  of  death  being  ours. 
With  multitudes  the  great  aim  is  to  secure  benefits  of  which  death  will  despoil 
them.     By  all  their  acquisitions  they  are  only  extending  the  ravages  of  the  King  of 
Terrors.     Be  it  your  aim  to  coerce  hostility  into  friendship,  and  make  the  ve*y 
spoiler  yours.      (D.  King.   LL.D.)        Death  is  ijours  : — I.    The  forerunners  op 
DEATH  ARE  FOR  ouB  ADVANTAGE.     These,  indeed,  are  often  not  joyous  but  grievous  at 
first,  but  afterwards  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  to  them  that  are 
exercised   thereby.      In    common  life  we  often   consider  those  things  which  are 
attended  with  a  very  considerable  degree  of  pain,  as  advantageous,  because  they 
are  so  in  their  results.     For  instance,  a  man  suffers  the  amputation  of  a  limb, 
because  he  hopes  that  the  operation  will  be  productive  of   good  :    and  so  it  is 
eventually;  life  is  spared.     Now,  on  the  same  principle,  but  on  higher  grounds,  we 
should  learn  to  submit  to  those  afllicticns,  whatever  they  may  be,  that  are  the  pre- 
cursors of  death,  to  put  us  in  mind  that  the  great  destroyer  is  on  his  way.     "  Our 
lifiht  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,"  &c.     II.  All  the  cikcujistances  of 
DEATH  ARE  FOR  OUR  ADVANTAGE — time  and  place  and  manner.     "  My  times  are  in 
Thy  hand."     And  we  know  that  God's  time  is  the  best;  and  the  place,  too,  in 
which  we   shall  expire,  and  the  manner  of   our  death — both  will  be  of    Divine 
appointment,  and  will  prove  to  be  the  best.     The  manner  of  your  death — whether 
it  be  natural  or  violent — whether  it  be  a  sudden  dentil,  or  preceded  by  a  lingering 
and  distressing  illness — all  these  things  are  ordered  by  the  Lord.     III.  The  conse- 
quences OF  DEATH   ARE   FOR   OUR  ADVANTAGE.      I  do  not  wouder  that   people  are 
unwilling  to  think  of  death  who  have  not  a  good  hope  through  grace  ;  but  the  heir 
of  eternal  life  can  look  forward  beyond  all  the  dark  clouds  that  intervene  between 
him  and  the  consummation  of  his  happiness,  and  "  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God."     "  Death  is  yours,"  if  you  are  members  of   Christ,  for  your  advantage — 
1.  Because  there  will  then  be  an  end  of  all  evil— not  only  moral  evil,  or  sin,  but  all 
natural,  inward  suffering.     2.  Because  as  soon  as  it  takes  place,  your  happy  s-i^'^its, 
disentangled  from  the  encumbrance  of  these  tenements  of  clay,  enter  into  eternal 
rest.     (-/.  Entwisli'.)         Death  an  advmintage  to  the   Christian  : — Death  is  ours — 

I.    As  THE  MEANS  OF  DELIVEMANCE    FROM  ALL  THE  INCONSISTENCIES   AND   SINFULNESS   OF 

TIME.     Select  any  of  the  people  of  God  whose  lives  are  recorded  in  the  Word  of 
God,  and  how  often  have  we  reason  to  deplore  their  inconsistencies !    But  for  death 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  in. 

this  would  be  the  eternity  of  their  history.     II.  As  the  means  of  delivering  us 

FROII  ALL  weakness  AND  IMPERFECTION,  WHETHER  OF  BODY  OR  OF  MIND.  III.  As  THE 
MEANS  OF  RELIEVING  US  FROM  THE  ISOLATED  POSITION  WHICH  WE  OCCUPY  IN  THIS  WORLD. 

About  the  angels  we  know  nothing ;  we  are  separated  from  them.  What  do  we 
know  about  the  immediate  presence  of  God ;  the  joys  of  a  glorious  immortality ; 
the  power  of  the  fellowship  that  is  formed  around  the  evei lasting  throne?  By 
death  we  enter  into  the  universal  region  of  the  good.  Conclusion  :  Sinner,  death 
is  not  yours — he  brings  you  no  benefit.  You  are  his  victim.  He  comes  as  the 
messenger  of  justice  to  lead  you  to  the  judgment  seat,  to  hear  the  doom  which  you 
are  to  undergo,  world  without  end.  Painful  as  your  pilgrimage  on  earth  may  be, 
It  is  your  liighest  happiness.  Your  happiness  must  terminate  with  its  close.  l''ou 
are  death's,  and  when  death  seizes  you,  instead  of  delivering  you  from  your  sins 
and  imperfections,  all  your  sins  and  imperfections  are  coutirmed  for  ever.  (J. 
Burnett.)  Death,  the  privilege  of  the  believer  : — "  Death  is  yours  "  if  you  look 
at  it — I.  In  reference  to  others.  1.  It  is  so  when  you  seriously  regard  its  universal 
appointment.  There  are  mullitudes  who  acknowledge  this  mournful  fact,  but  who 
derive  no  advantage  whatever  from  the  solemn  occurrence.  It  is  otherwise  with 
the  Christian  ;  he  beholds  a  number  of  lessons  which,  by  Divine  grace,  he  is 
enabled  to  learn.  (1)  He  sees  the  evil  and  malignity  of  sin  ;  for  there  is  no  rational 
explanation  of  the  cause  of  death,  but  as  a  penalty  due  to  the  violated  law  of  God. 
(2)  He  discovers,  also,  that  "the  creature  is  made  subject  to  vanity"  ;  for  it  is  not 
the  old  and  decrepid  alone  who  die.  2.  It  is  so  when  you  are  impressed  by  the 
deaths  of  particular  characters.  (1)  When  "  the  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his 
wickedness,"  he  is  sbocked  to  reflect  on  their  awful  doom,  and  makes  the  earnest 
appeal,  "Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor  my  life  with  bloody  men." 
(2)  When  he  hears  of  the  righteous  who  have  expired  in  the  expression  of  a  firm 
faith  and  joyful  hope  of  immortality,  he  pours  forth  the  fervent  petition,  "  May  I 
die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  may  my  last  end  be  like  his."  There  is  also 
something  iu  the  aspect  of  the  death-bed  experience  of  many  a  fellow-Christiau 
which  has  a  tendency  to  banish  the  fears  and  animate  the  holy  courage  of  the 
fellow-believer.  II.  In  reference  to  ourselves.  "  Death  is  yours,"  as  it  is — 1.  A 
complete  deliverance  from  sin.  2.  A  final  termination  of  suffering.  3.  A  retreat 
from  injurious  and  distressing  associations.  4.  Secures  your  admission  to  the 
enjoyment  of  all  possible  good.  (J.  Clayton.)  Death  for  the  advantage  of  the 
good  : — Let  us  consider  in  how  many  particulars  death  is  a  godly  man's  ;  it  is  for 
his  benefit  and  comfort.  And  first,  in  this  respect,  because  by  death  he  gaineth, 
he  is  invested  with  greater  glory,  joy,  and  happiness  than  this  world  can  afford. 
All  the  while  a  godly  man  liveth  in  this  world  he  is  a  loser,  he  is  kept  from  his  best 
treasures,  he  is  not  enjoying  his  best  blessings,  which  will  be  vouchsafed  to  him. 
The  apostle  doth  fully  express  it  (2  Cor.  v.  4).  We  would  gladly  be  clothed  with 
immortality,  yet  to  put  off  this  mortal  body  is  grievous  ;  as  little  children  cry  for 
their  new  garments,  and  yet  cry  while  they  are  putting  them  on.  Secondly,  death 
is  a  godly  man's,  because  it  putteth  a  period  to  all  those  miseries  and  troubles  he 
was  here  exercised  with.  It  is  the  haven,  after  all  the  tossings  he  had  in  this 
world.  Thirdly,  death  is  theirs,  because  it  is  the  finishing  of  ail  their  works  and 
service,  and  by  that  they  come  for  their  wages.  How  doth  tbe  labouring  man  long 
for  the  end  of  the  day,  or  the  week,  that  he  may  come  to  receive  his  wages  ? 
Fourthly,  death  is  the  godly  man's,  because  the  meditation  and  thoughts  of  it  are 
sanctified  to  him.  He  liveth  as  one  that  expecteth  it  daily.  Fifthly,  death  is  the 
godly  man's,  because  he  only  knoweth  how  to  die  well,  as  we  told  you.  Life  was 
his,  because  he  only  could  tell  how  to  live.  So  death  is  his,  because  he  only 
knoweth  how  to  die.  Simeon  saith  (Luke  ii.  29).  Sixthly,  the  godly  man  hath 
death  as  an  advantage,  if  you  respect  the  time  and  season  of  his  death.  His 
death  is  not  only  mercy,  but  the  time  of  his  death  is  mercy.  The  term  of  every 
man's  life  is  ajjpointed  by  God,  "  To  Him  belong  the  issues  of  death  "  (Psa.  Ixviii.  20). 
Now  God  in  great  wisdom  and  mercy  hath  determined  the  time  of  thy  death. 
Lastly,  even  the  violent  death  of  martyrdom,  which  cometh  by  the  cruel  and 
bloody  oppression  of  implacable  enemies,  that  is  theirs.  It  is  a  mercy,  a  gain,  and 
honour.  The  apostles  rejoiced  that  they  were  accounted  worthy  to  lose  what  they 
had  for  Christ's  sake.  [A.  Burgess.)  Death  of  rude  appearance,  hut  ivelcome  to 
the  good  : — Many  a  man  has  an  ill-favoured  countenance,  is  lean  and  haggard,  pale 
and  sallow,  and  mean  in  his  attire,  who  yet,  under  an  ungainly  exterior,  conceals 
great  talents  and  virtues.  Such  is  the  case  with  death.  Ah  me  !  how  much  of 
what   is  good  and  sweet  and  blessed   is  concealed  beneath  its  sour  aspect  and 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  321 

transient  bitterness!  It  is  not  I  who  die,  when  I  die,  but  my  sin  and  misery.  As 
often  as  I  think  of  death  I  figure  to  myself  that  I  see  a  messenger  coming  from 
a  distant  hind,  bringing  tlie  good  news  of  my  Saviour,  the  Bridegroom  of  my 
soul,  and  of  tlie  inheritance  which  He  has  pinxlia^ed  with  His  blood,  and  reserves 
for  me  in  heaven.  What  care  I  although  ihe  messenger  may  have  an  ugly  face,  be 
armed  with  a  Jong  dart,  wear  a  tattered  coat,  and  knock  rudely  at  my  door?  I 
attend  less  to  his  appearance  than  to  his  business.  (Go/tliold.)  Death  a  bless- 
ing : — I  congratulate  you  and  myself  that  life  is  passing  fast  away.  What  a 
superlatively  grand  and  consoling  idea  is  that  of  death!  Without  this  radiant 
idea,  this  delightful  morning  star,  indicating  that  the  luminarj'  of  eternity  is  going 
to  rise,  life  would,  to  my  view,  darken  into  midnight  melancholy.  Oh,  the  expecta- 
tion of  living  here  and  living  thus  always,  would  be  indeed  a  prospect  of  over- 
whelming despair!  But  thanks  be  to  that  fatal  decree  that  dooms  us  to  die; 
thanks  to  that  gospel  which  opens  the  vision  of  an  endless  life  ;  and  thanks,  above 
all,  to  that  Saviour  Friend  who  has  promised  to  conduct  all  the  faithful  tlirough 
the  sacred  trance  of  death,  into  scenes  of  paradise  and  everlasting  delight.  (./. 
Foster.)  Death  hrimis  freedom  to  the  good  : — Mr.  William  Jeukyn,  one  of  the 
ejected  ministers  in  England,  being  imprisoned  in  Newgate,  presented  a  petition  to 
King  Charles  II.  for  a  release,  which  was  backed  by  an  assurance  from  his  physician 
that  his  life  was  in  d'Uiger  from  his  close  imprisonment ;  but  no  otiier  answer  could 
be  obtained  than  this:  "Jenkyn  shall  be  a  prisoner  as  long  as  he  lives."  A 
nobleman  hearing  some  time  after  of  his  death,  said  to  the  king,  "  May 
it  please  your  majesty,  Jenkyn  has  got  his  liberty."  Up^n  which  he  asked, 
with  eagerness,  "Ay!  who  gave  it  him?"  The  nobleman  replied,  "A  greater 
than  your  majesty— the  King  of  kings "  ;  with  which  the  king  seemed  greatly 
struck,  and  i-emained  silent.  (Slerijiture  Doctrines  Illustrated.)  The  Christian's 
viastersliip  over  dt-ath  : — Development  in  our  life  on  earth  is  limited,  as  is 
the  development  of  the  bird  in  the  egg.  The  bursting  of  the  egg-shnll  is 
no  disaster,  but  a  relief  and  a  profit.  That  breaking  of  the  shell  brings 
the  bird  into  a  world  that  is  unsjieakably  more  glorious.  Death  is  our  servant,  not 
our  master — through  Christ  an  immeasurable  blessing.     Because — I.  It  restores 

us  MORB  NEARLY  TO  OUR  FRIENDS  WHO  HAVE  GONE  BEYOND.  II.  It  BRINGS  US 
NEARER    TO    ChUIST.        III.    It    PLACES    US    IX   A    POSITION    MORE    FAVOURABLE     FOR    SOUL 

GROWTH.  IV.  It  incre.\ses  OUR  CAPACITY  FOR  USEFULNESS.  Thosc  wlio  are  faithful 
in  this  life  in  a  few  things,  will  be  made  in  the  life  to  come  rulers  over  many 
things.  V.  As  a  consequence  our  happiness  \mll  be  greatly  augmented. 
{Homiletic  Monthly.)  Christ  and  death  : — Christ  makes  death  ours — I.  As  He 
GIVES  us  ASSURANCE  OF  THE  LIFE  BEYOND.  If  we  Consider  death  with  the  eye  of  the 
materialist  we  feel  that  we  are  death's.  We  are  delivered  helplessly  into  its  cruel 
hands,  and  it  strips  us  of  everything.  But  Christ  makes  death  ours  by  giving  us 
the  assurance  of  immortality.  1.  Men  have  an  instinct  of  immortality.  It  has 
been  found  in  the  lowest  savages,  and  in  the  most  intellectual  races.  Very 
strange  and  diversified  are  the  manifestalions  of  this  instinct,  but  that  it  exists  in 
the  human  heart  is  beyond  question.  And  this  instinct  we  are  bound  to  respect. 
"But  then,"  says  Mr.  Darwin,  "  arises  the  doubt,  Can  the  mind  of  man,  which  lias, 
as  I  fully  believe,  been  developed  from  a  mind  as  low  as  that  possessed  by  the  lowest 
animal,  be  trusted  when  it  draws  such  grand  conclusions?"  Here  he  does  bis 
own  theory  injustice.  Are  not  the  instincts  of  the  lower  creatures  on  the  whole 
marvellously  correct  ?  And,  may  we  not  ask  with  confidence,  if  the  instinct  of  the 
caterpillar  pointing  to  the  butterfly,  if  the  instinct  of  the  swallow  discerning  far 
beyond  the  sea  a  land  of  sunshine  and  flowers,  if  these  instincts  prove  no  mockery, 
why  should  the  instincts  of  human  nature,  pointing  to  a  grand  perfection  in  a 
world  above  and  beyond,  prove  untrustworthy  ?  2.  And  reason  Las  a  powerful 
verdict  to  give  on  this  question  of  our  immortality.  Even  sceptical  philosophers 
cannot  do  without  this  great  doctrine.  George  Sand  felt  that  without  immortality 
there  is  a  painful  "deficiency  of  propoition."  Darwin  felt  it  "an  intolerable 
thought"  that  after  such  long-continued  and  costly  progress  we  should  all  be 
annihilated.  And  Edgar  Quinet  concludes  "  that,  whilst  the  human  race  jjursues 
on  earth  its  career  of  perfection,  the  individual  continues  its  parallel  march  in 
some  place  and  in  some  form  already  prepared  for  it  by  Providence."  3.  But 
whilst  human  instinct  and  reason  thus  declare  for  immortality,  the  subject  at  last 
is  left  in  deep  uncertainty.  It  may  be  nothing  more  than  guess-work  and  illusion. 
But  when  Christ  comes  all  is  changed.  He  makes  eternity  a  fact.  You  cannot 
■^me  into  contact  with  Him  without  tasting  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  He 
VOL.   I.  21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

brouglit  life  and  immortality  to  light.  It  is  the  same  clianq;e  that  we  witness  when 
we  see  alchemy  changed  into  chemistry,  astrology  into  astronomy,  speculation  into 
science.  In  Chiist  the  dream  becomes  a  reality,  the  inference  a  certainty,  the 
desire  knowledge  and  experience.  Christ  has  shown  us  that  through  death  we  find 
"more  life  and  fuller,"  even  length  of  days  for  ever  and  ever.  II.  As  He  gives  vs 
FITNESS  FOB  THE  LIFE  BEYOND.  1.  Ws  are  Sometimes  disposed  to  consider  the 
question  of  immortality  as  altogether  an  intellectual  one;  we  think  if  we  can  only 
succeed  in  establishing  it  on  logical  grounds,  that  we  have  nothing  more  to  do 
than  to  surrender  ourselves  to  the  mighty  comfort.  But  the  moral  element  enters 
very  largely  into  it.  It  is  conscience  that  makes  death  terrible,  the  unknown 
world  so  dark  and  dreadful.  This  Epistle  goes  to  the  depth  of  the  thing  :  "The 
sting  of  death  is  sin."  V/ithout  sin  we  might  view  death  with  the  uneasiness  with 
which  we  might  suppose  a  caterpillar  to  view  a  ehr\  salis ;  but  a  wounded  con- 
science brings  in  another  element,  and  we  s-hrink  from  death  with  sore  amazement 
(see  also  Heb.  ii.  14,  1-5).  If  it  had  not  been  for  sin  we  should  have  feared  death 
only  as  a  yoang  bird  fears  to  try  its  wings,  but  we  fear  death  now  as  the  bird  fears 
the  barbed  arrow  which  drinks  up  its  life.  2.  It  is  very  easy  for  us  to  see  what  a 
vast  difference  is  made  in  our  estiiuate  of  death  whether  we  bring  in  or  leave  out 
the  idea  of  guilt.  Look  at  the  death  of  a  malefactor.  How  truly  repulsive  and 
terrible  is  death  in  such  a  case  in  all  its  circumstances!  Consider,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  death  of  a  martyr.  Here  the  material  adjuncts  are  pretty  much  the 
same;  but  how  different  is  the  effect  of  the  whole  spectacle!  The  very  same 
spectacle  of  death  is  a  horror  or  a  triumph  according  as  you  bring  into  it  the  idea 
of  guilt  or  innocence,  of  infamy  or  glory.  The  consciousness  of  sin  makes  death 
an  enemy.  Because  we  are  children  of  disobedience  we  are  all  our  lifetime  in 
bondage  to  the  fear  of  death  ;  we  are  debtors,  tliere  is  an  execution  out  against  us 
for  arrest,  and  we  are  always  trembling  lest  the  bony  policeman  should  lay  his  cold 
grip  upon  us,  saying,  "  You  are  my  prisoner,"  and  so  shut  us  up  in  tlie  })rison  till 
we  have  paid  that  uttermost  farthing  we  never  can  pay.  3.  Here  once  again 
Christ  makes  death  ours.  He  changes  death  for  us  from  the  death  of  a  malefactor 
to  the  death  of  a  martyr.  He  takes  away  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin.  He  satisfies 
the  conscience  as  He  does  the  intellect.  And  as  He  gives  peace  to  the  conscience 
He  gives  purity  and  life  to  the  whole  personality.  Christ  becomes  the  Resurrection 
and  the  Life,  freeing  us  from  the  death  of  sin,  awaking  in  us  the  life  of  righteous- 
ness, and  so  making  us  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.  Christ,  so 
far  as  we  gather  from  the  New  Testament,  never  saw  any  one  die ;  I  do  not  believe 
that  any  one  else  could  have  died  in  His  presence ;  death  cannot  come  where 
Christ  is.  Let  Christ,  then,  be  with  you  in  your  last  hour,  and  death  shall  be 
swallowed    up    in    victory.       (Jr.    L.    JVathinftnu.)  Spoiling  the  spoiler  : — The 

believer  stands  with  his  heel  on  the  neck  of  the  king  of  terrors.  Death  is  yours 
as — I.  A  CONQUERED  FOE  TRANSFORMED  INTO  A  FRIEND.  A  lion's  carcass  with  the 
honeycomb  in  it.  II.  An  oppoktunity  to  glorify  God.  The  Christinn's  way  of 
meeting  death,  not  that  of  the  Stoic  glorifying  his  firmness,  nor  that  of  the  sceptic 
glorifying  his  shame,  but  of  the  believer  magnifying  the  grace  of  God.  Showing 
forth  Christ's  power  perfected  in  his  weakness.  III.  A  redeemer  from  servitude 
to  the  clayey  body,  and  subje^ition  to  the  discordant,  tempting,  crippling  influence 
of  the  piiysical.  IV.  A  convoy  to  heaven — a  gateway  to  glory,  a  herald  of 
coronation.  The  dawn  of  "  Graduation  Day."  V.  A  roon.  Best  to  the  tired 
pilgrim ;  harbour  for  the  storm-tossed  voyager ;  Sabbath  eve  to  the  working 
man.  Conclusion  :  Faith  in  Christ  is  victory  over  death,  {Homiletic  Monthly.) 
Or  things  present. — Things  present : — We  reckon  present  things  at  the  highest 
rate :  "  A  bird  in  the  hand  is  worth  two  in  the  bush."  The  little  jiresent, 
to  our  apprehension,  eclipses  the  great  past  or  the  greater  future.  In  the 
cas3  of  ttie  true  Christian — I.  His  temporal  possessions  are  his  own.  The 
ungodly  man  for  awhile  engrosses  the  good  things  of  this  life,  but  they  are  sent  to 
him  often  in  anger,  and  are  taken  away  in  wrath.  As  for  you,  whatever  of  earthly 
good  the  Lord  has  apportioned  you,  is  in  a  most  blessed  manner  your  own; 
because — 1.  Honestly  got.  The  Christian  owns  no  stolen  j)roperty  or  unrighteous 
gain.  Dishonest  persons  may  be  rich,  but  none  of  their  riches  are  in  truth  their 
own  ;  like  the  jackdaw  in  the  fable,  they  wear  borrowed  plumes.  2.  Acknowledged 
to  the  great  Giver  with  becoming  gratitude.  Gratitude  is,  as  it  were,  the  quit  rent 
to  the  great  superior  owner,  and  until  we  discharge  the  claim,  our  goods  are  not 
lawfully  ours  in  the  court  of  heaven.  3.  The  due  portion  which  belongs  to  God 
has  been  conscientiously  consecrated.      The  tithing  of  tlie  substance  is  the  true 


CHAP,  in.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  323 

title  to  it.  It  is  not  altogether  thine  till  thou  hist  proved  thy  gratitude  by  thy 
proportionate  gift  to  the  cause  of  the  Master.  4.  We  seek  to  be  graciously  guided 
in  the  use  of  them.  They  are  not  bestowed  upon  us  absolutely ;  they  are  ours 
within  the  lines  of  law  and  gospel,  within  bounds  of  sobriety  and  holiness  ;  not  as 
masters,  but  as  mercies.  The  benediction  of  heaven  sweetens  the  lawful  use  of 
earthly  goods.  You  are  not  required  to  play  the  ascetic.  John  came  neither 
eating  nor  drinking ;  but  the  Son  of  man,  who  is  your  master,  came  both  eating 
and  drinking.  There  is  no  piety  whatever  in  your  accounting  the  gifts  of  Provi- 
dence as  necessarily  temptations  ;  you  can  m.ake  them  so,  but  that  is  your  folly  and 
no  fault  of  theirs.  Yaiu  are  those  who  sneer  at  nature  aud  the  lavish  bounty 
thereof.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  iulness  thereof."  It  is  no  crime  to 
enjoy  the  beauties  of  nature,  but  a  sign  of  idiocy  to  be  unafl'ected  thereby.  Fair 
scenes,  sweet  sounds,  balmy  odours,  and  fresh  gales,  your  Father  sends  theui  to  you, 
take  them  and  be  tliankful.  Let  us  note  well,  before  we  leave  this  point,  that  any 
of  God's  saints  who  have  but  little  of  this  world's  goods,  may  yet  remember  that 
all  things  are  theirs,  so  that  up  to  the  measure  of  their  necessi'  ies  God  will  be 
quite  sure  to  afford  them  sustenance.  The  Lord  is  your  shepherd,  and  you  shall 
not  want.  II.  Tkiiiohal  tkials.  1.  Tribulations  are  treasures.  Saints  gain  more 
by  their  losses  than  by  their  jn-ofits.  Your  present  trials  are  yours — (1)  As  medi- 
cine. You  need  that  your  soul,  like  your  body,  should  be  dealt  with  by  the  beloved 
Physician.  (2)  As  means  of  strei  gth.  No  man  becomes  a  veteran  except  by 
practice  in  arms.  Experience  workeih  patience,  and  patience  brings  with  it  a  train 
of  virtues.  (3)  As  windows,  through  which  we  get  the  clearest  views  of  Christ. 
Do  you  understand  what  it  is  to  come  up  to  Christ's  Cross,  and  to  be  conformed 
unto  His  death?  It  is  only  as  you  do  this  that  you  will  hive  felowship  with 
Jesus,  and  understand  what  His  love  was  towards  you.  2.  You  who  are  cross- 
bearers,  I  would  remind  you  for  your  comfort — (1)  That  you  have  to  bear 
the  cross,  but  not  the  curse.  Your  Lord  endured  both.  The  penal  result  of 
sin  Christ  has  exhausted,  and  now  the  cross  that  comes  to  you  is  garlanded  with 
love.  (2)  That  your  Loid  sends  you  a  cross,  but  not  a  crush.  Your  cross  is 
proportioned  to  your  strength.  (3)  That  your  cross  is  not  a  loss.  It  shall  only  be 
a  putting  out  to  interest  that  which  is  taken  from  you  that  it  may  be  returned  anon 
with  usury.  IH.  All  ocr>  cikcumstantlvl  surasorxDixcs.  These  are  ours  as  subser- 
vient to  our  usefulness.  You  "svish  to  win  souls,  and  say,  "I  wish  I  were  a  minister  "; 
but  you  have  a  family  round  about  you,  and  you  have  to  keep  to  that  farm,  to 
manage  the  shop.  Now  the  position  you  occupy  is,  all  things  consideied,  the  most 
advantageous  for  doing  your  utmost  for  the  glory  of  God.  Suppose  the  mole  should 
cry,  "  How  I  could  have  honoured  the  great  Creator  if  I  could  have  been  allowed 
to  fly  ! "  it  would  be  very  foolish,  for  a  mole  Hying  v\ould  have  been  a  very  ridiculous 
object,  while  a  mole  fashioning  its  tunnels  and  casting  up  its  castles  is  viewed  with 
admiring  wonder  by  the  naturalist,  who  perceives  its  remarkable  suitability  to  its 
sphere.  The  fish  might  say,  "  How  could  I  display  the  wisdom  of  God  if  I  could 
sii  g,  or  mount  a  tree,  like  a  bird !  "  But  you  know  a  fish  in  a  tiee  would  be  a  very 
grotesque  affair;  but  when  the  fish  cuts  the  wave  wiih  agile  tin,  all  who  have 
observed  it  say  how  wonderfully  it  is  adapted  to  its  habitat.  It  is  just  so  with  you. 
If  you  begin  to  say,  "  I  cannot  glorify  God  where  I  am,  and  as  I  am,"  I  answer, 
neither  could  you  anywhere.  "But  I  have  a  large  family,"  says  one,  "  what  can 
I  du?  "  Train  tiiem  in  the  fear  of  God.  "  I  work  in  a  large  factory  with  ungodly 
men,  what  can  I  do?"  Needless  inquiry!  What  cannot  the  salt  do  when  it  is 
cast  among  the  meat  ?  "I  am  sick,"  siiys  another  ;  "  I  am  chained  to  the  bi-d  of 
languishing."  But  your  patience  will  magnify  the  power  of  grace,  and  your 
words  of  expeiience  v\ill  enrich  those  who  listen  to  you.  Look  at  the  seaman  out 
at  sea  !  does  he  sit  down  and  fret  because  the  wind  will  not  blow  from  the  quarter 
that  he  would  most  prefer?  No  ;  he  tacks  about  and  catches  every  capful  of  wind 
that  can  be  of  use  to  him,  and  so  reaches  the  haven  at  last.  Look  at  a  good 
commander,  if  he  occupies  a  bad  position,  he  turns  that  to  account,  and  often 
makes  the  worse  become  the  better.  IV.  SpiraTOAL  privileges.  1.  The  favour 
of  God  is  not  for  heaven  only  ;  it  is  ours  to-day.  AdopUon  into  His  family  is  for 
this  present  time.  2.  Christ  is  present,  and  He  is  ours.  We  have  a  "  fountain 
fille>i  with  blood."  which  puts  away  all  sin  ;  a  mercy-seat  where  al  iprayer  is 
prevalent ;  an  Intercessor  who  takes  our  prayeis  and  offers  them.  3.  Tl  e  Hidy 
Ghost,  too,  is  present,  and  He  brings  you  present  enligiitenment,  guidance, 
strength,  consolation.  4.  And  if  there  be  any  promise  to-day  written  in  ihe  Wcrd 
of  God,  any  blessing  to-day  guaranteed  to  the  elect  family,  any  mindfulness  ol 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

Providence,  or  any  abundance  of  grace,  all  these  are  yours,  and  yours  now.  (C  H. 
SpJirgeon.)  Christ  and  the  ■present  : — That  things  above,  that  things  beyond, 
may  belong  to  the  Christian  is  wuU  understood  ;  tlie  sceptic  with  a  smile  will  allow 
tbis  ;  but  that  "things  present"  are  oui's  in  Christ  is  not  so  well  understood. 
Observe,  however — I.  That  the  faith  of  Christ  secures  to  us  "  things  present." 
It  is  a  common  complaint  of  secularism  that  the  tendency  of  supernatural  religion 
is  to  withdraw  our  attention  from  the  immediate  practical  world,  and  to  waste  our 
time  and  powers  on  mere  ligmeiits  of  the  imnginatiou.  And  it  is  a  very  common 
thing  for  secular  writers  to  point  to  the  medieval  age  for  the  demonstration  of 
their  position,  and  to  assert  that  civilisation  was  saved  only  by  the  Benaissance 
calling  man's  energies  from  the  unknowable  to  the  knowable,  from  heaven  to  earth. 
Now  this  is  capable  of  a  satisfactory  reply.  1.  We  appeal  from  a  corrupt  to  a  pure 
Christianity.  Surely  none  would  compare  the  positive  science  of  astronomy  with 
the  obscure  divinations  and  horoscopes  of  astrology.  Yet  astronomy  concerns 
itself  with  the  distant,  but  the  science  of  the  firmament  is  a  most  fruitful  one  in 
regard  to  our  present  immediate  worldly  interests.  And  so  if  in  the  middle  ages 
a  corrupt  theology  and  ecclesiasticism  worked  badly,  that  is  no  argument  against 
the  Christianity  of  Christ.  The  New  Testament  never  separates  earth  from 
heaven.  It  brings  before  us,  in  God  and  Christ  and  heaven,  great  ideals  which  are 
to  vivify,  to  enrich,  to  realise,  to  exalt,  to  perfect,  all  earthly  things.  Men  talk  of 
the  unvvorldliness  of  Christianity,  but  it  recognises  the  dignity  and  rights  of  the 
body,  it  assigns  us  all  the  wealth  of  nature,  it  leaves  us  free  to  work  out  our 
intellectual  faculty,  it  gives  its  Divine  sanction  to  all  the  articulations  of  human 
society.  Men  talk  of  the  narrowness  of  Christianity,  but  it  is  Avide  enough  for  all 
present  things  so  far  as  those  things  are  rational  and  useful.  If  there  ever  was  a 
grand  protest  against  narrowness  it  is  the  jnotest  of  the  text.  Christianity  is  wide 
enough  for  all  muscularities  ;  it  shuts  out  Eoman  amphitheatres  and  modern 
prize-rings,  but  thank  God  for  the  narrowness  that  shuts  out  brutality  and  blood. 
Christianity  is  wide  enough  for  all  art ;  it  shuts  out  Pompeian  chambers  of 
obscenity,  but  thank  God  for  the  narrowness  that  shuts  out  beastliness  and  ghastli- 
ness.  Christianity  is  wide  enough  for  love  and  home ;  it  shuts  out  Venus's  temple 
and  Mohammed's  harem,  but  thank  God  for  the  narrowness  that  shuts  out  the 
degradation  of  women.  Christianity  is  wide  enough  for  all  true  connnerce,  wealth, 
pleasure  ;  it  warns  us  against  covetousness,  lijentiousness,  materialism,  but  thank 
God  for  the  narrowness  that  prevents  our  takmg  the  big  barn  of  Dives  for  the 
supreme  goal  of  life.  2.  We  appeal  from  the  medii^val  to  the  modern  world. 
Whatever  a  few  dilettante  critics  may  say,  the  faith  of  Christ  has  filled  us  with  an 
energy  which  finds  uianifold  and  magnificent  manifestations  in  the  things  present. 
Do  you  find  that  the  faith  of  Christ  gives  men  about  you  a  distaste  for,  and  makes 
them  successful  in,  practical  life?  "The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness 
thereof,"  and  all  is  yours,  for  "  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."     II.  That 

THE    FAITH    OF    ChKIST     MAKES    "  THINGS    PRESENT  "    OURS    WITH   TRUEST   AND   FULLEST 

PROPRIETY.  In  Cluist  we  have — 1.  The  lichest  enjoyment  of  things  present. 
Things  are  not  ours  when  they  are  ours  legally,  conventionally — they  are  ours 
only  when  we  so  realise  them  that  they  rejoice  our  heart.  It  is  easy  to  have  riches, 
&c.,  and  j'et  not  have  the  power  to  eat  ther.  of.  Some  maintain  that  it  is  in  miserable 
conditions  that  the  deepest  need  is  felt  for  religious  truth  and  consolation;  and 
they  affirm  that  as  man  ceases  to  be  miserable,  so  religion  will  be  ignored  as  a 
superfluous  thing.  But  this  is  far  from  being  the  case.  Men  are  never  more 
deeply,  mysteriously  miserable  than  they  are  when  they  have  everything  their  soul 
desireth.  Look  at  Germany  to-day,  biilliant  in  genius,  flushed  with  power  and 
success,  and  yet  cankered  with  the  philosophy  of  despair.  And  we  are  constant 
witnesses  how  successful  opulent  men  are  wearied  of  life ;  they  remind  one  of  bees 
drowning  in  their  own  honey.  The  fact  is,  you  can  only  realise  the  joy  of  things 
present  in  the  light  of  God's  presence,  in  the  power  of  His  blessing.  When  the 
beautiful  orb  comes  between  the  sun  and  the  earth,  it  is  an  inky  blot  on  the 
heavens.  And  so  all  beautiful  things  in  human  life  become  dark  and  dis- 
appointing the  moment  they  come  between  us  and  God.  It  is  only  in  the  light  of 
God  that  life  shines,  only  in  His  blessing  that  it  is  rich.  2.  The  fullest  profit  of 
things  present.  A  life  of  material  success  is  no  advantage.  Maudsley,  who  has 
no  bias  to  religion  certainly,  observes  :  "  There  is  no  more  efficient  cause  of  mental 
degeneracy  than  the  mean  and  vulgar  life  of  a  tradesman,  whose  soul  is  entirely 
taken  up  with  petty  gains,  who,  under  the  sanction  of  the  customs  of  the  trade, 
practises  systematic  fraud  and  theft.     The  deterioration  of  nature  which  he  has 


CHAP.  III.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  325 


acquired  will,  unless  a  healthier  family  influence  serve  to  counteract  it,  be  trans- 
mitted as  a  family  heritage  to  his  children,  and  may  result  in  some  form  of  moral 
or  intellectual  deficiency,  perhaps  in  outbreaks  of  positive  insanity."     Here,  then, 
the  religion  of  materialism  and  nuiteiial  success  is  nothing  very  grand.    Now,  what 
is  to  save  a  man  from  this  deterioration  ?     Eomances  ?     Politics  ?     The  theatre  ? 
The  newspaper?     Surely  not.    Great  thoughts,  great  principles,  great  hopes— these 
will  lift  tbe  soul  of   the  tradesman  ;  and  these  are  to  be  found  only  in  religion. 
Christ  makes  things  present  ours  by  making  them  means  and  instruments  of  our 
higher  education.    Conclu-ion  :  In  this  way  we  are  told  much  about  impressionism, 
about  making  the  best  of  the  present  moment.     It  is  said  that  man  has  always  one 
foot  in  the  past,  the  other  in  the  future,  and  that  he  misses  altogether  the  flowers 
and    fruits,  the  delights  and  treasures,  of  the  present.      There   is  no  vivid,  full 
realisation  of  the  moment  except  as  we  realise  immortality  in  the  moment ;  he 
who  tiistes  the  power  of  the  present  must  taste  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come. 
In  Christ  things  present  are  ours  because  things  to  come  are  ours.     Present  joy  is 
ours  in  all  its  depth  and  preciousness  ;   and  these  "  light  afflictions,  which  are  but 
for  a  moment,"   are  ours  also.      "  Whilst  we  look  not  at  the  things  which  are 
seen,"  &c.     (W.  L.  Warkinsuii.)         The  present  for  the  good  of  the  (jodlij  man: — 
I.  Whatever  mercies  ok  good  thinos  come  about,  they  are  the  godly  man's,  in 
these  respects  :  First,  they  are  for  his  necessary  use  and  supply.     They  come  as 
so  many  gifts  immediately  given   by  God  for  thy  necessities.      Secouclly,   these 
prosperous  things  are  not  only  in  a  sanctified  way  to  the  godly,   but  God  also 
requireth  tluT,t  with  joy  and  gladness  we  should  make  use  of  them  for  His  glory. 
It  is  lawful  for  them  to  eat  and  drink,  and  enjoy  the  good  mercies  they  have  with 
a  cheerful,  joyful  spirit.     God  doth  not  only  love  a  cheerful  giver,  but  a  clieerful 
receiver  also  of  His  mercies.     So  then,  when  prosperous  things  befall  thee,  thou 
mayest  with  great  joy  of  heart  make  use  of  them.    Thirdly,  these  prosperous  things 
are  not  only  sanctified  to  them,  but  they  are  also  made  sanctifying  of  them.     God 
giveth  them  those  good  things  of  the  body  to  make  their  souls  better.     Abraham 
had  many  outward  mercies,  but  these  also  were  helpful  to  his  graces  ;  he  was  rich 
in  faith,  as  well  as   in  cattle   and  great   substance.     Fourthly,   these  pi'ospei-ous 
present  things  are  theirs,  because  they  know  how  to  make  the  present  use  of  them 
for  God's  glory.     As  life  was  theirs,  and  death  theirs,  because  they  only  could  live 
well  and  die  well,  so  present  riches,  present  death,   present  comforts  are  theirs, 
because  they  know  how  to  make  the  present  improvement  of  them.     And  thus  it 
should  be  with  every  godly  man ;  there  is  nothing  befalls  thee,  no  good  comes  to 
thee,  but  thou  shouldst  bethink  thyself,  How  can  this  be  improved  for  God?     How 
may  I  make  heavenly  advantages  of  these  things  ?     Thus  be  like  the  bee  sucking 
honey  out  of  every  herb.     Fifthly,  present  good  things  are  a  godly  man's,  because 
they  ai'e  accompanied  with  the  love  and  favour  -of  God,  which  is  infinitely  more 
than  the  good  things  themselves.    That  all  these  good  things  are  the  effects  of  God's 
favour  and  gracious  reconciliation  through   Christ,  this  makes   them  ours  in  an 
eminent  manner.     When   God  gave  Abraham  such  large  worldly  revenues,  and 
withal  said  He  Himself  would  be  his  great  reward  (Gen.   xv.   1).     This  was  the 
fulness  of  happiness.     A  good  conscieirce  is  a  continual  feast.     Now  no  man  halh 
a  good  conscience  but  he  who  is  reconciled  with  God  through  Christ.    Lastly,  these 
prosperous  events  are  theirs,   because  God  giveth  contentment  of   spirit.      The 
blessing  of  the  Lord  maketh  rich,  and  He  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it  (Prov.  x.  22). 
Many  men  have  these  outward  mercies,  but  then  many  thorns  grow  up  with  them. 
There   is  so  much  gall  in  their  honey  that  all  the  swe^'tness  is  gone.     II.  We 
come  now  to  the  sec<md  sort  of  present  events,  and  those  auh;  tkibulations  and 
AFFLICTIONS.     There  are  none  of  these  present  troubles  upon  thee,  though  grievous 
and  burdensome,  but  it  is  for  thy  good.    Now  they  may  well  be  called  ours— First, 
because  they  come  fi'om  God's  gracious  love  to  us.     It  is  the  same  haud  that  doth 
stroke  thee  and  strike  thee  (Heb.  xii.  G  ;  Psa.  cxix.  15) .    Thy  tribulations  are  for  thy 
advantage,  as  much  as  all  the  mercies  thou  ever  enjoyedst.     Go  to  ihe  fountnin 
from  whence  they  came,  and  that  is  nothing  but  precious  love.     Secondly,  they 
are  thine  for  the  blesst-d  and  heavenly  effects  they  work  on  the  godly,  so  tl  at  they 
could  not  be  so  well  without   them.     Now  of  ninny  excelh  nt  effects,  consider — 
(1)  They  are  to  humble  us  for  sin,  to  make  us  feel  how  bitter  it  is  to  go  out  of  God's 
way.     What  profit  have  I  of  such  sins  that  now  do  so  wound  me  ?     (2)  Another 
end  is,  to  make  us  more  vigilant  for  the  future,  to  fn-eserve  us  against  futuie  tempta- 
tions.    W"e  have  been  burnt  already.     Thirdly,  these  atflicnous  are  ours,  because 
they  are  exercises  to  draw  out  our  graces,  our  faith,  our  patitnce,  our  heavenly- 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

niindedness,   and  thereby  our  crown  of    glory  is   greater.     (A.    Burrtess.)  Or 

tilings  to  come. —  Things  to  come  : — I.  The  begad  fuxueb  is  cues.  We  are  apt  to 
wish  to  pry  into  it,  but  grace  forbids  us  to  indulge  impertinent  and  foolish  curiosity. 
My  text  is  a  crvslal  ball,  which  doth  not  tpU  thee  facts  and  minutife,  but  what  it  is 
far  better  for  thee  to  know,  if  thou  be  Christ's — viz.,  that  all  future  things  are 
vested  in  thy  name.  Let  that  content  thee.  1.  We  have  no  reason  to  expect  that 
the  rest  of  our  life  will  be  more  unhappy  than  the  years  which  are  passed  already. 
Life  to  us  has  its  sorrows,  but  goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  us  hitherto, 
and  they  shall  with  equal  certainty  follow  us  all  the  days  of  our  life.  You  who 
are  contending  against  sin  may  anticipate  the  joy  of  conquest.  You  who  are 
planning  how  you  can  serve  God  on  a  wider  scale,  and  in  a  wiser  manner,  may 
expect  the  joy  of  His  guidance,  2.  Still,  without  any  foolish  forebodings,  you 
may  expect  troubles.  Changes  in  circumstances  may  arise,  poverty  may  supplant 
wealth,  and  slander  injure  fame,  or  if  not,  thy  friends  must  die.  Then,  sooner 
or  later,  bodily  infirmities  must  set  in.  And  there  must  come  temptations  and 
inward  conflicts,  in  all  which  we  shall  have  need  to  possess  our  souls  in  patience, 
lest  we  be  overcome  of  evil.  And  certainly  to  us  all  there  must  come  the  valley  of 
death-shade;  "  for  it  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die."  3.  Passing  on  a  little 
further,  in  the  Word  of  God  we  have  dark  hints  as  to  the  grand  events  of  the 
future,  which  concern  the  Church  and  the  world.  All  things  that  shall  happen, 
be  they  ever  so  counter  to  your  wishes,  will,  nevertlieless,  come  up,  like  Blucher  at 
Waterloo,  at  the  exact  moment  when  they  shall  help  on  the  grand  old  cause. 
4.  Amongst  the  things  to  come,  there  is  heaven — the  heaven  of  the  separate  spirit, 
and  the  perfect  heaven,  when  soul  and  body  in  one  man  shall  sit  down  at  the  right 
hand  of  God — all  this  is  ours.  IL  The  bright  eterxal  futdre  is  ours.  1.  Notice 
that  the  text  is  not  "  all  may  be  yours."  According  to  some  a  Christian  may  have 
a  hope  of  heaven,  but  he  can  never  have  a  certainty  of  it.  2.  Notice,  too,  that  the 
text  is  not — "  Things  to  come  sliall  be  yours."  But  how  can  they  be  ours  till  they 
have  come?  Because  we  have  a  title  to  them  ;  and  though,  like  nobles  who  are 
under  age,  we  come  not  into  our  estates  until  we  have  reached  our  majority,  yet 
those  estates  are  as  much  ours  as  if  we  possessed  them  at  this  moment.  When 
one  of  our  English  kings  demanded  of  his  barons  where  were  their  title  deeds  to 
their  lands,  a  hundred  swords  flashed  from  the  scabbards,  as  every  man  swore  to 
maintain  his  right  by  his  good  sword.  We  take  no  sword  from  its  scabbard,  but 
■we  iDoint  to  Christ,  for  He  is  both  our  God  and  our  right,  and  we  are  persuaded 
that  as  our  Surety  and  Representative,  He  will  preserve  our  inheritance  for  us. 
3.  Notice,  again,  that  in  the  text  there  is  no  exception — "  Things  to  come;  all  are 
yours."  Whatever  may  be  the  future  glory  of  the  saints,  it  all  belongs  to  them. 
And  as  there  is  no  exception  of  things,  so  there  is  no  exception  of  persons.  Not 
"All  belongs  to  a  few  of  you,  and  only  a  portion  to  others."  4.  The  text  speaks 
without  a  grain  of  contingency  as  to  the  things  to  come.  It  does  not  say  heaven  is 
ours  if  there  be  a  heaven;  but  the  blessings  are  spoken  of  as  though  they  must 
come.  Our  future  glory  is  ordained  by  Divine  decree.  It  is  hastened  on  by  every 
event  of  Providence ;  it  is  prepared  by  the  ascension  and  session  of  our  Lord ;  in 
measure,  beatified  saints  are  aheady  partakers  of  it,  and  we  may  rest  assured  that 
by  no  means  shall  we  be  defrauded  of  it.  III.  Exa:\ii>,-e  well  your  title  deeds  to 
see  whether  they  belong  to  tou.  Are  you  Christ's  ?  Do  you  trust  Him  ?  Do 
you  love  Him  and  serve  Him  ?  If  so,  your  title  is  flear,  and  all  future  things  are 
yours.  Eejoice  even  now  in  your  inheritance.  Conclusion  :  1.  All  these  things 
are  yours  ;  then — (1)  Prepare  for  them.  (2)  Gratefully  bless  God  for  them. 
2.  If  thou  hast  no  title  for  these  things  to  come,  be  amazed  and  confounded, 
for  it  will  be  an  awful  thing  for  heaven  to  come  and  thou  no  entrance  into 
it.  God  grant  that  thou  mayest  lay  hold  on  Christ  by  an  act  of  faith  ;  thus 
and  thus  only  the  blessings  of  Christ  shull  become  yours.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ  and  the  future : — I.  Humanity  has  a  grand  future.  Consider — 1.  The 
possibilities  of  nature.  The  scoffer  speaks  of  all  things  continuing  as  they  were 
from  the  beginning  of  the  creation,  but  the  scoffer  is  wrong.  Things  have  changed, 
are  changing,  and  will  change  immensely  yet.  You  cannot  look  into  the  prophecy 
of  Isaiah,  into  tl)e  aigument  of  Paul,  into  the  vision  of  John,  without  a  deep  feeling 
of  the  coming  glorification  of  nature.  "  Yes,''  you  say,  "  but  we  cannot  build  much 
on  these."  Very  well,  then,  listen  to  a  President  of  the  Koyal  Society.  Sir  J.  W. 
Dawson  writes:  "There  have  been,  and  might  be  ayain,  conditions  which  would 
convert  the  ice-clad  arctic  regions  into  blooming  paradises,  and  which,  at  the  same 
time,  would  moderate  the  fervent  heat  of  the  tropics.     We  are  accustomed  to  say 


CHAP.  HI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  327 

that  notliing  is  impossible  with  God  ;  but  how  Uttle  have  we  known  of  the  gigantic 
possibiHtios  which  lie  hidden  under  some  of  the  most  common  of  His  natural 
laws  !  "  "  How  great  is  Thy  goodness,  which  Thou  hast  laid  up,  which  Thou  hast 
hidden,  for  them  that  fear  Thee  !  "  Nature  is  a  great  storehouse,  whose  treasures 
of  darkness  will  in  due  time  be  brought  into  the  light.  2.  The  possibilities  of 
society.  (1)  Who  shall  say  where  the  perfecting  of  our  physical  nature  shall  end  ? 
The  coming  man,  according  to  science,  is  to  be  tall,  and  free,  and  lofty  of  carriage, 
having  a  godlike  intelligence  of  countenance.  And  the  woman  of  the  future  is  to 
grow  with  and  through  the  ages  in  strength  and  beauty.  (2)  Who  shall  say  what 
the  intellectual  force  of  the  coming  man  may  be?  Emerson  speaks  of  "  the 
unexplored  riches  of  the  human  constitution,"  and  it  is  delightful  to  think  of  the 
faculties  of  our  nature  which  are  yet  so  largely  undeveloped.  (3)  Our  senses  now 
only  take  in  a  bit  of  the  universe,  and  a  larger  education  of  those  senses  will  bring 
into  ken  new  continents  of  wonder  and  wealth.  We  in  the  nineteenth  century  are 
wonderful  people,  but  in  a  century  or  two  more  we  shall  appear  to  our  posterity 
Jnere  barbarians.  (4)  Who  shall  say  what  the  social  perfection  of  the  future  shall 
be?  Tlie  Book  of  the  Revelation  has  proved  a  stumbling-block  to  many.  But 
George  Lewes  reminds  us  that  Comte's  system  has  its  Apocalypse  as  full  of  wonder- 
ful things  touching  a  gloiified  humanity  as  John's  cities  of  gold.  So  all  parties 
are  full  of  expectations  of  progress — saints,  scientists,  socialists,  are  looking  for 
ages  of  gold.  Men  are  always  asking  for  finality,  but  there  is  no  finality  in  any- 
thing. We  move  from  evil  to  good,  from  good  to  better,  from  better  to  better  still. 
Every  new  discovery  fills  us  with  wonder  and  delight,  and  we  are  prone  to  stay 
with  it,  to  rest  in  it,  as  if  it  were  the  ultimate  glory ;  but  God  keeps  saving  to  us, 
"  Thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  these. "  Some  men  talk  of  the  world  fin\shing  ; 
it  is  but  commencing.  This  is  but  the  first  stage  of  our  existence,  and  new  earths 
and  new  heavens  open  on  our  sight.  II.  The  grand  future  of  humanity  will  be 
REALISED  IN  Chiust.  Tliis  is  the  distinct  teaching  of  the  Scriptures.  The  Old 
Testament  teaches  that  in  Messiah  the  world,  the  ages,  will  become  the  possession 
of  the  faithful.  In  the  Hebrews  we  are  tanght  that  Christ  is  Heir  of  all  things, 
and  that  He  brings  many  sons  to  share  His  glory  ;  and  so  in  Eom.  viii.  Tlie  God 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  apostle  declares  in  the  Ephesians,  hath  set  Christ  at 
His  own  right  hand  in  the  heavenly  places,  and  hath  put  all  things  under  His  feet, 
and  gave  Him  to  be  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Churdh,  which  is  His  body.  1.  It 
is  only  in  godliness  that  there  is  progress.  (1)  Eeligion,  in  setting  the  living  God 
before  us,  sets  before  us  a  grand  inspiring  Ideal,  which  makes  the  highest  perfection 
possible.  We  have  only  to  look  to  China  to  find  an  illustration  of  the  non-pro- 
gressiveness  of  an  atheistic  people.  It  is  the  land  of  arrested  development,  of 
fossils,  of  petrifactions.  If  you  could  take  religion  out  of  our  civilisation,  as  some 
desire,  Europe  would  immediately  resemble  the  fabled  city  in  which  every  person 
and  thing  was  changed  into  stone.  (2)  Now,  if  godliness  be  the  life  of  the  race, 
Christianity  is  the  religion  of  progress,  because  it  gives  us  the  highest  conception 
of  godliness.  Blessed  is  the  nation  th»t  has  God  in  Christ  for  its  Ideal.  How  can 
it  stand  still  ?  "Nearer,  my  GoJ,  to  Thee,  nearer  to  Thee,"  will  be  its  motto,  its 
evolving  force,  its  strength  and  glory.  It  is  only  in  righteousness  that  there 
is  progress.  Moral  advancement  is  the  condition  of  all  other  advancement,  and  it 
would  be  utterly  ruinous  if  our  material  prosperity  outran  our  moral  wealth.  There 
is  certain  knowleilge  and  a  certain  liberty  you  keep  from  a  child,  who  could  only 
abuse  them ;  and  you  give  him  a  spoon  until  he  is  lit  to  be  trusted  with  knives, 
razors,  and  swords.  So  it  is  with  the  nations.  It  was  necessary  that  there  should 
be  a  fuller  moral  discipline  in  the  race  before  we  could  be  trusted  with  certain 
knowledge  and  instruments  and  forces.  And  so  God  will  continue  to  enrich  us  as 
we  are  morally  fit  for  fuller  wealth  and  dominion  ;  just  as  Christ  sets  up  amongst 
us  the  righteousness  of  God,  so  shall  all  other  things  be  added  unto  us.  2.  It  is 
only  in  hope  that  there  is  progress.  "  When  the  heart  sinks  the  ship  sinks,"  and 
when  a  people  lose  heart  the  mightiest  and  richest  civilisation  suffers  wreck.  Now, 
the  religion  of  Christ  is  pre-emiuently  the  religion  of  hope.  Of  the  confusion  and 
anguish  of  the  world  there  is  no  mistake,  but  everything  depends  upon  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  wailing  creation.  Pays  the  pessimistic  philosophy,  the  world  is  in 
its  death-throes.  And  herein  that  philosophy  strikes  at  the  very  root  of  civilisation 
and  progress.  No,  says  Christianity,  it  is  the  birth-pang  of  a  grander  world  that 
is  now  coming  into  the  light.  And  herein  is  the  faith  of  Christ  a  well-spring  of 
life  and  energy  to  our  race  hs  it  struggles  onward  to  its  goal  of  glory.  We  are 
saved  by  hope— that  is,  by  Christ.     {IV.  L.  Watldnaon.)  The  Christiau''s  2^osses- 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

sions  : — Here  is  the  three- fold  cord  which  unites  earth  with  heaven.     I.  The  source 
of  all  things— God.      He  possesses  all  things.     1.  By  creation.     2.  By  undisputed 
authority.      There  is  no  other  being  in  the  world  to  dispute   His  right.      3.  By 
practical  manifestation.      He  regulates  all  we  see  and  know.      II.  The  eecipients 
of  all  things — "All  things  are  yours."      1.  In  the  Church — its  members,  their 
labours,  graces,  and  efforts.     2.  In  the  present  world — that  is,  all  its  highest  good. 
3.  In  the  world  to  come — life,  death,  and  eternity.     III.  The  medium  of  connec- 
tion— "  Ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."     Here  is  one  Being  standing  between 
man  and  God.     Christ's  relationship  to  the  Father  renders  Him  proprietor  of  the 
universe.     His  relationship  to  us  gives  us  all  He  possessed.     We  are  one  with  Him 
who  is  one  with  the  Father.    (Ilomilist.)      Inclusions  : — I.  All  things  fob  man — so 
wide  is  the  first  inclusion.     Laws  and  forces,  beauties  and  sublimities,  thought, 
invention,  genius,  endeavour,  failure,  victory — the  history  of  thf-m,  the  evolution  to 
which  they  have  contributed — life  and  death,  what  is,  and  what  is  to  be — such  is 
man's  inheritance.     "  How  the  world  is  made  for  each  of  us!  " — each  a  centre  to 
which  the  streams  of  a  thousand  hills  converge,  the  rays  of  a  thousand  stars,  the 
sorrows  and  joys  of  ten  thousand  hearts.      "  Man  is  one  world,  and  hath  another 
to  attend  him."    He  can  go  the  whole  round  of  creation,  selecting,  appropriating 
■what  he  will.      II.  But  there  is  another  inclusion  by  which  the  first  is  ruled 
AND  BiADE  CONSONANT  WITH  OUR  TRUE  POSITION.     It  Cannot  Seem  that  our  enjoyment 
and  use  exhaust  the  economy  of  the  world.     Does  any  one  go  the  whole  round  of 
creation  and  gather  its  gems  to  enrich  himself? — then  his  wisdom  is  at  an  end. 
The  whole  would  be  lost,  as  mere  unproductive  expenditure,  if  men  kept  it  for 
their  own  glory.     There  is  One  who  claims  men.     The  end  of  God's  gifts  is  not 
to  aggrandise  a  man  so  that  he  shall  become  a  self-satisfied  vanity,  filled  with  the 
wind  of  knowledge,  the  i^ride  of  possession.     The  law  is — All  belongs  to  you,  and 
you  to  Christ.     It  is  when  we  are  possessed  by  Clirist,  and  our  life  is  His  tribute, 
that  the  wealth  of   nature  and  the  bounty  of   providence  fill  our  souls  to   their 
spiritual  fulness.      III.  And  the  final  inclusion  gives  a  perfect  is^sue  to  the  series. 
All  is  from  God,  and  returns  through  Christ  to  God.      Where  else  can  there  be 
an  end?     The  world  and  life,  the  streams  from  a  thousand  springs,  flow  into  the 
being  of  the  man  whose  soul  is  opened  and  enlarged  by  his  devotion  to  Christ. 
And  Christ  with  all  the  men  He  has  made  His  own,  and  all  they  have  gathered 
from  the  generous  creation,  a  lyoad,  deep,  rejoicing  river,  must  flow  iu  eternal 
tribute  to  the  Father.     Conclusion  :  We  see — 1.   The  use  of  the  world — to  enlarge 
the  mind,  enrich  the  soul,  and  perfect  the  power  of  man.      2.  The  place  of  men 
with  all  their  science,  power,  and  experience,  gathered  from  the  vassal  world — to 
Eerve  Christ,  to  make  for  Him  a  manifold  kingdom  of  brave,  wise,  earnest  life.     3. 
Christ  as  mediatorial  Prince,  all  the  conquests,  gains,  and  harvests  of  His  patient 
toil  and  splendid  sacrifice  devoted  to  the  glory  of  the  Father,  whose  He  is.     This  is 
the  cycle  which  completes  the  Chiistian  philosophy  of  being,  the  economy  of  the 
natural  and  spiritual  universe,  revealing  the  glory  of  the  world,  of  man,  of  Christ, 
and  of  God.     [R.  A.  Watson,  M.A.)         An.  account  of  stock  : — We  have  here  a  roll 
of  government  securities — a  warranty-deed  to  the  whole  universe.     In  making  an 
inventory  of  the  Christian's  possessions,  I  remark — I.  That  he  owns  this  world. 
If  you  have  a  large  park,  a  grand  mansion,  &c.,  to  whom  will  you  give  the  first 
right  to  them  ?     To  your  own  children.     Now  this  world  is  God's  park,  and  while 
He  allows  those  who  refuse  His  authority  the  privilege  of  walking  through,  all  this 
grandeur  is  the  right  of  the  Christian.     He  may  not  have  the  title  deed  to  one  acre 
of  land ;  but  we  can  go  up  on  a  mountain  and  look  off  and  say,  "  All  this  is  mine : 
my  Father  gave  it  to  me."     Lawyers  when  they  search  into  titles  often  find  every- 
thing right  for  some  years  back;  but,  after  a  while,  they  come  to  a  break  in  the 
title,  a  diversion  of  the  property,  and  find  that  the  man  who  supposed  he  owned  it 
has  no  ri^ht  to  it  at  all.      Now  examine  the  title  to  all  earthly  possessions.     Go 
back  a  little  way,  and  men  of  the  world  think  they  have  a  right  to  them  ;  but  go 
farther  back,  und  you  will  find  the  whole  right  vested  in  God.     Now,  to  whom  did 
He  convey  it  ?     To  His   own  children  !     And  in  the  last  days  they  will  have  it 
literally.     "  The  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."     The  Christian  has  a  right  to — 1. 
The  refinements  of  life.     He  has  a  right  to  as  fine  apparel,  to  as  beautiful  adorn- 
ments, to  as  elegant  a  residence.     Show  me  any  passage  that  tells  the  people  of  the 
world  that  they  have  privileges  that  are  denied  the  Christian.     2.  All  the  sweet 
sounds.     When  did  the  house  of  sin  or  the  bacchanal  get  the  right  to  music  ?     3. 
All  artistic  and  literary  advantage.     I  do  not  care  on  whose  wall  the  picture  hangs, 
or  on  whose  pedestal  the  sculpture  stands,   "All  are  jours."      4.  Full  temporal 


CHAP.  III.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  329 

support.  The  commissary  department  of  an  army  will  busy  scores  of  people,  but 
just  think  of  the  commissary  department  of  a  world  !  God  spreads  this  table  first 
of  all  for  His  children,  and  therefore  it  is  extreme  folly  for  tliem  ever  to  fret  about 
food  or  raiment.  If  God  takes  care  of  a  wasp,  will  He  not  take  care  of  you  ?  5. 
All  the  vicissitudes  of  tliis  life,  so  far  as  they  have  any  religious  profit.  Tliere  are 
a  great  many  sharp  curves  in  life;  but  if  we  are  Christians  we  are  on  the  right 
track,  and  are  going  to  come  out  at  the  right  place.  In  tliis  voyage  of  life  we  often 
have  to  change  our  tacks.  One  storm  blows  us  this  way,  and  another  that  wav ; 
but  He  who  holds  the  winds  in  His  fist  will  bring  us  into  the  haven  at  the  right 
time.  One  of  the  best  things  that  ever  happened  to  Paul  was  being  thrown  off  his 
hors*^.  One  of  the  best  things  tliat  ever  htippened  to  Joseph  was  being  thrown 
into  the  pit.  The  losing  of  his  physical  eyesight  helped  John  Milton  to  see  the 
battle  of  the  angels.  All  things  work  together  for  your  good.  II.  He  owns  the 
NEXT.  Death  is  not  a  rutlian  that  comes  to  burn  us  out  of  house  and  home,  to 
leave  us  homeless  for  ever.  He  is  only  a  messenger  who  comes  to  tell  us  it  is 
time  to  move  from  this  hut  into  that  palace.  The  Christian  owns  all  heaven.  He 
will  not  walk  in  the  eternal  city  as  a  foreigner,  but  as  a  farmer  walks  over  his  own 
premises.  "  All  are  yours."  All  the  mansions  j'ours.  Angels  your  companions. 
Trees  of  life  your  shade.  You  look  up  into  the  face  of  God,  and  say,  "  My  Father." 
You  look  up  into  the  face  of  Jesus  and  say,  "  My  brother."  Y^ours  the  love.  Yours 
the  acclaim.     Yours  the  transport.     (2'.  De  Witt  Talmuge,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.3.  And  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's.  —  Ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is 
GocVs  : — I.  "  CiiKisT  IS  God's."  To  understand  tliis  high  saying  we  must  remember 
that  Christ  is  God.  But  Christ  is  man  also.  As  Man,  Christ  is  God's  great  Agent 
for  man  in  every  respect.  1.  He  is  God's  Messenger,  God's  Witness,  to  reveal  the 
mind  and  heart  of  God  towards  fallen  men.  His  whole  life  is  an  index  by  which 
you  may  read  the  secret  spring  of  love  divine;  in  Him  "God  is  love."  2.  He  is 
God's  Servant — obedient  in  life,  "  obedient  unto  death."  3.  He  is  God's  Piiest — ■ 
the  One  only  "  Mediator  between  God  and  men,"  who  '•  ever  liveth  to  make  inter- 
cession for  them."  4.  He  is  God's  King,  reigning  now  invisibly  in  truth,  and  to 
reign  in  due  time  visibly  in  righteousness  over  the  whole  earth.  II.  "  Ye  are 
Chkist's."  1.  By  creation,  in  common  with  all  things.  "All  things  were  made 
by  Him,"  etc.  2.  By  pui'chase,  in  common  with  all  mankind.  He  "  tasted  death 
for  every  man."  3.  By  ordinance,  in  common  with  all  Christendom.  4.  By  gift 
from  God  the  Father.  5.  By  the  secret  power  of  the  eternal  Spirit  working  in  due 
season,  according  to  the  purpose  and  plan  of  God.  6.  In  the  enjoyment  of  a 
friendship  and  fellowship  such  as  no  other  friendship  can  equal.  {H.  McNeile, 
D.D.)  That  a  godly  man  in  all  that  lie  is,  or  can  do,  is  wholli/  Christ's  : — Where 
■we  may  observe  the  apostle  in  a  climax  rising  higher,  "All  things  are  yours,  you 
are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  So  that  the  highest  round  in  this  ladder  reacheth 
to  heaven  as  Jacob's  did,  and  the  lowest  one  is  in  the  earth.  "  All  things  are  yours," 
there  is  your  privilege;  but  "you  are  Christ's,"  there  is  your  duty;  even  to  see 
that  whatever  you  are,  or  can  do,  it  be  in  reverence  to  Him.  So  all  things  are  for 
the  godly,  and  the  godly  is  for  Christ.  I.  Let  us  consider  in  what  respects  the 
GODLY  MAX  IS  Ciirist's.  1.  He  is  bought  and  purchased  by  His  blood,  so  that  he 
oweth  all  his  being,  comforts,  and  privileges  to  Christ  (chap.  vi.  19,  20).  So  then, 
well  may  the  godly  man  be  said  to  be  Chiist's,  for  he  cometh  to  be  His  at  a  dear 
rate.  Never  did  king  get  subject,  or  master  a  servant,  at  so  dear  a  price  as  Clirist 
obtained  thee.  2.  The  godly  they  are  Christ's  because  by  His  Spirit  they  are 
made  new  creatures.  They  have  a  new  being.  For  it  cannot  be  that  any  should 
be  Christ's  who  live  in  the  flesh  and  are  carnally  minded.  3.  Tljey  are  Christ's 
because  He  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last,  the  beginning  and  the 
end.  He  is  the  Alpha ;  He  is  the  Author  and  Fountain  of  all  the  spiritual  good  we 
have ;  and  the  apostle  calls  Him  "  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith  "  (Heb.  xii. 
2).  It  is  He  that  giveth  life  and  motion  and  all  spiritual  streuglh  to  us.  Now 
every  effect  is  more  the  cause's  than  it  is  its  own.  Seeing,  therefore,  thou  hast  no 
good  but  what  thou  hast  received  from  Christ,  thou  art  wholly  to  depend  on  Him, 
as  the  stream  is  on  the  fountain,  as  the  light  is  on  the  sun— for  take  them  away 
and  tht  se  imojediately  perish.  We  are  not  to  live  to  ourselves,  but  to  Him  (Gal.  iii. 
20).  All  our  graces  are  to  carry  us  out  of  ourselves  to  Christ,  our  faith  in  Christ, 
our  love  and  affections  to  be  pitched  on  Christ.  4.  We  are  Christ's  in  that  all  our 
Christian  completeness  is  in  Him  (Col.  i.  19).  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him 
should   all   fulness   dwell.      The  privileges   of  justification,   aud  adoptiou,    wud 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [cuap.  hi. 

sanetification,  that  we  have  by  Him,  are  to  be  more  than  meat  or  drink  unto  us. 
5.  We  are  Christ's  because  we  are  wholly  to  be  disposed  by  Him  in  all  conditions, 
in  all  exercises  and  temptations.  For  Christ  being  made  a  Lord  and  King  over 
us,  He  orders  us  in  all  things.  II.  Now  in  the  next  place  let  us  consider  some 
CHAEACTEES  OE  PROPEETiES  OF  SUCH  AS  AEE  Cheist's.  1.  They  desiro  more  know- 
ledge of  Him,  more  acquaintance  with  Him;  they  prize  Him  above  all  worldly 
things  (Pliil.  iii.  8).  2.  Those  that  are  Christ's  abhor  and  have  no  communion 
with  any  sin  or  wickedness,  because  that  only  Christ  hateth.  3.  Those  that  are 
Christ's,  they  live  not  to  themselves  but  to  Him.  They  please  not  themselves  or 
others  in  a  hinful  way.  Exhortation  to  those  who  are  Christ's  to  lie  self-denying, 
to  take  up  Christ's  cross,  to  love  Him  more  than  all  they  have ;  for  Chiist  is  not 
for  thee,  but  thou  for  Christ.  (A.  Biirgess.)  Christ  is  God's : — Now  the  doctrine 
speaks  of  Christ  both  in  respect  of  His  human  nature,  and  as  He  is  a  Mediator — 
not  as  God.     Let  us  see,  then,  how  Christ  as  a  man  and  as  a  Mediator  is  God's. 

1.  His  incarnation  and  coming  into  the  world,  it  was  not  for  Himself  but  for  God. 

2.  That  Christ  is  God's  appeareth,  in  that  He  acknowledgeth  His  doctrine  and  truth 
not  to  be  His,  but  His  Father's,  taking  all  off  from  Himself,  and  making  Himself 
only  a  minister  or  ambassador  in  His  Father's  Name,  and  revealing  His  will 
(John  viii.  26,  28 ;  vii.  16).  3.  That  Christ  is  wholly  God's  appeareth  iu  that  as 
the  doctrine  He  preached  was  the  Father's,  so  He  sought  not  His  own  glory,  did 
not  exalt  Himself  but  the  Father  (John  viii.  29  ;  xvii.  4).  4.  That  Christ  is  wholly 
God's  appeareth  in  that  obediential  resignation  of  Himself  to  do  God's  will 
(John  xvii.  4).  {Ibid.}  Ye  are  Christ's  means  that  we  are  dependent  on  Him 
and  belong  to  Him.  Note — I.  Cheist's  propeietokship.  1.  In  this  is  involved 
the  denial — (1)  That  we  are  our  own.  We  do  not  belong  to  ourselves  in  the  sense 
that  our  own  advantage  can  be  the  legitimate  end  of  our  pursuit,  or  that  our  will 
can  be  the  legitimate  rule  of  our  conduct.  (2)  That  we  belong  to  the  world, 
parents,  friends,  country,  mankind  in  either  of  the  above  senses ;  that  their  good  or 
their  will  can  be  the  legitimate  end  or  rule.  (3)  That  we  belong  to  the  Church. 
It  is  a  fatal  error  to  live  for  and  be  governed  by  the  Church,  and  know  no  higher 
end  or  rule  or  duty.  2.  Positively  the  declaration  includes  that  we  are  Christ's  in 
such  a  sense  that  His  glory  is  the  end  and  His  will  the  rule  of  our  life.  He,  and 
He  alone,  has  the  right  to  us.  To  Him,  and  to  Him  alone,  is  devotion  and  sub- 
mi-sion  due.  II.  Its  basis.  1.  Not  specially  creation,  for  as  creatuies  we  belong 
to  the  Triune  God.  2.  But — (1)  Gift.  From  countless  orders  of  creatures  the 
people  of  Christ  were  given  Him,  in  the  counsels  of  eternity,  as  a  peculium,  a 
speciality,  in  which  He  was  to  have  exclusive  right.  God  as  Sovereign  of  the 
universe  can  give  what  He  pleases,  and  His  will  is  the  only  real  and  stable  ground 
of  property  or  possession.  (2)  Purchase,  (a)  This  gives  the  right  of  property  as 
founded  on  justice,  (b)  The  purchase  involving  redemption  from  infinite  evil  gives 
the  higher  and  tenderer  obligation  of  gratitude,  (c)  The  price  paid  being  His  own 
precious  blood  it  gives  the  highest  of  all  obligations,  that  of  love.  (3)  Conquest. 
We  were  the  captives  of  Satan.  Christ  has  destroyed  his  power  and  delivered  us 
who  were  led  captive  at  his  will.  III.  Its  various  forus.  We  are — 1.  The 
servants  of  Christ,  which  expresses  the  relation  as  founded  in  justice.  We  are 
bound  as  His  SovXm  to  live  fur  Him  and  obey  Him.  2.  His  bride.  This  includes 
the  ideas  of — (1)  Exclusive  possession.  (2)  Preference  and  peculiar  love.  (3) 
Perfect  community  of  interest.  3.  His  friends,  bound  to  Him  by  mutual  love  and 
contidence.  4.  His  body.  Nothing  is  so  intimately  a  man's  own  as  his  body.  It 
has  a  common  life  and  consciousness  with  him.  The  pains  and  pleasures  of  the 
body  are  our  own  pains  and  pleasures.  It  has  a  common  interest  and  destiny  with 
us.  So  are  we  bound  to  Christ  in  all  these  ways.  This  is  the  neaiest  relationship 
of  all.  IV.  The  blessedness  eesultixg  from  it.  1.  Security.  If  we  belong  to 
Christ  as  His  servants,  &c.,  we  are  secure  for  time  and  eternity.  2.  Participation 
in  Christ's  excellence,  both  as  to  soul  and  body — in  His  happiness,  gloiy,  and 
dominion.  V.  Ddties.  1.  That  we  should  act  worthy  of  this  relation.  Eemember 
that  we  belong  neither  to  ourselves  nor  the  world,  but  only  to  Christ.  2.  Content- 
ment. We  may  well  be  saiisiied  if  we  are  Christ's,  for  all  things  are  ours.  3. 
Jo\ful  anticij)ation  of  Christ's  comiiig.  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Ye  are  Christ's: — You 
are  His — I.  15y  donation  ;  for  the  Father  g  ive  you  to  the  Son.  II.  By  pdechase  ; 
for  He  counted  down  the  prii-e  for  your  redemption.  III.  By  dedication  ;  for  you 
have  consecrated  yourself  to  Him.  IV.  By  relation;  for  you  are  named  by  His 
name,  and  ma'ie  one  of  His  biethren  and  joint  heirs.  Application — Labour 
practically  to  show  the  wurld  that  you  are — (1)  The  servant.     (2)  The  friend.     (3) 


I.  CORINTHIANS.  331 


The  bride  of  Jesus.     (C.  H.  Spiir/jeon.)  The  possession : — A  gentleman  one  clay 

took  an  acquaintance  to  the  top  of  his  house  to  show  him  the  extent  of  his  posses- 
sions. Waving  his  hand  about,  "There,"  said  he,  "that  is  my  estate."  Then 
pointing  to  a  great  distance  on  one  side,  "Do  you  see  that  faim?"  "Yes." 
"  Well,  that  is  mine."  Pointing  again  to  the  other  side,  "  Do  you  see  that 
house?"  "Yes."  "That  also  belongs  to  me."  "Then,"  said  his  friend,  "do 
you  see  that  little  village  out  yonder?"  "Yes."  "Well,  there  lives  a  jDoor 
■woman  in  ttiat  village  ■who  can  say  more  than  all  this."  "Ayl  what  can  she 
say?  "     "  Why,  she  can  say,  '  Christ  is  mine.'"     He  looked  confounded,  and  said 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  1-5.  Let  a  man  so  account  of  us  as  of  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  ste'w^ards 
of  the  mysteries  of  God. — The  miuistri/ : — So  keenly  alive  is  Paul  to  the  danger 
and  folly  of  party-spirit,  that  he  has  still  one  more  word  of  rebuke  to  utter.  I.  Padl. 
AND  inn  REST  WERE  SERVANTS  AND  STEWARDS.  1.  The  question  therefore  was,  were 
they  faithful?  not,  were  they  eloquent  or  philosophical?  Criticism  no  preacher 
need  expect  to  escape.  Sometimes  one  might  suppose  sermons  were  of  no  other 
use  than  to  furnish  material  for  discussion.  But  who  shall  say  which  style  is  most 
edifying  to  the  Church  and  which  teacher  is  most  faithfully  serving  his  Master? 
2.  Witli  him  who  is  conscious  that  he  must  give  account  to  his  Master,  "  it  is  a 
very  small  thing  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment,"  whether  for  applause  or  c<n- 
demnation.  A  teacher  who  thinks  for  himself  is  compelled  to  utter  trutlis  which  he 
knows  will  be  misuiulevstood  by  many  ;  but  so  long  as  he  is  conscious  of  his  fidelity 
this  does  not  trouble  him.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  applause  of  men  comes  to 
him  only  as  a  reminder  that  there  is  no  finality  in  man's  judgment,  and  that  it  is 
only  Christ's  approval  which  avails  to  give  permanent  satisfaction.     II.  Great 

DIFFICULTY  HAS  ALWAYS  BEEN  EXPERIENCED  IN  TRACING  THE  SIMILARITIES  AND  DISTINC- 
TIONS    BETWEEN     THE    APOSTLES    AND    THE    ORDINARY    MINISTRY,     and    had    Paul     beCU 

■writing  in  our  own  day  he  would  have  spoken  more  definitely.  For  what  makes 
union  hopeless  in  Cliristendom  at  present  is  not  that  parties  are  formed  round 
individual  leaders,  but  that  Churches  are  based  on  diametrically  opposed  opinions 
regarding  the  ministry  itself.  1.  As  in  the  State  a  prince,  though  legitimate, 
dots  not  succeed  to  the  throne  without  formal  coronation,  so  in  the  Church 
there  is  needed  a  formal  recognition  of  the  title  which  any  one  claims  to  office. 
2.  It  would  therefore  seem  to  be  every  one's  duty  to  inquire,  before  he  gives 
himself  to  another  profession  or  business,  whether  Christ  is  not  claiming  him 
to  serve  in  His  Church.  III.  Paul  concludes  this  portion  of  his  Epistle  with  a 
pathetic  comparison  of  his  condition  as  an  apostle  with  the  condition  of  those 
IN  Corinth  who  were  glorying  in  this  or  that  teacher  (ver.  8).  With  the  fiothy 
spirit  of  young  converts,  they  aie  full  of  a  triumph  which  they  despise  Paul  for 
not  inculcating.  While  tbey  thus  triumjihed,  he  who  had  begotten  them  in  Christ 
■was  being  treated  as  the  offscouring  and  tilth  of  the  world.  1.  Paul  can  only  com- 
pare himself  and  the  other  apostles  to  those  gladiators  who  came  into  the  arena 
last,  after  the  spectators  had  been  sated  with  bloodless  performances  (ver.  9). 
While  others  sat  comfortably  looking  on,  they  were  in  the  arena,  exposed  to  ill- 
usage  and  death.  Life  became  no  e  isier,  the  world  no  kinder,  to  Paul  as  time  went 
on  (vei\  11).  Here  is  the  finest  mind,  the  noblest  spirit,  on  earth  ;  and  this  is  how 
he  is  treated.  And  yet  he  goes  on  with  his  work,  and  lets  nothing  interrupt  that 
(vers.  12,  13).  Nay,  it  is  a  life  which  he  is  so  far  from  giving  up  himself,  that  he 
will  call  to  it  the  easy-going  Christians  of  Corinth  (ver.  l(j).  2.  And  if  the  contrast 
between  Paul's  self-sacrificing  life  and  the  luxurious  life  of  the  Corinthians  might 
be  exj)ected  to  shame  them  into  Christian  service,  a  similar  coutiast  should 
accomplish  some  good  results  in  us.  Already  the  Corinthians  were  accepting  that 
pernicious  conception  of  Christianity  v\hich  looks  upon  it  as  merely  a  new  luxury. 
They  recognised  liow  happy  a  thing  it  is  to  be  forgiven,  to  be  at  peace  with  God,  to 
liave  a  sure  hope  of  life  everlasting.  As  yet  they  had  not  caught  a  glimpse  of  what 
is  involved  in  becoming  holy  as  Clirist  is  holy.  Are  there  none  still  who  listen  to 
Christianity  rather  as  a  voice  soothing  their  fears  than  as  a  bugle  suoiniouing  them 
to  conflict  ?     I'aul  does  not  summon  the  Church  to  be  outcast  from  all  joy ;  but 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

when  be  says,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,"  he  means  that  there  is  not  one  standard  of 
duty  for  him  and  another  for  us.  All  is  wrong  with  us  until  we  are  made  somehow 
to  recognise  that  we  liave  no  right  to  selfishly  aggrandise  while  Paul  is  driven 
through  life  with  scarcely  one  dny's  bread  provided.  If  we  be  Christ's,  as  Paul 
was,  it  must  inevitably  come  to  cbis  with  us  :  that  we  cordially  yield  to  Him  all  we 
are  and  have.  If  our  hearts  be  His,  this  is  inevitable  and  delightful ;  unless  they 
be  so,  it  is  impossible,  and  seems  extravagant.  3.  It  was  Christ's  own  self-sacrifice 
that  threw  such  a  spell  over  the  apostles  and  gave  them  so  new  a  feeling  towards 
their  fellow-men  and  so  new  an  estimate  of  their  deepest  needs.  After  seeing  how 
Christ  lived,  they  could  never  again  justify  themselves  in  living  for  self.  And  it  is 
because  we  are  so  sunk  in  self-seeking  and  worldliness  that  we  continue  so  un- 
apostolic.  4.  It  might  encourage  us  to  bring  our  life  more  nearly  into  the  line  of 
Paul's  were  we  to  see  cleaiiy  that  the  cause  he  served  is  really  inclusive  of  all  that 
is  worth  working  for.  We  can  scarcely  apprehend  this  with  any  clearness  without 
feeling  some  enthusiasm  for  it.  You  have  seen  men  become  so  enamoured  of  a 
cause  that  they  will  literally  sell  all  they  have  to  forward  it,  and  when  such  a  cause 
is  worthy  tlie  men  who  adopt  it  seem  to  lead  the  only  lives  which  have  some 
semblance  of  glory  in  them.  Our  Lord,  by  claiming  our  service,  gives  us  the 
opportunity  of  saiking  our  selfishnes-^,  which  is  in  the  last  analysis  our  sin,  and  of 
living  for  a  worthier  object  than  our  own  pleasure  or  our  own  careful  preservation. 
When  He  tells  us  to  live  for  Him  and  to  seek  the  things  that  are  His,  He  but  tells 
us  in  other  words  and  in  a  more  atti'active  and  practical  form  to  seek  the  common 
good.  We  seek  the  things  that  are  Christ's  when  we  act  as  Clirist  would  act  were 
He  in  our  place.  (M.  Bods,  B.B.)  The  true  estimate  of  the  Christian  viinistri/  : — 
I.  Its  undue  glokification.     The  Christian  minister  may  be  made  an  idol  of — ■ 

1.  By  party  worship  of  the  man.  This  was  the  particular  danger  here.  Let  us 
take  the  cases  the  apostle  selects  (ver.  6)  as  specimens  of  all.  (1)  Paul  and  Apollos 
each  taught  a  truth  that  had  taken  possession  of  his  soul,  and  so  with  modern 
t'^achers.  Well,  this  truth  commends  itself  to  kindred  spirits  ;  it  expresses  their 
difficulties,  it  is  a  flood  of  light  on  many  a  dark  jjassage  of  their  history.  No 
wonder  that  they  view  with  gratitude  and  enthusiasm  the  messenger  of  this  blessed- 
ness. And  no  wonder  that  the  truth  thus  taught  becomes  at  last  the  chief,  ahiiost 
the  sole,  truth  i^roclaimed  by  him.  Because — (a)  Every  man  has  but  one  mind, 
and  must,  therefore,  repeat  himself,  {li)  That  which  has  won  attachment  from 
his  congregation  can  scarcely  be  made  subordinate  in  subsequent  teaching  without 
losing  that  att'tchment  ;  so  that  ministers  and  congregations  often  narrow  into  a 
party,  and  hold  one  truth  especially.  And  so  far  they  do  well ;  but  when  they  hold 
that  truth  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  truths  it  is  not  well ;  and  then,  when  with 
bitter  and  jealous  antagonism,  party-men  watch  all  other  religious  factions  but  their 
own,  the  sectarian  work  is  done:  the  minister  is  at  once  the  idol  and  the  slave  of 
the  party.  (2)  Now  St.  Paul  meets  this  with  his  usual  delicacy  (vcr.  6).  Think 
you  that  he  knew  nothing  of  that  which  is  so  dear  to  many  a  minister  in  our  day — 
the  power  of  gaining  the  confidence  of  his  people,  the  power  of  having  his  every 
word  accepted  as  infallible  ?  Yet  hear  him — I  am  a  minister,  a  steward  only.  I 
dare  not  be  a  party  leader,  for  I  am  the  servant  of  Him  who  came  to  make  all  one. 

2.  By  attributing  supernatural  powers  and  imaginary  gifts  to  the  office.  When 
one  claiming  the  power  of  the  keys,  and  pretending  to  the  power  of  miraculous 
conveyance  of  grace  in  the  sacraments ;  or,  declaring  that  he  has  an  especial 
power  to  receive  confession  and  to  forgive  sins  ;  then,  grave  men,  who  would  turn 
contemptuously  from  the  tricks  of  the  mere  preach^-r,  are  sometimes  subdued  before 
those  of  the  priest.  And  yet  this  is  but  the  same  thing  in  another  form  ;  for  pride 
and  vanity  sometimes  apjaear  in  the  very  guise  of  humility.  Who  would  not 
depreciate  himself  if,  by  magnifying  his  office,  he  obtained  the  power  he  loved? 
Bernard,  professing  to  be  unsecular,  yet  ruled  the  secular  aifairs  of  the  world,  and 
many  others  have  reigned  in  their  sackcloth  with  a  power  which  the  imperial  purple 
never  gave.  II.  Its  depreciation.  1.  There  is  a  way  common  enough  in  which 
Ihe  minister  is  viewed  simply  as  a  very  useful  regulation,  on  a  par  with  the  magis- 
tracy and  the  fiolice.  In  this  light  his  chief  duty  is  to  lecture  the  poor,  and  of  all 
the  texts  which  bear  on  politics  to  preach  from  only  two,  "  Render  unto  Caesar  the 
things  which  are  Ctesar's,"  and,  "Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers"  ; 
to  be  the  treasurer  of  charitable  institutions,  and  to  bless  the  rich  man's  banquet. 
Thus  the  office  is  simply  considered  a  pi-ofession,  a  "living"  for  the  younger 
branches  of  noble  houses,  and  an  advance  for  the  sons  of  those  of  a  lower  grade. 
In  this  view  a  degraJing  compact  is  made  between  the  minister  and  society.     If  he 


CHAP,  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  333 

will  not  interfere  with  abuses  and  only  echo  current  conventionalisms,  then  shall 
there  be  shown  to  him  the  condescending  patronage  which  comes  from  men  who 
stand  by  the  Church  as  they  would  stand  by  any  oiher  old  time-honoured  institu- 
tion ;  who  would  think  it  ill-bred  to  take  God's  name  in  vain  in  the  presence  of  a 
clergyman,  and  unmanly  to  insult  a  man  whose  profession  prevents  his  resenting 
indignities.  Now  it  is  enough  to  quote  the  apostle's  view  (ver.  1),  and  at  once  you 
are  in  a  different  atmosphere  of  thought.  2.  The  other  way  is  to  measure,  as  the 
Corinthians  did,  teachers  by  their  gifts,  and  in  proportion  to  their  acceptability  to 
them.  Men  seem  to  look  on  the  ministry  as  an  institution  intended  lor  their 
comfort,  for  their  gratification,  nay,  even  for  their  pastime.  In  this  way  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  seems  to  be  something  like  a  lecture,  professional  or 
popular ;  a  free  arena  for  light  discussion  and  flippant  criticism.  Now  St.  Paul 
(ver.  3)  simply  refuses  to  submit  his  authority  to  any  judgment;  and  this  you  will 
say,  perchance,  was  priestly  pride.  It  was  profound  humility  ;  he  was  to  be  judged 
before  a  tribunal  far  more  awful  than  Corinthian  society.  Fidelity  is  the  chief 
excellence  in  a  steward,  and  fidelity  is  j)recisely  that  which  men  cannot  judge  (vers. 
4,  5).  Another  Eye  had  seen,  and  He  could  tell  how  far  the  sentence  was  framed 
for  man's  applause ;  how  far  the  unpleasant  truth  was  softened,  not  for  love's  sake, 
but  simply  from  cowardice ;  how  far  independence  was  only  another  name  for 
stubbornness  ;  how  far  even  avoidance  of  sectarianism  is  merely  a  proud  resolve 
not  to  interfere  with  any  other  man's  ministry,  or  to  allow  any  man  to  interfere 
with  his.  Conclusion  :  Learn — 1.  Not  to  judge,  for  we  do  not  know  the  secrets  of 
the  heart.  We  judge  men  by  gifts,  or  by  a  coriv-spondeuce  with  our  own  peculiarities  ; 
but  God  judges  by  tidelit.>.  Many  a  dull  sermon  is  the  result  of  humble  powers, 
honestly  cultivated,  whilst  many  a  brilliant  discourse  arises  merely  from  a  love  of 
display.  Many  a  diligent  and  active  ministry  proceads  from  the  love  of  power. 
2.  To  be  neither  depressed  unduly  by  blnme  nor  to  be  too  much  exalted  by  praise. 
Man's  judgment  will  not  last,  but  God's  will.  (F.  W.  liohertson,  M.A.)  The 
character  of  gospel  vtini.sters  : — I.  The  character  of  gospel  ministers.  1.  They 
are  ministers  of  Christ.  (1)  They  derive  their  commission  from  Christ  (1  Tim.  i. 
12;  Epb.  iv.  8-13;  Matt,  xxviii.  20).  (2)  They  are  under  Cbrist's  direction  and 
command.  Tbey  ought  not  to  go  until  He  sends  them,  and  they  ought  to  go  when- 
ever and  wherever  His  providence  and  the  voice  of  His  Church  call  them.  (3) 
They  are  employed  in  Christ's  service,  to  act  under  His  authority,  to  ijublish  and 
enforce  His  law  and  His  gospel,  to  keep  the  ordinances  of  His  house,  and  by  all 
appointed  means  to  subserve  His  work  of  grace  and  holiness  and  the  interests  of 
His  kingdom  and  glory  in  the  world.  (4)  Christ  Himself  is  the  great  subject  of 
their  ministrations.  They  are  to  preach  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  ;  and  all  the  lines 
of  their  ministry  are  one  way  or  another  to  centre  in  Him.  (5)  They  receive  their 
furniture  for  Christ's  work,  and  their  assistance  in  it,  from  Him.  (a)  As  to  their 
temporal  concerns,  that  they  may  be  subsisted  in  His  service.  He  has  ordained  that 
they  who  preach  the  gospel  should  hve  of  the  gospel.  And  He  takes  care,  in  His 
providence,  to  protect  tbem  from  the  rage  of  their  enemies,  so  long  as  He  has  any 
work  to  do  by  them  (Acts  xviii.  9,  10).  (b)  And  as  to  their  gifts  and  graces,  He  is 
exalted  to  fill  the  officers  of  His  Church  with  such  supplies  as  are  necessary  for  the 
work  of  the  ministry  (Eph.  iv.  7) ;  He  distributes  His  gifts  with  great  variety  for 
different  administrations  by  His  Spirit  (chap.  xii.  11)  ;  and  is  with  them  alway  to 
the  end  of  the  world.  (6)  All  the  success  and  reward  of  their  ministry  proceeds 
from  Christ.  They  can  speak  only  to  the  ear,  but  He  speaks  to  the  heart,  and  adds 
such  energy  to  their  words  as  turns  them  into  spirit  and  life.  2.  They  are  stewards 
of  the  mysteries  of  God.  (1)  V/hat  their  stewardship  relates  to.  The  mysteries  of 
God.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel  may  be  called  the  mysteries  of  God  on  various 
accounts,  (a)  They  were  secret  in  God  till  He  revealed  them,  first  more  obscurely 
under  the  Old  Testament  and  afterwards  more  clearly  under  the  New  (Rom.  xvi.  25, 
2G).  (h)  And  even  after  these  things  are  revealed  in  New  Testament  light  there  are 
mysteries  in  them  still,  especially  with  relation  to  the  manner  of  their  existence  or 
of  their  operation  (1  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  John  iii.  8).  (c)  After  all  the  revelation  which  is 
made  of  them  unrenewed  souls  do  not  see  their  excellence  and  beauty  till  Christ 
opens  their  understandings  to  undei  stand  the  Scriptures,  and  they  come  to  view 
them  in  the  transforming  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (chap.  ii.  11).  (2)  Their  steward- 
ship itself,  (a)  They  are  not  lords  of  the  aA'airs  which  are  under  their  management. 
A  steward  is  but  a  servant  to  his  Lord,  and  under  Him  ;  and  so  are  all  the  ministers 
of  Christ  (Matt,  xxiii.  10).  They  are  not  authors  of  the  mysteries  they  dispense, 
but  are  to  preach  only  that  gospel  whiL-h  they  have  received  from  Him.     {h)  Tlieir 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

stewardship  intimates  that  what  they  are  concerned  in  is  committed  to  them  as  a 
trust,  which  they  must  give  an  account  of  to  God  (chap.  ix.  16,  17 ;  2  Tim.  i.  13, 
14).  (c)  Their  stewatdship  intimates  that  faithfuhiess,  care,  and  dihgence  are  to 
be  used  in  discharging  tLieir  trust  (ver.  2).  They  must  be  faithful  to  Christ,  to 
trutli,  and  to  their  own  and  others'  souls.  II.  The  eegard  that  is  to  be  shown 
TO  GOSPEL  MiNisTEKS.  "Let  a  man  so  account  of  us,"  &c.  You  should  consider 
them  all — 1.  As  servants  and  stewards,  that  you  may  not  raise  them  too  high  in 
your  account  of  them.  2.  As  the  servants  of  Christ  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries 
of  God,  that  you  may  not  sink  them  too  low  in  your  account  of  them.  [J.  Gvyse, 
D.D.)  A  true  and  a  false  estimate  of  genuine  ministers  of  the  gos/jel : — Here  we 
have — I.  A  true  estimate.  1.  They  are  servants  of  Christ.  There  are  some 
who  regard  them  as  servants  of  their  Church.  The  Churches  guarantee  their 
stipend,  and  they  require  that  their  dogmas  shall  be  propounded  and  their  laws 
obeyed.  He  who  yields  to  such  an  expectation  degrades  his  position.  The  true 
servant  of  Christ  will  feel  and  act  as  the  moral  leader  and  commander  of  the 
people.  "  Obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you,"  &c.  There  is  no  office  on  this 
earth  so  dignifi.  d  and  royal  as  this.  2.  As  servants  of  Christ  they  are  responsible. 
"  Stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  The  gospel  is  a  mystery  not  in  the  sense  of 
incomprehensibility,  but  in  the  sense  of  progressive  unfolduient.  It  is  a  mystery 
to  the  man  who  at  first  befjins  its  study,  but  as  he  gets  on  it  becomes  more  and 
more  clear.  The  true  minister  is  to  translate  these  mysteries  into  intelligible  ideas, 
and  dispense  them  to  the  people.  As  a  steward  of  such  things  his  position  is  one 
of  transcendent  responsibility.  3.  As  servants  of  Christ  they  are  faithful — (1)  To 
their  trust ;  not  abuse  it,  but  use  it  according  to  the  directions  of  its  Owner.  (2) 
To  their  hearers  ;  seeking  no  man's  applause,  fearing  no  man's  frown,  "  commend- 
ing himself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  tlie  sight  of  God."  4.  As  servants  of 
Christ  they  are  indi-pendent  (ver.  3).  Whilst  no  true  minister  will  despise  the 
favour  or  court  tht'  contempt  of  men,  they  will  not  be  concerned  about  their  judg- 
ment so  long  as  they  are  faithful  to  God  Paul  indicates  three  reasoi  s  for  this 
independency.  (1)  His  own  consciousness  of  faithfulness  (ver.  5).  "Others  may 
accuse  me,  but  I  am  not  conscious  of  tt'at  which  should  condeum  me,  or  render 
me  unworthy  of  this  otRce."  (2)  His  confidence  in  the  judgment  of  God.  "  But 
He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord."  I  am  content  to  abide  I'y  His  judgment.  (3)  His 
belief  in  a  full  revelation  of  that  judgment  (ver.  5).  Do  not  let  us  judge  one 
another ;  do  not  let  us  even  trust  too  much  to  our  own  judgment  of  ourselves.  Let 
us  await  heaven's  judgment,  (a)  There  is  a  period  appointed  for  that  judgment. 
(Ij)  At  that  period  there  will  be  a  full  revelation  of  our  cljaracters.  (c)  At  that 
period,  too,  <-very  man  shall  have  his  due.  II.  A  false  estimate  (ver.  G).  Paul 
speaks  of  himself  and  ApoUos  to  show  the  improimety  of  one  miui-ter  being  pitted 
against  another.  The  Corinthians  seemed  to  estimate  ministers — 1.  In  p-oporiion 
as  they  met  their  views  and  feelings.  Every  true  preacher  preaches  the  gospel  as 
it  has  passed  through  his  own  mind,  and  as  it  passes  through  his  own  mind,  it  will, 
of  course,  be  more  interesting  to  the  minds  most  in  harmony  with  his  own.  Hence, 
in  the  Corinthian  Church  those  who  preferred  Peter's  preaching  thought  no  one  was 
like  Peter,  &c.  It  is  so  now.  Thus  it  is  that  some  of  the  most  inferior  jDieachers 
are  over-rated,  and  the  most  devoted  deg'aded;  whereas  all  true  ministers  are 
"  servants  of  Christ,"  the  "  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,"  and  as  such  should 
be  honoured.  2.  According  to  the  greatness  of  their  natural  endowmenis  (ver.  7). 
Between  the  natural  endowments  of  Paul,  Apollos,  and  Peter  there  was  a  great 
diiierence,  and,  indeed,  between  all  ministers  of  the  gospel.  But  what  of  that? 
There  is  noihing  in  those  for  boasting,  for  they  all  came  from  God.  No  man 
or  angel  deserves  credit  on  account  of  natural  abilities.  (7^.  Thoinas,  D.D.) 
The  ministerial  trust: — A  party  in  the  Church  at  Corinth  said  tliey  were  of  Christ. 
They  pretended  to  be  so  much  under  His  immediate  influence  that  the\  had  no 
need  of  other  teachers.  "  What,"  said  they,  "  is  Paul,  or  Apollos,  >  r  Cephas  to  us? 
We  are  of  Christ."  For  the  reproof  and  instruction  of  such,  as  thus  undervalued, 
as  well  as  for  the  reproof  and  instiuction  of  the  other  parties  who  were  disposed  to 
exalt  the  ministers  of  Christ,  the  apustle  says,  "  Let  a  man,"  &c.  I.  Stewakds  fill 
AN  HONOUKABiE  BUT  subohdinate  OFFICE.  ].  A  stewatd  is  Set  o\cr  a  certain  house- 
hold for  the  purpose  of  su|ierintending  its  affairs.  Sustaining,  then,  the  chaiacter 
of  rulers  in  God's  tiouse,  nnd  representatives  of  the  majesty  of  heaven,  the  office 
with  which  ministers  of  the  gospel  are  clothed  must  be  an  honourable  one.  The 
apostle,  humble  as  he  was,  magnified  his  office,  and  enjoined  that  it  should  be 
respected  and  esteemed  by  others.     2.  But  the  ofiice  is  no  less  subordinate ;  it  is 


CHAP.  IV.]  I,   CORINTHIANS.  335 

held  under  him  who  is  the  lord  of  the  steward.  In  correspondence  with  this, 
ministers  are  but  servants  of  Cbrist.  Sovereignty  in  the  holy  hill  of  Zion  is  that 
glory  wbich  He  will  not  give  to  another.  From  Him  they  receive  their  appoint- 
ment and  all  those  qualifications  wliich  are  necessary  for  the  effectual  discharge  of 
their  office.  He,  too,  allots  them  their  respective  fields  of  labour,  and  assigns  the 
measure  of  their  success.  II.  Stewards  have  a  tbdst  committed  to  them.  The 
office  of  a  steward  is  to  take  churge  of  the  estate  of  his  lord.  Agreeably  to  this, 
ministers  of  the  gospel  have  a  trust  of  all  others  the  most  important.  Time,  talents, 
opportunities,  and  spheres  of  usefulness  are  a  portion  of  the  goods  committed  to 
their  charge.  But  the  trust  delivered  to  them  is  the  mysteries  of  God,  the 
whole  of  Divine  truth  contained  in  the  Scriptures.  1.  The  gospel  is  denominated 
a  mystery  (Mark  iv.  11;  l\om.  xvi.  25;  1  Cor.  ii.  7;  Col.  i.  '2G).  Because — (1) 
Its  gracious  doctrines  would  have  remained  hid  in  the  mind  of  God  had  it  not 
pleased  Him  to  have  made  a  revelation  of  them  to  man.  (2)  It  was  but  obscurely 
and  partially  revealed  under  the  Old  Testaujent  economy.  (3)  It  can  only  be 
properly  understood  through  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  the  gospel 
there  is  a  variety  of  mysteries,  and  accordingly  the  word  is  used  in  tlie  plural 
number.  There  are  mysteries — (a)  Which,  though  disclosed  in  Scripture  as  to  their 
existence  and  reality,  are  not  level  to,  but  far  above  the  comprehension  of  a  finite 
mind.  Such  are  the  doctrines  of  the  Trinity,  (b)  Which,  having  been  revealed, 
may  in  some  measure  be  understood  and  explained.  Such  are  the  doctrines  of  the 
fall,  the  atonement,  justification,  etc.,  &c.  (c)  Which,  though  not  at  present  com- 
prehendfd  by  the  believer,  will  be  fully  disclosed  to  him  in  heaven,  to  which,  "At 
that  day,  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  you  in  Me,  and  I  in  you." 
"  Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,"  ttc.  2.  Of  these  mysteries  ministers  are 
the  stewards.  In  making  known  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  they  are  unto  God  a 
sweet  savour  of  Christ,  in  them  that  are  saved,  atid  in  them  that  perish.  III. 
Stewards  are  requiiied  to  be  faithful  to  their  trust  (ver.  2).  1.  They  are  not 
his  own,  but  his  lord's  goods  that  a  steward  has  in  his  custody,  and  therefore  he 
must  be  careful  not  to  embezzle  or  squander  tliem,  but  to  lay  out  the  whole  to  the 
best  advantage.  In  agreement  with  this,  it  is  required  from  ministers  to  be  found 
faithful.  2.  No  such  ttiing  as  faithfulness  could  be  displayed  by  a  worldly  steward 
had  he  no  correct  knowledge  of  the  estate,  or  of  the  goods  that  were  consigned  to 
his  care.  In  like  manner,  it  is  impossible  that  those  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of 
God  can  be  faithful  to  their  trust  who  do  not  give  all  (hligence  in  perusing  the 
Scriptures,  to  become  scribes  well  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  worldly  steward  to  provide  food  for,  and  to  liistribute 
it  among  the  members  of  the  house  over  which  he  is  set.  In  correspondence  with 
this,  it  is  the  duty  of  those  who  are  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God  to  be  attentive 
to  the  si)iritual  wants  of  those  among  whom  they  labour,  and  to  make  careful  pro- 
vision of  what  is  requisite  for  the  supplyment  of  these.  Fidelity  also  requires  an 
impartial  distribution  of  the  Word  of  Life.  Saints  and  sinners  are  alike  to  have 
the  Word  of  Truth  rightly  divided  among  them.  The  former  need  to  be  c  mforted 
and  assisted ;  the  latter  to  be  cautioned  and  directed  by  it.  4.  It  is  the  duty  of  a 
worldly  steward  vigilantly  to  watch,  and  anxiously  to  protect  from  spoliation  the 
property  which  his  lord  has  committed  to  his  trust.  In  like  manner  it  is  the  duty 
of  the  stewards  of  Divine  mysteries  to  wati  h  over  them,  and  to  guard  them  against 
the  attacks  of  their  enemies.  .5.  The  steward  of  the  mysteries  of  God  who  is  faith- 
ful to  his  trust  must  be  decidedly  a  man  of  God.  IV.  Stewards  are  accountable 
roR  I  HE  TRUST  THAT  HAS  BEEN  COMMITTED  TO  THEM.  Both  just  and  utijust  Stewards 
may  look  forward  with  certainty  to  a  day  of  reckoning.  In  agreement  with  this, 
ministers  of  the  gospel  are  accountable  for  the  s  denin  trust  which  has  been  com- 
mitted to  them.  An  account  wdl  be  demanded  from  them  of  their  time,  how  it 
was  spent  by  them — of  their  gifts,  how  they  improveil  them — of  the  go.-pel,  how 
they  preached  it — and  of  precious  souls  as  to  the  concern  manifested,  and  the 
efforts  made  by  them  for  their  salvation.  Conclusion  :  Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things?  None,  in  their  own  strength.  Your  sufficiency  is  only  of  God.  (J. 
Duncan.)  Ministeis  and  steicanis  : — Ministers  here  means  "  under-rowers,"  as 
pulling  together  in  one  galley  where  Christ  sits  at  the  helm,  the  vessel  being  the 
Church,  and  the  pa-sengers  the  members  of  the  Church.  Not  only  is  disunion  in 
the  crew  fatal  to  progress  and  a  thing  tending  to  sMpwreck,  but  the  fact  of  Cnri^t's 
presideney  and  magisterium  should  exalt  high  above  petty  partisanship,  especially 
when  the  supreme  owner  of  the  Siicred  galley  is  God.  Here  the  house-stewards  of 
God  and  dispensers  of  His  mssteries  are  said  to  be  stiictly  such,  as  being  servants 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

or  underlings  of  Christ ;  for  between  the  Father  of  the  household  or  Church  and 
the  distributors  of  the  spiritual  goods  stands  the  Son.  In  fact  the  image  is  again  a 
stair  of  three  steps.  The  Father  delivers  the  Divine  decrees  or  eternal  ideas,  else- 
where called  the  hidden  wisdom  of  God,  to  the  Incarnate  Son.  He  in  turn  com- 
municates them  to  His  apostles,  selected  by  Plimself  to  disjiense  and  apportion 
with  wise  judgment  these  secret  counsels  or  mysteries  of  God  to  the  members  of 
the  household.  The  house  of  God,  an  idea  latent  in  the  word  "household,"  denotes 
the  Christian  theocracy  (1  Tim.  iii.  16)  of  which  Christ  is  the  nearer  Head,  God 
(the  Head  of  Christ)  the  more  i-emote.  It  appears  certain  from  some  of  the  deeper 
texts  of  Scripture  that  all  that  has  taken  place  in  the  world  through  all  the  ages  is 
but  the  historical  evolution  in  time  of  the  manifold  and  marvellous  counsel  of 
Triune  Deity,  willed  iu  a  remote  eternity.  These  archetypal  ideas,  both  of  creation 
and  redemption,  were  in  part  only  and  by  degrees  revealed  to  Paul,  and  of  that  part 
he  himself  has  communicated  to  the  Church  a  part  only  :  for  that  he  knew  more 
than  he  wrote  is  clear  enough  from  his  occasional  ejaculations  of  wonder,  followed 
by  no  elucidations :  to  such  an  inspired  mind  teeming  with  supernatural  mysteries, 
no  marvel  that  all  human  science  pales  and  waxes  dim  before  a  single  ray  of  Divine 
wisdom  !  (Cknwn  Lvaiis.)  The  steward  of  God'.t  mysteries  : — The  Church  at 
Corinth  were  divided  into  rival  factions,  arrayed  under  party  leaders  ;  and  uupro- 
fitable  controversies  and  unbecoming  tempers  were  the  natural  results.  The  idea 
of  the  Christian  ministry  as  a  Divine  institution  was  lost  sight  of,  while  the  man 
who  held  the  office  was  invested  witlr  undue  importance.  St.  Paul  endeavours  to 
correct  this  state  of  things  by  showing  that  the  oUicewas  distinct  from  any  qualities 
or  attractions  which  might  belong  to  the  man.  The  apostle  himself  was  both 
learned  and  eloquent,  but  this  did  not  constitute  him  a  minister  of  Christ.  So  far 
as  the  man  was  concerned,  he  was  satisfied  to  be  esteemed  "the  least,"  and  even 
"the  servant  of  all,"  but  when  the  office  was  brought  into  view  it  was  a  different 
matter.  A  hundred  men,  in  any  county,  may  write  a  better  hand  than  the  "  county 
clerk,"  and  yet  his  hand  and  seal  are  indispensable  for  the  validity  of  certain  acts. 
Shall  so  much  depend  on  office,  in  worldly  things,  and  can  it  be  supposed  that  the 
Divine  Head  of  the  Church  has  taken  less  precaution  to  secure  the  interests  of  the 
soul?  1.  "  jNIinisters  of  Christ."  1.  Derive  their  commission  from  Him  (John 
XX.  21).  The  apostles  went  forth  in  His  name,  and  never  pleaded  any  authority 
for  what  they  said,  or  did,  but  His.  As  an  ambassador  is  duly  authorised  to  make 
and  ratify  trenties  in  his  king's  name,  and  to  act  concerning  measures  iuvolving  the 
weal  or  woe  of  millions,  so  is  Christ's  ambassador  clothed  with  power  to  proclaim 
the  terms  of  reconciliation  with  God.  2.  Are  rulers  in  God's  kingdom.  "All  power" 
was  given  unto  tbe  Saviour  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  this  authority  He  dispenses 
to  His  servants,  who  are  sent  forth  to  execute  His  will.  They  are  to  awe  men  into 
obedience,  not  by  implements  of  temporal  dominion,  but  by  weapons  from  God's 
own  armoury.  3.  They  become  the  comforters  of  the  sorrowing,  and  physicians  of 
the  broken-hearted.  4.  Intercede  with  God  for  His  people.  All  Christians  of  course 
discharge  this  duty  (James  v.  16),  but  more  especially  those  who  are  commissioned 
by  the  Most  High  to  serve  at  His  altar.  11.  "  Stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God." 
1.  They  are  conservators,  expounders,  and  dispensers  of  all  those  things  once 
hidden,  but  now  revealed.  2.  They  are  the  dispensers  of  His  grace  through  the 
ordinances  of  the  gospel.  3.  As  such  it  is  required  of  them  to  be  faithful — (1)  To 
their  heavenly  Master,  not  following  ways  agreeable  to  themselves,  but  meekly 
receiving  their  Lord's  instructions  and  doing  their  utmost  to  carry  them  into  effect. 
Worldly  hopes  and  fears  must  not  influence  thera,  and  all  they  say  and  do  should 
have  reference  to  their  final  account.  (2)  To  their  fellow-servants.  "  Gospel 
ministers,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "  should  not  only  be  like  dials  on  watches,  or  mile- 
stones upon  the  road,  but  like  clocks  aud  larums,  to  sound  the  alarm  to  sinners. 
Aaron  wore  bells  as  well  as  pomegranates,  and  the  prophets  were  commanded  to 
lift  up  their  voice  like  a  trumpet.  A  sleeping  sentinel  may  be  the  loss  of  the  city." 
A  dying  nobleman  once  sent  for  his  minister,  and  said  to  him,  "  You  know  that  I 
have  been  living  a  very  wicked  life,  and  yet  you  have  never  warned  me  of  my 
danger."  "  Yes,  my  lord,"  was  the  constrained  and  sickening  response,  "  your 
manner  of  living  was  not  unknown  to  me ;  but  great  personal  kindness  to  me  made  me 
unwilling  to  offend  you  by  words  of  reproof."  "  Oh,  how  wicked!  how  cruel  in  you  !  " 
cried  the  dying  man.  "  The  provision  which  I  made  for  you  and  your  family  ought 
to  have  prompted  care  and  fidelity.  You  neglected  to  warn  and  instruct  me ;  and  now, 
my  soul  is  lost  1  "  Conclusion :  Christians— 1.  Be  thankful  for  the  provision  which 
has  been  made  for  your  instruction  and  guidance.    2,  Be  careful  to  improve  it.    (■/. 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  337 

N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Mnn  a  steward  : — Note — I.  The  trust  implied.  Of  what  are 
we  stewards  ?  All,  in  fact,  that  we  are  and  have,  but  sin.  Health,  reason,  pro- 
perty, influence,  d'c,  &c.  "All  things,  0  Lord,  come  of  Thee,"  etc.,  etc.  This 
trust  is — 1.  Undeniable.  The  moral  reason  of  humanity  binds  man  to  acknowledge 
that  all  he  has  he  holds  in  trust.  He  is  not  the  proprietor,  but  the  trustee.  2. 
Ever-increasing.  Mercies  increase  every  hour,  and  with  the  increase  obligation 
accumulates.  II.  The  thust  discharged.  1.  A  good  man  usps  all  under  a  sense 
of  his  responsibility  to  God.  2.  In  the  right  discharge  of  this  trust  man — (1) 
Blesses  himself.  (2)  Serves  his  geueration.  (3)  Wins  the  approbation  of  his  God. 
III.  The  trust  abuskd.  We  read  of  some — 1.  That  waste  their  Lord's  goods.  2. 
That  are  uuprohtable  servants.  "  Many  will  say  unto  Me  in  that  aay."  (•/. 
Harding,  BI.A.)  Ch'rfij/  and  laity  : — Consider — I.   What  the  clergy  are.      1. 

Ministers.  (1)  The  word  in  the  original  signifies  an  "  uuder-rower."  Our  Lord  is 
the  Pilot  of  the  vessel  of  His  Church,  aud  the  clergy  are  the  rowers  under  His  com- 
mand. He  from  heaven  still  guides  His  Church  below;  but,  under  His  guidance, 
and  by  His  own  appointment,  a  distinct  share  of  the  work  is  allotted  to  His 
ministers.  (2)  Strictly  speaking,  the  clergy  are  not  the  ministers  of  the  congrega- 
tion, and  it  is  not  their  primary  duty  to  try  and  i^lease  the  peoj^le.  They  are 
"  ministers  of  Christ  "  ;  and  they  must  count  it  "  a  very  small  thing  "  that  they 
.should  be  "  judged  of  man's  judgment,"  remembering  that  "  He  that  judgeth  them 
is  the  Lord."  2.  Stewards.  A  steward  is  one  who  is  appointed  by  an  owner  of 
estates  to  deal  on  his  behalf  with  his  tenants,  manage  his  property,  rule  in  his 
absence,  dispense  his  bounty.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  owner  of  the  estate  of 
His  Church,  <ind  the  clergy  are  the  officers  appointed  by  Him  to  represent  Him  in 
matters  affecting  His  people.  As  the  power  of  a  steward  is  not  inherent,  but  only 
delegated,  so  the  authority  of  "  the  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God  "  has  its  origin 
in,  and  depends  for  its  continuance  on,  the  will  of  Chiist  their  Lord.  Now  it  is 
obvious  that  a  steward — (1)  Must  receive  some  external  appointment,  and  must  be 
able  to  produce  his  credentials.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  should  call  himself 
a  steward.  "  No  man  taketh  this  honour  to  himself,  but  he  that  is  called  of  God." 
(2)  Must  have  somewhat  committed  to  his  charge,  some  ofiicial  acts  to  perform,  and 
some  bounty  to  dispense.  And  to  the  clergy,  as  "  stewards,"  are  committed  "  the 
mysteries  of  God."  It  is  their  business  to  defend  and  promulgate  the  "  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus,"  not  preaching  themselves— i.t".,  their  own  theories  and  fancies— but 
"the  faith  once  for  all  delivered  to  the  saints."  (3)  Is  not  only  representative  of 
his  master  to  the  tenants,  but  that  equally  is  he  representative  of  the  tenants  to  his 
master.  And  so  it  is  the  high  privilege  of  the  clergy  as  "  stewards,"  to  become 
intimately  acquainted  with  the  circumstances,  needs,  perplexities,  and  sorrows  of 
Christ's  people ;  it  is  their  duty  to  find  out  all  about  them,  and  then,  on  their 
behalf,  to  go  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  intercede.  Certainly  if  the  dignity  of  "  the 
ministers  of  Christ  "  is  great  their  responsibility  is  greater  still.  II.  How  the 
laity  should  regard  them — "Account  of  them,"  &c.  And  if  you  do  so  you 
will— 1.  Esteem  tbem  very  highly,  not  for  their  own,  but  for  their  work's  sake. 
Lose  sight  of  the  man  in  the  office,  and  prove  your  esteem  by  receiving  at 
his  hands  "  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,"  for  thus  you  will — 2.  En- 
courage them.  And  probably  there  is  no  class  of  men  who  more  greatly 
need  encouragement.  Recognising  their  difficulties,  and  wishing  to  encourage 
them,  you  will  be  led — 3.  To  pray  for  them.  (1)  That  the  words  spoken  by 
them  may  have  success.  (2)  That  they  may  be  preserved  from  all  the  dangers 
peculiar  to  the  position  which  they  hold.  (3)  Lest  that  by  any  means  when 
they  have  preached  to  others  they  themselves  should  be  castaways  !  {-J.  Beclnj.) 
'' Thf  vuj^teries  of  God"  : — There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  word  "mystery" 
rouses  a  certain  feeling  of  mental  discomfort,  almost  amounting  to  suspicion  and 
dislike,  in  the  mind  of  an  ordinary  Englishman  when  he  first  hears  it.  In  the 
ordinary  use  of  language,  too,  the  word  has  got  into  bad  odour  by  the  force  of  bad 
association.  A  mystery  is  frequently  understood  to  mean  something  that  will  not 
bear  the  light ;  something  that  is  wanting  in  the  qualities  of  straightforwardness 
and  explicitness;  someth'.ng  that  belongs  to  the  region  of  charlatanism,  intrigue, 
iynnrance,  superstition.  It  would  be  curious  to  ascertain  the  idea  which  the  word 
"  mystery  "  suggests  to  the  first  five  men  whom  we  meet  in  the  street.  One  man 
would  probably  say,  "I  mean  by  mystery  something  confused  and  unintelligible"  ; 
and  another,  "Something  involving  a  }3lain  contradiction  "  ;  and  another,  "  A  state- 
ment which  is  chiefly  disiinguished  by  its  defiance  of  reason  "  ;  and  another,  "  Some 
physical  or  even  moral  impossibility  "  ;  and  another,  "  That  which  is  believed  to  be 
VOL.  I.  22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


true  because  there  is  no  real  reason  for  disbelieving  it."  And  if  tbese,  or  anything 
like  these,  are  the  ideas  which  are  associated  by  us  with  the  word  "  mystery,"  what 
wonder  that  the  word  is  regarded  with  a  certain  dislike  and  suspicion  when  we  find 
it  in  the  region  of  religious  truth  ?  What,  then,  let  us  ask,  is  the  true  account  of 
this  word  "mystery."  The  word  "  mystery  "  in  the  Bible  is  a  purely  Greek  word, 
the  termination  only  being  changed.  In  Greece  for  many  centuries  it  meant  a 
religious  or  sacred  secret  into  which,  after  due  preparation,  men  were  initiated  by 
solemn  rites.  At  Eleusis,  near  Athens,  to  give  only  one  of  the  most  famous  examples, 
there  were  for  centuries  mysteries  of  this  description,  and  theie  has  been  much 
controversy  in  the  learned  world  as  to  their  exact  origin  and  object,  the  most 
probable  account  of  them  being  that  they  were  designed  to  preserve  and  hand  on 
certain  truths  which  formed  part  of  the  earliest  religion  of  Greece,  and  which  were 
lost  sight  of  or  denied,  or  denounced  by  the  popular  religion  of  a  later  day.  A 
tenet  thus  concealed  and  thus  disclost d  was  called  a  "mystery,"  because,  after 
disclosure,  it  was  still  concealed  from  the  general  public,  because  it  had  been 
concealed  even  from  the  initiated  up  to  the  moment  of  initiation,  and  because, 
probably,  it  was  of  a  character  to  sug^^est  that,  however  much  truth  it  might  convey, 
there  was  more  to  which  it  pointed,  but  which  still  remained  unknown.  This  was 
the  general  sense  which  the  word  had  acquired  at  the  time  when  the  New  Testament 
was  written.  Now  the  apostles  of  Christ,  in  order  to  make  their  Divine  message  to 
the  souls  of  men  as  clear  as  might  be,  took  the  words  in  common  use  which  most 
nearly  answered  tbeir  purpose — did  the  best  they  could  with  them,  giving  them,  so 
to  speak,  a  new  turn,  inspiring  them  with  a  new  and  a  higher  signiticance.  What, 
then,  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  "mystery"  in  the  New  Testament?  It  is  used 
to  describe  not  a  fancy,  not  a  contradiction,  not  an  impossibility,  but  always 
a  truth,  yet  a  truth  which  has  been  or  which  is  more  or  less  hidden.  There  are 
some  truths  on  which  the  mind's  eye  rests  directly,  just  as  the  bodily  eye  rests 
on  the  sun  in  a  cloudless  sky ;  and  there  are  other  truths  of  the  reality  of  which 
the  mind  is  assured  by  seeing  something  else  which  satisfies  it  that  they  are  tljere, 
just  as  the  bodily  eye  sees  the  strong  ray  which  pours  forth  in  a  stream  of  brilliancy 
from  behind  a  cloud  and  reports  to  the  understanding  that  if  only  the  cloud  were 
to  be  removed  the  sun  would  itself  be  seen.  Now  "  mysteries"  in  religion,  as  we 
commonly  use  the  word,  are  of  this  description  ;  we  see  enough  to  know  that  there 
is  more  which  we  do  not  see,  and,  in  this  state  of  existence,  which  we  shall  not 
directly  see.  We  see  the  ray  which  implies  the  sun  behind  the  cloud.  And  thus 
to  look  upon  apparent  truth,  which  certainly  implies  tnitli  wliich  is  not  ajiparent, 
is  to  be  in  the  presence  of  mystery.  Why,  it  is  asked,  should  there  be  in  religion 
this  element  of  mystery?  Why  should  there  be  this  outlying,  this  transcendental 
margin  traced  round  the  doctrines  and  the  rites  of  Chfistianity — this  margin  within 
which  the  Church  whispers  of  mystery,  but  which  seems  to  provide  a  natuial  home 
for  illusion  ?  This  is  probably  what  Toland,  by  no  means  the  least  capable  of  the 
English  deists,  thought  when  he  undertook  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  century  the 
somewhat  desperate  enterprise  of  showing  that  Christianity  is  not  mysterious.  To 
strip  Christianity  of  mystery  was  to  do  it,  he  conceived,  an  essential  service — to 
bring  it,  in  the  phraseolot-'y  of  his  day,  "within  the  conditions  of  nature,"  within 
the  rules  of  that  woild  of  sensible  experience  in  which  we  live.  Is  it,  then,  the 
case  that  the  natural  world  around  us  is  so  entirely  free  from  that  element  of 
mystery  which  attaches  so  closely  to  the  doctrines  and  the  rites  of  Christianity  ? 
Before  long  spring  will  be  here  again,  and  probably  some  of  you  will  try  in  some 
sort  to  keep  step  with  the  exjiansions  of  its  beautiful  life  even  here  in  London  by 
putting  a  hyacinth  bulb  into  a  glass  jar  of  water,  and  watching  day  by  day  the 
leaves  and  the  bud  unfold  above,  and  the  roots  develop  below,  as  the  days  get 
warmer  and  brighter,  until  at  last,  about  Easter-tiine,  it  bursts  into  full  and 
beautiful  bloom.  Why  should  the  bulb  thus  break  out  into  tlower,  and  leaf,  and 
root,  before  your  eyes  ?  "  Why,"  some  one  says,  "  they  always  do."  Yes,  but  why 
do  they?  What  is  the  motive  power  at  work  which  thus  breaks  up  the  bulb,  and 
which  almost  violently  issues  into  a  flower  of  such  beauty,  in  perfect  conformity  to 
a  general  type,  and  yet  with  a  variety  that  is  all  its  own  ?  You  say  it  is  the  law  of 
growth  ;  yes,  but  what  do  you  mean  by  the  law  of  growth  ?  You  do  not  explain 
it  by  merely  labelling  it — you  explain  neither  what  it  is  in  itself,  nor  why  it  should 
be  at  work  here,  or  under  these  conditions.  You  cannot  deny  its  existence,  and 
yet  the  moment  you  endeavour  to  penetrate  below  the  surface  it  altogether  eludes 
you.  What  is  this  but  to  have  ascertained  that  here  is  a  fact,  a  truth,  hidden 
behind  the  cloud  that  is  formed  by  the  suiface  aspect  of  nature?     What  is  this  but 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  COEINTHIANS.  839 

to  be  in  the  presence  of  mystery  ?     The  philosopher  Loclie  laid  down  the  doctrine 
■which  has  been  often  quoted  since  his  time,  that  we  cannot  acquiesce  in  any  propo- 
sition unless  we  fully  understand  all  that  is  conveyed  by  each  of  its  terms,  and 
hence  he  inferred  that  when  a  man  tells  us  that  any  mystery  is  true,  he  is  stating 
that  to  which  we  cannot  assent,  because  a  mystery,  from  its  nature,  is  said  to  be 
a  hidden,  and,  therefore,  uncomprehended  truth.     This,  at  first,  seems  plausible 
enougli ;  but  in  fact  we  may,  and  do,  assent  reasonably  enough  to  a  great  many 
propositions  respecting  the  terms  of  which  we  have  only  an  obscure  or  an  incom- 
plete idea.     A  man  born  blind  may,  I  take  it,  reasonably  assent  to  the  descriptions 
of  objects  which  we  who  have  the  blessing  of  sight  see  with  our  eyes,  although 
probably  no  description  could  possibly  give  him  an  adequate  impression  of  the 
reality.     Locke  hiiuself,  like  the  strong  thii  k  r  that  he  was,  admitted,  could  not 
but  admit,  the  infinite  divisibility  of  matter  ;  yet  had  he,  has  any  man,  an  ade- 
quate conception  of  what  this  means  ?     It,  too,  belongs  to  the  sphere  of  mystery. 
To  treat  nature  as  not  mysterious  is  to  mistake  that  superficial,  thoughtless  fami- 
liarity with  nature  for  a  knowledge  based  on  observation  and  rellection.     And  the 
mysterious  creed  of  Christendom  corresponds  with  nature,  which  is  thus  constantly 
mysterious,  while  both  are  only  what  we  should  expect  in  revelation.     And  nature, 
too,  in  its  way,  is  a  revelation  of  the  infinite  God.     Suppose,  if  you  can,  that  a 
religion  claiming  to   come   from   God  were  wholly   divested   of   this  element  of 
mystery;  suppose   that  it  spoke  of  a  God  whose  attributes  we  could  understand 
as  perfectly  as  the  character  of  cur  next-door  neighbour ;  and  of  a  government  of 
the  world  which  presented  no  more  difficulties  than  the  administration  of  a  smuU 
joint-stock  company  ;  and  of  prayer,  and  rules  of  worshij),  which  meant  no  more 
tliHD  the  conventional  usages  and  ceremonies  of  human  society.     Should  we  not 
fay- — you  and  I — "  Certainly  this  is  very  intelligible ;  it  is  wholly  free  from  the 
infection  of  mystery;  but  is  it  really  a  message  from  a  higher  world  ?     Is  it  not 
too  obviously  an  accommodation  to  our  poor,  dwarfed  conceptions  ?     Does  it  not 
somewhere  in  its  system  carry  the  trade  mark  of  a  human  manufactory?"     After 
all,  we  may  dislike  and  resent  mystery  in  our  lower  and  captious,  as  distinct  from 
our  better  and  thoughtful,  moods ;  but  we  know  on   reflection  that  it  is  tbe  in- 
evitable robe  of   a  real  revelation  of   the   Infinite  Being,  and   that,  if  the  great 
truths  and  ordinances  of  Christianity  shade  off,  as  they  do,  into  regions  where 
we  cannot  hope  to  follow  them,  this  is  only  what  was  to  be  expected  if  Christi- 
anity is  what  it  claims  to  be.     [Cduon  Liddon.)       It  is  required  in  stewards  that 
a  man  toe  found  faithful. — Ministerial  stetrardsliip  : — I.  Mixisteks  the  stewards  of 
God.     1.  Divinely  commissioned.     A  call  to  the  ministry  is  a  call  frum  God,  or  it 
has  in  it  no  worth  or  authority.     Let  a  man  possess  the  consciousness  of  this  com- 
mission, then  he  will  go  forth  with  authority  and  power.     Without  it  his  lips  will 
falter  and  his  heart  fail.    2.  Divinely  qualified.    There  must  be — (1)  Rfental  fitness. 
A  minister  must  be  "  apt  to  teach."     (2)  Moral  fitness.     The  first  condition  is  con- 
version of  heart ;  the  next,  holiness  of  life.     How  lifeless  and  barren  a  ministry 
without  tliis !     3.  Divinely  sustained.     With  all  the  help  and  happiness  of  such 
outward  encouragements  as  it  is   the  duty  of   Churches   to  give,  ministers  feel 
that  they  need  Divine  strength.     II.  As  ministees,  we  -are  entrusted  with  the 
gospel.       It   is   our   duty — 1.    To    expound    it.      Exxjository    preaching    has    not 
received  sufficient  attention.     2.   To  apply  it.     It  is  not    sufficient   to   elucidate 
tbe    principles  of   the    gospel,   they   must    be  enforced.      The    gospel — (1)  Makes 
known  the  pardon  which  has  been  provided  for    sinners ;    and    it   is    incumbent 
on  the   stewards   of  God   to   beseech   them   to   be   reconciled   to   God.     (2)   Is   a 
trumpet-call   to   Christian   perfection.      To    transform    men    we    must    be    per- 
suasive— intensely    practical.       3.   To   defend   it.       (D.    Thomns,   D.D.)  The 
Christian   ministrtj : — I.  The   account    given    in    the   text    of    the    nature    of 
OUR  office  as  ministers    of    Christ   and    stewards    of   the    mysteries  of  God. 
1.  The  ministry  of  the  word  is  in  all  essential  points  the  snme  ever  since  it  was 
ordained  as  an  employment.     At  the  same  time  it  is  plain  that  several  circum- 
stances attending  it  ai'e  considerably  varied.     The  ordinary  call  to  the  office,  which 
now  takes  place,  is  very  different  from  the  miraculous  mission  by  which  men  were 
consecrated  to  it  in  former  times.     Their  vocation  was  more   immediate,   more 
striking,  attended  with  more  ample  powers,  as  well  as  more  splendid  effects.     The 
pasters  of  the  Christian  Church,  in  these  later  ages,  are  neither  possessed  of  the 
immediate  inspiration  nor  of  the  power  of  working  miracles  enjoyed  by  the  Hpostles. 
Tliey  are  now  men  in  all  r>  spects  like  yourselves.     When  we  speak  of  a  faithful 
minister  we  speak  of  the  rare  and  happy  union  of  ability  and  attention,  of  zeal  and 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  iv. 


knowledge,  of  meekness  and  firmness,  in  the  same  character  ;  for  all  these  are 
necessary  to  sustain  the  office  with  propriety.  And  are  these  qualities  to  be 
attained  with  a  slif,'ht  degree  of  application?  2.  But  you  ai'e  not  to  imagine  that 
while  such  high  obligations  are  laid  on  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  no  duties  are, 
on  the  otlier  hand,  required  of  you  towards  those  who  hold  that  station.  (1)  The 
same  authority  which  lays  such  arduous  obligations  on  your  pastors,  requires  of 
you  to  entertain  a  spiiit  of  equity  and  candour  towards  them.  (2)  This  rule 
of  equity  and  candour  is  transgressed  in  a  still  higher  degree  when  yon  expect 
of  us  to  preach  doctrines  accommodated  to  your  passions,  or  to  refrain  from 
delivering  those  truths  which  are  unacceptable  or  alarming.     II.  You  are  eequieed 

TO  ENTERTAIN  A  JUST    ESTEEM  FOE    THE    OFFICE    AND    CHAEACTEE    WHICH    WE    BEAE.      We 

claim  no  obsequiou'*  homnge,  we  arrogate  no  dominion  over  your  faith  ;  but  we  expect 
that  no  man  should  despise  us.  III.  Make  a  peopeb  impeovfment  of  the  truths 
WHICH  WE  DELiVEE.  {R.  Wcillef.)  Fa itliful  Stewardship : — Consider — I.  The  ot'ation 
WHICH  IS  occupied.  The  station  of  a  steward — one  who  has  a  delegated  authority — 
who  acts  in  subserviency  to  another — and  who  is  required  to  account  for  the  manner 
in  which  he  has  conducted  himself  while  holding  that  responsible  station.  The  term 
applies  originally  to  the  ministers  of  the  gospel ;  ytt  we  may  safely  found  upon 
them  a  general  argument  and  appeal.  You  have  eacli  of  you  received  various  gifts, 
which  you  are  to  hold  as  stewards  of  God,  and  for  which  you  have  to  render  a  final 
account.  1.  Intellectual  faculties.  2.  Temporal  blessings,  such  as — (1)  Property, 
and  opulence,  and  rank,  and  those  things  which  give  men  such  influence  in  the 
sphere  in  which  they  move.  (2)  National  distinction.  (3)  Civil  and  religious 
liberty.  3.  Spiritual  mercies.  (1)  The  Scriptures.  (2)  Holy  ordinances.  (3)  The 
ministry  of  the  gospel.  (4)  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  to  convince,  convert,  sanctify,  &c. 
Every  Christian  attainment,  hope,  enjoyment,  makes  the  f)erson  who  possesses  it  a 
steward,  and  involves  the  highest  res]  ousibility.  II.  The  chaeacter  by  which  the 
OCCUPATION  OF  THIS  STATION  SHOULD  BE  ATTENDED.  The  steward  is  Called  upon  to 
"  be  faith'ul "  to  his  Master's  property,  and  whatever  is  committed  to  his  trust.  1. 
Abundant  facts  prove  that  men  are  generally  reckless  in  regard  to  all  the  privileges 
enumerated.  2.  Consider,  then,  in  what  this  fidelity  consists.  The  great  basis  of 
all  duty  is  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  Crod,"  &c.  Now,  in  order  to  answer  to 
the  character  described  in  the  text,  there  must  be  sincere  repentance,  an  entire 
reliance  on  the  one  only  foundation  of  hope,  and  an  earnest  striving  for  the  salva- 
tion of  the  immortal  soul  by  the  diligent  use  of  the  means  prescribed.  It  is  your 
duty — (1)  To  work  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  There  must  be 
employed  for  tliis  every  natural  and  intellectual  power:  for  this  Sabbaths  were 
hallowed,  the  Book  of  God  given,  the  ministry  instituted,  etc.  (2)  To  attend  to 
what  pertains  to  the  Divine  honour  and  glory  in  the  world  in  which  we  live.  While 
we  attend  diligently  to  the  conniion  business  of  life  we  must  not  forget  what  we  owe 
to  God,  on  whose  bounty  we  live,  in  whose  presence  we  stand,  and  before  whom  we 
must  soon  appear.  (3)  This  part  of  the  subject  may  be  applied — (a)  To  those  who 
occupy  private  stations  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  What  have  you  done  in  the  way 
of  desire,  in  the  way  of  effort,  in  the  way  of  prayer  ?     (b)  To  ministers.     III.  The 

SOLEMN    CONSIDEEATIONS    BY    WHICH    THE    EXHIBITION    OF    SUCH    A    CHARACTEE    MAY    BE 

ENFORCED.  A  steward  must  reckon  on  a  day  of  final  account.  This  will  be  a  dav 
of  reckoning — 1.  For  rewards  of  glory.  2.  For  punishment  also.  {J.  I'arsons.) 
Faitlifuhiess :  —  St.  Paul  accepted  the  full  responsibility  of  his  office.  God  has 
nowhere  placed  on  the  human  heart  such  a  high  trust  as  the  ministry  of  the  gospel. 
We  do  not  think  lightly  of  the  responsibilities  of  tlie  statesman,  the  warrior,  the 
philanthropist,  the  teacher;  but  the  ambassador  of  the  Cross  stands  in  the  Saviour's 
plrice,  and  speaks  in  His  name.  On  his  office  depends  the  salvation  of  mankind. 
The  minister  must  feel  the  responsibility  of  his  office,  and  so  must  those  to  whom 
he  ministers.  The  congregation  that  demands  topics  and  forms  to  gratify  taste  or 
emotion  cannot  be  st-nsible  of  the  fact  that  God  speaks,  and  not  man.  Micaiah  said, 
"  As  the  Lord  liveth,  what  the  Lord  saith  unto  me,  that  will  I  speak."  The  man 
who  helps  sinners  to  build  on  a  false  foundation  is  a  source  of  greater  danger  than 
the  company  of  evildoers.  I.  Let  us  do  what  we  can.  1.  It  is  possible  to  fancy 
what  mighty  twangs  we  would  do  liad  we  the  op)iori unity.  Some  thoughts  of  this 
nature  must  have  crossed  the  mind  of  the  man  who  received  only  one  talent. 
Exchange  the.-e  grand  piobabilities  for  actual  possibilities.  God  has  given  us  to 
do  what  we  can,  and  expects  us  to  do  it.  2.  "  He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is 
least,  is  faithful  also  in  much,"  etc.  Look  into  every  department  of  life,  and  see 
that  he  who  has  faitlifiilly  filled  the  humL.k'r  situation,  has  both  fitted  himself  for, 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   COniNTHIANS.  341 


and  been  promoted  to  a  higher.  Joseph  the  slave  became  the  premier  of  Ep;ypt. 
The  captive  Hebrew  youths  were  made  presidents  of  Chaldea.  The  history  of  those 
men  is  not  more  marvellous  than  "  From  Log  Cabin  to  White  House,"  or  from  the 
shoemaker's  bench  to  the  mission-field  of  India.  Seeing  that  the  Church  of  Christ 
is  burdened  with  duties,  we  long  to  see  the  day  when  every  Christian  shall  be  an 
active  worker.  II.  Let  us  do  kveuy  work  in  its  own  time.  1.  To-morrow  will  not 
have  a  moment  to  spare  for  duties  that  are  neglected  to-day.  Duty  says — "  Now 
or  never."  Nature,  the  lives  of  men  of  mark,  and  our  own  experience  are  decisive 
as  to  this.  "Procrastination  is  the  thief  of  time."  To  put  olt'  duty  to  a  more  con- 
venient season  is  done  with  impunity.  "Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,"  &c. 
Every  hour  has  its  duty,  and  every  duty  its  pleasure.  2.  To  further  enforce 
diligence  in  this  matter,  observe  that  our  very  safety  in  time  to  come  is  secured  by 
fidelity  to  present  trust.  Negligence  is  a  preparation  for  temptation  (2  Pet.  i.  10). 
The  path  of  duty  is  the  path  of  safety.  III.  Let  us  do  our  work  in  the  eight 
sriRiT.  It  is  impossible  to  be  faithful  considering  the  difficulties  in  the  way,  with- 
out willingness  and  love.  To  be  forced  to  work  for  Jesus  by  fear  is  to  destroy  the 
greatest  condition  of  success.  IV.  Let  ouk  work  be  done  under  a  sense  of 
RESPONSIBILITY.  The  work  is  not  ours.  We  do  not  supply  the  materials.  We  are 
all  responsible  to  God.  The  day  of  account  is  coming.  Shall  we  meet  it  with  joy, 
or  with  grief  ?     [Weekly  I'ulpit.) 

Vers.  3-5.  But  with  me  it  is  a  very  small  thing  that  I  should  be  judged  of  you, 
or  of  man's  judgment. — Judfjment: — I.  Is  the  prerogative  of  God.  1.  It  belongs 
not  to  man.  2.  Not  to  ourselves.  3.  But  the  Lord.  II.  Is  preiiatuee  in  this 
LIFE.  Because— 1.  Many  things  are  hidden.  2.  There  is  no  universal  and  abso- 
lute standard.  3.  None  capable  of  applying  it.  III.  Is  reserved  to  the  coming 
OF  Christ.  1.  To  Him  all  jiulgment  is  committed.  2.  By  Him  all  hearts  shall  be 
disclosed.  3.  From  Him  every  man  shall  receive  his  reward.  (Fainilij  Cliurc]i)nan.) 
The  judgment : — I.  Of  man  is  of  little  value.  Because— 1.  Without  authority. 
2.  Seldom  just.  3.  Always  transient.  II.  Of  our  conscience  is  deceptive. 
Because — 1.  We  are  ignorant.  2.  It  cannot  justify  us.  III.  Of  the  Lord  is 
decisive.  1.  True.  2.  Supreme.  3.  Final.  (J.  LtjtJi,  D.D.)  Min's  judgments  : — 
Many  are  in  the  habit  of  reversing  the  apostle's  words ;  and  what  is  most  sur- 
prising is  that  great  numbers  who  would  be  shocked  at  the  thought  are  nevertheless 
really  more  governed  by  the  opinions  of  men  than  by  the  Word  of  God.  The  truth 
is.  the  fear  of  man  grows  up  with  us  from  our  infancy,  is  often  encouraged  by 
education,  and  is  disguised  under  fair  names,  or  mixed  up  with  something  allow- 
able, so  that  we  become  enslaved  to  it  without  suspicion.  Combined  with  this 
passages  of  Scripture  are  passed  lightly  over,  which  pronounce  it  to  be  a  bad  sign 
when  all  men  speak  well  of  us.  Let  us  see — I.  What  the  case  actually  is.  1. 
The  found-ttion  of  a  great  part  of  the  evil  is  the  want  of  accustoming  children  to  be 
influenced  by  the  love  or  fear  of  God.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  too  often  no 
other  motives  placed  before  them  than  those  of  pleasing  tiieir  parents,  of  being 
well  thought  of  by  their  friends.  Besides,  it  is  natural  to  wish  to  be  tliDUght  well  of 
by  others,  because  we  often  derive  solid  benefits  from  a  good  reputation,  and  great 
inconvenience  from  a  bad  one.  This  leads  to  the  great  evil  of  substituting  an  idol 
for  God  ;  and  this  idol  often  applauds  what  God  condemns,  and  condemns  what 
God  approves.  And  rather  thm  sacrifice  this  idol  men  will  go  to  great  lengths — 
even  to  murder  and  suicide.  2.  But  it  may  be  said  that  he  who  is  indifferent  to 
the  opinion  of  others  must  lose  one  great  check  on  his  vices,  and  that  men,  in 
proportion  as  they  despise  the  judgment  of  othsrs,  magnify  themselves  in  their  own 
conceits.  True,  they  who  are  without  God  can  but  go  from  one  extreme  to  another  ; 
and  ind-,'ed  it  is  better  to  fear  other  men  than  to  fear  no  one,  and  there  is  worse 
selfishness  and  pride  in  coTisulting  only  our  own  judgment  than  in  following  after 
the  praise  of  others.  But  all  this  is  excluded  if  we  submit  to  the  judgment  of  God. 
Here  is  a  check  upon  carelessness  and  hardness  to  reproof,  and  here,  too,  is  freedom 
from  all  unworthy  compliances,  and  a  freedom  which  can  nowhere  else  be  found 
pure  from  pride  and  contempt  of  our  neighbours.     II.  How  far  the  Scripture 

ALLOWS   us   TO   DESIRE    OR    CARE     FOR     THE    GOOD    OPINION    OF    OTHERS.       1.    It    is    cleaf 

that  to  gain  a  good  character  with  men  must  never  be  our  chief  object ;  if  it  is,  the 
praise  of  men  will  be  our  only  rewar  d.  So  parents  should  teach  their  children  to 
secure  the  approbation  of  God  first ;  then  they  will  know  that  in  trying  to  please 
them  they  are  obeying  God,  who  has  commanded  th^m  to  honour  their  parents. 
2.  The   ai^probatioii   of   good  and   wise   men   should   be  received  with  thankful- 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv, 

ness.  On  secular  matters  bad  men  can  judge  as  well  as  good;  but  in  all 
matters  of  right  and  wrong,  no  opinion  but  that  of  a  Christian  is  worth  a 
moment's  notice.  They  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  their  praise  or  censure 
is  really  our  interpretation  of  God's.  3.  But  the  judgment  of  God  is  the  final 
appeal.  To  our  own  Master  we  stand  or  fall.  (2'.  Arnold,  D.D.)  Judgment 
of  ministers  : — I.  Ministrbs  of  Cheist  must  expect  to  be  made  the  subjects 
OF  HUMAN  JUDGMENT.  They  are  like  a  city  set  on  an  hill,  and  every  action 
they  perform  will  be  weighed,  and  every  word  they  speak  will  be  examined.  Nor 
can  there  be  any  doubt  about  the  right  of  men  to  judge  the  ministers  of  Christ. 
Ministers  come  to  them  professing  to  be  commissioned  from  God,  to  deal  with  them 
about  the  concerns  of  their  souls,  and  have  they  not  a  right  to  examine  the  truth 
of  their  statement,  their  qualifications  for  their  work,  and  the  manner  in  which 
they  discharge  the  duties  of  their  high  office  ?  That  the  right  of  jmlging  ministers 
is  often  grossly  abused  cannot  be  denied.  But  this  can  never  be  assigned  as  a 
reason  why  they  should  be  deprived  of  it  altogether.  Those  who  hear  the  gospel 
are  commanded  to  prove  all  things,  and  to  hold  fast  only  that  which  is  good.  II. 
Though  the  judgment  of  man  should  not  be  entirely  overlooked,  it  is  a  matter 
OF  comparatively  small  ijiportance.  Many  ministers  pay  far  too  little  attention 
to  the  good  opinion  of  their  people.  But  though  the  judgment  of  man  should  not 
be  overlooked,  yet  it  is  a  matter  of  comparatively  small  importance.  The  opinions 
which  men  form  about  ministers  are  often  piTJudiced,  unjust,  and  fluctuating ;  and 
it  is  not  by  their  judgment  that  they  shall  be  tried  at  the  last  day.  Their  applause 
need  not  flatter  our  vanity;  their  condemnation  need  not  make  us  sad.  III. 
Ministers  must  not  rest  satisfied  with  the  favourable  opinions  which  they 
MAY  BE  inclined  TO  FORM  OF  THEMSELVES.  Paul  says,  "  I  judgc  not  mine  own 
self."  This  expression  must  refer  to  his  ministerial  character.  As  a  believer 
in  Christ  he  knew  much  of  himself,  and  bitterly  bewailed  the  existence  of  sin 
within  him.  But  as  a  minister  of  Christ  he  was  not  conscious  in  himself  of  having 
been  negligent,  partial,  or  unfaithful.  He  was  able  to  make  solemn  appeal  to  the 
elders  of  Ephesus  (Acts  xx.  18-21).  But  though  he  knew  nothing  of  which  he  could 
accuse  himself,  "  yet,"  he  says,  "  am  I  not  hereby  justified."  The  opinion  which 
I  have  of  myself  does  not  determine  my  character,  nor  shall  it  determine  my  con- 
dition. But  if  Paul  did  not  justify  himself,  how  shall  we  justify  ourselves?  "Who 
will  have  the  presumption  to  compare  himself  in  zeal,  in  faithfulness,  in  ability, 
in  diligence,  in  success,  with  this  holy  apostle  ?  Are  we  not  commonly  blind  to 
our  faults?  Are  we  not  equally  prone  to  overrate  our  virtues?  But  however  much 
we  may  be  disposed  to  conceal  our  faults  from  ourselves  and  others  ;  however  much 
we  may  be  disposed  to  overrate  our  virtues,  still  the  opinion  which  we  may  form 
of  ourselves  will  have  no  influence  in  determining  our  everlasting  condition.  The 
Lord  shall  judge  righteous  judgment.  It  is  not  impossible  that  we  may  be  proud 
even  of  our  faults,  and  may  think  that  a  ground  of  self-justification  which  in  the 
sight  of  God  is  a  ground  of  condemnation.  We  should  tremble  at  the  thought  of 
deceiving  ourselves.  If  m^-n  deceive  us  as  to  the  affairs  of  this  world,  future  watch- 
fulness and  diligence  may  repair  all  the  damage  which  we  have  sustained,  but  if  we 
deceive  our  own  souls  the  consequences  may  be  eternally  ruinous.     IV.  We  must 

LOOK  chiefly  to  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  GoD,  AND  UNDER  AN  ABIDING  SENSE  OF  ITS  JUSTICE 
AND    IMPARIIALITY    ENDEAVOUR   TO    REGULATE    OUR    OWN    CONDUCT.       1.    He    is    perfectly 

acquainted  with  our  character  and  conduct.  What  is  the  judgment  of  our  own 
mind  when  compared  with  the  judgment  of  Him  wliose  "  eyes  are  in  every  place, 
beholding  the  evil  and  the  good  "  ?  2.  The  opinion  which  He  forms  of  us  deter- 
mines our  character.  We  are  in  reality  what  He  sees  us  to  be.  Prejudice,  passion, 
interest,  partiality,  can  have  no  influence  upon  His  mind  :  He  sees  things  as  they 
really  are.  The  world  may  ai:)prove — but  what  is  this  if  the  Lord  condemn?  3. 
His  judgment  shall  fix  our  everlasting  condition.  In  the  present  world  the  wheat 
and  the  tares  grow  together.  But  when  the  Lord  shall  come  to  judgment,  the 
unclean  shall  be  separated  from  the  clean,  the  unfaithful  from  the  faithful  ministers 
of  Christ;  and  upon  each  a  dift'erent  sentence  shiill  be  passed.     V.  It  becomes  us 

TO    regulate    our    WHOLE   BEHAVIOUR   BY    THESE    SOLEMN    AND    IMPORTANT    TRUTHS.       If 

we  daily  remember  that  we  shall  be  judged  by  the  Lord,  we  shall  be — 1.  Excited 
to  faithfulness.  We  must  boldly  and  resolutely  publish  the  whole  counsel  of  God. 
We  must  "reprove,  rebuke,  and  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering,  and  doctrine," 
whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  2.  This  will  prove  a  powerful 
antidote  to  trifling  with  the  concerns  of  immortal  souls.  3.  The  remembrance  of 
this  will  reader  our  conduct  the  more  becoming.     4.  The  remembrance  of  this  will 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  343 


support  us  under  the  unjust  censures  and  calumnies  of  men.  The  reproach  which 
3'ou  bear  for  Christ  will  ultimately  redound  to  your  glory.  "  If  we  sutfer,  we  shall 
also  reign  with  Him."  5.  The  remembrance  of  this  will  support  us  under  that 
neglect  into  which  our  talents  and  performances  may  undeservedly  fall.  xMinisters 
of  the  most  eminent  talents  and  faithfulness  and  piety  are  often  neglected.  That 
love  of  novelty  which  is  so  prevalent  in  the  human  heart,  and  which,  if  not  laid 
under  proper  restraints,  is  attended  with  such  serious  consequences,  is  apt  to  render 
the  labours  of  the  same  individual  tiresome.  When  this  temper  of  mind  is  produced 
prejudice,  and  not  reason,  becomes  the  judge.  But  wben  tbis  happens,  aud  it  has 
happened  often  and  will  certainly  hiippen  again,  a  faithful  minister  rejoices  that 
it  is  but  a  light  matter  to  be  judged  of  man's  judgment,  but  that  He  that  judgeth 
him  is  the  Lord.  (W.  S.  Smart.)  The  judgment  of  men  compared  tcith  the  judg- 
vient  of  God: — 1.  When  two  parties  meet  to  adjust  their  respective  claims,  tlie 
principles  on  which  they  proceed  must  depend  on  the  relation  in  which  they  stand 
to  each  other;  and  there  is  no  more  fatal  delusion  than  that  by  which  the  principles 
applicable  to  the  case  of  a  man  entering  into  judgment  with  his  fellow-men  are 
transferred  to  the  case  of  man's  entering  into  judgment  with  his  God.  2.  Now  a 
man  may  have  the  judgni'^nt  of  his  fellows,  and  yet  be  utterly  unfit  for  contending 
in  judgment  with  God  ;  and  it  is  possible  to  build  on  the  applause  of  man  the  sandy 
foundation  of  a  confidence  before  God.  Have  we  never  met  with  men  esteemed  in 
society  who  find  scriptural  views  of  humanity  to  be  beyond  their  comprehension, 
and  with  wliom  the  voice  of  God  is  deafened  by  the  testimony  of  men  ?  And  thus 
many  live  in  the  habitual  neglect  of  a  salvation  which  they  cannot  see  that  they 
reipiire.  To  do  away  this  delusion,  we  sliall  advert  to  the  distinction  between  the 
judgment  of  men  and  thnt  of  God.  I.  Founded  upon  the  claims  op  God  when 
COMPARED  WITH  man's.  1.  People  have  no  right  to  complain,  but  are  willing, 
indeed,  to  ajjplaud  if  I  give  to  every  man  his  own.  In  an  uufallen  world  this 
virtue  would  not  at  all  signalise  me,  but  it  so  happens  that  I  live  in  a  world  where 
deceit  and  dishonesty  are  common.  But  again,  I  may  give  to  others  more  than 
their  own,  and  thus  earn  the  credit  of  other  virtues.  A  man  may,  without  any 
sensible  surrender  of  enjoyment  at  all,  stand  out  to  the  eye  of  others  in  a  blaze  of 
moral  reputation.  And  even  when  the  man  can  appeal  to  some  mighty  reduction 
of  weaUh,  as  the  measure  of  his  beneficence,  is  there  not  still  left  to  him  that 
without  which  all  is  nothingness  ?  A  thousand  avenues  of  enjoyment  are  still 
open  to  him,  and  he  is  free  to  all  the  common  ble-sings  of  nature,  and  freer  still  to 
all  the  consolations  and  privileges  of  the  gospel.  2.  Thus  it  appears,  that  after  I 
have  fulfilled  more  than  all  the  claims  of  men,  and  men  are  fiiled  with  delight  and 
admiration,  the  footing  on  which  I  stand  with  God  still  remains  to  be  attended  to, 
and  His  claims  to  be  adjusted.  While  not  one  claim  wliich  your  neighbours  cun 
prefer  is  not  met  most  readily,  the  great  claims  of  the  Creator  may  lie  altogether 
unheeded.  God  is  not  man,  nor  can  we  measure  what  is  due  to  Him  by  what  is 
due  to  our  fellows  in  society.  Amid  all  the  praise  we  give  and  receive  from  each 
other,  we  may  have  no  claims  to  that  substantial  praise  which  cometh  from  God 
only.  3.  A  justsense  of  the  extent  of  claim  which  God  lias  upon  His  own  creatures 
would  lead  us  to  see  that  we  may  earn  a  cheap  and  easy  credit  for  such  virtues  as 
will  satisfy  the  world,  and  be  utter  strangers  to  the  self-denial  and  the  spirituality 
and  the  affection  for  the  tilings  that  are  above — all  of  which  graces  enter  as  essential 
ingredients  into  the  sanctification  of  the  gospd.  II.  Founded  on  God's  cleaker 
and  more  elevated  sense  of  that  holiness  without  which  no  man  shall  see 
His  face,  and  without  which  we  are  utterly  unfit  for  the  society  of  heaven. 

1.  Man's  sense  of  right  and  wrong  may  be  clear  and  intelligent  enough,  in  so  far 
as  that  part  of  character  is  concerned  which  renders  us  fit  for  the  society  of  eartli. 
Those  virtues,  without  which  a  community  could  not  be  held  together,  are  boih 
urgently  demanded,  and  highly  appreciated.  And  even  without  any  exquisite 
refinement  of  these  virtues,  many  an  ordinary  character  will  pass  ;  and  should  he 
be  deformed  by  levity,  or  even  by  profligacy,  he  may  still  bear  his  part  among  the 
good  men  of  society.  And  if  such  indulgt^nce  be  extended  to  the  iniquities  of  the 
outer  man,  let  us  not  wonder  that  the  errors  of  the  inner  man  should  find  in- 
dulgence. What  else  can  we  look  for  than  that  tbe  man  who  feels  no  tenderness 
towards  God  will  tolerate  in  another  an  equally  entire  habit  of  ungod  iness  ?  And 
with  a  man  whose  rights  I  have  never  invaded,  and  w  ho  shares  equally  with  myself 
in  nature's  blindness  and  propensities,  I  will  not  be  afraid  of  entering  into  judgment. 

2.  Man  and  man  may  judge  each  other  iu  mutual  complacency.  But  between  man 
and  God  there  is  another  principle  and  standard  of  examination.     There  is  a  claim 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  justice  on  the  part  of  the  Creator,  totally  distinct  from  any  human  claim  ;  and 
while  the  one  will  tolerate  all  that  is  consistent  with  society  upon  earth,  the  other 
can  tolerate  nothiug  that  is  inconsistent  with  society  in  heaven.  God  made  us  for 
eternity.  He  formed  us  after  His  own  likeness  ;  and  ere  we  can  be  re-admitted  into 
paradise,  we  must  be  created  anew  in  the  image  of  God.  Heaven  is  the  place  into 
which  nothing  that  is  unholy  can  enter ;  and  we  are  not  preparing  for  our  inherit- 
ance unless  there  be  gathering  upon  us  the  lineaments  of  a  celestial  character. 
Think  then  of  the  delight  which  God  takes  in  the  contemplation  of  what  is  pure 
and  righteous  ;  think  how  one  great  object  of  His  creation  was  to  diffuse  over  the 
face  of  it  a  multiplied  resemblance  of  Himself;  and  that,  therefore,  however  fit 
you  may  be  for  sustaining  your  part  in  the  alienated  community  of  this  world,  you 
are  most  assuredly  unfit  for  the  assembly  of  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  if, 
imlike  unto  God  who  is  in  the  midst  of  them,  you  have  no  congenial  delight  with 
the  Father  of  all,  in  the  contemplation  of  spiritual  excellence.  Take  the  case  of 
Job.  In  reference  to  his  fellows,  he  could  make  a  triumphant  appeal  to  the  honour 
and  the  humanity  which  adorned  him.  But  when  God  at  length  revealed  Himself, 
and  brought  His  claims  to  bear  upon  his  conscience,  he  abhoned  himself  and 
repented  in  dust  and  in  ashes.  It  is  indeed  a  small  matter  to  be  judged  of  man's 
judgment.  The  testimony  of  our  fellows  will  as  little  avail  us  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, as  the  help  of  our  fellows  will  avail  us  in  the  hour  of  death.  He  who  judges 
us  is  God;  and  from  this  judgment  there  is  no  escape.  (2'.  Clialmers,  D.D.) 
Public  opinion : — This  is  the  language  of  a  man  exposed  to  sharp  and  unfriendly 
criticism.  There  wei'e  some  busy  persons  at  work  by  whom  everything  that  the 
apostle  did  or  said  was  misrepresented.  Besides  this,  there  was  much  going  on 
which  called  for  a  sharp  exercise  of  the  apostolical  authority,  and  we  all  know  that 
the  exercise  of  authority  creates  opposition.  So  St.  Paul's  enemies  succeeded  in 
creating  a  body  of  public  opinion  against  him.  Consider — I.  The  nature  and 
AUTHORITY  OF  PUBLIC  OPINION.  No  soQuer  ai'o  men  formed  into  society  than,  iu 
order  to  keep  this  society  together,  the  members  instinctively  secrete  a  certain 
deposit  of  thought  and  feeling  about  their  common  interests.  To  this  deposit 
everybody  contributes  something,  and  by  it  everybody  tacitly  understands  that  they 
are  to  be  bound.  Thus  every  family  has  its  public  opinion.  Thus  every  village 
and  every  town  has  its  public  opinion.  Again,  classes  and  professions  have  a 
public  opinion,  which  in  some  cases  is  tyrannical.  And,  above  all  this,  arises  a 
larger  public  opinion,  to  which  they  all  contribute,  and  by  which  they  are  each  in 
turn  controlled,  the  public  opinion  of  the  country.  And  this,  we  all  know,  is  a 
tremendous  force.  Then,  again,  as  civilisation  advances,  as  nations  come  to  know 
more  and  more  of  each  other,  there  springs  up  the  opinion  of  the  civilised  world. 
This  will  probably  be  more  felt  in  days  to  come  than  it  is  now.  So  Churches  have 
a  public  opinion  of  their  own.  Outside  the  faith,  which  rests  upon  God's  authority, 
there  is  a  lai-ge  margin  of  questions  upon  which  the  opinion  of  Christians  is  inces- 
santly taking  form  ;  and  this  is  by  no  means  certain  to  be  always  well-informed  or 
just.  It  was  with  this  that  St.  Paul  here  stood  face  to  face.  II.  The  apostle's 
INDEPENDENCE  OF  IT.  Not  that  he  had  any  pleasure  in  feeling  or  proclaiming  this 
independence ;  but  as  matters  stood,  he  felt  that  he  could  not  hope  to  be  of  service 
unless  he  were  jjerfectly  candid  and  independent.  It  is  sometimes  assumed  that 
when  a  man  blames  public  opinion  he  must  necessarily  be  right,  as  it  is  an  act  of 
conscience  requiring  courage  and  resolution  ;  but  an  eccentric  man  may  defy  public 
opinion  simply  to  give  play  to  his  personal  peculiarities.  Public  opinion  often 
smiles  good-naturedly  at  such,  ratmg  them  at  their  proper  value.  But,  again,  a 
criminal  is  at  war  with  public  opinion  ;  for  public  opinion  asserts  as  much  of  moral 
truth  as  is  necessary  to  keep  society  together ;  and  a  criminal  offends  against  some 
part  of  that  moral  truth  uhich  society  defends.  Looked  at  from  its  moral  and 
religious  point,  ijublic  opinion  is  at  best  a  compromise.  It  affirms  not  the  whole 
law  of  God,  but  just  so  much  as  may  be  useful  for  social  purjjoses.  It  strikes  an 
average  from  the  impulses  it  receives  from  above  and  from  below— between  the 
good  and  bad  elements  of  human  society.  The  criminal  makes  war  upon  public 
opinion  because  he  is  below  it ;  the  true  Christian  is  at  war  with  it  because  he  is 
above  it.  St.  Paul  was  opposed  to  the  public  opinion  of  the  Church  of  Corinth  in 
this  latter  sense.  If  that  public  opinion  had  been  successful  the  apostle  would  have 
had  all  heart  taken  ovit  of  him  ;  for  it  denied  the  virtue  of  the  lledeemer's  work, 
and  restricted  the  universal  Church  of  God  within  national  frontiers.  St.  Paul 
did  not  care  liow  he  was  judged  by  a  public  opinion  intent  upon  such  purp  'Ses  a3 
these.     HI.  The  co.nsidek.vtions   that  sustained  St.  Paul  in  his  independence. 


CHAP.  IV.]  J.  CORINTHIANS.  345 

To  a  good  man  it  can  never  be  a  pleasure  to  find  himself  differing  from  other 
people;  because  it  means  that  one  side  must  be  wrong.  The  precei't,  "  As  much 
as  lieth  in  y^u  live  peaceably  with  all  men,"  implies  that  a  Christian  should  do  hia 
best  to  keep  in  harmony  with  Ihe  common  opinion  of  his  fellow  men.  But  there 
are  times  and  circumstances  when  such  agreement  is  impos>ible,  and  such  was  St. 
Paul's  case.  He  had  heai'd  as  it  were  the  hum  of  unfriendly  voices  which  pro- 
nounced  him  a  faithless  steward  of  the  Divine  mystpries.  Not  in  contempt  or 
scorn  did  th*^  great  apostle  say,  "For  me  it  is  a  small  thing  to  be  judged  of  you  or 
of  man's  judgment."  He  spoke  out  of  another  world.  He  was  in  spirit  witli  God. 
He  did  not  venture  to  judge  himself.  He  knew  nothing  agninst  himself;  but  he 
did  not  feel  his  ignorance  to  be  a  certificate  of  acquittal.  He  felt  that  in  his  own 
mysterious  being  there  were  unsuspected  depths,  which  God  alone  could  fathom. 
But  the  AH  seeing  he  knew  was  also  the  All-meiciful ;  and  if  there  were  that  in 
His  servant  which  moved  Hiin  to  displeasure,  so  also  there  was  in  Himself  that 
which  would  cancel  it.  God  knew  the  )nriity  of  the  apostle's  intention,  and  it  was 
the  sense  of  this  Divine  judgment  which  made  him  feel  the  worthlessness  of  those 
judgments  of  the  Corinthian  Church.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  any  man  who 
serves  God  must  expect,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  judged  hardly  by  public  opinion.  It 
is  the  average  public  opinion  which  blames  those  whose  ciimes  would,  if  they 
could,  destroy  society ;  and  so,  on  the  other  hand,  it  condemns  those  who,  not 
content  with  so  much  of  moral  and  religious  life,  desire  to  have  as  much  of  ho'iness 
as  they  can.  So  it  was  with  Noah,  in  his  time  ;  so  it  was  with  Abraham,  Moses,  and 
the  great  representative  prophets.  And  our  Lord  warned  us  that  we  must  not  expect 
the  world  to  change  ;  "  If  the  world  hate  you,  it  hated  Me  before  it  hated  you  "; 
and  again,  "  If  ye  were  of  the  world,"  iV'C.  Thus  the  apostle  concludes  that  who- 
ever will  live  godly  must  suffer  persecution.  So  it  has  ever  happened,  from  the 
time  of  the  apostles,  that  the  Church  has  been  at  war  wi'h  public  opinion.  The 
history  of  all  the  martyrs  is  a  history  of  this  conflict  of  public  opinion  pushed  to  its 
last  extremity.  But  before  a  man  steels  himself  against  the  judgment  even  of  a 
section  of  his  fellow  m  n,  he  onght  to  be  very  sure  of  his  ground.  A  man  may  hold  the 
truth,  not  as  God's  voice  in  him,  but  as  a  personal  prejudice  or  passion  of  his  own. 
This  spirit  will  reproduce,  not  the  temper  of  Paul,  but  the  temper  of  the  Pharisee. 
But  on  the  other  hand,  when  on  the  one  side  there  is  human  error,  and  on  the 
other  eternul  truth,  then  to  give  way  is  to  be  a  slave  and  a  coward.  Conclusion  : 
St.  Paul's  words  remind  ns  of  two  classes  who  suffer  because  of  public  opinion.  1. 
Take  the  case  of  a  public  man  who  is  convinced  that  a  certain  line  of  legislation  is 
for  the  true  interests  of  his  country.  He  hopps  that  his  countiymen  will  share  his 
convictions,  but,  alas!  he  is  disappointed.  The  judgment  formed  of  him  becomes 
more  and  more  unfavourable.  It  may  be  that  there  are  documents  which  would  at 
once  restore  confidence  ;  but  these  for  reasons  of  public  policy  cannot  be  published 
for  years  to  come,  and  then  only  to  vindicate  his  memory.  He  whispers  to  himself, 
"  There  is  a  witness  of  my  intentions — one  who  hereafter  will  make  my  righteous- 
ness as  clear  as  noonday.  He  is  my  strength."  And  as  he  passes  out  from  public 
scenes  he  can  say  to  the  nation  wliich  is  dismissing  him,  "  For  me  it  is  a  small 
thing,"  &c.  2.  Look  at  the  young  man  who  has  just  come  up  to  London  to  l)egin 
life.  He  finds  himself  among  three  or  four  hundred  companions  of  his  own  age. 
He  is  a  member  of  a  society  which  has  a  ijublic  opinion  of  its  own.  If  he  be  going 
to  cling  unflinchingly  to  what  he  knows  to  be  right,  he  will  have  to  reckon,  soo-er 
or  later,  with  that  oi)inion.  Many  young  men  would  go  bravely  through  fire  who 
cannot  stand  ridicule  ;  and  ridicule  is  the  weapon  which  a  narrow  and  rude  public 
opinion  invariably  uses  in  enforcing  or  trying  to  enforce  its  assertions.  Sooner  or 
later  that  young  man  will  have  to  say,  "  For  me  it  is  a  small  thing  to  be  ju'iged  of 
you  or  of  man's  judgment"  ;  but  yet  let  him  remember  that  he  may  say  it  in  the 
spirit  of  the  Pharisee  or  in  the  spirit  of  the  Christian.  I  cannot  say  that  he  will 
escape  suffering;  but  he  can,  like  the  apostle,  turn  from  the  hard  woids  of  man 
unto  the  love  of  Goil.  There  is  an  old  Latin  maxim,  "  Don't  let  us  say  hard  things 
about  the  dead."  Why  not  ?  Because  they  have  already  be^n  judged,  and  have 
learnt  what  awaits  them  at  the  general  judgment.  Eemember  always  that  there 
are  two  judgments — the  human  and  the  Divine.  Let  us  not  ignore  man's  judgment ; 
but  let  us  not  forget  that  upon  the  greatest  of  subjects  it  is  sometimes  likely  to  be 
mistaken,  and  that  beyond  it  there  is  another  judgment  which  cannot  err.  {Canon 
Liddon.)  Maijiiaiiimit>j  : — Some  person  reported  to  the  amiable  poet,  Tasso, 
that  a  malicious  enemy  spoke  ill  of  him  to  all  the  world.  "  Let  him  persevere," 
said  Tasso  ;  "  his  rancour  gives  me  no  pain.     How  much  better  it  is  that  he  should 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


speak  ill  of  me  to  all  the  world  than  that  all  the  world  should  speak  ill  of  me  tc 
him!"  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  I  judge  not  mine  own  self. — Self-judgment  is— I. 
Fallible.  Because — 1.  Partial.  2.  Founded  in  ignorance  of  ourselves,  and  of 
the  true  standard  of  judgment.  II.  Insufficient.  1.  It  may  condemn.  2.  But 
cannot  justify  us.  III.  Wiihodt  adtuoeity.  1.  The  Lord  is  our  Judge.  2.  He 
knoweth  all  things.  (./.  Lyth,  D.D.)  For  I  know  notMng  by  myself;  yet  am  I 
not  hereby  justified ;  but  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord. — Conscience  the  aj)prover, 
hut  not  tlie  justifter  of  the  Christiciii : — 1.  Man  is  God's  masterpiece,  but  conscience 
is  the  masterpiece  of  man.  It  is  clear,  both  from  Scripture  and  from  the  experience 
of  our  own  hearts,  that  every  man  is  a  partaker  of  this  wonderful  faculty.  But 
this  natural  conscience  is  in  every  unconverted  man  an  accusing  conscience.  It 
witnesses  against  him ;  it  condemns  him.  The  sense  of  sin  on  the  natural 
conscien-e  is  one  of  Satan's  strongest  chains.  While  a  man  is  under  it  he  will 
only  run  further  into  sin.  We  may  see  how  it  worked  in  Adam,  the  first  sinner, 
directly  he  had  broken  God's  commandment,  and  his  conscience  accused  him  as 
guilty.  It  drove  him  to  fly  from  God,  and  when  called  out  to  appear  before  his 
Judge,  drove  him  to  excuse  himself.  And  so  in  every  man  a  guilty  conscience 
leads  into  more  sin  ;  and  the  more  surely  he  believes  God  to  be  a  holy  God,  that 
hates  sin,  and  a  just  God,  that  will  surely  punish  it,  like  the  devils,  he  believes  and 
trembles.  And  he  never  can  get  peace  by  any  effort  of  his  own.  The  criminal 
who  knows  that  he  has  broken  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  that  his  life  is  forfeited 
to  the  justice  of  his  country,  can  have  no  jjeace  while  he  knows  that.  The  gospel 
discovers  to  us  the  only  way  by  which  sin  can  be  pardoned.  Thus  the  tidings 
which  the  gospel  brings  can  alone  give  peace  to  the  conscience  of  any  man.  2. 
Now  St.  Paul  had  found  the  bles-ing  of  this  way  of  peace  in  the  gospel.  And  from 
the  hour  that  Christ  manifested  Himself  to  him,  to  his  soul,  it  was  his  continual 
ende.ivour  to  "  keep  a  conscience  void  of  offence  both  towards  God  and  man."  And 
that,  by  the  grace  of  God,  which  was  given  him,  he  had  not  endeavoured  after  this 
in  vain,  our  text  shows.  Observe — I.  That  St.  Paul  had  kept  a  "  conscience 
VOID  OF  offence,  BOTH  TOWARDS  GoD  AND  MAN."  "I  know  nothing  against  myself." 
There  was  no  permitted  sin  allowed  in  his  mind.  He  had  known  the  deep  corrup- 
tion of  his  own  heart  (P»om.  vii.  18).  He  found  that  without  Christ  he  could  do 
nothing  ;  that  he  had  no  power  "  of  himself  to  think  anything  of  himself  "  ;  there- 
fore by  the  Spirit  he  sought  strength  out  of  liimself,  and  by  that  Spirit  was  enabled 
to  do  what  his  conscience,  cleans^-d  by  Christ's  blood  and  enlightened  by  Christ's 
Spirit,  bade  him  do,  and  to  avoid  what  it  taught  him  to  avoid  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  "  His 
heart  did  not  condeum  him."  He  knew  that  he  had  endeavoured  as  in  the  sight  of 
God  to  speak  and  to  live  in  Christ ;  and  thus  at  tlie  very  close  of  his  life  he  wrote 
2  Tim.  iv.  7.  II.  That  notwithstanding  this,  he  was  not  hereby  justified. 
Now  this  is  the  very  opposite  of  what  the  worldly  moral  man  and  nominal  Chris- 
tian say.  Their  ground  of  confidence  is  just  that  which  St.  Paul  declares  was  no 
ground  of  confidence  in  him.  "  I  have  done  my  duty ;  thank  God  I  have  nothing 
to  fear."  Done  their  duty  !  St.  Paul  had  done  more  than  them,  and  yet  he  did 
not  say  what  these  say.  This  wms  not  that  on  which  he  rested  his  hope  of  accej^t- 
ance  before  God,  though  it  was  a  proof  that  God  had  accepted  him,  and,  as  such, 
a  subject  of  rejoicing  and  a  grc)und  of  thankfulness.  He  felt,  that  after  all  he 
had  done,  he  was  an  unprofitable  servant,  and  that  he  had  done  nothing  by 
himself,  but  only  the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  him.  His  only  ground  of 
hope  and  confidence  was  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  8).  {W,  W.  Champneys,  M.A.) 
False  peace  : — It  is  then  possible  that  a  man's  conscience  may  think  tliat  all  is  well 
with  it;  ard  yet  all  may  be  very  ill.  St.  Paul  had  declined  all  judgments  of  men. 
One  only  can  judge  the  heart.  He  who  made  it.  Man  can  judge  from  the  surface 
only.  In  the  very  plainest  cases  he  may  be  mistaken.  Human  praise  and  blame 
are  mostly  valueless,  because  men  know  not  the  whole  which  they  praise  or  blame 
(chap.  ii.  11).  But  neither  must  man  trust  wholly  his  judgments  of  himself.  Since 
even  an  apostle  said,  that  althougli  he  "kuew  nothing  of  himself,"  he  was  not 
thereby  justified,  what  a  vast  abyss  then  must  the  unexamined  conscience  of  a 
sinner  be  !  I.  There  are  two  sorts  of  peaceful  and  of  troubled  consciences.  1. 
There  is  a  good  conscience  which  is  peaceful,  because  it  mourns  its  past  sin  for 
love  of  Him  who  lo\ed  us;  it  resists  piesent  temptation,  in  His  might  who  over- 
came the  evil  one  ;  it  trusts  in  Him  who  never  fails  those  who  trust  Him.  This  is 
a  foretaste  of  paradise  (Ptjil.  iv.  7).  2.  But  peace,  as  it  is  the  blessing  of  the 
good  conscience,  so  it  is  the  curse  of  the  bad  conscience.  A  troubled,  remorseful 
conscience  has  life.     There  is  hope  of  a  man  amid  any  mass  of  sins,  if  he  hateg 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  347 

them ;  but  a  conscience  wholly  at  peace  and  yet  sinning  is  not  alive,  but  dead. 
The  eye  of  the  soul  is  blind ;  the  ear  has  been  stopped  ;  the  heart  has  been  drugged 
(1  Tim.  iv.  2).  II.  How  then  may  we  know  whether  ouh  peace  is  the  false  or  the 
TRUE  ?  1.  False  peace  needs  but  that  a  man  should  follow  his  passions  ;  true  peaca 
requires  that  a  man  should  have  resisted  them.  True  peace  rests  on  the  kncwledgo 
and  love  of  God  ;  false  peace  relies  on  ignorance  of  God  and  of  itself.  2.  It  is  some- 
thing to  see  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  false  peace.  It  is  something  to  know  that 
all  is  not,  of  a  necessity,  well  with  a  man,  because  he  is  at  peace  wiih  himself.  For 
this  is  his  very  delusion.  "  I  have  nothing  against  myself;  my  conscience  does  not 
reproach  me."  Take  some  instances.  (1)  How  was  David  at  rest  for  a  whole  year 
after  his  sins  of  adultery  and  murder !  His  conscience  was  alive  as  to  the  injustice 
of  taking  away  a  poor  man's  ewe-lamb  ;  it  wns  dead  to  his  own.  (2)  How  did 
Balaam  blind  his  conscience !  He  did  speak  God's  words  in  his  office  as  a  prophet ; 
as  a  man,  he  gave  the  devilish  counsel  to  seduce  Israel  to  idolatry  by  the  beauty  of 
the  daughters  of  Midian,  and  fell  in  the  battle  with  the  people  whom,  in  the  name 
of  God,  he  had  blessed.  (8)  How  did  Simeon  and  Levi  blind  their  conscience  by 
their  passion  in  their  treacherous  vengeance !  Yet  they  themselves  hud  no  doubt 
that  ttiey  were  justified  (Gen.  xxxiv.  31).  (4)  Esau  justified  himself  by  lookmg 
away  from  himself,  and  calling  Jacob  a  supplanter.  (5)  Saul,  in  his  first  act  of 
disobedience,  did  violence  to  himself;  in  the  second  he  justified  himself,  ^^'hen  he 
consulted  the  witch  it  was  on  the  plea  of  necessity,  and  when  he  murdered  himself, 
religion  was  still  in  his  mouth,  "lest  the  uncircumcised  should  abuse  me."  (6) 
Samson  d-  ceived  himself  by  tampering  as  to  the  secret  of  his  strength,  making  as 
though  he  had  betrayed  it,  when  he  did  not,  until  at  the  end,  when  he  did  betray  it. 
(7)  Ahab  coveted  Nabotb's  vineyard,  and  held  himself  justified,  while  he  inquired  not 
how  Jezebel  would  give  it  to  him.  3.  13nt  since  tbere  has  been  sucli  a  large  reign  of 
self-de  eit,  how  may  any  of  us  know  that  we  are  not  deceived  now?  (1)  Men  have 
thought  they  did  God  service  while  they  murdered  God's  servants.  It  is  not  enough, 
then,  to  think  that  we  do  (iod  service.  (2)  A  conscience,  healthfully  at  jieace, 
has  b  en  kept  in  peace,  through  believing  in  God,  loving  God,  serving  God,  and,  by 
the  gr;ice  of  God,  conquering  self  for  the  love  of  God.  A  conscience,  falsely  at  peace, 
arrived  at  its  peace,  through  ignorance  of  God  and  of  itself,  amid  the  dislike  to  loi)k 
into  Gods  Word  or  to  compare  its  own  ways  with  it,  persuading  itself  that  what  it 
likes  is  not  cont  ary  to  the  law  of  God,  stilling  doubts,  that  it  may  not  be  according 
to  the  law  of  God.  (3)  That  is  a  false  peace,  which  would  be  broken,  if  man  knew 
the  whole  heart  and  the  wbole  life.  Any  moment  might  break  it ;  if  not  broken  before, 
it  will  be  broken  more  terribly  in  the  day  of  judgment.  (4)  A  false  peace  is  founded 
on  false  maxims,  such  as — "Why  should  I  not  do  what  others  do?  "  "Why should 
I  be  singular?  "  (5)  A  false  peace  is  gained  by  looking  at  this  or  that  fault  of  anotber. 
"  This  thing  cannot  be  so  bad,  because  such  an  one  dues  it."  These  may  be  tests  to 
you.  Has  i\\j  peace  come  to  thee,  while  looking  into  thyself,  or  looking  away  from 
thyself?  by  taking  up  with  corrupt  maxims  of  the  world,  or  while  looking  into  the  law 
of  God?  while  listening  to  conscience,  or  while  escajiing  from  it?  while  encourag- 
ing thyself  by  the  sins  of  those  around  thee,  or  while  looking  to  Jesus  to  forgive 
thee  the  past,  to  keep  thee  by  His  Spirit  and  give  thee  power  over  thy  sins?  Con- 
clusion :  1.  Look  well  then  whether,  at  the  beginning,  thy  conscience  followed  thy 
desires,  or  thy  desires  thy  conscience.  Granted  that  there  is  nothing  about  which 
you  reproach  yourself,  that  your  desires  and  your  conscience  are  at  one,  how  was 
the  peace  made — which  gave  way  ?  People  begin  mostly  in  little  things.  They, 
take  some  little  thing  which  is  not  theirs,  or  which  seems  of  no  great  value  to  its 
owner,  or  which,  it  is  thou^'ht,  he  will  nut  miss.  Conscience  remonstrates,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  steal."  And  then  the  will  cozens  the  conscience,  and  says,  it  is  but 
"this  and  that."  The  deed  is  done  again.  Conscience  again  forbids.  Then  it  is 
put  oS.  "  Only  this  once ;  I  cannot  help  it  now.  I  have  begun.  I  cannot  draw 
back."  Conscience  is  thrust  back  again,  wounded,  murmuring.  When  next  con- 
science forbids,  it  is  put  ofi  to  a  more  convenient  time,  or  the  passion  turns  away 
from  it,  or  tells  it  to  its  fa^e,  "  I  will  do  it."  And  then,  to  avoid  conscience,  the, 
soul  buries  itself  amid  any  tumult  of  pleasure,  or  thought,  or  care.  In  this  way 
does  the  soul  inure  itself  to  break  every  commandment.  The  conscience  is  first 
dulled;  then  drugged  to  sleep;  then  stupefied;  then  seared  and  past  feeling.  Look 
at  the  first  step  and  the  last !  Who  in  the  first  act  of  self-indulgence  could  picture 
the  bloated  drunkard  ?  Who  could  picture  the  remorseless  hardened  sinner  in  the 
first  forced  stifling  of  remorse?  2.  But  conscience  has  an  inextinguishable  life. 
It  cannot  be  destroyed.     It  will  awake  again  once ;  here,  or  in  eternity.     Pitiable 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ,  [chap.  iv. 

it  is,  when  it  wakes  on  the  death-bed,  and  says  to  the  dying  sinner,  "Behold  thy- 
self." Miserable  and  pitiable  as  this  would  be,  it  would  be  a  great  mercy  of  God. 
If  the  soul  is  awakened  even  on  the  death-bed,  it  may  yet  be  saved  by  the  grace  of 
God,  Too  often,  if  it  has  slept  till  then,  it  seems  then  to  sleep  the  sleep  of  death. 
But  miserable  and  pitiable  as  this  awakening  of  conscience  would  be  then,  at  the 
the  last,  there  is  what  is  more  miserable  still,  that  it  should  not  awaken.  What 
would  it  be  if  your  conscience  w^ere  to  awake  first  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ? 
(E.  B,  Pusey,  D.D.)  The  only  true  Judge  : — I.  Christ  and  kot  man  the  only 
JUDGE  OF  human  CONDUCT.  1.  Human  judges  are  imperfect  in  knowledge  and 
wisdom.  2.  They  are  often  unrighteous  in  their  purpose.  3.  Their  ability  to 
punish  or  reward  is  limited.  II.  Cheist's  qualifications  as  a  judge.  1.  He  is  our 
Master.  2.  He  is  the  head  of  the  family  to  which  we  as  Christians  belong.  3.  He 
has  perfect  knowledge  of  the  law  by  which  we  are  to  be  judged.  4.  He  knows  all 
about  every  one  of  us.  5.  He  has  absolute  power  to  enforce  His  decisions. 
(Homiletic  Monthly.)  The  terror  of  the  day  of  judgment  as  arising  from  its 
justice  : — I.  Terrible  are  the  outward  circumstances  of  the  day  of  judgment 
(2  Pet.  iii.  10  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29),  because  tbey  imply  some  great  displeasure  of  God. 
]3ut  not  against  things  inanimate  could  that  disi^leasure  be  (Hab.  iii.  8).  Through 
that  mysterious  law  whereby  the  creation  is  bound  up  with  the  lot  of  man  (Psa. 
cvii.  34;  Bom.  viii.  22),  the  visitation  of  this  our  dwelling-place  indicates  dis- 
pleasure against  ourselves.  But  it  will  be  terrible  to  those  only  whom  the  judgment 
shall  condemn.  II.  The  terror  of  terrors  in  that  day  is,  that  it  is  judgment. 
Of  all  the  attributes  of  God,  that  which  is,  above  all,  terrible  is — His  justice.  Man 
can  bear  to  look  on  His  holiness,  and  even  on  His  majesty  and  almightiness  :  these 
are  not  of  necessity  directed  against  him  ;  he  can  even  endure  to  think  of  His  wrath 
against  sin,  His  heavy  displeasure  against  the  sinner.  To  be  passed  over  might 
imply  that  God  knew  the  soul  to  be  dross  from  which  the  refiner's  fire  could  extract 
no  gold.  The  most  awful  severity  of  God  were  a  token  of  love,  that  God  had  not 
abandoned  us.  But  justice!  It  is  terrible,  because  God  Himself  is,  as  it  were, 
bound  by  it  (Acts  x,  34).  He  cannot  show  favour,  where  it  is  a  question  of  justice. 
III.  The  day  of  judgment,  as  the  summary  of  all  particular  judgments  on 
individual  souls,  is  the  great  justification  of  God  ;  the  unfolding  of  the  right- 
eousness of  His  judgments.  We  know  that  there  is  to  be  a  final  parting  between 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  We  know  too  that  they  who  have  made  most  diligent 
use  of  the  talents  committed  to  them  shall  have  higher  rewards,  and  that  among  the 
lost  there  will  be  degrees  of  punishment.  And  since  all  these  on  both  sides  will 
vary  with  each  several  soul,  so  each  must  come  into  its  own  distinct  judgment,  that 
it  and  all  besides,  men  and  angels,  may  know  why  God  assigned  to  it  its  place ; 
why  He  could  not,  without  violating  His  own  justice,  assign  it  to  any  other.  All 
nations  and  each  individual  will  be  judged  (Matt.  xxv.  31,  32  ;  Rom.  xiv.  10-12  ; 
Kev.  XX.  12,  13).  Until  God  brings  home  to  the  soul  the  value  of  a  sgul,  mankind 
seems  such  an  uninteresting  mass.  Those  ever-renewed  millions  of  China  are  born, 
live,  die,  and  are  to  us  as  one  man.  We  think  of  them  as  "the  Chinese."  It  never 
even  occurs  to  most  of  us  that  they  have  any  individual  character.  So  as  to  those 
hordes,  who,  at  any  time,  overran  the  world.  In  God's  sight  they  are  individual 
souls,  each  with  its  own  separate  history,  by  which  they  have  been  or  shall  be 
judged.  But  then  how  tine  and  minute  and  appreciating  an  attribute  that  justice 
must  be  which  will  allot  to  every  soul  of  man  its  own  place,  its  own  degree  of  bliss 
or  of  suffering,  relatively  to  every  other !  For  this  belongs  to  exact  justice.  There 
can  be  no  ground  of  complaint  there.  W^e  could  not  there  wish  it  otherwise ;  for  it 
were  to  wish  that  God  were  less  just.  We  shall  be  judged  according  to  our  works  ; 
not  the  works  of  one  period  of  life  only,  but  all  (Eccles.  xii.  14 ;  Matt.  xvi.  27 ; 
2  Cor.  v.  10) ;  not  of  one  age  only,  but  of  all;  not  good  alone,  but  bad  also  ;  nor  deeds 
only,  but  the  "  idle  word  "  ;  nor  by  these  alone,  but  "  by  the  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  he.irt."  IV.  The  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  great  surprise,  because  most 
OF  us,  AT  the  best,  KNOW  SO  LITTLE  OF  OURSELVES.  "The  foolish  virtjius  "  will 
expect  that  the  door  will  be  opened;  and  they  will  find  it  shut.  They  think  that 
they  stand  in  a  relation  to  Him,  as  their  Lord  ;  He  knows,  owns  them  not.  They 
shall  be  amazed  at  their  exclusion.  Even  among  the  saved,  St.  Paul  speaks  of  what 
must  be  the  most  agonising  surprise,  short  of  the  loss  of  the  soul  itself,  the  loss  of 
the  soul's  imagined  store  with  Gud  (chap.  iii.  11-15).  V.  The  day  of  judgment 
WILL  ALSO  BE  A  GREAT  REVERSAL.  "  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last,  and  the  last 
shall  be  first."  Every  human  standard  will  simply  cease  in  that  day;  everything, 
whereby  we  can  estimate  our  fellow-men ;    all  which  is  admired,  looked  up  to, 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  349 

idolispcl,  will  be  of  no  account.  One  question  alone  there  will  be  then,  What  use 
has  been  made  of  all  and  each?  Every  gift  of  God  well  used  will  have  its  appro- 
priate reward  ;  but  one  question  will  anticipate  all,  "  Whom,  according  to  your 
light,  have  you  loved  and  obeyed  ? "  VI.  The  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  great 
DISCLOSURE.  How  few  outstanding  things  will  even  a  strict  sifting  of  the  conscience 
disclose  1  You  see  the  countenance  marked  with  vanity  or  cunning  or  contempt  or 
sensuality,  &e. — how  many  thousand,  thousand  indulged  thoughts  or  acts  must 
have  gone  to  stamp  that  expression  on  the  countenance  which  was  foimed  to  be  the 
image  of  God.  Tuey  are  forgotten,  dead,  buried  :  but  there  is  the  terrible  resurrec- 
tion. His  sins  of  omission,  who  can  ever  imagine  ?  One  has  but  to  name  the  word 
"  prayer,"  and  with  what  a  countless  multitude  of  omissions  it  encompasses  us ! 
Yet  even  sins  of  omission  are  in  some  degree  imaginable,  but  what  about  graces 
neglected  or  despised !  And  then  the  calls  of  God's  providence  any  one  of  which 
might  have  led  to  a  lasting  conversion  to  God,  where  have  they  left  us  ?  "  To 
whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  s-hall  be  much  required."  What  we  have  had, 
might  have  made  glorious  saints  of  those  who  have  had  less.  Who  will  be  able  to 
bear  the  sight  of  all  his  neglected  priviltges?  Embrace  them,  then,  this  day,  and 
so  prepare  for  that  day.  {E.  B.  Piisey,  1).D.)  Therefore  judge  nothing  tjefore 
the  time,  until  the  Lord  come.— Preinattire  judt/inn  fuibiddoi : — The  apostle  here 
teaches  us  that  all  pretensions  to  a  certain  knowledge  of  other  men's  sincerity  in 
religion  are  rash  and  unwarrantable.  1.  We  are  in  some  cases  more  competent 
judges  of  the  wickedness  than  of  tlie  goodness  of  men's  hearts.  Particular  acts  of 
sin  are  incident  to  good  men.  But  the  habitual  indulgence  of  sin  is  characteristic 
of  the  wicked  only.  But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  with  equal  certainty 
pronounce  any  man  to  be  holy ;  for  worldly  motives  may  operate  on  corrupt  hearts 
to  produce  the  appearance  of  holiness.  2.  Though  we  cannot  absolutely  determine 
any  man's  godly  sincerity,  yet  we  may  form  such  a  charitable  judgment  concerning 
our  fellow  Christians,  as  is  sufficient  to  religious  communion.  We  may  have  different 
degrees  of  evidence  in  favour  of  different  persons,  arising  from  their  different  attain- 
ments, or  from  our  different  acquaintance  with  them.  But  our  judgment  must 
always  incline  to  the  favourable  side.  We  are  to  hope  every  man  a  saint,  till  we 
have  conclusive  evidence  that  he  is  not  such.  Having  stated  the  doctrine  in  the 
text,  note  some  arguments  in  support  of  it.  I.  The  knowledge  of  men's  hearts  is 
God's  prerogative.  "  I,  the  Lord,  search  the  hearts,"  &c.  It  is  on  this  ground 
that  the  apostle  cautions  us  not  to  judge  anything  before  the  time.  For  us  to 
judge  the  heart  is  to  invade  His  throne.  II.  It  is  no  easy  matter  for  men  to  know 
their  own  hearts.  "  The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  .  .  .  who  can  know 
it?  "  So  the  apostle  says,  "  I  judge  not  my  own  self,"  &c.  We  are  cautioned  not 
to  deceive  ourselves,  nor  to  be  deceived.  III.  We  can  judge  the  hearts  of  others 
only  by  external  indications.  In  conversing  with  a  friend  we  may  be  much 
pleased  with  his  doctrinal  knowledge,  religious  sentiments,  and  professed  experience. 
This,  however,  is  but  external  evidence.  We  know  not  but  he  aims  to  deceive  us, 
or  may  be  deceived  himself.  Such  works  as  are  the  proper  fruits  of  faith  are  more 
solid  evidence;  for  in  these  there  is  less  room  for  dissimulation.  But  we  may  mis- 
judge even  here  ;  for  it  is  but  a  small  part  of  any  man's  life  which  falls  under  our 
observation.  IV.  The  scripture  gives  us  many  instances  of  the  uncertainty  of 
HUMAN  judgment  IN  THIS  MATTER.  All  the  disciples  were  deceived  by  the  hypocrisy 
of  Judas ;  and  none  of  the  first  believers  in  Jerusalem  could  discern  the  sincerity 
of  Paul.  What  arrogance,  then,  must  it  be  in  us  to  assume  the  bold  pretension  of 
ascertaining  the  existence  of  grace  in  other  men's  hearts !  Wise  is  the  caution 
given  in  the  text.  Conclusion:  The  subject  suggests  some  useful  remarks.  1.  The 
spirit  and  temper  of  the  primitive  disciples  afford  a  substantial  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  our  religion.  They  were  not  credulous,  but  cautious ;  not  hasty  in  their 
judgment,  but  deliberate  in  their  inquiries.  2.  Worthy  of  our  imitation  is  the 
prudence  of  the  early  Christians  in  regard  to  those  whom  they  received  as  teachers 
of  religion.  In  admitting  members  into  the  Church,  they  were  liberal  and  candid ; 
but  in  receiving  public  teachers  they  acted  with  great  caution.  They  required,  not 
only  a  present  personal  profession,  but  a  testimony  from  others  of  previous  good 
conduct.  3.  The  sentiment  entertained  by  some,  that  there  is  in  true  Christians  a 
kind  of  sympathy  or  fellowship,  by  which  they  infallibly  know  one  another,  appears 
to  be  irrational  and  unscriptural.  4.  It  is  dangerous  hastily  to  pronounce  men  iu 
a  converted  state.  This  is  judging  before  the  time.  As  we  cannot  know  others 
infallibly,  so  neither  can  we  form  a  probable  judgment  of  them  speedily.  5.  We 
cannot  be  sure  of  forming  a  pure  Church  on  earth.    (/.  Lathrup,  D.I).)      Fremature 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

jiulipiients  discouraged  : — How  necepsary  it  is  to  make  charitable  judgments  of  our 
fellow-men!  We  cannot  wholly  know  tbem  now.  We  see  the  husk  of  the  man 
only,  the  kernel  is  not  yet  fully  revealed.  We  must  wait.  In  looking  at  our  fellow- 
men  we  are  sometimes  like  as  though  we  were  walking  through  a  friend's  orchard 
in  the  autumn.  We  see  a  tree  with  only  a  few  scrawny  apples  upon  it.  We  have 
only  contemj)t  for  such  a  specimen,  and  say  to  the  owner,  "  Why  don't  you  cut 
that  tree  down  ?  It  does  not  deserve  a  place  here."  But  the  owner  replies  :  "  Cut 
that  tree  down !  Why  it  is  one  of  my  best  varieties,  but  the  season  has  been 
a^^ainst  it.  First  of  all,  the  rabbits  almost  barked  it,  then  it  was  tilmost  uprooted 
by  a  storm,  but  it  is  cominf<  round,  and  next  year  I  will  show  you  some  of  the  finest 
fruit  in  my  orchard  from  that  tree."  So  we,  in  looking  upon  a  human  life,  judging 
from  a  few  imperfect  specimens  of  its  charai-ter  that  circumstances  largely  couti'oUed, 
may  possibly  condemn  it  as  being  unworthy.  But  perhaps  the  Great  Husbandman 
is  saymg,  "  Circumstances  have  been  against  him  fur  awhile,  but  a  high  quality  of 
life  is  there;  it  is  growing  to  something  better  than  now  aj  pears  and  in  spite  of 
adverse  influences,  it  is  even  now  a  worthier  life  than  many  of  loftier  pretensions. 
(S.  Pascoe.)  liujldeous  judgment : — The  Church  of  Corinth  was  largely  turned 
into  a  school  of  ill-natured  criticism.  1.  Each  of  the  parties  was  occupied  in  find- 
ing fault  with  the  names  appealed  to  by  the  others ;  and  thus  some  taunted  those 
who  clung  fcsj.ecially  to  St.  Paul  with  the  suggestion  that  their  mnch-loved  apostle 
might  be  an  active  teacher  and  oiganiser,  a  great  letter- writer,  an  ingenious 
dii-putaiit ;  l  ut  he  was  not  faithful:  he  was  wanting  in  that  i-incerity  of  purpose 
which  is  iuilispensable  in  a  public  servant  of  Christ.  St.  Paul  here  deals  with  this 
charge.  No  doubt  a  steward  must  be  before  all  things  faithful ;  but  whether  the 
Corinthians  or  any  other  men  think  him  faithful  or  not  matters  very  little  to  him, 
since  he  does  not  venture  to  decide  even  for  himself.  His  conscience,  indeed, 
accuses  him  of  unfaithfulness  ;  but  then  he  does  not  see  very  far,  and  he  is 
judged  by  One  who  knows  a-1.  Therefore  the  Corinthians  had  better  give  up  their 
habit  of  judging  "  until  the  Lotd.  come."  2.  This  precept  often  occurs  in  the  Bible. 
Our  Lord  says,  "Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged";  and  St.  Paul  warns  the 
Eomans :  "  Therefore  thou  art  inexcusable,  0  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that 
judgest."  I.  What  is  the  import  of  this  precept?  1.  It  is  not  meant  that  we 
are  to  form  and  express  no  juds^ment  whatever  upon  human  conduct.  For — (1) 
Many  judgments  are  inevitable  if  we  thiuk  at  all.  Judgments  of  some  kind  issue 
from  us  just  a^  naturally  as  flour  does  from  a  working  corn-mill.  How  can  it  be 
otherwise?  (a)  God  has  given  us  a  morwl  sense,  and  if  this  be  alive  it  must  judge 
with  uiter  antipathy  that  which  is  in  contradiction  with  this  governing  kw ;  not  to 
do  this  is  to  capitulate  to  the  forces  of  evil,  and  to  cancel  the  law  of  right  within  us. 
{h)  God  has  gi\en  us  also  a  law  or  sense  of  truth.  As  to  what  is  true,  some  of  us 
are  better  iniormed  than  others.  We  &\e,  e.g.,  instructed  Christians,  who  know 
and  believe  the  whole  body  of  tiuth  taught  by  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  ;  and  so 
we  ai  prove  of  afji-eement  and  disapprove  of  dii-agreenient,  to  what  we  hold  for  truth. 
In  our  days  men  sometimes  think  it  pood-nalured  to  tieat  truth  and  falsehood  as 
at  bottom  much  the  same  thing ;  but  this  cannot  be  done  with  impunity.  (2)  Floly 
Si-ripture  stimulates  and  trains  the  judicial  faculty  within  us.  Th-'  great  servants 
of  God  in  the  Bitde  are  intended  to  rouse  us  to  admire  and  to  imitate  them  ;  the 
sinners  in  the  Bible  aie  intended  to  create  in  us  moral  repulsion  for  their  crimes. 
And  what  is  this  but  an  inward  judgment?  And  as  the  Jewish  law,  by  its  higher 
standard,  makes  the  judicial  faculty  in  n  an  more  active  than  it  was  in  the  case  of 
the  heathen,  so  Christianity,  with  a  higher  standard  still,  makes  it  more  active  in 
tie  Christian  tlian  it  was  in  the  Jew.  A  Christian  cannot  help  condemning  acts 
that  violate  the  law  of  Christ;  not  to  do  so  is  to  renounce  that  law  as  a  rule  of 
thought  and  conduct.  A  Christian  ought,  according  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebiews, 
to  have  his  moral  sens'  s  exercised  so  as  to  discern  between  g-  0(i  and  evil. 
Evidently  the  apostle  wished  the  faculty  of  moral  judgment  to  be  very  active  at 
Corinth  in  the  case  of  the  incestuous  person.  (3)  Human  society  has  alw  ys  found 
it  necessary  to  lay  upon  some  of  its  members  the  duty  of  judging  otheis.  Every 
day  of  term  causes  are  heard  and  judged  in  oui  Law  Courts  before  the  time.  Is 
this  to  contravene  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul  ?  Is  it  not  clear  that  without  some  such 
officer  as  a  judge  associated  human  life  would  be  impossible?  No,  a  judge,  so  far 
from  being  an  unchristian  functionary,  is  the  organ,  within  certain  limits,  of  the 
judgment  of  the  human  and  Christian  conscience.  2.  What,  thui,  is  the  apostle's 
exact  meaning — what  is  the  cla^s  of  juf'gments  no  one  of  which  is  permitted  to  a 
Christian  ?     Some  of  the  Corinthians  undertook  to  decide  what  was  the  character 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  351 

and  worth  of  Paul's  motive,  and  therefore  he  bids  them  judge  nothing,  i.e.,  of  this 
purely  internal  character,  "  until  the  Lord  come."  Our  Lord  would  drag  bad 
motives  from  their  obscurity  and  show  in  the  full  liglit  of  day  the  real  motives 
upon  which  all  before  His  throne  had  acted.  It  is,  then,  the  judgment  of  that 
which  does  not  meet  the  eye,  the  judgment  of  the  characters  as  distinct  from  acts, 
which  is  forbidden.  If  we  witness  an  act  of  theft,  we  must  say  that  it  is  an  act  of 
theft,  and  that  Almighty  God  will  punish  it.  If  we  are  a?ked  to  say  further  what 
is  the  moral  condition  of  a  thief  befoie  God,  the  answer  is  by  no  means  so  easy. 
II.  The  reasons  which  make  it  difficult  for  all  of  cs  to  judge  the  characters 

AS    DISTINGUISHED    FROM  THE    ACTS  OF  OTHER   MEN    EQUITABLY.       1.    We    have  OUr   likcs 

and  dislikes;  fiily  those  who  have  a  very  strong  sense  of  justice  keep  these 
tendencies  well  in  hand  before  they  speak  or  act  in  relation  to  others.  (1)  We  do 
not  welcome  virtues  which  condemn  ourselves.  If  our  tendency  be  to  vanity,  we 
find  it  hard  to  do  justice  to  the  humble,  dc,  &c.  (2)  We  assume  that  the  virtues 
which  cost  us  little  or  nothing  to  practise  are  the  most  important,  and  tbat  the 
vices  which  contradict  these  virtues  ought  to  be  juc'ged  with  the  greatest  severity. 
A  bias  like  this  disqualifies  us  for  equitable  judgment  and  warns  us  not  to  attempt 
to  juilge  character  "  before  the  Lord  come."  2.  We  are  necessarily  ignorant  of 
circumstances,  which,  if  they  do  not  decide  our  action,  they  do,  nevertheless, 
influence  it  very  seriously.  One  eye  only  can  take  a  full  account  of  circumstances. 
He  knew  what  had  been  the  circumstances  of  the  penitent  thief  when  He  said  : 
"  This  day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  piradise."  He  knew  what  had  been  the  cir- 
cumstances of  Judas  when  He  said,  "  It  were  better  for  that  man  if  he  had  never 
been  born."  As  for  us  we  do  not  know,  and  therefore  we  had  better  "judge 
nothing  "  as  to  character  "  until  the  Lord  come."  3.  We  see  only  the  outside  of 
character  in  those  whom  we  know  most  intimately.  Sometimes,  under  most  un- 
promising appearances,  there  is  a  fund  of  hidden  good.  On  the  other  hand,  out- 
ward a]ipearaoces  may  be  uniformly  fair  while  concealing  some  deep  secret  evil 
that  is  eating  out  the  very  lieart  of  the  soul,  like  the  disease  which  is  at  work  upon 
the  constitution  while  the  bloom  of  health  still  lingers  on  the  cheek.  Every  man 
who  is  trying  to  serve  God  must  deplore  the  contrast  between  his  real  life  and  the 
favourable  reputation  which  he  enjoys  among  his  friends,  and  must  experience 
something  like  relief  when,  now  and  then,  he  gets  abused,  it  may  be  quite  unjustly, 
since  in  this  way  he  feels  the  appraisement  is  partly  redressed.  We  cannot  antici- 
pate God's  judgments  in  either  direction.  He  looked  of  old  on  a  pagan  and  He 
said,  "  Lo !  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith  ;  no,  not  in  Israel."  He  called  some 
who  had  the  greatest  reputation  for  goodness  "  "hited  sepulchres,"  &c.  He  said 
that  the  first  on  earth  would  often  be  the  last  hereafter,  and  that  the  last  would  be 
first.  You  may  here  remind  me  of  our  Lord's  words,  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall 
know  them."  Yes  ;  but  He  is  speaking  of  false  prophets,  and  He  tells  us  that  tlie 
goodness  or  badness  of  human  actions  is  a  guide  lo  the  worth  of  the  systems  which 
produce  them  ;  He  is  giving  us  a  test  of  doctrines.  As  for  character  it  is  by  no 
means  almost  or  adequately  to  be  mea-ured  by  acts.  The  Pharisee's  good  acts 
were  more  numerous  and  indisputable  than  those  of  the  publican,  but  the  publican's 
inward  disposition  was  his  justification  before  God.  4.  Once  moi-e,  tbere  is  the 
soul  of  every  action,  the  intention  with  which  it  is  done.  Apart  from  this  an  act 
is  merely  the  product  of  an  animated  machine.  Many  actions  in  themselves 
excellent  are  corrupted  by  a  bid  m  'tive.  Prayer  is  a  good  action,  so  is  fasting,  so 
is  almsgiving  ;  but  we  remember  what  our  Lord  said  of  those  who  prayed  or  gave 
alms,  or  fasted  to  be  seen  of  men.  On  the  other  hand,  a  g"od  motive  cannot  trans- 
form an  act  in  itself  bad  into  a  good  act.  A  lie  remains  a  lie,  even  if  we  tell  it  with 
a  pious  motive.  Oh,  what  a  mysterious  unknown  world  is  the  world  of  motives ! 
Human  law  has  little  to  do  with  it ;  it  touches  the  fringe  of  it,  but  reluctantly  now 
and  then,  as  when  it  essays  to  distinguish  between  manslaughter  and  murder.  But 
do  we  really  know  about  it?  and,  in  our  ignorance,  how  can  we  possibly  undertake 
to  judge  the  inward  life  of  others  before  the  time?  On  two  occasions  St  Paul 
seems  to  have  violated  his  own  precept :  when  he  lienounced  Elvmas  and  Ananias. 
But  he  was  acting  under  the  guidance  of  an  inspiration  which  discovered  to  him 
the  real  character  of  these  men,  but  which  it  would  be  contrary  to  humility  and 
go  d  sense  in  us  to  assume  that  we  were  posse-sed  of.  If  our  Lord  said  to  His 
hearers,  "  Ye  hypocrites,"  He  saw  the  men  thiough  and  through,  so  that  there  was 
not  a  trace  of  possible  injustice  in  His  description.     III.    When  the  Lord  comes 

THERE  WILL    BE    A   JUDGMENT  AT  ONCE  ADEQUATE    AND   UNIVERSAL.       1.    WVll  it  is  foT  US 

that  we  have  not  to  trust  to  any  of  the  phrases  that  are  sometimes  proffered  us  as 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


substitutes  for  the  last  judgment— the  judgment  of  posterity.  Tosterity,  the 
chances  are,  will  know  nothing  whatever  about  us.  Posterity  does  judge  the  few 
eminences  of  a  past  age,  but  whether  posterity  is  right  or  wrong  what  does  it 
matter  to  those  most  concerned  ?  They  hear  nothing  of  its  favourable  or  unfavour- 
able verdict,  they  have  long  since  passed  before  a  higher  tribunal.  And  what 
about  the  millions  of  whom  posterity  never  hears  ?  Surely  it  is  well  that  we  may 
look  forward  to  something  better  than  a  juJj^ment  of  posterity.  2.  "  Until  the 
Lord  come."  Yes;  He  can  do  that  which  we  cannot  do;  He  can  judge  men  as 
they  really  are.  There  is  no  warp  in  His  perfect  humanity  that  can  for  a  moment 
affect  the  balance  of  His  judgment ;  there  is  no  sin  or  weakness  to  which  He  has 
a  subtle  incUnation,  or  of  which  He  will  ever  exaggerate  the  evil.  He  is  acquainted 
with  any  circu instances  that  excuse  or  enhance  the  guilt  of  each  who  stands  before 
His  throne.  He  has  had  His  eye  all  along  upon  each  one  of  us.  He  can  form  not 
merely  an  outward  but  an  inward  estimate  of  us ;  He  is  never  misled  by  appear- 
ances; and  therefore,  when  He  does  come.  His  judgment  will  be  neither  superficial 
nor  inequitable  ;  it  will  carry  its  own  certificate  of  perfect  justice  into  the  inmost 
conscience  of  those  whom  it  condemns.      (Canon  Liddon.)  Unrighteous  judg- 

ment: — General  Grant,  sjieaking  of  charges  of  cowardice,  says,  "  The  distant  rear 
of  an  army  engaged  in  battle  is  not  the  best  place  to  judge  what  is  going  on.  The 
stragghrs  in  the  rear  are  not  to  make  us  forget  the  intrepid  soldiers  in  front."  But 
how  many  judge  the  Christian  Church  and  religion  by  its  worst  representatives! 
{H.  O.  Mackei/.)  Who  both  will  brin?  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness, 
and  will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  heart. — The  processes  of  the  last  judg- 
ment: — This  is  a  very  simjde  description  of  the  last  judgment,  only  a  brief  state- 
ment of  some  things  to  be  done  by  the  Judge,  without  any  of  those  details  which 
address  themselves  irresistibly  to  the  imaginntion.  I.  Christ  will  bking  to  light 
THE  hipdex  thtnxtS  OF  DAKKNiiss.  1.  Now  such  is  the  imperfeetness  of  the  strictest 
human  legislation  that  a  great  deal  of  crime  passes  undiscovered.  Tlie  effect  of 
this  is  to  eucourage  many  to  commit  it  in  hope  of  impunity.  If  it  were  certain 
that  every  breaker  of  the  law  would  be  visited  with  its  penalties,  there  would  be 
few  violations  of  its  statutes.  2.  But  this  holds  good  not  only  in  regard  to  legal 
offences  which  cover  only  a  limited  range  of  wickedness.  There  are  many  sins 
which  a  man  may  commit  without  exposing  himself  to  any  legal  penalty,  but  not, 
if  the  commission  be  known,  without  suffering  in  his  good  name  or  reputation. 
You  have  only  to  bring  it  about,  that  public  odium  shall  be  attached  to  a  certain 
action,  and  you  may  almost  reckon  on  it  becoming  comparatively  unknown.  But 
then  public  opinion,  as  wt-ll  as  the  law,  may  be  altogether  evaded  through  conceal- 
ment. There  are  so  many  ways  of  hiding  vice,  so  many  chances  against  being  found 
out.  There  is  hardly  anything  so  posverful  as  an  encouragement  to  sin  as  the 
expectation  of  concealment.  3.  Yet  the  very  publicity  to  which  we  attribute  such 
power  may  be  affirmed  in  regard  of  all  of  us.  The  moment  you  recognise  the 
Divine  omnipresence  you  make  the  very  notion  of  secrecy  al)surd.  And  yet  so 
powerful  is  practical  unlielief  that  the  very  things  which  men  would  not  dare  to  do, 
if  they  thought  themselves  observed  by  a  human  being,  they  do  without  scruple  if 
observed  only  by  God.  4.  But  let  us  see  whether  it  be  of  any  real  advantage  that 
the  inspection  is  that  of  God  and  not  that  of  man.  We  wili  suppose  it  known  that 
on  this  day  twelvemonth  there  shall  be  made  a  revelation  of  the  actions  of  every 
man's  lite  :  now  would  not  the  prospect  of  this  have  a  vast  influence  on  a  man; 
would  not  those  actions  which  he  would  not  have  dared  to  commit,  had  he  not 
looked  for  concealment,  press  on  his  mind  and  cause  him  deep  agony;  and  would 
he  not  instantly  set  about  the  work  of  reformation,  that  he  might  reduce  as  much 
as  possible  what  would  have  to  be  disclosed?  It  is  not,  then,  the  temporary 
impunity  which  induces  a  man  to  commit  what  would  bring  him  to  shame  if  it 
were  bat  disclosed— it  is  the  hope  of  escaping  altogether.  And  it  is  no  imaginary 
case  which  we  thus  bring  to  convict  you  of  the  worst  infatuation,  if  you  could  be 
content  with  hiding  from  your  fellow-men  what  is  faulty  in  your  actions ;  this  is 
the  very  case  which  is  actually  to  come  to  pass.  5.  We  do  not  see  why  it  should 
practically  make  any  difference  to  you,  that  this  revelation  is  not  to  take  place  until 
after  death.  Except  that  you  should  be  vnstly  more  affected  than  if  it  occurred 
during  your  life ;  for  if  you  dread  the  revelation  because  of  punishment  which  may 
follow,  you  should  dread  it  the  more  when  the  punishment  is  eternal ;  and  if  it  be 
the  shame  that  you  fear,  where  would  your  exposure  be  so  terrible  as  in  the  presence 
of  myriads  of  angels,  and  of  the  whole  human  race  ?  And  now  we  want  to  know 
-why  the  very  men,  on  whom  the  prospect  of  such  a  revelation  would  tell  with  awful 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


force,  if  it  were  certain  to  take  place  daring  their  natural  lives,  can  regard  it  with 
the  most  utter  indifference,  because  not  to  take  place  until  they  have  passed  into 
eternity  ?  It  must,  we  think,  be  that  they  do  not  associate  such  a  revelation  with 
the  business  of  the  last  judgment.  We  need  not  suppose  there  is  any  one  of  you 
who  has  secietly  transgressed  the  laws  of  the  land,  in  such  sense,  that  if  his  actions 
were  exposed,  they  would  bring  on  him  judicial  interference;  but  we  may  suppose 
that  there  are  numbers  who  would  be  horror-struck  with  the  idea  of  having  their 
lives  laid  bare,  so  that  every  man  might  know  whatever  they  had  done.  Does  the 
merchant  allow  himself  to  be  guilty  of  practices  not  strictly  honourable,  etc.,  &e.  ? 
Why  you  would  sink  into  the  earth  for  very  shame  if  this  revelation  of  yourselves 
were  to  take  place  now  in  the  face  of  the  congregation  !  Oh  !  then,  think,  Shall 
we  be  able  to  bear  it  better  when  spirits  innumerable  from  every  district  of  the 
universe  shall  look  with  searching  gaze  on  all  our  hidden  doings?  If  the  disgrace 
of  exposure  would  make  you  long  now  to  hide  yourselves  in  the  depths  of  the  earth, 
shall  you  not  then  be  of  those  who  will  call  passionately  on  the  rocks  and  mountains 
to  cover  them? — passionately,  but  vainly — for  there  shall  be  no  more  darkness  but 
the  darkness  of  hell,  and  that  is  the  daikness  of  a  fire  which  cannot  conceal  because 
it  cannot  consume.  II.  Christ  will  m\ke  manifest  the  corNSELs  of  the  heart. 
But  there  are  many  who  might  venture  to  live  in  public ;  so  high  are  tlieir  morals, 
so  amiable  their  tempers.  These  men  will  not  fear  exposure.  But  if  there  be  some 
who  might  venture  on  submitting  their  lives,  who  is  there  that  would  venture  on 
submitting  his  thoughts'?  Active  sin  bears  hardly  any  proportion  to  ima«med  sin  ; 
for  whilst  a  thousand  things  may  put  restraint  on  the  acti"ns,  there  is  nothing 
whatever  to  control  the  imagination,  save  an  earnestness  1o  obey,  by  God's  help, 
the  injunction,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of 
life."  Compassed,  as  we  all  are,  with  infirmity,  there  is  no  diligence  which  can 
keep  watch  over  an  ever  active  fancy;  so  that  almost  before  we  are  aware,  there 
will  be  defilement  within,  whilst  all  is  yet  purity  without.  But  there  will  be  a 
scrutiny  going  down  into  the  heart  out  of  which  proceeds  evil  thoughts,  adulteries, 
etc.  Well  might  Malachi  exclaim,  "Who  can  abide  the  day  of  His  coming?" 
This  ought  completely  to  overturn  every  confidence,  except  that  which  is  based  on 
the  mediation  of  Christ.  We  do  not  see  how  any  self-righteousness  could  think  of 
submitting  to  such  a  trial  as  is  here  spread  before  us.  No  living  man  can  endure 
such  a  scrutiny,  unless  he  has  applied,  by  faith,  to  the  conscience,  that  blood  which 
cleanses  from   all  sin.      (//.    Melrill,   B.D.)  Hidden    thiiujs   revealed  : — The 

hydrometer  is  an  instrument  by  which  the  sti'ength  of  spirit  is  determined,  or, 
rather,  by  which  the  quantity  of  water  mixed  with  the  spirit  is  ascertained:  and 
the  dependence  which  may  be  placed  on  its  accuracy  once  gave  rise  to  a  curious 
scene  in  China.  A  merchant  sold  to  the  purser  of  a  ship  a  quantity  of  distilled 
spirit,  according  to  a  sample  shown  ;  but  not  standing  in  awe  of  conscience,  he 
afterwards,  in  the  privacy  of  his  storehouse,  added  a  quantity  of  water  to  each 
cask.  The  article  having  been  delivered  on  board,  and  tried  by  the  hydrometer, 
was  discovered  to  be  wanting  in  strength.  When  the  vendor  was  charged  with  the 
fraud,  he  stoutly  denied  it ;  but  on  the  exact  quantity  of  water  which  had  been 
mixtd  with  the  spirit  being  named,  he  was  confounded;  for  he  knew  of  no  human 
means  by  which  the  discovery  could  have  been  made,  and,  trembling,  he  confessed 
his  roguery.  If  the  ingenuity  of  man  is  thus  able  to  detect  the  iniquity  of  a  fellow- 
creature,  and  to  expose  his  secret  practices,  how  shall  we  escape  the  all-seeing  eye 
of  the  Almighty,  that  omniscient  Being,  "  who  both  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden 
things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  heart"?  Hidden 
iinpretisions  reveah'd: — Place  on  a  cold  polished  metal,  such  as  a  new  razor,  a 
wafer.  Breathe  on  it;  and  though,  when  the  wafer  is  removed,  no  trace  of  the 
wafer  whatever  will  be  discovered,  breathe  again,  and  a  spectral  image  of  the  wafer 
will  come  plainly  into  view.  And  as  often  as  you  repeat  the  breathing,  the  image 
will  appear.  More  than  this,  if  the  polished  metal  be  carefully  put  aside  where 
nothimi  can  deteriorate  its  surface,  though  it  remains  for  many  months,  breathing 
on  it  again  will  cause  a  shadowy  form  to  emerge.  Indeed,  a  shadow  never  falls 
upon  a  wall  without  leaving  thereupon  a  permanent  trace,  a  trace  which  might  be 

.made  visible  by  rev<-rting  to  proper  processes.  Iii  photograph v,  peoples, 
palaces,  churches,  landscapes,  Ac,  may  lay  hidden  from  the  eye  on  the  sensitive 
surface  for  years,  and  reappear  in  all  their  freshness,  reality,  and  proportion,  as 

'soon  as  the  proper  developers  are  applied.  It  is  thus  with  mental  impressions. 
No  impression  once  made  upon  the  mind  is  ever  lost.  Like  the  wafer  image  on 
the  polished  metal,  or  the  picture  on  the  sensitive  plate,  it  may  lay  concealed  ;  but 
VOL.  I.  23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 


a  mere  breath,  or  beam,  or  particle  will  call  it  forth  in  all  its  reality,  and  thus  on 
for  ever.  A  man  commits  a  trilling  sin ;  the  act  falls  as  a  mere  wafer  on  the 
surface  of  his  soul;  but  the  impression  of  that  wafc-r  is  more  lasting  than  the 
stars.  But  God  has  given  to  the  human  soul  a  quality  which  no  polished  metal 
or  sensitive  plate  f)ossesses.  No  impression  made  thereon  is  ever  obliterated, 
though  it  is  multiplied  on  millions  of  millions  of  times.  Every  impression  is 
vividly  and  imperishably  fixed  in  all  its  own  distinctiveness,  and  so  it  would  be  well 
for  us  to  reflect  as  we  look  or  think  or  act.  {Tlie  Homilist.)  And  then  shall 
every  man  have  praise  of  God. — God  glorified  in  the  judgment : — It  is  evident 
enough  from  the  connection  that  the  apostle  does  not  mean  that  every  man, 
whosoever  he  may  be,  shall  obtain  praise  of  God.  This  taking  for  granted 
the  excellence  of  the  individual  would  be  distinctly  opposed  to  all  his  reasoning. 
He  can  only  mean  that  every  man,  whose  conduct  has  been  acceptable  to  God, 
shall  be  openly  approved,  and  that  in  exact  proportion  to  his  piety  and  zeal. 
But  when  you  consider  the  text  as  containing  generally  a  description  of  the 
last  assize,  you  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  largeness  of  the  assertion. 
By  no  perverse  ingenuity  can  the  words  be  made  to  s:inction  the  wild  notion  of 
universal  salvation,  for  those  who  indulge  in  the  idle  dream  would  not  venture 
to  talk  of  having  praise  of  God.  But,  nevertheless,  it  would  seem  as  if  there  might 
be  some  sen=e  in  which  all,  without  exception,  shall  have  jiraise  of  God,  viz., 
in  the  sense  that  all  are  to  be  made  to  glorifj-  (lod.  It  will  be  for  the  fulfilliug  this 
end  that  any  receive  commendation;  and  so  far  then  as  every  man  may  at  length 
be  said  to  fultil  it,  every  man  may  be  spoken  of  as  in  the  position  of  one  praised. 
And  whether  or  not  it  be  a  groundless  conjecture,  that  the  praise  given  to  every 
man  may  denote  that  every  man  will  be  made  to  glorify  God,  we  know,  at  least, 
that  this  latter  is  not  supposition  but  fact.  We  can  never  wearv  of  endeavouring  to 
expel  the  delusion  that  God  is  too  merciful  to  inflict  lasting  pain,  and  th^it  He 
never  will,  therefore,  exact  what  His  Word  threatens.  The  delusion  is  based  on  a 
manifest  fallacy.  It  supposes  that  it  must  be  at  variance  with  the  Divine  nature. 
But  God  will  be  glorified  in  punishing  the  rebellious,  as  well  as  in  pardoning  the 
2ienitent.  God  has  made  all  things  for  Himself.  He  is  His  own  end,  and  it  is 
Godlike  in  Him  to  do  and  allow  whatsoever  inromotes  His  own  glory.  For  this  it 
was  that  thousands  of  worlds  glittered  through  infinite  space;  for  this  it  was  that 
earth,  sea,  air,  teemed  with  animated  beings ;  for  this  it  was  that  He  sent  His  own 
Son  as  the  surety  of  the  lost ;  for  this  it  was  that  He  opened  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  all  believers ;  aye,  and  for  this  it  was  that  He  appointed  the  prison  of 
hell  to  all  despisers.  You  are  wrong  in  thinking  that  He  has  nothing  to  gain  in 
condemning  you.  He  has  glory  to  gain  ;  more  glory  than  in  releasing  you,  if  you 
die  in  your  sins ;  for  this  were  to  compromise,  whilst  the  other  is  to  display  all  His 
attributes.  Examine  the  terms  of  salvation  through  Christ ;  comply  with  them, 
and  then  shall  every  man  literally  have  i>raise  of  God :  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."     {H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Ver.  6.  And  these  things,  brethren,  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  to  myself  and 
to  Apollos  for  your  sakes. — Apostolic  delicacy  tivd  tact : — St.  Paul  nreans  that  in 
the  preceding  passage  (from  chap.  iii.  5)  he  has  presented,  while  applying  them  to 
himself  and  Apollos,  the  principles  regarding  the  ministry  which  he  was  concerned 
to  remind  them  of,  in  view  of  certain  preachers  of  the  Church  which  misunderstood 
them.  He  did  not  wish  to  designate  those  preachers  by  name,  lest  he  should  shock 
susceptibilities  already  awakened.  He  explains  this  method,  which  he  felt  called 
to  use  in  the  delicate  circumstances,  by  the  words  "  for  your  sakes,"  which  here 
signify  "  the  more  easily  to  gain  your  acceptance  of  the  truth  thus  presented." 
Expressions  like  "Paul  is  nothing,  Apollos  is  nothing,"  applied  to  other  leading 
persons  at  Corinth,  would  have  seemed  injurious,  ^\hile  in  tiie  form  used  by  Paul 
the  truth  declared  lost  all  character  of  personal  hostility.  Hence  it  follows  that 
"  these  things  "  applies  solely  to  the  last  passage  concerning  the  ministry,  and  not 
at  all  to  the  ijrevious  passages  regarding  the  nature  of  the  gospel.  It  is  therefore  a 
mistake  to  find  here  a  proof  in  favour  of  applying  to  Apollos  or  his  partisans  the 
polemic  aaainst  human  wisdom  in  chaj)s.  i.  and  ii.  The  passage  rather  shows  how 
thoroughly  Paul  felt  liimself  one  with  Apollos,  seeing  he  could  treat  him  as  a  second 
self,  and  distinguish  him  so  pointedly  from  teachers  who  opposed  him  at  Corinth. 
{Prof.  Godet.)  How  the  ajiostle  reprjves  the  pride  of  the  Corinthian  Church  : — I. 
By  ex.vmple  (ver.  6).  II.  By  argument  (ver.  7).  III.  By  sarcasm  (ver.  8),  IV. 
By  the  considkration  of  God's  procedure  (ver.  9).     V.  By  contrast  (ver.   10). 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  355 

VI.    By   an    ENUJtERATION  of  APOSTOr.IC    HUllir.IATIONS    AND    SUFFERINGS    (veVS.    11-13). 

(Ibid.)  That  ye  might  learn  in  us  not  to  think  of  men  above  that  which  is 
written.  —  'The  true  stiDulard  of  t lie  gospel  iiiini.-itri/  : — The  ajjostle  means  by  "  what 
is  written,"  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament;  not  that  he  refers  to  any 
particular  passage,  but  to  the  general  spirit  and  point  of  view  of  the  Divine  revela- 
tion. The  facts  which  he  has  delivered  to  the  Corinthians  are  "  according  to  tlie 
Scriptures  "  (chap.  xv.  3).  He  claims  the  same  allegiance  to  the  Old  Testament  on 
behalf  of  Apollos,  wlio  was  "strong  in  the  Scriptures."  The  words  are  another 
undesigned  vindication  of  himself  and  Apollos  from  the  charge  of  being  party 
leaders.  Both  kept  close  to  the  teaching  of  Scripture.  The  faithfulness  of  the 
steward  (chap.  iv.  2)  turns  out  to  be  loyalty  to  tlie  Word  of  God  ;  and,  as  the 
faithful  servant  fears  not  the  judgment  of  men,  so  also  tlie  pride  of  his  stlf-conceit 
is  quelled  by  the  subjection  of  his  si:)irit  to  God's  revelation.  Both  qualities  ai'e  the 
opposite  of  the  tortuous  intellectual  cleverness  of  the  Corinthians.  Both  are  the 
surest  safeguard  of  transparent,  direct,  honest  simplicity  of  character,  which,  in 
turn,  is  the  best  jireservative  of  Church  order,  and  the  only  remedy  against  faction. 
{Frinci2>al  Edwards. )  That  not  one  of  you  be  puffed  up  for  one  against  another. — 
Puffed  up  : — "  Be  not  puffed  up  one  above  another  "  (comp.  in  the  Greek  1  Thess. 
V.  11).  The  followers  of  Apollos  exalted  themselves  over  those  of  Paul,  and  those 
of  Paul  over  those  of  Cephas.  One  exalted  himself  above  another  and  against  him. 
He  not  only  thought  himself  better  than  his  brother,  but  assumed  a  hostile  attitude 
towards  him.  This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  next  verse,  which  is  directed  against 
the  self-conceit  of  the  Corinthians  and  not  against  their  zeal  for  their  teachers. 
(C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  The  evil  of  j)ride  exhibited:—!.  By  direct  exposure.  1.  It 
is  an  over-estimation  of  self  (ver.  G).  2.  Ignores  its  dependence  upon  God  (ver.  7). 
3,  Is  inflated  with  imaginary  superiority  (ver.  8).  II.  By  contrast  wrm  apostolic 
EXAMV-LE.  1.  ApostlfS  esteemed  themselves  the  least,  the  proud  think  themselves 
the  greatest  (vers.  9,  10).  2.  Apostles  willingly  endured  for  Christ's  sake,  the  proud 
shun  all  self-sacrifice  (vers.  11,  12).  3.  Apostles  maintained  under  their  afflictions 
a  spirit  of  forbeararce  and  love,  the  proud  are  easily  offended,  tfcc.  (chap.  vi.  13). 
(Fuinily  Charchinau.) 

Ver.  7.  For  who  maketh  thee  to  diTer  from  another  ?  and  what  hast  thou  that 
thou  didst  not  receive? — 1^1)110)1  di[fere)tees  :—Whj  cannot  we  write  poetry  like 
John  Milton,  or  paint  like  Ilai^hael  ?  One  man  seems  to  be  good  without  an 
eii'ort ;  another  man  says  he  cannot  be  good  do  what  he  will.  We  differ  intel- 
lectually. There  is  Jedediah  Buxton,  a  common  ploughman  ;  give  him  the  size  of 
a  wheel,  and  he  would  tell  you  on  the  spot  how  many  circumvolutions  it  would 
make  in  going  round  the  globe.  Of  Streleczki,  a  Polish  count,  it  is  said  that 
"from  the  colonial  cap  icities  of  Australia  to  the  diameter  of  an  extinct  cratt-r  in 
one  of  the  Polynesian  islands,  from  the  details  of  an  Irish  i^oor  law  to  the  chemical 
composition  of  malachite,"  he  was  perfectly  at  home.  How  different  from  our- 
selves !  Let  us  come  around  this  subject  determined  to  find  out  what  we  can  of  its 
deep  and  holy  meaning.  Let  me  first  address  myself — I.  To  those  who  may  be 
iNCLiNKD  TO  DESPAIR.  They  fis  their  eye  upon  brilliant  examples,  and  say,  "  How 
is  it  that  we  are  not  glorious  and  powerful  like  these?  "  Now  this  thing  is  really 
not  so  bad  as  it  looks.  There  are  compensations.  You  wish  to  be  like  the  great 
calculator  I  have  named.  Let  me  tell  you  that  on  almost  every  subject  but 
numbers  Jedediah  Buxton  was  little  better  than  an  imbecile.  His  admirers  once  took 
him  to  the  opera,  and  when  he  came  back  he  said,  "  Wonderful,  she  took  so  many 
steps  in  so  many  minutes!  "  Now  will  you  change  with  him?  And  as  for  the 
Polish  count  he  knew  everything,  but  he  built  nothing,  was  brilliant  but  not  sdid. 
You  should  set  one  thing  over  ngainst  another.  Every  daisv  has  its  own  little  bit 
of  colour.  Kemember  the  tortoise  and  the  hare.  Instead  of  duelling  on  your 
defects  dwell  on  your  gifts.  If  you  have  little  you  might  have  had  less.  If  you 
stammer  ^ou  miLht  hiive  been  dumb.  Though  you  have  no  wings  you  have  good 
strong  limbs.  II.  To  those  who  pride  themselves  on  their  gifts  and  powers. 
The  apostle  referred  to  these,  and  a?ks  a  qnesiion  of  those  who  are  jjuff^d  up, 
W;iich  might  well  make  them  modest  and  thoughtful :  "  What  hast  thou  that  thou 
didst  not  receive  ?  "  He  makes  every  man  a  debtor.  Strength  is  from  God.  so  is 
skill,  so  is  opportunity.  But  one  man  has  ten  thousand  a  year,  and  another  man 
can  hardly  live  ;  what  about  such  contrasts  as  these  ?  Let  me  tell  you.  1.  A  mm 
may  require  a  ladder  ten  thousand  steps  liigh  before  he  can  see  any  Prov  dence  at 
all,  and  anuther  man  can  see  God  in  the  raiment  of  the  lilies  and  the  livelihood  of 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

birds.  2.  One  man  may  be  able  to  bear  the  prosjierity  represented  by  ten  thousand 
a  year,  and  another  might  be  crushed  by  the  golden  load.  3.  And  wholly  apart 
from  all  such  considerations,  it  still  remains  graciously  true  that  "  a  man's  life 
consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth."     III.  To  those 

WHO   WOXDER   how    IT    IS    THAT     OXE     MAN     IS    SAVED,    AND    ANOTHER    5IAN    IS    LOST.       1. 

God  is  far  more  concerned  for  the  salvation  of  the  human  family  than  it  is  possible 
for  man  to  be.  He  will  do  all  that  can  be  done.  Let  me  leave  the  awful  problem 
in  His  good  hands.  2.  The  juiJgments  of  God  are  founded  upon  the  gifts  of  God. 
"When  much  is  given,  much  will  be  required ;  where  little  has  been  given,  little  will 
be  required.  3.  It  is  not  for  me  to  say  who  will  be  saved,  and  who  will  not.  I  may 
not  ask,  "Lord,  are  th^re  few  that  be  saved  ?  "  or  He  will  instnntly  answer  :  Strive 
to  enter  in  at  the  straight  gate  !  He  will  throw  me  back  on  my  own  obligations, 
and  withdraw  me  from  problems  too  deep  for  my  immature  and  presumptuous 
mind.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Distinrjuisldng  grace -.  —  VivXe  is  the  inherent  sin  of 
man,  and  yet  it  is  of  all  sins  the  most  foolish.  A  thousand  arguments  might  be 
used  to  show  its  absurdity ;  but  none  of  these  would  be  sufficient  to  quench  its 
vitality.  Take  for  instance  the  argument  of  creation.  We  are  the  thing  formed  ; 
shall  we  sav  of  ourselves  that  we  deserve  honour  because  God  hath  formed  us 
wondrouslv  ?  What  are  we,  after  all,  but  as  grasshoppers  in  God's  sight  ?  But 
surely  if  this  prevail  not  to  clip  the  pinions  of  our  pride,  the  Christian  man  may  at 
least  bind  its  wings  with  arguments  derived  from  the  distinguishing  love  and 
peculiar  mercies  of  God.  Observe — I.  Wherein  God  hath  made  us  to  differ. 
1.  Many  of  us  differ  from  others  in  God's  providential  dealings  towards  us.  Many 
of  God's  beloved  children  are  in  tlie  depths  of  poveity,  while  some  of  us  who  are 
here  have  all  that  heart  can  wish.  Let  us  gratefully  nsk,  "  Who  maketh  us  to 
differ?"  Perhaps  none  of  us  can  ever  know,  until  tire  great  day  shall  reveal  it, 
how  much  some  of  God's  servants  are  tried,  and  if  God  hath  made  our  path  more 
pleasant,  it  is  owing  only  to  His  grace,  and  we  will  not  be  high-minded,  but  con- 
descend to  men  of  low  estate.  The  more  God  has  given  us  the  more  we  are  in 
debt.  Why  should  a  mun  boast  because  he  is  deeper  in  debt  than  another?  But 
the  best  way  for  you  to  feel  this  is  to  go  into  the  hospital ;  then  go  round  the 
neighbourhood  to  the  sick  who  have  lain  for  years  upon  the  same  bed,  and  after 
that  go  and  visit  some  of  God's  poverty-stricken  children.  2.  Many  differ  in 
regard  to  God's  gracious  dealings.  (1)  Ask  yourself.  Why  am  I  not  at  this  very 
hour  hearing  the  Word  with  my  outward  ear,  but  rejecting  it  in  my  inward  heart  ? 
Have  I  made  myself  to  differ  ?  God  forbid  that  such  a  proud  thought  should  defile 
our  hearts.  The  only  reason  is  because  He  hath  made  thee  to  differ.  Who  are 
more  hardened  than  those  to  whom  we  have  alluded  ?  (2)  There  are  some  of 
whose  salvation,  if  it  were  to  be  wi ought  by  man,  we  must  indeed  utterly  despair; 
for  their  hearts  are  harder  than  the  most  stubborn  steel.  How  is  it  that  my  heart 
is  melted,  my  conscience  is  tender,  and  that  I  know  how  to  pray  and  to  groan 
before  God  on  account  of  sin  ?  (3)  But  the  lowest  class  of  sinners  do  not  mingle 
with  our  congregations,  but  are  to  be  seen  in  our  streets  and  lanes.  How  frightful 
are  the  sins  of  drunkenness,  of  b'asphemy,  of  lasciviousness  !  "  Who  maketh  thee  to 
differ  ?  "  Some  of  you  have  experienced  redemption  from  these  very  iniquities. 
(4)  How  is  it  that  the  minister  has  not  forsaken  his  profession  ?  How  is  it  that 
the  deacons  have  not  turned  aside  uuto  crooked  ways?  How  is  it  that  so  many 
members  of  this  Church  have  been  kept  so  that  the  wicked  one  toucheth  them  not? 
Let  Abraham  be  deserted  by  God,  he  equivocates  and  denies  his  wife.  Let  Noah 
be  deserted,  he  becomes  a  drunkard.  Let  David  be  left,  and  Uriah's  wife  shall  soon 
show  the  world  that  the  mnn  after  God's  own  heart  hath  still  an  evil  heart  of 
unbelief  in  departing  from  the  living  God.  Then  give  all  glory  to  the  only  wise 
God  your  Saviour  who  has  kept  you  thus.  (.5)  Since  you  and  I  have  joined  the 
Church  how  many  who  were  once  our  companions  have  been  damned  whilst  we 
have  been  saved  ?  Oh,  why  is  it  you  are  not  already  a  fiend ;  who  is  it  that 
has  given  you  a  good  hope  through  grace  ?  II.  Now  what  shall  we  say  to 
these  things?  If  God  has  made  you  to  differ — 1.  You  should  pray,  "Lord, 
humble  us.  Take  away  pride  out  of  us.  O  God,  forgive  us,  that  we  should 
ever  be  proud."  2.  Why  may  He  not  make  others  to  differ  too  ?  "  After 
the  Lord  saved  me,"  said  one,  "  I  never  despiured  of  an\body."  Will  you 
ever  give  up  praying  for  anybody  now  that  you  are  saved  ?  Let  me  serve  Him 
more  than  others.  "What  do  ye  more  than  others?"  (C  E.  Spurgeon.) 
All  bleKsiiigs  come  frmn  God  : — I.  I  begin  with  reminding  you  that  every  blessing 
WE  POSSESS  IS  the  gift    of    God,  a.  d  that  we  have  notliing  which  we  did  not 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   COEINTIIIANS.  357 

receive  fi-om  Him.     Tliat  this  is  the  case  with  respect  to  natunil  endowments  will 
readily  l>c  admitted.     A  quick  apprehension,  a  retentive  memory,  a  lively  imagina- 
tion, and  other  mental  powers  are  favours  which  the  great  Author  of  our  being 
dispenseth  to  whom,  and  in  what  measure,  it  pleaseth  Him  ;  and  never  was  any 
man  so  arrogant  as  to  pretend  that  he  bestowed  these  qualiiies  upon  himself.     It  is 
no  less  evident  that  the  light  of  Divine  revelation  is  an  additional  blessing  which 
flows  immediately  from  the  same  fountain  of  beneficence.     We  see  every  day  that 
earthly  things  are  estimated,  not  by  their  use,  but  by  their  scarcity ;  though,  in 
fact,  the  things  that  are  truly  precious,  because  most  necessary,  instead  of  being 
rare,  are  scattered  abroad  with  the  greatest  profusion.     Thus  doth  God  dispense 
temporal  benefits :  the  best,  that  is  the  most  useful,  are  universally  given  out  iu 
greatest  abundance.     And  it  may  justly  be   affirmed  that  spiritual  blessings  are 
dispensed  in  the  same  way.     The  most  comprehensive  blessing,  the  unspeakable 
gift  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  of  all  others  the  most  free  and  liberal.     In  like  manner  the 
great  rules  of  duty,  and  the  truths  that  are  best  adapted  to  purify  our  hearts,  and 
reform  our  practice,  are  dispersed,  as  it  were,  around  us  in  the  greatest  plenty  and 
variety.     This  affords  a  glorious  display  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  our  great 
Lawgiver  and  Judge.     But,  alas  !  we  thwart  His  merciful  intentions.     Overlooking 
what  is  near,  we  roam  abroad  in  quest  of  other  things  that  lie  at  the  remotest 
distance  from  us,  and  have  the  feeblest  influence  upon  our  temper  and  practice. 
To  correct  this  false  taste,  by  recalling  men's  attention  to  the  most  simple  and 
practical  truths,  ought,  in  my  apprehension,  to  be  the  principal  aim  of  a  gospel 
minister.     Life  is  short,  and  souls  are  i^recious,  and  therefore  things  of  eternal 
consequence  ought  in  all  reason  to  be  preferred.     II.  To  select  some  practicaii 
LESSONS  was  the  second  thing  proposed,  to  which  I  now  proceed.     1.  If  all  the 
blessings  we  possess  be  the  gifts  of  God,  the  effects  of  His  free  and  unmerited 
bounty,  then  surely  we  ought  to  be  humble.     2.  From  the  s.ime  principle,  with 
equal  ease  and  certainty,  we  may  deduce  our  obligation  to  thankfulness  and  praise. 
3.  To  humility  and  gratitude  I  add  resignation  to  the  will  of  God.     Surely  if  no 
wrong  be  done  us,  we  have  no  right  to  complain.     We  ought  rather  to  adore  that 
goodness  which  at  first  bestowed  the  gift,  gave  us  the  comfortable  enjoyment  of  it, 
and  continued  it  with  us  so  long.     4.  Did  we  attend  to  this  truth  we  should  not 
dare  to  employ  any  means  that  are  unlawful  for  improving  our  circumstances,  or 
acquiring  the  good  things  that  belong  to  a  present  world,  and  even  in  using  the 
means  thut  are  lawful,   we  should  constantly  look  up  to  God  for  success,  and 
imj)lore  His  blessing  upon  our  honest  endeavours.     5.  The  importance  of  enjoy- 
ing the  blessing  of  God,  with  all  the  gifts  which  His  bounty  bestows  upon  us. 
From  this  alone  ariseth  their  value,  and  nothing  else  can  impart  to  them  that 
sweetness  which  renders  the  possession  of   them  truly  desirable.     {R.    Walker. ) 
The  free  grace  and  gifts  of  God: — These  are  questions  which  strike  at  the  very 
root  of  human  pride.     They  teach  us  the  absolutely  dependent  condition  of  every 
one  upon  earth.     Why  some  should  be  rich,  others  poor  ;  why  some  should  be  strong, 
others  weak  ;  some  bl  ssed  with  the  highest  powers  of  thought  and  understamling, 
and  others  deprived  of  reason,  of  this  great  gift  of  God  ;  why  some  should  be 
endowed  with  manv  excellent  eraces  of  the  soul ;  why  some  should  be  cut  off  in  the 
very   midst   of  their   sins,    whilst    we   have    been    spared — are    difficulties  which 
human   reason   could  never   explain.       We   require    something   infinitely  beyond 
all  human  authority  to  explain  these   things,  and  to  teach  them  as  truths  to  be 
reconciled   with  the  gracious  attributes  of  the  Supreme  Being — and  this  wMnt  is 
well  supplied.     From  Scripture  we  learn,  that  as  God  is  the  Creator  of  all  thin^:s, 
so  Ee  has  the  unquestionable  right  of  disposing  and  adapting  everythintr  accord- 
ing  to    His    own  fi-ee  will,    both    in    the    moral    and    natural    world.     His    holy 
Word  vtry  plainly  tells  us  that  He  is  the  sole  Author  of  all  gooil  (John  iii.  27, 
vi.  G5  ;  James  i.   17  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  7;  2  Cor.  iii.  5;  Phil.  ii.   li).     There  are  o'her 
passages  which  ti^ach  us  that  God  deals  out  His  mercies  according  to  His  own  free 
grace,  witnout  regard  to  an\  real  merit  on  the  part  of  those,  His  fallen  cr features, 
who  are  the  objects  of  His  gracious  and  Fatherly  care  (Acts  xvii.  24,  25,  28 ;  Exod. 
xxxiii.  19  ;  Isa.  Isv.  1 ;   Matt.  xx.  15  ;   Luke  xix.  10  ;    Kom.  ix.  16,  xi.  33;    Eph.  ii. 
8,  9).     1.   Of  this  doctrine  of  God's  free  grace  in  the  distribution  of  His  manifold 
gifts,  the  following  practical  uses  may  be  made.     First,  we  are  never  to  suffer  our 
not  being  able  to  understand  the  counsels  of   God  to  perplex  our  minds,   or  to 
prevent  us  from  fulfilling  the  various  duties  which  He  liatli  given  us  to  perform. 
We  know  enough  of  Gods  moral  government  over  us  to  know  this  great  truth, 
that  whatever  comes  from  Him  must  be  right  and  good,  however  unable  we  may  be 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

to  explain  all  His  dealings  towards  the  children  of  men.  We  are  therefore  to  go  on 
with  the  work  of  God,  the  salvation  of  our  immortal  souls,  with  constancy  and  holy 
zeal.  2.  We  are,  secondly,  to  rest  satisfied  with  what  hath  been  already  made  known 
to  us,  waiting  for  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  God  in  the  world  to  come. 
{H.  Marriot.)  The  inequalities  of  life : — 1.  That  inequalities  do  exist  is  one 
of  the  most  patent  and  enduring  of  facts.  And  we  cannot  but  reflect  that  it  might 
have  been  otherwise.  The  moral  law,  indeed,  could  not  have  been  other  than  it  is 
consistently  with  the  nature  of  its  Author  ;  but  we  might  conceivably  have  had  a 
world  upon  whic-h  a  law  of  equality  might  have  been  stamped  as  plainly  as  it  is  in 
fact  everywhere  absent.  Nor  is  grace  in  this  matter  the  antithesis  of  nature.  2. 
The  great  truth  which  the  apostle  suggests  is  that  the  author  of  differences  is  the 
infinitely  wise  and  good  God.  It  is  not  chance  ;  it  is  not  a  fatal  outcome  of  in- 
exorable law.  We  differ  from  one  another — I.  In  external  ciecujistances.  1.  Of 
these  inequalities,  England  is,  perhaps,  beyond  any  country  in  Europe,  the  great 
example.  The  contrast  presented  by  the  east  and  west  ends  of  the  metropolis  is 
probably  not  to  be  found  in  any  other  capital ;  and,  considering  the  small  area  and 
vast  population  of  this  country,  the  actual  distribution  of  land  and  wealth  might 
seem  to  approach  the  proportions  of  a  social  danger,  and  to  threaten  some  form  of 
destructive  change.  2.  There  are  answers  enough  to  the  apostle's  question.  These 
differences,  we  are  told,  are  begotten  of  ancient  injustice;  they  are  a  legacy  of 
feudalism,  or  they  are  traceable  to  more  recent  eras  of  misgovernment ;  they  repre- 
sent the  traditional  selfishness  of  one  class  and  the  chronic  inertness  and  degrada- 
tion of  another.  Let  the  truth  of  all  this,  here  and  there,  be  granted,  yet  vast 
differences  will  still  remain,  due  to  the  simple  fact  that  God  makes  one  man  to 
differ  from  another  in  productive  power,  and  hence  there  is  inevitably  a  cor- 
responding difference  in  the  amount  produced.  If  to-morrow  you  could  cut  up  the 
land  into  strips,  that  every  Englishman  should  have  his  tiny  share  in  it,  a  fortnight 
would  not  pass  before  the  reign  of  inequality  would  have  begun  again.  Nature  and 
fact  would  assert  themselves  against  theory ;  and  property  varying  in  amount 
concomitantly  with  each  man's  productive  power,  would  find  its  way  into  the  hnnds 
of  a  minority — tliough,  no  doubt,  a  new  minority — of  the  people.  3.  What  is  this, 
then,  but  the  old  story  of  the  Church  ever  upholding  privilege  against  right,  wealth 
against  poverty,  the  few  against  the  many  ?  What  is  this  but  an  endeavour  to 
stereotype  wrong  by  making  God  responsible  for  it,  and  by  interposing  Divine 
sanctions  between  it  and  its  correction  ?  And  if  we  point  in  reply  to  a  future  in 
which  inequalities  will  be  for  ever  redressed,  we  are  fiercely  warned  that  this  faith 
of  ours  in  a  future  stands  in  the  way  of  efforts  to  improve  man's  present  lot.  No, 
you  misunderstand  us.  If  property  be  of  a  kind  to  make  crime  almost  the  instinct 
of  self-preservation  ;  if  the  lack  of  education  means  no  ruling  moral  principles  in 
the  conscience  ;  if  human  beings  are  huddled  together  into  dwellings  which  deny 
to  purity  its  simplest  safeguards,  then,  most  assuredly,  the  Church  of  Christ  would 
be  false  to  her  Master  if  she  did  not,  at  whatever  risks,  urge  a  remedy.  Nay,  more, 
whenever  Christianity  is  really  believed  and  acted  on,  it  tends  to  lessen  the  general 
inequalities  of  life.  Its  charities  throw  bridges  over  the  abysses  which  separate 
classes ;  its  si^irit  of  self-sacrifice  prompts  the  free  abandonment  of  wealth  and 
station  for  the  sake  of  others.  Yet  when  all  that  can  be  done  in  this  direction  has 
been  done,  great  inequalities  must  remain,  because  they  are  due  to  inherited 
differences  of  personal  capacity.  II.  In  the  personal  endowments  with  which  our 
Creator  has  sent  us  into  the  world.  1.  Eace  differs  so  widely  from  race,  that 
these  differences  have  been  exaggerated  into  one  of  the  stock  ai'guments  against  the 
unity  of  the  human  family.  But  members  of  the  same  race  often  differ  from  each 
other  scarcely,  if  at  all,  less  widely.  Not  s^'ldom  does  this  original  inequality 
traverse,  as  if  with  a  disdainful  irony,  the  other  inequalities  of  external  circum- 
stances which  you  have  inherited  from  those  who  have  transmitted  to  you 
their  name  and  blood.  2.  Here  we  are  encountered  by  the  doctrine  of  heredity. 
We  are  told  that  every  quality  in  the  individual  has  its  roots  and  germs  in  the 
ancestral  past.  Undoubtedly  this  doctrine  rests  on  a  ba^is  of  fact ;  but  if  you  say 
that  most  of  the  differences  between  man  and  man  can  be  explained  by  it,  does  this 
do  anything  more  than  postpone  the  larger  question  which  lies  behind?  Why 
should  a  given  individual  have  this  particular  ancestry  ?  Nay,  why  should  there 
be  anything  to  be  transmitted,  or  any  law  of  type  to  govern  its  transmission  ?  In 
pi-esence  of  these  questions,  science  is  wisely  silent ;  but  religion  is  not  silent. 
And  the  answer  to  them  leaves  man,  as  he  was  of  old,  in  the  pre-scientific  days, 
face  to  face  with  the  Almighty  Creator.     III.  In  the  religious  advantagks  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  359 

OPPORTUNITIES  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  BESTOWED  ON  US.  Our  homcs  are,  in  this  respect, 
very  different ;  in  some  God  is  practically  ignored,  in  others  His  will  and  honour 
are  made  a  first  consideration.  The  schools  to  which  we  have  been  sent  are  very 
different ;  in  some  religion  is  all  but  forgotten,  in  others  it  is  the  life  and  soul  of 
the  whole  system.  Our  friendships  are  very  different ;  and  there  are  times  in  life 
when,  religiously  speaking,  a  friendship  may  have  decisive  consequences.  Who 
maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another?  Who  stands  behind  the  opportunities  of 
youth,  behind  the  intellectual  and  moral  environments  of  manhood,  behind  the 
subtle  predispositions,  which  from  the  early  days  of  life  exercise  a  propellin'j;  influ- 
ence in  this  direction  or  in  that?  Who  gave  his  mother  to  St.  Augustine,  and  his 
father  to  John  Stuart  Mill  ?  These  differences  come  from  God  ;  and  if  we  ask  why 
they  should  exist,  we  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  abysmal  mysteries,  out  of 
which  issues  the  warning,  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  Me  to  do  what  I  will  with  Mine 
own?  Is  thine  eye  evil  because  I  am  good?"  Conclusion:  1.  But  is  not  this 
disappointing?  Might  we  not  have  hoped  that  Christ,  in  whom  all  are  brethren, 
and  wbo  makes  all  free  indeed,  would  also  have  made  us  equal  ?  But  let  us  note 
that  inequality  of  gift  does  not  imply  that  God  loves  less  those  to  whom  He  gives 
less.  He  gives  as  we  can  bear  His  gifts ;  He  withholds,  as  He  bestows,  in  love. 
Nay,  underlying  the  great  difl'erences  there  is  a  much  truer  equality  than  we  may 
think.  As  in  a  well-ordered  state  all  are  equal  Lefure  the  law,  so  in  the  Church  all 
are  equal  before  their  Maker  and  Redeemer.  We  are  equal,  in  that — (1)  We  all  have 
before  us  the  solemn  moment  of  death.  (2)  We  shall  all  be  judged  relatively  to  the 
gifts  and  opportunities  we  have  enjoyed.  (3)  We  must  all  of  us  be  washed  in  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  sanctified  by  the  Eternal  Spirit.  (4)  We  are  all  of  us 
receivers,  although  some  of  us  may  have  received  five  talents,  and  others  one.  2. 
What  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received  ?  Is  there  nothing  ?  Yes,  one  thing, 
only  one — sin.  B.  The  temjter  in  which  we  should  think  and  act  in  view  of  the 
truth  before  us  has  three  characteristics.  (1)  Disinterestedness.  Any  gift,  pos- 
sessed by  others,  and  used  for  the  glory  of  the  Giver,  should  excite  in  a  Christian 
pure  and  disinterested  pleasure.  If  He  has  not  given  them  to  us  individually, 
what  does  that  matter,  so  far  as  our  appreciating  them  is  concerned  ?  (2)  Anxiety. 
Anxiety  for  others  lest  they  should  misuse  God's  bounty ;  but  great  anxiety 
for  ourselves,  if  any  of  us  have  reason  to  think  that  we  have  been  entrusted 
with  anything  considerable.  "  Be  not  high-7ninded,  but  fear."  (3)  Self-conse- 
cration. It  mny  be  little  that  yon  can  give,  give  it  to  God  ;  it  may  be 
w^hat  men  deem  much,  give  it  unreservedly.  (Caiwn  Liddoii.)  A  catechism 
jor  the  proud :  —  1.  The  Corinthian  Church  was  exceedingly  gifted.  Alas  ! 
its  grace  was  not  in  proportion  to  its  gifts,  and  consecpiently  a  proud  spirit 
was  developed.  Parties  were  formed  who  gloried  in  men  that  other  men  might 
glory  in  them.  2.  There  is  great  wisdom  in  PhuI's  rebuke.  He  did  not  cry  down 
their  talents.  You  very  seldom  lower  a  man's  opinion  of  himself  by  undervaluing 
his  gifts.  He  remembers  the  fable  of  the  fox  and  the  sour  grapes.  Pride  is  not  to 
be  cured  by  injustice  :  one  devil  will  not  drive  out  another.  Pride  often  finds  fuel 
for  itself  in  that  which  was  intended  to  damp  its  flame.  The  apostle  follows  a  far 
more  sensible  course  ;  he  asks  where  the  talent  3omes  from.  3.  The  questions  of 
the  text  may  well  humble  us  ;  but  to  this  end  we  need  the  Assistance  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  overcome  our  self-conceit.  Piide  hides 
itself  under  numberless  disguises.  Many  take  a  pride  in  what  they  call  having  no 
pride  about  them.  When  Diogenes  trampled  on  his  valuable  carpets  and  said,  "  I 
trample  upon  the  pride  of  Plato  !  "      "  Yes,"  said  Plato,  "  and  with  greater  pride." 

Note — I.    A     GREAT     AND     COMPREHENSIVE     TRUTH.         "  EverV     gOod     gift,"     &C.       1. 

Temporal  advantages.  Men  boast  of — (1)  Strength  and  beauty;  but  these  are 
gifts,  not  virtues.  Some  consider  the  strongest  man  to  be  the  best,  forgettii  g  that 
horses  and  elephants  can  bear  greater  loads,  and  lions  and  tigers  can  be  fiercer 
in  fight.  As  for  beauty,  one  of  its  most  ijotent  charms  lies  in  its  modest  uncon- 
sciousness. These  personal  advantages  are  distributed  at  the  Divine  pleasure. 
The  Lord  has  made  one  athletic  while  another  is  born  a  cripple,  &c.  (2)  Positinn. 
But  what  determined  the  circumstances  of  our  birth  ?  and  after  all  we  are  all  on 
a  level  if  we  trace  our  pedisrees  to  their  common  meeting-place.  Some  claim  to 
have  made  their  own  position;  nay,  to  have  made  themselves.  Yes.  and  woiship 
their  supposed  maker.  But  "  who  gave  you  your  opportunity  and  the  force  of 
character  which  have  brought  you  to  the  front  ?  "  (3)  Talent  and  knowledge  ;  but 
to  whom  do  they  owe  those  natural  predilections  and  talents  which  have  been 
denied  to  others  who  have  been  equally  industrious  ?     Whence  also  has  come  the 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

health  which  has  enabled  the  student  to  persevere  in  laborious  research  ?  (4) 
Wealth.  Certainly  it  is  to  a  man's  credit  that  he  has  not  squandered  his  money 
in  waste  and  self-indulgence  ;  but  still,  what  has  he  that  he  did  not  receive?  His 
habits  and  discretions  may  be  traced  to  training,  or  to  force  of  mind,  or  to  happy 
example,  and  they  are,  therefore,  things  received.  And  then  his  success,  it  is  not 
alone  due  to  industry,  for  sickness  or  accident  might  have  made  him  unable  to  earn 
his  bread.  "  Tliou  sbalt  remember  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  for  it  is  He  that  giveth  thee 
power  to  get  wealth."  2.  Gracious  privileges.  Those  who  have  been  paved  by 
Divine  grace  differ  greatly  from  what  they  used  to  be,  and  from  others  still 
unregenerate.  How  comes  tbis  ?  It  has  been  by  the  hearing  of  the  go.'-pel  as  the 
means,  but  we  must  ascribe  it  to  Divine  grace,  and  not  to  chance,  that  we  were 
born  wbere  the  gospel  was  preached,  and  not  left  under  the  influence  of  heatben- 
ism.  The  sovereignty  of  God  is  to  be  seen,  again,  in  the  fact  that  one  should 
be  found  under  a  cold,  dead  ministry,  and  another  should  hear  a  soul-saving 
preacher.  Yet  further,  there  were  some  who  heard  the  same  sermons  as  you  did 
and  were  not  converted,  and  you  were.  How  came  that  about  ?  It  is  true  you 
did  pay  more  earnest  attention,  but  what  led  you  to  do  so?  3.  Spiritual  blessings. 
Conviction  of  sin;  did  that  arise  spontaneously,  or  did  the  Spirit  convince  >ou  of 
sin  ?  Eepentance  towards  God — was  that  wrought  in  you  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  or 
was  it  the  outgrowth  of  your  own  free  will  ?  You  have  faith,  but  faith  is  the  gift 
of  God.  Since  your  conversion  you  have  exhibited  some  measure  of  holiness,  but 
was  that  wrought  in  you  by  the  Spirit,  or  is  it  the  fruit  of  your  natural  excellence? 
Who  distinguishes  thee  now?  Suppose  thou  wert  left  to  thyself,  couldst  thou 
continue  in  thy  state  of  grace  ?  And  who  shall  make  us  to  differ  in  days  to  come  ? 
Are  we  our  own  keepers  ?  II.  Its  teachings.  1.  It  is  a  rebuke  to  pride.  Let  any 
one  of  us  look  back  to  our  first  estate,  and  we  shall  surely  be  compelled  to  silence 
every  boast  for  ever.  Think  of  what  we  should  be  if  grace  left  us  !  2.  An  excite- 
ment to  gratitude.  If  all  I  have  and  am  is  due  to  the  distinguishing  grace  of  God, 
then  let  me  bless  the  Lord  in  the  deptlis  of  my  soul.  This  gratitude  should  take 
the  shape  of  continual  obedience.  3.  A  reminder  of  responsibilities.  Where  much 
is  given  much  will  be  required.  It  is  to  be  deeply  regretted  that  some  of  those  who 
have  the  most  ability  to  do  good  are  doing  the  hast.  4.  A  suggestion  of  great 
tenderness  in  dealing  with  others.  "Who  maketh  thee  to  differ?"  You  met  the 
other  day  with  a  man  fast  bound  with  b.id  habits,  and  you  said,  "Nothing  can  be 
done  witli  such  a  wreck.  I  will  not  waste  words  upon  him."  It  would  be  better 
to  drink  into  the  spirit  of  John  Bradford,  who,  when  he  saw  a  condemned 
malefactor,  was  wont  to  say, "  There  goes  John  Bradford  but  for  the  grace  of  God." 
I  have  never  despaired  of  the  salvation  of  any  man  since  the  Lord  saved  me, 
5.  An  encouragement  for  seekers.  Now,  you  know  some  eminent  Christians ; 
remember  that  there  is  nothing  good  in  them  but  what  they  have  received  from 
God.  The  Lord  can  give  the  like  grace  to  you.  "  Then  what  have  I  to  do?" 
Simply,  according  to  the  text,  to  be  a  receiver;  and  that  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the 
world.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Pride  catrchised  and  condemned  : — Pride  cannot  endure 
honest  questioning,  and  so  Paul  tried  it  by  the  Socratic  method,  and  put  it  through 
a  catechism.  We  have  here — I.  A  question  to  be  answered  with  ease.  Wlien 
we  are  asked,  "  Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another  ?  "  the  answer  is,  "  God  "  : 
and  if  we  are  asked,  "What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?"  we  re|dy, 
"  We  have  nothing  but  our  sin."  We  are  the  more  glad  to  hear  Paul  say  this, 
because  he  was  what  is  nowadays  styled  a  "  self-made  "  man.  Yet  though  he  was 
"  not  a  whit  behind  the  very  chief  of  the  apostles,"  he  said,  "  I  be  nothing."  "  By 
the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  Our  question  is  easy  to  answer,  whether  it  be 
applied  to  natural  gifts  or  to  spiritual  ones.  II.  A  question  to  be  answered 
WITH  SHAME.  "If  tliou  didst  receive  it,"  &c.  When  we  gloiy  in  anything  we 
have  received — 1.  We  rob  God  of  His  honour.  Every  particle  of  praise  we  take  to 
ourselves  is  so  much  stolen  out  of  the  revenues  of  the  Kmg  of  kings,  2.  Vv''e  leave 
our  truthful  position.  When  I  confess  myself  to  be  weak,  helidess,  and  ascribe  all 
I  have  to  grace,  then  I  stand  in  the  truth ;  but  if  I  take  the  remotest  praite  to 
myself,  I  stand  in  a  lie.  3.  We  are  sure  to  esteem  our  Lord  less.  If  Christ  goes 
up  self  goes  down ;  and  if  self  rises  Jesus  falls  in  our  esteem.  4.  We  undervalue 
our  fellow  Christians,  and  that  is  a  great  sin.  "  Take  heed  tliat  ye  despise  not  one 
of  these  little  ones  "  ;  but  if  we  over-estimate  ourselves  we  do  so.  5.  We  miss  the 
right  coursi'  as  to  our  gifts,  and  forget  that  they  are  only  lent  us  to  be  used  for  our 
Mdster.  It  is  recjuired  of  stewards  that  they  be  found  faithful,  not  that  they  vaunt 
themselves  and  de^-k  thenisches  in  their  Master's  goods.    Some  boast — (1)  IJecause 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  361 


God  has  placed  them  in  oflSce.  What  mighty  airs  some  give  themselves  !  "  Honour 
to  whom  honour  is  due " — they  have  learned  by  heart,  and  seen  a  personal 
inference  in  it.  (2)  About  their  experience.  This  also  is  vanity.  Let  the  man 
who  does  this  i-emember  that  he  has  gone  nowhere  except  as  the  Lord's  hand  has 
borne  him  onward.  Suppose  a  garden  were  proud,  and  boasted  of  its  fruitfulness  ! 
HI.  Other  questions  which  these  questions  suggest.  1.  Have  I  ever  given  to 
God  His  due  place  in  the  matter  of  my  salvation  ?  2.  Have  1  the  spirit  of  humble 
gratitude  ?  3.  Seeing  I  have  been  a  receiver,  what  have  I  done  towards  giving  out 
again  ?  They  make  in  the  north  of  England  earthenware  saving  boxes  for  the 
children.  You  can  put  what  you  like  in,  but  you  cannot  get  it  out  until  you  break 
the  box  ;  and  there  are  persons  of  that  sort  among  us.  Some  have  died  lately,  and 
their  estates  have  been  reported  in  the  Probate  Court.  We  ouglit  not  to  be  as  a 
stagnant  pond,  but  like  the  great  lakes  of  America  which  receive  the  migbty  rivers 
and  pour  them  out  again,  and  consequently  keep  fresh  and  clear.  4.  Since  what  I 
have  had  I  have  received  by  God's  grace,  might  I  not  receive  more?  Covet  earnestly 
the  best  gifts.  5.  If  all  that  Christians  have  they  have  received,  sinner,  why  shuuld 
not  you  receive  as  well  as  they  ?  (Ibid.)  NotJiing  to  be  proud  of : — In  "  Etbics 
for  Young  People,"  Professor  C.  C.  Everett  tells  of  a  question  he  asked  when  a 
small  boy.  He  says  :  "  A  lady  was  talking  willi  me  about  '  easily  besetting  sins.' 
She  said  that  her  besetting  sin  was  pride.  -I  looked  at  her  in  innocent  wonder  and 
exclaimed,  '  Why,  wliat  have  you  to  be  proud  of  ?  '  I  saw  at  once  by  her  confusion 
that  I  had  made  a  very  impudent  and  unlucky  speech."  We  cannot  ask  this 
question  of  others  ;  but  if  any  one  who  is  disposed  to  be  pi'oud  should  ask  himself 
the  question,  "  What  have  you  to  be  proud  of  ?  "  and  answer  it  truly,  it  might  do 
him  good.  Tlte  inflation  of  j)ridc  : — Jehan  Hering,  who  was  a  close  observer  of 
ants  and  their  doings,  once  gave  an  account  of  a  battle  royal  which  he  watched 
between  two  of  the  smallest  of  the  sj)ecies.  It  took  place  on  the  stem  of  a  leaf ; 
the  cause  was  a  scrap  of  food.  The  contestants  fought  until  one  killed  the  other. 
"  The  victor,"  says  Hering,  "then  strutted  to  and  fro  in  view  of  the  other  ants. 
Napoleon  could  not  have  been  more  sure  of  his  own  mighty  place  in  creation.  '  For 
me,'  he  seemed  to  say,  'was  this  world  made.'  Tlie  mite  was  actually  inflated 
with  vanity."  An  observer  watching  the  throng  of  human  beings  passing  along 
our  crowded  thoroughfares,  would  often  be  reminded  of  Hering's  ant.  So  many  are 
the  men  and  women  who  express  in  their  walk,  their  manner,  their  voice,  a  sense 
CI  their  own  importance.  Ht-re  is  a  middle-aged  tradesman  who  has  just  driven  a 
sharp  bai'gain  ;  there  is  a  schoolboy  who  ran  a  winning  race  last  week ;  yonder  is  a 
young  man  who  is  pushmg  his  way  successfully  into  business  or  into  fashionable 
society,  and  here  comes  a  young  girl  whose  only  claim  to  distinction  is  a  new  hat. 
These  are  not  strong  proofs  of  superiority  to  the  swarming  millions  of  people  on 
the  earth.  Yet  these  men  and  women  bear  themselves  as  if,  like  the  ant,  each  of 
them  thought,  "  This  world  was  made  for  me  !  "  Theodore  Hook,  viewing  a  vain 
member  of  his  college  strutting  along  in  cap  and  gown,  approached  presently,  and 
timidly  demanded,  "  If  you  please,  sir,  are  you  anybody  in  particular?"  How 
many  of  us,  when  most  secure  in  our  vanity,  could  stand  that  probing  question  ? 
The  men  and  women  who  have  real  work  in  life  as  a  rule  forget  themselves,  and 
acquire  that  total  lack  of  self-consciousness  which  is  the  basis  of  the  finest  manners. 
Apostolic  xvarnincis  : — I.  To  those  who  fostered  the  personal  worship  of  the 
ministers — that  is,  of  themselves.  1.  The  qualities  which  are  requisite  for  the 
higher  part  of  the  ministry  are — great  powers  of  sympathy;  humbleness;  wisdun 
to  direct ;  knowledge  of  the  world ;  and  a  knowledge  of  evil  which  comes  rather 
from  repulsion  from  it.  But  those  which  adapt  a  man  for  the  merely  showy  parts 
are  of  an  inferior  order :  fluency,  self-contidence,  tact,  a  certain  histrionic  jjower  of 
conceiving  feelings,  and  expressing  them.  Now,  it  was  precisely  to  this  class  of 
qualities  that  Christianity  opened  a  new  field  in  places  sm-h  as  Corinth.  Men  who 
had  been  unknown  suddenly  found  an  opportunity  for  public  addresses,  activity, 
and  leadership.  They  became  fluent  talkers;  and  the  more  shallow  and  self- 
sufficient  they  were,  the  more  likely  it  was  that  they  would  become  the  leaders  of  a 
faction.  And  how  did  the  apostle  meet  this?  Ey  inculcating  (ver.  7)  Christian 
dependence:  "Who  maketh  thee  to  differ?"  Cnristian  responsibility:  "What 
hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?  "  2.  This  tendency  besets  us  ever.  Even 
at  school  brilliancy  is  admired,  whilst  plodding  industry  is  sneered  at.  Yet  which 
of  these  would  St.  Paul  approve?  Which  shows  fidelity?  The  dull  medio -re 
talent  faithfully  used,  or  the  bright  talent  used  only  for  glitter  and  disj^lay  ?  St. 
Paul  did  not  sneer  at  eloquence,  &c. ;  but  he  taid.  These  are  your  responsibilities. 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  iv. 


You  are  a  steward  :  you  have  received.  Beware  that  you  be  found  faithful.  Woe, 
if  the  gifts  and  manner  that  have  made  you  acceptable  have  done  no  more.  In 
truth,  this  independence  of  God  is  man's  fall.  Adam  tried  to  be  independent ;  and 
just  as  all  things  are  ours  if  we  be  Christ's,  so,  if  we  be  not  Christ's,  then  our 
pleasures,  gifts,  Lonours  are  all  stolen  ;  "  we  glory  as  if  we  had  not  received."  II. 
To  THOSE  WHO  UNHULY  MAGNIFIED  THE  OFFICE.  1.  There  Were  men  who  exercised 
lord.ship  over  the  congregations.  Plare  vers.  8  and  9  side  by  side,  and  think,  first 
of  all,  of  these  teachers — admired,  flattered,  made  rich,  and  then  going  on  to  rule 
as  autocrats,  so  that  when  a  Corinthian  entertained  his  minister,  he  entertained  his 
oracle,  his  very  religion.  And  then  turn  to  the  apostolic  life.  If  the  one  be  an 
apostle,  what  is  the  other?  If  one  be  the  high,  the  Christian  life,  how  can  the 
other  be  a  life  to  boast  of  ?  2.  Eemark  here  the  irony.  People  who  look  upon 
Christianity  as  a  mere  passive,  strengthless  thing,  must  needs  be  perplexed  with 
l^assagts  such  as  these.  But  remark  how  gracefully  it  turns  with  Paul  from  loving 
though  angry  irony,  to  loving  earnestness:  "I  would  to  God  ye  did  reign." 
Would  to  God  that  the  time  for  triumph  were  come  indeed,  that  these  factions 
m'ght  cease,  and  we  be  kings  together!  3.  See  here  the  true  doctrine  of  the 
apostolical  succession.  The  apostolical  office  is  one  thing  ;  the  apostolical  character 
is  quite  another.  And  just  as  the  true  children  of  Abraham  were  not  his  lineal 
descendants,  but  the  iuheritors  of  his  faith,  so  the  true  apostolical  succession  consists 
not  in  what  these  men  pride  themselves  upon — their  office,  attainments,  &c. ;  but 
rather  in  a  life  of  truth,  and  in  the  suffering  which  inevitably  comes  as  the  result 
of  being  true.  4.  Now,  therefore,  we  can  understand  the  passage  with  which  he 
ends  :  "  Wherefore  I  beseech  you,  be  ye  followers  of  me"  (ver.  16).  Only  do  not 
misread  it.  You  have  here  no  mere  partisan  trying  to  outbid  and  outvie  others. 
He  says  that  tlie  life  he  had  just  described  was  the  one  for  them  to  follow.  In 
this — "Be  \e  followers  of  me,"  he  declares  the  life  of  suffering,  in  the  cause  of 
duty,  to  be  higher  than  the  life  of  popularity  and  self-indulgence.  He  saj's  that 
the  dignity  of  a  minister,  and  the  majesty  of  a  man,  consists  not  in  "  Most 
Eeverend,"  or  "  Most  Noble,"  prefixed  to  his  name;  but  it  lies  in  being  through 
and  through  a  man,  according  to  the  Divine  idea  ;  a  man  whose  chief  privilege  it  is 
to  be  a  minister,  a  follower  of  Him  who  "came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to 
minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many."     (F.  W.  Bobertson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  8-13.  Now  ye  are  full  .  .  .  rich  ...  as  kings. — TJie  difference  hetween  the 
coiuiterfeit  a)id  the  real  Cliristian  : — I.  The  counterfeit — 1.  Is  so  replenished  with 
Divine  knowledge  that  he  needs  no  teacher.  2.  Is  so  rich  in  grace  that  he  exalts 
himself  above  the  spiritually  poor.  3.  Is  so  confident  in  himself  that  he  would  rule 
the  consciences  of  others.  II.  The  keal — 1.  Piegards  himself  as  the  least  (vers. 
9,  10).  2.  Submits  willingly  to  toil  and  suffering  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  3.  Ee- 
compenses  evil  with  good.  (./.  Lijth,  D.D.)  The  state  of  the  Cori)tthians  con- 
traated  with  that  of  the  upostls  : — I.  The  state  of  the  Corinthians.  They  were — ■ 
1.  Full  of  the  good  things  of  this  world.  2.  As  kings,  reigning.  3.  But  their 
condition  spiritually  was  such  as  to  demand  earnest  prayer.  II.  The  state  of  the 
apostles.  1.  Poor  in  worldly  things — rich  in  faith.  2.  A  spectacle  both  to  angels 
and  to  men  ;  a  sight  of  misery  to  men  ;  a  spectacle  of  sorrow  to  angels.  But  their 
reward  is  not  far  distant.  (J.  H.  I'asson.)  AjmsIoUc  irony  : — I.  Exposes  pride. 
1.  It  is  empty,  yet  imagines  itself  full  of  wisdom.  2.  Poor,  yet  regards  itself  as 
rich  in  every  g  od  gift.  3.  Dependent,  yet  would  reign  as  a  king.  II-  Condemns 
it — 1.  By  an  indirect  assertion  of  its  folly.  2.  By  an  implied  consciousness  of  per- 
sonal insufficiency.  {J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Apostolic  treatment  of  vanitii  : — Vanity  is 
a  state  of  mind  at  once  the  most  prevalent  and  detestable,  it  is  a  plant  that  springs 
from  self- ignorance,  and  is  disgusting  to  the  spectator  in  all  its  forms  and  fruits. 
The  apostle  treats  it  with — I.  Withering  sarcasm.  "  Now  ye  are  full,"  &c.  The 
Bible  furnishes  us  with  many  instances  of  irony  (1  Kings  xviii.  27  ;  Job  xii.  2), 
but  nowhere  have  we  it  more  forceful  than  here.  Here  are  three  metaphors,  the 
firt-t  taken  from  persons  filled  with  food,  the  second  from  persons  so  rich  that  they 
required  no  more,  the  third  from  those  who  have  reached  the  highest  elevation, 
obtained  a  throne.  Paul  seems  to  say  to  these  conceited  teachers  that  they  were 
so  great  that  they  did  not  require  such  services  as  his.  We  scarcely  know  of  a  more 
effective  way  of  treating  vanity  than  by  san-asm.  Treat  the  vain,  swaggering  man 
before  you  not  accordiuK  to  your  judgment  of  him,  but  according  to  his  estimate  of 
himself.  Sneak  to  him  as  one  as  stupendous  as  he  believes  himself  to  be,  and  your 
irony  will  stab  him  to  the  quick.     Sarcasm  often  becomes  the  instrument  of  a  great 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.   CORINTHIANS. 


manly  soul  roused  into  indignation.  II.  A  noble  generosity.  "  I  would  to  God 
ye  did  reiyn,  that  we  also  might  reign  with  you."  Here  the  north  wind  of  sarcasm 
gives  way  to  the  south  breezes  of  love.  What  he  means  is  a  wish  that  they  were 
as  truly  full,  rirh,  and  royal  as  they  thought  themselves  to  be.  The  irony  of  a 
Christly  man,  however  pungent,  is  not  malign,  but  generous.  {D.  llionias,  D.D.) 
For  I  think  that  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  last,  .  .  .  for  we  are  made  a 
spectacle  unto  the  world,  and  to  angels,  and  to  men.^B/'fore  the  footlights  : — 
1.  A  man  may  imagine  it  to  be  an  easy  matter  to  appear  before  an  audience  ;  but 
to  stand  before  the  footlights,  when  every  turn  of  one's  features  are  plainly  to  be 
seen,  is  a  strain  on  the  nerves  which  is  hard  to  bear.  2.  The  Christian  life  is,  how- 
ever, more  trying  than  any  performance  on  the  stage.  The  actor  appears  before 
a  few  hundred  spectators  who  are  willing  to  be  pleased,  and  he  is  under  the  glare  of 
the  fooilights  for  only  two  or  three  hours  at  a  time  ;  but  the  Christian  is  a  spectacle 
to  his  man.v  neighbours  and  also  to  the  angelic  hosts,  and  his  part  continues  for 
]ife.  3.  The  ap  stle  refers  to  the  spectacles  in  the  Colosseum  at  Rome.  On  some 
days,  when  about  eighty  thousand  persons  were  assembled  in  its  galleries,  the  first 
show  in  the  arena  would  be  men  fighting  with  hungry  lions  and  tigers,  but  in  this 
peiformance  the  men  were  allowed  to  wear  armour.  In  the  pause  after  the  first 
show,  the  vast  crowd  would  refresh  themselves  with  grapes,  wine,  and  food,  and 
then  the  second  performance  began,  consisting  of  naked  men  fighting  with  each 
other,  and  without  anything  to  defend  themselves  except  their  swords,  the  result 
being  that  the  slightest  touch  of  their  weapons  inflicted  a  gash.  The  most  horrid 
regulation,  however,  was  that  he  who  preserved  his  own  life  should  not  be  released, 
but  kejit  for  slaughter  another  day.  These  men,  therefore,  that  were  actors  in  the 
last  performance  might  well  be  called  men  appointed  to  death.  4.  Of  course  every- 
body in  his  senses  when  he  appears  before  the  footlights  of  life,  that  is,  when  other 
people  can  see  him,  does  his  best.  It  is  only  the  drunkard,  the  insane,  or  the 
woman  that  has  lost  all  sense  of  shame,  who  label  their  sins  before  the  eyes  of 
otheis  like  a  sign-board  stating  what  they  are.  If  an  ordinary  man  have  something 
that  is  bad  witLiin  him,  he  tries  to  hide  it  from  his  fellow-men.  Let  the  spectacle 
of  your  life  be — I.  Ax  embodijient  of  metcy.  II.  Exhibit  the  essence  of  truth. 
Learn  to  love  ti^e  truth  because  it  is  tlie  truth,  and  do  it  because  it  is  right.  Some 
people  are  not  afraid  to  do  wrong;  all  they  are  afraid  of  is  being  "found  out." 
III.  Embody  charity  in  your  deeds  to  your  fellow-jien.  Follow  the  charity  of  God, 
who  keeps  open  the  gates  of  heaven  day  and  night.  (If'.  Birch.)  A  loondcrful 
spectacle  : — I.  The  spectacle.  1.  The  actors  were  Divinely  called.  They  appeared 
on  the  stage  in  answer  to  the  behest  of  the  highest  will,  guided  in  the  selection  by 
perfect  wisdom.  He  who  called  David  from  the  flock  to  preside  over  Israel,  called 
these  men  from  their  daily  avocations  to  preside  over  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  2.  The  actors  were  Divinely  commissioned.  The  mission  of  apostolic  life  . 
was  special  (1  Cor.  v.  18-20).  3.  Tbe  actors  were  subjected  to  intense  sufferings, 
and  to  cruel  death.  This  was  not  accidental,  but  a  part  of  their  mission.  They 
suffered  in  the  tragedy  to  enforce  its  lessons  (Matt.  x.  16-18).  It  is  almost  certain 
that  they  all  suffered  martyrdom,  except  St.  John.  II.  The  spectators.  1.  Angels. 
We  cannot  say  how  their  pure  minds  were  affected,  or  what  emotions  throbbed  in 
their  breast.  It  appears  from  Eph.  iii.  10,  11,  that  they  gather  lessons  from  the 
life  of  the  Church  militant.  (1)  They  saw  the  power  of  truth  in  lifting  man  above 
circumstances.  By  this  they  discovered  that  he  had  a  nobler  nature  than  they 
had  been  wont  to  ascribe  to  him.  (2)  The  apostles  gloried  in  tribulation,  and  this 
went  beyond  their  experience  and  joy.  They  returned  from  the  theatre  inflamed 
with  a  greater  degree  of  devotion.  (3)  That  spectacle  had  something  to  do  with 
their  final  safety.  They  had  often  ministered  to  the  apostles  in  their  trials,  which 
taught  them  more  perfect  submission,  and  warmer  obedience.  No  part  of  the 
audience  realised  the  spectacle  better  than  the  angels.  2.  Men.  We  have  no 
difficulty  in  understanding  the  lessons  which  apostolic  life  teach  us.  (1)  Entire 
consecration  of  life  to  the  service  of  Christ.  The  apostles  were  not  half-hearted  or 
indifferent,  but  threw  their  heart  and  soul  into  the  work.  Can  we  look  at  this 
specta<de,  and  not  be  moved  ?  (2)  That  the  Christian  life  will  surely  vanquish 
difficulties.  The  boldness  of  faith  is  the  same  as  that  which  encouraged  the 
apostles  to  say — "  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  we  have  seen  and  heard." 
{Weekly  Pulpit.)  A  spectacle  to  angels  : — In  its  widest  reference  the  text  teaches 
that  our  world  is  a  theatre  or  arena,  whereon  men  act  their  various  parts,  as  in  a 
drama — "  a  spectacle  to  angels."  And  this  thought  is  at  one  with  all  Bible  testi- 
mony.    It  teaches  that  from  the  first  our  planet  has  been  an  object  of  absorbing 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv. 


interest  to  all  gpiiitual  beings.  I.  The  drama  of  human  life  has  been  cast  in 
THKEE  GBEAT  MORAL  ACTS.  And  as  displaying  the  Divine  attributes,  the  angels  are 
represented  as  bending  down  to  study  all  of  them.  1.  The  first  scene  was  one  of 
blissful  and  holy  human  life.  And  endowed,  as  the  first  man  was,  with  every 
power  of  perseverance  in  holiness,  and  plied  with  every  motive  to  retain  it,  that 
first  act  in  the  drama  of  human  life  was  fittingly  "  a  spectacle  to  angels."  2.  The 
second  scene  is  a  world  apostate  and  accursed.  An  exhibition  is  now  to  be  made 
of  the  terrible  nature  of  sin,  as  seen  alike  in  the  malice  of  the  tempter  and  the 
misery  of  the  tempted.  And  when  you  consider  the  whole  plot  and  progress  of  the 
drama— all  the  exhibitions  of  moral  character  under  this  fearful  inspiration  of  sin, 
the  whole  wondrous  development  of  redemption,  from  the  first  promise  down 
through  those  ages  of  antediluvian  depravity,  through  all  those  slowly  evolving 
ritualisms  to  the  tra.qie  scene  of  Calvary,  through  all  the  gospel's  subsequent 
triumphs— then  this  second  act  seems  not  unworthily  "  a  spectacle  to  augels." 
3.  But  on  this  scene  the  curtain  falls.  And  when  it  rises  again,  it  will  be  upon  an 
arena  worthier  angelic  regard.  Out  of  the  wreck  and  ruin  of  the  present  system  of 
things,  as  a  platform  fitted  for  the  manifestation  of  triumphant  holiness,  shall 
come  forth  the  "  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  II.  Its  special  and 
PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  TO  OURSELVES.  It  is  a  plain  truth  of  revelation  that  these 
glorious  beings  are  ever  around  us.  They  are  represented  not  only  as  "  ministering 
unto  the  heirs  of  salvation,"  but  as  watchful  of  even  their  seemingly  most  trivial 
interests,  "  bearing  them  up,  lest  they  dash  their  foot  against  a  stone."  Let  us 
consider  this — 1.  For  encouragement  and  consolation  amid  the  trials  of  life. 
This  is  the  application  Paul  gives  it  in  the  context.  In  a  life  wherein  so  few 
occasions  are  ours  to  do  great  things  for  God,  and  whose  great  law  is  suffering,  it 
is  blessed  to  think  that  it  is  especially  when  in  sorrow,  and  agony,  and  death,  we 
are  "  a  spectacle  to  angels."  They  come  on  their  bright  wings  to  our  desolate  homes, 
our  sick-beds,  our  death-beds,  and  every  whisper  of  submissive  Christian  love 
sounds  out  as  a  grand  hallelujah  to  the  Infinite  Glory,  and  every  gentle  tear  in  the 
eye  of  faith  flashes  as  a  gem  of  immense  price  in  the  diadem  of  their  God.  2.  As 
aground  of  exhortation.  We  are  all  "  a  spectacle  to  angels."  And  how  are  we 
acting  ?  (1)  You  mav  be  this  day  an  impenitent  man  ;  and  if  so,  the  part  you  are 
acting  is  one  solemn  beyond  all  conception — the  part  of  an  imperilled  man  with  an 
immortal  soul  to  save!  For  just  such  acting  is  this  life-stage  fitted.  Oh,  what 
solemn  scenery  it  arranges  around  you !  Here  Sinai  with  its  fire,  and  there 
Calvary  with  its  Cross.  And  now  tell  me,  you  that  live  as  if  there  were  no  God, 
and  no  judgment,  sporting  with  the  soul  and  salvation,  if  you  are  acting  well  your 
part  before  this  great  cloud  of  witnesses !  Hath  it  not  been  with  gestures  of 
astonishment  and  indignation  they  have  watched  you?  (2)  Or  you  may  be  a  true 
child  of  God;  and  then  the  part  j-ou  are  acting,  if  less  terrible,  is  scarcely  less 
solemn  ;  for  it  is  that  of  a  redeemed  man  in  the  service  of  the  Eedeemer.  In 
reference  to  this  thought,  Paul  speaks  of  the  believer  as  having  "  put  on  Christ " — 
i  e.,  as  a  tragedian  assumes  that  of  the  hero  he  personates.  Thus,  to  personate 
the  Lord  .Jesus  is  the  part  you  are  to  act,  as  "  a  spectacle  to  angels."  And  for  such 
acting,  also,  is  the  world-stage  fitted.  For  it  is  the  self-same  world  wherein  He 
personally  acted.  The  same  sinful  and  suffering  humanity  is  ever  around  you. 
The  same  realities  of  eternity  rise  in  transparencies  beyond  you.  And  tell  me,  if 
you  seem  unto  yourselves  acting  your  magnificent  part  well?      III.    As   thus  a 

SPECTACLE    TO    ANGELS,    IT    MAY    BE    SAID,  IN    ONE    SENSE,  WE  CAN  CHOOSE  THE    PARTS    WE 

ARE  TO  ACT  IN  THEIR  PRESENCE.  There  are  some  things  common  and  certain  to  us 
all,  and  in  regard  of  them  we  can  choose  at  least  our  own  style  of  acting.  1.  Take 
one  set  order — 1.  A  death-scene !  A  darkened  chamber.  A  company  of  heart- 
broken relatives  keeping  watch.  The  actor  is  a  poor  lover  of  pleasure,  who  put  his 
eternity  carefully  away  from  him,  living  only  for  this  world.  Now  witness  his 
acting  as  it  seems  unto  angels.  Behold  those  feeble  hands,  lifted  as  to  repel  some 
shape  of  terror.  Listen!  That  cry  of  anguish:  "  Oh,  do  not  let  me  die!"  "I 
cannot  die  !  "  "I  rejected  the  Saviour  !  "  "  I  am  lost,  lost,  lost !  "  (2)  The  next 
is  a  judgment  scene!  And  again  this  poor  worldling  ajDpears  upon  the  stage,  "a 
spectacle  to  angels."  And  see  it — that  look  of  hopeless  anguish,  as  there  falls  on 
the  shrinking  sense  the  appalling  sentence — "  DepHrt !— depart !  "  (3)  The  last 
scene  is  in  eternity!  Go,  ponder  it  as  pictured  in  God's  solemn  Book.  2.  This  is 
one  style  of  acting.  Consider,  in  contrast,  the  other!  The  same  stage;  the  same 
scenery  ;  but  all  else  different !  (1)  Again  the  denth-scene  !  See  the  radiant  fire  in 
the  eye  !  the  rapturous  smile  on  the  lip  I     Hear  those  words,  feeble,  yet  joyous  in 


CHAP.  IV.]  7.   CORINTHIANS.  365 

faith  and  love  :  "  Thougli  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  d'c. 
Behold  that  fixed  look  heaveovvard,  as  the  ransomed  spirit  spreads  wing  for  its 
place  in  the  many  mansions  !  (2)  The  same  scene  of  judgment!  Note  that  look 
of  triumph,  that  cry  of  rapture,  at  the  approving  sentence  :  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of 
My  Father,"  &c.  (.'))  Again,  a  scene  laid  in  eternity!  But  here,  stage,  scenery, 
acting,  all  dift'erent.  Such,  shortly,  are  the  two  styles  of  human  action  on  the 
great  theatre  of  life.  And  for  each  of  us,  just  behind  this  massive  curtain,  are 
stage  and  scenery  being  prepared !  And  we  are  here  to  choose,  each  for  himself, 
the  style  of  his  performance.  And  now,  tell  me  how  you  will  act  your  solemn  part — 
O  immortal  man!  as  "a  spectacle  to  angels."  {C.  Wadsiroytli.)  Humanity  uatchcd 
by  angels: — The  word  spectacle  is  from  the  Greek  word  thcatron.  I.  Implies  the 
EXISTENCE  OP  ANGELIC  INTELLIGENCES.  No  One  v;ho  bclieves  in  the  Bible  can  doubt 
this.  Its  pages  are  almost  as  full  of  angels  as  those  of  Homer  are  full  of  gods. 
They  are  represented  as — 1.  Overwhelming  in  numliers  of  various  orders  and 
gradations,  possessing  life,  power,  intelligence,  holiness,  celerity,  transcending  all 
that  is  human.  2.  As  the  special  ministers  of  the  Great  Monarch  of  the  universe, 
executing  His  judgment  and  distributing  His  favours.  They  have  eyes  to  mark  my 
movements,  ears  to  catch  my  words,  hearts  to  sympathise  with  my  lonely  history, 
and  power  to  lift  me  up,  or  to  press  me  down.  II.  Argues  the  importance  of  human 
LIFE.  Would  those  transcendent  intelligences  watch  creatures  of  no  or  little  worth  ? 
1.  They  may  know  the  extraordinary  relation  of  man  to  God.  Not  merely  the 
creatures  of  His  power,  the  subject  of  His  government,  but  the  redeemed  of  His 
Son.  They  see  human  nature  in  personal  connection  with  Christ,  uplifted  to  the 
centre  of  the  universe.  Thus  they  study  God  through  man,  and  through  man  they 
have  liiftier  views  of  the  Infinite,  than  from  a  universe  of  blazing  systems,  and  of 
unfallen  intelligences.  2.  They  may  know  the  wonderful  possibilities  of  his  nature. 
What  thoughts  he  can  originate,  what  discoveries  he  can  make,  what  works  he  can 
invent,  what  good  he  can  accomplish,  what  evil  he  can  effect.  3.  They  may  know 
the  influence  of  his  life.  They  may  see  the  thoughts  and  words  and  deeds  of  his 
life,  spreading  in  ever  widening  circles  over  the  great  world  of  spirits.  They  may 
see  from  one  man's  life  many  hells  created  and  many  heavens  produced.  To  our 
fellow-men  we  ai'e  insignificant,  but  to  angels  we  are  of  transcendent  importance. 
III.  Urges  circujispection  in  human  conduct.  Men  are  generally  cautious  in 
their  conduct  when  they  feel  even  a  human  eye  upon  them,  especially  if  that  eye  be 
keen,  intelligent,  and  pure.  The  unexpected  glance  of  a  child  has  paralysed  the 
arm  of  a  burglar  before  now.  But  who  would  not  be  circumspect  if  we  felt  that  the 
eyes  of  angels  were  ever  on  us,  on  us  in  our  most  private  cb amber  and  in  our 
public  walks?  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Man  anobject  of  anpelic  observation  : — If  the 
eye  of  such  intelligences  are  constantly  upon  us,  what  are  the  practical  conclusions  ? 
I.  That  our  conduct  here  concerns  the  universe.  No  man  lives  unto  himself  ; 
each  unit  is  a  link  in  being's  endless  chain.  His  actions  must  tell  banefully  or 
benefii'ently  on  the  creation ;  hence  all  loving  and  loyal  intelligences  direct  their 
attention  to  him  with  deep  and  unabating  interest.  Besides,  men  and  angels  are 
offsprings  of  the  same  Father,  participators  of  the  same  nature,  subjects  of  the 
same  moral  government.  No  wonder  they  are  so  concerned.  II.  That  our  part 
should  be  carefully  playfd.  It  behoves  every  man  to  be  cautious  how  he  acts 
in  the  presence  of  his  fellow-creatures,  whether  they  are  children  or  adults, 
plebeians  or  princes ;  but  ho  v  much  more  cautious  should  he  be  when  he  knows 
that  angels,  whose  pure  natures  loathe  sin  in  all  its  forms,  have  their  keenest  gaze 
fastened  ever  on  his  life  !  III.  That  there  is  no  chance  of  concealing  our  sin. 
The  attempt  to  cloak  or  dissemble  our  sins  is  absurdly  futile.  Whilst  there  is  One 
who  reads  the  heart,  there  may  be  millions  who  mark  all  our  overt  acts,  whether 
in  darkness  or  in  light.  IV.  That  we  may  expect  help  in  all  holy  endeavours. 
Those  celestial  spirits  are  sent  foith  to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  They 
helped  Abraham  on  the  plains  of  Mamre,  and  Lot  in  his  flight  towards  Zoar ;  they 
freed  the  apostle  from  tlie  prison  ;  they  bore  the  spirit  of  Lazarus  to  the  bosom  of 
Abraham.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  10-14.  We  are  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  tut  ye  are  wise  in  Christ.— The  folly 
of  Pfl'(/ .-—The  better  to  serve  Christ,  Paul  refrained  from  making  acquirement  of 
knowledge  his  chief  aim.  And  many  others  have  renounced  a  path  which  might 
have  led  to  literal y  eminence  in  order  to  devote  their  entire  energies  to  evangelical 
work.  Ag'iin,  by  abstaining  from  teaching  mere  human  learning  and  by  preaching 
a  gospel  which  in  the  eyes  of  men  was  folly,  Paul  became,  and  felt  himself  tc  be. 


,366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

in  their  view,  a  foolish  man.  In  other  words,  because  of  his  loyalty  to  Chiist  he 
passed  among  men  as  one  destitute  of  wisdom  {cf.  chap.  ii.  2).  {Prof.  Beet.) 
Paul  anil  the  Corinthians  :  a  contrast: — The  contrast  between  the  two  situations 
'  enunciated  in  vers.  8  and  9  is  expressed  here  in  three  antitheses,  which  are,  hs  it 
.  were,  so  mnny  blows  for  the  proud  Corinthians.  The  text  is  addressed  especially 
to  the  principal  men  of  the  Church,  but  at  the  same  time  to  all  its  members  who 
share  in  the  pretensions  of  these  proud  party  leaders.  And — I.  As  to  teaching.  The 
apostles  had  to  face  the  reputation  of  foolishness  wldch  the  gosj)el  brings  on  them, 
while  at  Corinth  there  is  found  a  way  of  prea'-hing  Christ  so  as  to  procure  a  name 
for  wisdom,  the  reputation  of  profound  pbilosopliers  and  men  of  most  reliable 
judgment.  As  a  Eabhi  Paul  might  have  become  as  emii  enfc  a  savant  as 
Gamaliel ;  for  Christ  he  consented  to  pass  as  a  fool.  The  Corinthians  knew  b  tter 
how  to  manage  :  they  make  tlie  teaching  even  of  the  gospel  a  means  of  gaining 
celebrity  for  their  lofty  wisdom.  II.  As  to  conduct.  They  came  before  their  public 
with  the  feeling  of  their  strength :  there  is  in  them  neither  hesitation  nor  timidity. 
The  apostles  do  not  know  these  fjrand  lordly  airs.  Witness  chap.  ii.  1-5.  III.  As 
TO  THE  WELCOME  DECEIVED  FEOM  THE  woRED.  The  Corlnthians  are  honoured, 
feted,  regarded  as  the  ornament  of  cultivated  circles  ;  there  is  a  rivalry  to  do  them 
honour.  The  apostles  are  i-carcely  judged  worthy  of  attention  ;  nay,  rather  reviled 
and  calumniated.  In  this  last  contrast  the  apostle  reverses  the  order  of  the  two 
terms,  and  puts  the  ap  >Ktles  in  the  second  place.  This  is  liy  way  of  transition  to 
one  or  two  traits  of  detail  in  the  aposiolic  life  he  is  about  to  draw.  Indeed 
"  des|iised  "  is  the  theme  of  the  following  verses.  {Prof.  Godet.}  Paul's  treat- 
ment of  self-conceited  teachers: — The  Corinthian  teachers  were  "  puffed  up  "  with 
conceit.  Paul  treats  them  here  with — I.  An  ironic  appeal  (ver.  10).  "  Ye  have 
glory,  but  we  have  dishonour ;  we  know  nothing,  you  know  everything ;  we  are 
tiuiid  and  feelle,  but  ye  are  strong  and  fearless  ;  you  are  thought  a  deal  of,  but 
we  are  despised. "  How  would  our  little  penny-a-liners  feel  if  such  a  man  as  Carlyle 
were  to  speak  m  tins  way  ?  If  they  had  any  sense  remaining,  they  would  quiver  into 
nothingness.  How  much  more  would  those  small  pretentious  teachers  feel  this 
stroke  of  satire  from  the  grand  npostle  !  II.  A  personal  history.  1.  Heie  he 
refers  to — (1)  His  privations  (vf-r.  11) — without  nourishment,  clothing,  and  the 
shelter  of  a  home.  (2)  His  labours  (ver.  12).  (3)  His  persecutions  (ver.  13). 
.  (4)  The  spirit  in  which  he  endured  the  sufferings  (ver.  12).  2.  Why  did  he  state 
all  this?  Not  for  the  sake  of  parade,  but  for  the  sake  of  bringing  these  proud 
tea  hers  to  their  senses.  They  could  not  fail  to  feel  that  he  was  a  pre-eminent 
minister  of  Christ ;  n  twithstanding  this,  in  the  world  he  was  treated  with  cruelty  and 
contempt.  W'hat,  then, had  they  to  be  proud  of  as  ministers  ?  {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Even  unto  this  present  hour  we  both  hunger  and  thirst. — True  religion  : — I  What 
IT  COSTS.  1.  Sacrifice.  2.  Shame.  3.  Suffering.  4.  Toil.  II.  What  it 
SECDRES.  1.  Companionship  with  the  best  of  men.  2.  The  approliation  of  God. 
•3.  A  certain  and  glorious  reward.  {J.  Li/th,  D.D.)  And  labour,  working  with  our 
own  hands. ^/Io?i  st  labour  : — 1.  Is  no  disgiaee.  2.  Is  a  sign  of  true  independence. 
3.  Is  acceptable  to  God.  {Ibid.)  Manudl  labour  fjentleuianhj  : — When  Bishop 
Pattt'son  went  among  the  South  Sea  Islanders  they  were  surprised  to  see  that  he 
was  ready  to  put  his  hund  to  anything.  He  would  do  a  jiiece  of  carpentering,  wash 
up  things  after  menls,  and  teach  the  little  blacks  to  wash  and  dress  themselves. 
Other  white  men  wanteil  to  put  all  the  work  on  the  net^roes  ;  so  in  oider  to  mark 
the  difference,  they  called  the  bishop  a  "gentleman-gentleman,"  and  the  others 
"  }'ig-gentlemen. "  Je^us  Christ,  "the  first  true  gentleman  that  ever  breathed," 
was  when  on  earth  called  "  the  Carpenter,"  and  if  one  of  His  chief  apost  es,  St. 
Paul,  worked  with  his  hands  as  a  tent-maker,  manual  labour  ouglit  never  to  be 
thought  del ogatory  to  the  dignity  of  a  gent  eman.  A  honourable  occujuition  : — 
There  are  three  vitally  important  choices  to  be  made  by  young  men,  about  which  a 
few  p'ain  hints  may  be  pertinent  and  useful.  The  first  one  is  his  occupati  n. 
"  He  who  does  not  liring  np  his  son  for  a  trade  brings  i  p  a  boy  for  the  devil,"  is  an 
ancient  Jewish  proverb.  In  Ani'  rica,  too,  many  of  the  native-born  youths  eschew 
a  mechanical  trade  as  vulgar,  and  go  scouring  about  for  some  eisier  "  situalion." 
'If  Benjamin  Franklin,  the  printer,  and  Roger  Sherman,  the  shoemaker,  were  alive 
now,  they  would  tell  their  young  countrymen  what  a  foolish  mistake  many  of  them 
are  making.  So  would  Vice-President  Wilson  and  Governor  Ranks,  who  snid  that 
he  "graduated  from  an  institution  which  had  a  faftorybell  on  the  r.  of  and  a 
water-wheel  at  the  bott-m."  In  selecting  your  occupation,  endeavo'ir  first  to  find 
■out  what  the  Creator  made  you  for.     Consult  your  natural  b.nt  and  talent.     If  you 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  367 

have  a  talent  for  ti-aile,  then  you  may  venture  into  a  counting-room  or  store.  II 
you  have  a  native  skill  in  chemistry,  and  are  made  for  a  doctor,  then  study 
medicine.  If  your  mathematical  capacity  tit  yon  for  it,  you  may  be  an  engineer.  No 
one  ever  fails  in  life  who  understands  his/o)-<e,  and  few  ever  succeeded  in  life  who 
did  not  understand  it.  Seek  for  a  useful,  productive  calling,  and  steer  clear  of  a 
career  of  "  speculation  "  as  you  would  a  gambling  den  or  a  glass  of  gin.  Don't  be 
ashamed  to  begin  at  the  bottom  and  work  up.  Remember  that  every  occupati'n  is 
honourable  in  which  you  can  serve  God  and  your  fellow-men,  and  keep  a  clean  con- 
pcience.    [T.  L.  Cuyler.)       Being  reviled  we  bless. — Apostolic  meehnexs  : — Observe — 

1.  What  the  true  Christian  must  expkct.  1.  Eeproacb.  2.  Persecution.  3. 
Calumny.  4.  Contempt.  II.  Why  he  must  expect  it.  Because  of — 1.  The  ex- 
perience of  others.  2.  The  unaltered  spirit  of  the  world.  III.  How  he  ought  to 
bear  it.  1.  Meekly.  2.  Patiently.  3.  Christianly.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  triumph 
of  the  true  Christian  : — He  triumphs — I.  Over  the  hatred  op  the  world.  Which 
is — 1.  Unchangeable.  2.  Bitter.  3.  Variously  manifested.  II.  Bx— 1.  Faith.  2. 
Hope.     3.  Love.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  14-21.  I  write  not  these  things  to  shame  you,  hut  as  my  beloved  sons 
I  warn  you. — Paul  on  e.rnnqjle  to  par(iits  and  tcacliers  : — He  pioceeds — I.  With 
LOVE.  1.  Not  as  a  schoolmaster,  but  as  a  father.  2.  Not  to  shame,  but  to  warn. 
3.  Not  to  threaten,  but  encourage  (ver.  IG).  4.  Not  to  punish,  but  to  supply  suit- 
able help  (ver.  17).     H.  With  firmness.     1.  He  discourages  the  perverse  (ver.  18). 

2.  Exposes  the  false.  3.  Exalts  the  true.  3.  Submits  the  choice  of  a  rod  or  love. 
{J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Christian  training  is — I.  Lovixo  in  its  aim  and  procedure 
(vers.  14-16).  II.  Prudent  in  its  choice  (ver.  17).  III.  Firm  in  its  purpose 
(vers.  18-21).  (Ibid.)  The  true  minister  is  the  father  of  his  fork:— I.  His 
relative  position.  1.  Not  a  mere  instructor,  but  the  instrument  of  communi- 
cating new  life.  2.  This  cannot  be  accomplished  by  severity,  but  by  a  loving  pro- 
clamation of  the  truth.  II.  His  influence — 1.  Depends  upon  example  (ver.  16). 
2.  Supposes  that  he  is  in  Christ  (ver.  17).  3.  Will  generally  succeed  where  pre- 
cept and  example  are  combined.  {Ibid. )  Censoriousness  and  faithfulness  contrasted : 
— "  He  that  would  be  a  good  man  must  have  either  a  friend  to  admonish  him  or 
an  enemy  to  watch  over  him."  Censoriousness — I.  Is  A  Nimrod,  a  mif^hty  hunter 
for  faults  (Jer.  xx.  10 ;  Psa.  Ivi.  6).  Faithfulness  does  not  delight  to  dwell  on  a 
fault,  but  censoriousness  does.  II.  A  mighty  creator.  It  makes  faults  where 
there  are  none ;  it  puts  the  worst  construction  on  words  and  a'tions.  Ex- 
amples:  The  Pharisees  and  disciples  going  tlirough  the  corn-fields.  Eliab  to 
David.  It  calls  zeal  rashness— Michael  to  David.  Faithfulness  is  discreet  in  its 
decisions.  III.  Is  an  easy  believer  where  he  is  not  an  inventor  of  faults. 
Examples  :  The  two  false  witnesses  against  Christ.  The  people  of  Ephesus  when 
Demetrius  slandered  Paul.  The  Israelites  when  the  spies  returned  and  brought 
the  evil  rep  ^rt  which  the  Israelites  believed.  Faithfulness  is  not  credulous  ;  it 
believes  not  every  spirit,  but  "tries  the  spirits."  IV.  Is  a  kind  of  optician.  It 
magnifies  small  thiugs,  makes  a  man  an  offender  for  a  word,  carries  magnifying- 
glasses  with  it.  Faithfulness  endeavours  to  miti^att^  the  offence  (1  Pet.  iv.  8).  V. 
Is  A  KIND  OF  CRIER.  It  propagates  the  faults  of  men  where  they  are  not  known. 
Example  :  Ham  (Gen.  ix.  20-22).  Faithfulness  concealeth  the  matter  (Gen.  ix. 
33;  Prov.  xi.  13).  VI.  Delights  to  dwkll  on  a  fault  (Psa.  cii.  8).  Faithfulness 
grieves  and  laments  the  failings  of  others  (I'rov.  xxiv.  17).  VII.  Is  very  super- 
cilious IN  IIS  REPROOFS  (Isa.  Iv.  5  ;  Luke  xviii.  11).  Faithfulness  is  tender  of 
the  reputation  of  others,  and  desires  to  reclaim  and  restore  them.  {Homilist.) 
Though  ye  have  ten  thousand  instructors  in  Christ,  yet  have  ye  not  many  fathers. 
—  The  pedagogue  and  the  father  .  —  Flje  word  "  pedng  >gues  " — who  in  most  cases 
were  charged  with  constant  attendance  on  boys  till  thev  came  of  age — here  denotes 
in  a  figure  the  later  workers  in  the  Corinthian  Church.  Of  this  Church  St.  Paul 
has  been  termed  the  founder,  his  successors  the  after-builders;  he  the  planter, 
they  the  waterers:  now  he  is  father,  they  the  tutors.  The  apostle  here  merely 
wishes  to  remi'  d  his  readers  of  his  own  paternal  rights,  which  can  never  be  invali- 
dated by  subsequent  libonrers  iu  the  same  field.  Observe  that  they  are  called 
"tutors  in  Christ,"  but  he  "  father  in  Christ  Jesus" — i.e.,  a  host  of  tutors  ye  may 
have  in  the  sphere  of  knowing  about  Christ  ;  but  into  the  life  of  knowing  Christ  as 
Saviour,  none  but  I  begot  you  by  my  preaching  of  the  t'oppel.  "  I  "  jg  emphatic  : 
mine  was  amoral  beyettii  g  unto  salvation;  this  took  place  once  for  all;  teachers 
after  me  are  not  spiritual  fathers,   but   educators  in  the  faith  which  I  sowed. 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

{Cajion  Evans.)  The  spiritual  father :— I.    Is  moke  than  an  instructoe.      II. 

Is  THE  MEDIUM  OF  A  NEW  LIFE.  1.  Iiistrumentally.  2.  By  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
who  originates  life  into  the  soul.  III.  Is  bound  to  his  children  by  indissoluble 
TIES.  IV.  Has  special  claims  on  theie  love  and  obedience.  V.  Should  be  the 
object  of  imitation.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Spiritual patervity  : — I.  That  one  may 
become  the  spirituai,  father  of  another.  This  is — 1.  Something  more  than  to 
become  the  father  of  one's  ideas.  There  are  gifted  men  who  generate  the  leading 
ideas  in  the  minds  of  their  contemporaries,  by  their  conversation,  speeches, 
writings.  But  these  are  mere  schooliu asters  or  teachers.  Coleridge  and  Carlyle 
are  examples  of  this.  2.  Something  more  than  the  author  of  a  certain  style  of 
thinking.  Aristotle,  Bacon,  &c.,  are  examples.  3.  One  who  generates  in  another 
his  own  spirit,  syrapattiies.  and  aims  ;  one  who  transforms  the  character  of  another 
into  his  own  image.  II.  That  the  noblest  spiritual  father  is  he  who  begets 
IN  another  the  Christly  character.  Many  are  the  moral  characters  prevalent 
among  men — the  sensual,  the  sceptical,  the  selfish.  The  Christly  character  stands 
in  sublime  contrast  to  these  ;  it  is  disinterested,  spiritual,  Divine.  The  man  who 
general es  in  others  this  character — 1.  Imparts  the  highest  good.  To  be  like  Christ 
is  the  highest  end  of  being ;  it  is  the  siimimtin  honum  of  souls.  2.  Creates  the 
hifihest  mutual  affection.  Paul  called  Timothy  his  "beloved  son,"  and  speaks 
with  inexpressible  tenderness  of  his  converts  as  his  little  children  with  whom  he 
travailed  iu  birth  (Gal.  iv.  10).  III.  That  the  Christly  character  is  only 
begotten  by  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Natural  religion  cannot  do  it ;  Judaism, 
Mohammedanism,  heathenism  cannot  do  it;  no  speculative  creeds,  moral  codes, 
ritualistic  religions  can  do  it.  The  gospel  alone  is  the  power  to  generate  in  man 
the  true  Christly  character  ;  it  is  that  transformative  glass  into  which  as  we  look 
we  get  changed  into  the  same  image  from  "  glory  to  glory."  Conclusion:  Learn 
from  this — 1.  The  supreme  interest  of  man.  What  is  that?  Learning,  wealth, 
fame?  No;  Christliness.  He  who  has  this,  has  everything ;  all  things  are  his. 
He  who  has  not  this,  has  "nothing,"  says  Paul.  2.  The  grandest  distinctions 
amongst  men.  What  are  they?  Sages,  soldiers,  sovereigns?  No;  spiritual  sires. 
The  man  who  generates  in  another  the  Christly  character  has  done  a  greater  work 
than  any  sage  or  king  has  ever  done.  Every  man  may,  and  ought  to,  become  a 
spiritual  father.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Christian  lineage  : — As  a  child  who  has  been 
kept  in  ignorance  of  his  parentage  rejoices  to  know  those  who  have  given  him  life, 
so  we  in  times  of  evil  condition  and  days  of  questioning  may  be  made  glad  in  the 
knowledge  that  we  belong  to  a  noble  race.  I.  The  records  and  memorials  of  the 
Christian  fabiily.  1.  The  propagating  power  of  the  Divine  life  in  men  is  one  of 
the  distinctive  features  of  Christ's  religion.  Other  systems  have  made  provision  for 
carrying  down  their  tenets,  but  the  office  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to  recreate.  The 
Founder  of  Christianity  and  His  disciples  claimed  those  in  their  day  as  "  children," 
those  who  had  been  born  again  into  a  new  family  circle.  2.  In  looking  up  the 
genealogy  of  any  line,  the  fact  that  there  were  known  to  be  numerous  descendants 
gives  us  the  best  evidence  that  we  shall  be  able  to  trace  the  branches  to  the  parent 
stock.  The  Church  has  as  well  authenticated  outlines  from  the  time  of  Constantine, 
in  325,  as  have  the  governments  of  the  greatest  nations  of  the  past  or  their  ruling 
houses.  3.  You  will  realise,  however,  that  a  Church  which  has  reached  this  stage 
of  organisation  and  influence  must  have  some  time  allowance  for  its  crystallisation. 
Your  scientist  wants  you  to  grant  him  thousands  of  years  for  the  erosion  of  the  bed 
of  Niagara  and  the  glacier  tracts  and  deposits  of  natuial  forces.  He  must  not  deny 
some  fair  period  of  Christianising  energy  to  cut  the  channel  in  which  we  find  the 
love  of  God  moving  within  the  visible  Church,  so  that  the  gospel  might  spread  as 
it  had  done  from  India  to  Spain  and  Britain.  The  graves  of  the  saints  would 
bridge  the  gulf  from  Constantine  to  Polycarp,  if  there  were  no  other  records. 
Their  inscriptions  of  the  Christian  virtues,  hopes  of  immortality,  and  faith  in 
Jesus  would  restore  the  materials  for  our  family  history,  and  the  types  by  which 
we  could  trace  our  ancestry  if  all  other  lines  should  fail.  II.  Proofs  of  our 
SPIRITUAL  LINEAGE.  1.  Paul  traccs  his  own  new  birth  and  life  to  Jesus,  so  that  we 
may  consider  the  great  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  as  a  representative  of  what  men  had 
begun  to  be  in  the  line  of  Christian  descent,  and  compare  ourselves  with  him. 
We  are  told  what  was  the  character  of  other  people  before  they  also  were  changed 
(1  Cor.  vi.  9-11).  In  order  to  set  forth  more  clearly  the  type  of  the  new  family,  an 
example  is  given  of  one  of  Paul's  pupils  (ver.  17).  Timothy  is,  as  it  were,  a 
spiritual  grandson  of  Jesus.  We  can  tell  what  the  gospel  was  as  it  worked  in  the 
son,  sire,   and  founder  of  our  faith.     Then  Timothy  is    particular  not  to  teach 


ciiAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  369 


doctrines  only,  but  to  put  the  peojole  in  remembrance  of  Paul's  ways.  They  could 
see  whether  the  child's  walk  and  features  were  like  those  of  the  parent,  and  were 
"  in  Christ."  2.  There  are  nnny  varieties  of  temperament  among  children  of  the 
same  househdd,  and  the  Christian  family  presents  us  those  with  differing,'  and 
peculiar  traits.  But  does  any  candid  man  dare  to  say  he  cannot  find  to-day  the 
type  of  those  who  formed  the  early  Church  in  spirit,  love,  and  works?  If  the  men 
of  the  kingdom  come  short  of  your  ideal,  ask  yourself  where  you  received  this  noble 
image  of  the  mind  save  from  the  gospel  history.  It  should  not  be  a  matter  of 
surprise  that  giotesque  forms  come  to  us  from  the  isolated  frontier  communities 
of  the  world.  The  wonder  is  that  they  have  preserved  any  likeness  to  our  great 
ancestors.  Select  the  best  examples  of  faith  and  service  in  our  world  to-day, 
and  you  will  be  careful  how  you  say  you  cannot  find  Christ,  or  His  truth,  or 
His  will  for  you  to  obey.  Through  all  the  ages  of  darkness,  idolatry,  and  per- 
secution, the  Spirit  has  been  among  men.  HI.  An  invitation  to  join  xhb 
Christian  family.  "Be  ye  imitators  of  Me."  (IF.  R.  Campbell.)  Spiritual 
jyaternit;/  .-  —  In  my  fernery  I  have  some  feins  which  have  little  ones  growing 
on  the  ends  of  their  fronds  ;  and  as  they  are  line  specimens,  there  are  great 
numbers  of  the  baby-ferns.  Probably  as  many  as  three  or  four  hundred  com- 
plete ferns  have  sprung  up  out  of  each  mother-fern,  all  of  them  having  tiny  roots, 
and  everything  necessary  to  their  growth,  so  that  you  have  nothing  to  do  but 
to  pick  them  off,  put  tiiem  in  a  little  silver  sand,  and  they  will  grow,  and  by  and  by 
become  mother-ferns  themselves.  Every  one  of  them,  if  broken  off  the  frond,  will 
live  and  grow  ;  but  you  need  not  break  them  off,  for  they  will  continue  to  grow 
without  being  separated  from  their  mother,  for  they  are  all  alive,  and  they  do  not 
appear,  by  their  existence,  to  cause  any  damage  to  the  original  plant  from  which 
they  spring.  The  baby-ferns  will  keep  on  living  and  growing  as  long  as  the  frond 
of  the  mother-fern  lives ;  and  even  when  the  frond  dies,  each  baby-fern,  if  it  is 
planted,  will  live  and  thrive,  and  in  its  turn  will  become  a  mother-fern,  producing 
its  hundreds  of  children  to  perpetuate  the  species.  There  are  other  plants  that  are 
somewhat  similar  to  the  mother-fern  in  this  respect.  I  saw  at  Mentone  a  very  tine 
specimen  of  a  flowering  aloe.  It  sent  up  its  blossom  high  into  the  air,  and  in  due 
season  the  little  aloes  fell  off,  and  dropped  into  the  ground,  and  wherever  they  fell 
they  grew  after  the  manner  of  the  mother-plant.  I  picked  one  up,  and  brought  it 
home  ;  and  now  it  is  growing  into  quite  a  large  plant.  These  little  aloes  are  born 
alive  ;  they  do  not  come  in  a  seed,  like  a  bird  in  an  egg,  but  they  come  from  the 
plant — living  things  falling  from  the  living  parent.  Kow,  is  not  this  a  good  illus- 
tration of  what  a  Christian  should  be  ?  It  is  well  to  be  a  living  Christian  yourself  ; 
but  it  is  better  to  have  springing  fiom  you  many  others  that  are  your  offshoots, 
each  one  ready  to  start  on  his  own  account,  and  to  take  root,  and  multiply  to 
almost  any  extent.  If  you  and  I  are  living,  acting,  serving,  growing  Christians 
ourselves,  maintaining  a  high  degree  of  spiritual  life,  we  may  be  the  means,  by  the 
blessing  of  God,  of  imparting  life  to  many  others.  Those  to  whom  we  are  thus 
blessed  will  be  to  us  what  Paul's  converts  were  to  him,  "  our  glory  and  joy." 
Every  true  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  leaves  an  influence  for  good  behind 
him  when  he  is  taken  away ;  but  it  is  better  still  it  his  influence  is  also  felt 
while  he  lives.     (C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  Wherefore,  I  beseech  you,  be  ye  followers 

of  me. — Teacliiiif)  by  example: — I.  Is  Gon's  method.  1.  Christ.  2.  Scriptural 
examples.  II.  Is  incumbent  on  all,  especially  ministers,  i^arents,  teachers, 
etc.  III.  Supposes  some  pkoficiency  in  the  teacher  —  principle,  practice, 
motive.  IV.  Is  most  certain  and  effective.  It  is  more  simple,  persuasive, 
powerful.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  force  of  example  : — 1.  It  is  our  duty  and  con- 

cernment to  regard  the  practices  of  good  men,  and  to  follow  their  example.  It  is 
the  mannnr  of  the  apostles  on  all  occasions  to  inculcate  the  duty  of  imitating  the 
^-xamples  of  the  good.  2.  That  we  might  have  worthy  patterns  to  imitate,  God 
hath  raised  ujj  in  all  ages  excellent  persons  to  lead  us  by  g<)od  example  in  the 
paths  of  rightf-ousness.  3.  It  was  a  special  design  of  God's  piovidence  in  record- 
ing and  recommending  to  our  regard  the  sacred  histories.  They  were  not  framed 
as  monuments  of  a  fruitless  memory ;  they  were  not  proposed  to  us  as  entertain- 
nif  nts  of  our  curiosity  ;  but  they  are  set  before  us  as  copies  to  transcribe,  as  lights 
to  guide  us  in  onr  way  to  happiness.  4.  Good  example  is  of  exceeding  advantage 
to  practice  on  many  accounts.     I.  It  more  compendiously,  easily,  and  pleasantly 

INFORMS    OUR    MINDS    AND    IiIRECTS  OUR  PRACTICE  THAN  PRECEPTS  OR  ANY  OTHER  INSTRU- 
MENT   OF    DISCIPLINE.      Who  would   not  more  readily  learn  to   build  by  viewing 
carefully  a  well-contrived  structure,  tlian  by  a  studious  inquiry  into  the  rules  of 
VOL.    T.  24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAr.  iv. 

architecture?  or  to  draw  by  setting  a  good  picture  before  him,  than  by  merely 
si^eculating  on  the  laws  of  perspective?  Neither  is  the  case  much  diiferent  in 
moral  concernments  ;  one  good  example  may  represent  more  fully  and  clearly  the 
nature  of  a  virtue  than  any  verbose  description.  E.rj. — 1.  If  we  desire  to  know 
what  faith  is,  and  how  we  should  rely  on  the  Divine  Providence,  let  us  propose  to 
our  consideration  the  practice  of  Abraham.  2.  He  that  would  learn  how  to  demean 
himself  in  resisting  the  assaults  of  temptation,  let  him  consider  that  one  carriage 
of  Joseph.  3.  Would  we  learn  wisdom,  constancy,  and  resolution  in  the  conduct 
of  honest  and  worthy  designs,  let  us  set  before  our  eyes  the  pattern  of  Moses.  4. 
Would  you  be  instructed  how  faithfully  to  discharge  the  ministerial  or  any  other 
ofrice?  With  a  steadfast  attention  then  behold  the  excellent  pattern  of  St.  Paul. 
5.  I  might  iu  like  manner  instance  how  Elias's  practice  might  teach  us  to  be 
zealous  champions  for  truth  and  righteousness ;  how  tliey  who  would  be  good 
judges,  or  honest  patriots,  may  receive  direction  from  the  carriage  of  Samuel, 
Daniel,  and  Nehemiah.      II.    Ix  peksuades  and  inclines   our   reason   to   good 

PRACTICE,    COJIMENDING    IT     TO     US     BY    PLAUSIBLE     AUTHORITY.        For    that    wisS    and 

virtuous  persons  do  anything  is  a  veiy  probable  argument  that  we  are  concerned 
to  do  the  like.  It  is  obvious  in  temporal  concernments  how  boldly  men  adventure 
their  dearest  interests  in  following  such  whom  they  deem  honest  and  able  to  guide 
them.  III.  It  incites  oub  passions  and  ivipels  them  to  the  PERrt)EMANCE  of 
DUTY.  1.  It  raises  hope,  by  discovering  to  us  the  possiuility  of  suci.-ess  in  under- 
taking good  designs,  and  that  by  the  best  and  most  convincing  of  arguments, 
eNperience.  "The  exalnj^le,"  saith  St.  Bernard,  "  of  a  work  done  is  a  lively  and 
eflicacious  oration,  easily  persuading  what  we  intend  by  proving  that  feasible  which 
we  strive  to  persuade  unto."  2.  It  inflames  courage.  So  the  apostle  to  the 
Hebrews  signified  when  he  set  before  them  the  examples  of  the  patria>chs.  How 
many  persons,  timorous  and  averse  from  dangerous  undertakings,  have  notwith- 
standing become  very  bold  and  adventurous  in  war  by  the  discipline  and  influence 
of  an  exemplary  valour!  3.  It  provokes  emulation,  moving  us  earnestly  to  desire, 
and  thence  eagerly  to  pursue,  whatever  good,  privilege,  or  advantage  we  see  another 
to  enjoy.  Shall  be,  a  man  like  myself,  by  noble  dispositions  and  worthy  perform- 
ances, render  himself  highly  considerable,  while  I,  by  sordid  qualities  and  unworthy 
practices,  render  myself  despicable?  Shall  a  stripling  David  gloriously  triumph 
over  giants,  while  I  basely  am  vanquished  by  dwarfs?  4.  It  works  on  modesty, 
that  preserver  and  guardian  of  virtue,  as  Cicei-o  calls  it.  For  every  good  action  of 
another  doth  upbraid  and  shame  him  who  acteth  not  confurmably  thereto.  5.  It 
awakens  that  cuiiosity  which  is  of  no  mean  efficacy  on  our  actions.  For  whatever 
we  see  done,  we  are  apt  to  inquire  why  and  to  what  purpose  it  is  done,  what  the 
grounds  are,  and  what  the  fruits  of  the  performance.  6.  It  jjleases  the  mind  and 
fancy  in  contemplation,  thence  drawing  a  considerable  influence  on  practice.  No 
kind  of  studious  entertainment  doth  so  generally  deliglit  as  history,  or  the  tradition 
of  remarkable  examples.  Conclusion  :  Consider  that  God  hath  provided  and  recom- 
mended to  us  one  example,  as  a  perfect  s'andard  of  good  practice  :  the  example  of 
our  Lord,  the  which  declareth  the  use  and  efficacy  of  t?ood  example  as  one  principal 
instrument  of  piety.  (/.  Bcirrow,  D.D.)  A  teacher  must  not  .sef  an  imperfect 
examjile: — The  teacher  must  be  himself  his  own  illustration.  And  he  must  aim  at 
the  highest.  His  example  will  be  their  standard.  This  is  natural.  A  pupil  teacher 
at  school  used  to  gain  a  good  deal  of  23opularity  by  writing  a  line  or  two  on  the 
copy-books  of  the  children  in  his  class.  One  day  the  head  teacher  said,  "  Do  you 
know  why  the  boys  like  you  to  write  the  first  line  in  their  copy-books?"  "I 
suppose  it  is  because  they  think  I  am  a  good  writer,"  replied  the  conceited  youth. 
"  No  ;  it  is  because  they  know  you  are  a  bad  one,"  was  the  answer.  "  The  head- 
line is  perfect,  and  hard  to  follow.  Yours  is  such  a  poor  copy,  that  any  one  can 
imitate  it  quite  easily.'' 

Vers.  17-20.  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  unto  you  Timotheus. — The  visitation : — 
I.  The  VISITOR.     1.  Known.      2.  Beloved   in   Christ.      3.  Tried.      II.  His  work. 

1.  To  remind — 2.  Of  old  truths.  3.  In  Christ.  III.  The  design.  To  secure 
unity.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Now  some  are  puffed  up,  as  though  I  would  not  come 
to  you. — Pride  rebuked : — I.  Pride  is  a  fruitful  source  of  mischief  in  the 
Church.  II.  Often  exhibits  itself  in  reflections  upon  God's  ministeb.i.  1. 
Their  motives  are  impugned.  2.  Forbearance  is  regarded  as  weakness.  3.  Delay 
as  want   of    purpose.      III.   Must   be   fairly   met — 1.   In   the   Spirit  of   Christ. 

2.  In  deiDcndence  upon  the  will  of  God.     IV.  Must  be  wisely — 1.  Discriminated. 


CHAP.  IV.]  J.   CORINTHIANS.  371 

2.  Eebuked.  (Ibid.)  The  discipliiinrt/  office  of  tlie  Cliristian  viinhter  : — I.  Its 
KEQuiKEMENTS — 1.  Firmness,  and  sincerity  of  purpose  (ver.  18).  2.  Submission 
to  the  will  of  God  (ver.  19).  3.  Wise  discernment  (ver.  20).  II.  Its  means.  1. 
In  harmony  with  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  Especially  the  Word  of  God.  3. 
Accompanied  with  power.  III.  Irs  Chuistian  character.  It  is — 1.  Forbearing. 
2.  Discriminating.     3.  Kind.     (Ibid.)  The  icortlde.ts,  the  subordinate,  and  the 

vital  in  personal  Christianity  : — Note — 1.  The  spirit  that  should  regulate  all 
our  purposes.  2.  The  liability  of  the  best  men  to  disappointments.  The  words 
suggest^I.  The  worthless.  They  said  that  Paul  would  not  venture  to  visit 
Coiinth  again.  And  when  they  heard  that  he  was  sending  Timothy  instead 
they  boasted,  maybe,  that  Paul  was  afraid  to  come  himself.  They  were 
"  puffed  up  "  witli  the  idea  that  they  knew  more  about  Paul's  feeling  and 
intention  than  their  fellow-members.  They  were  inflated  with  the  spirit  of 
vanity.  Now  there  has  always  been,  and  still  is,  a  great  denl  of  this  in  pro- 
fessors of  religion.  What  is  called  tlie  Christian  world  seems  to  be  as  rife  with 
"  puffs  "  as  the  world  of  commerce,  literature,  or  politics.  Some  are  "puffed  up  " 
on  account  of — 1.  The  superior  contriljutions  they  are  able  to  make  to  the  cause 
of  charity  and  religion.  Having  more  of  this  world's  goods  than  others,  their 
names  stand  pre-eminent  on  subscription  lists,  are  emblazoned  in  reports,  and  are 
loudly  trumpeted  on  platforms.  The  more  they  give  the  more  they  are  praised, 
and  the  more  they  are  praised  the  more  they  are  "  puffed  up."  2.  Their  superior 
intellectual  endowments.  Not  a  few  in  our  churches  imagine  themselves  as 
possessing  mental  faculties  and  furniture  far  superior  to  the  majority,  and  they  are 
"puffed  up."  But  the  very  fact  that  they  are  "  puS'ed  up"  on  this  ground  proves 
the  inferiority  of  their  mental  endowments.  As  a  rule,  the  higher  they  are  the 
more  humble  they  will  be.  3.  The  extensive  popularity  they  have  obtained.  Those 
who  are  acquainted  to  any  extent  with  the  tastes  and  sentiments  of  the  populace 
will  scarcely  be  disposed  to  render  great  honour  to  the  man  who  will  attract  the 
greatest  numbers.  The  most  miserable  prints  have  the  largest  circulation,  the 
most  emptv  talkers  attract  the  iargt-st  audiences.  4.  The  supposed  superiority  of 
the  Church  or  sect  to  which  they  belong.  Such  people  are  constantly  glorifying 
"our  Church,"  "our  denomination,"  "  our  body."  He  who  is  impressed  with  the 
greatness  of  the  universe,  still  more  with  the  greatness  of  God,  could  hnrdly 
consider  any  human  institution  great.  5.  The  assumption  that  they  and  their 
community  are  the  special  favourites  of  heaven.  This  "  puffing-up"  spirit  is  the 
"  canker  of  religion  "  ;  it  gnaws  like  a  worm  at  the  root,  and  when  we  look  for  the 
harvest  it  is  dust  and  bitterness.  II.  The  subordinate.  What  is  the  subordinate  ? 
The  "  word."  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word."  Take  the  "  word  "  liere  as 
representing  profession  in  religion.  1.  There  should  be  a  "  word  "  or  prnfession, 
but  this  is  not  religion.  A  profession  of  true  religion  is  important  in  itself  inas- 
much as  it  is — (1)  A  duty.  "Whosoever  shall  confess  Me  before  men,"  *c.  But 
it  is  a  duty  only  where  the  reality  exists.  The  man  who  has  not  religion  sins  a,nd 
acts  in  violation  of  duty,  and  his  profession  is  hypocrisy.  (2)  An  aid  to  religion 
itself.  It  is  possible,  it  may  be,  for  religion  to  exist  in  the  soul,  where  there 
is  no  public  pro'es-ion  of  it.  It  may  be  like  a  seed  germinating  under  the  soil,  but 
in  this  state  it  must  be  very  weak  as  well  as  uninfluential.  The  man  who  has  the 
real  thing  in  him,  however  v/eak,  and  makes  a  declaration  of  it,  strengthensand 
develops  it  thereby.  2.  The  "word,"  therefore,  or  confession  of  religion,  is  of 
value,  but  its  value  is  subordinate.  Nicodemus  was  a  disciple,  though  a  secret 
one.  P.ofessioa  without  possession  is  a  sin  and  a  hindrance.  Profession  with 
possession  is  a  duty  and  a  help.  III.  The  vital.  The  kingdom  of  God  is— 1.  A 
"power."  It  is  the  "  power"— (1)  Of  truth  over  the  intellect.  (2)  Of  love  over 
the  heart.  (3)  Of  right  over  the  conscience.  2.  A  reigning  power,  "  kingdom." 
3.  The  Di'  ine  power.      {D.  Thmas,  D.D.)  But  I  will  come  unto  you  shortly 

if  the  Lord  wm.— Human  pvrposes—1.  Are  suspended  on  the  Divine  purposes. 
2.  Should  be  entertained  in  submission  to  the  Divine  will.  3.  Should  be  committed 
to  the  direction  of  the  Divine  Providence.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  And  will  know,  not 
the  speech  of  them  that  are  puffed  up,  but  the  power. — A  boaster  may  be  known 
— 1.     By  his  prating.     2.  By  his  lack  of  power.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  hut  in  power.— T7ie  kingdom 
of  God  not  word,  hut  power  :—  The  kingdom  of  God— I.  Is  not  in  word.  It  is  one 
of  the  leading  features  of  the  a^e  to  make  the  gospel  consist  ^n  )ihvases.  It  is 
a  kind  of  pious  fashion  to  formulate  religious  truths  like  the  definitions  of  an 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

exact  science,  and  satisfy  ourselves,  and  condemn  others,  only  as  they  agree  or 
not  with  the  vernacular  of  partv.  There  is  a  grievous  lack  of  earnest  originality, 
a  suspicious  amount  of  spiritual  plagiarism  in  colloquial  Christianity.  Men  adopt 
current  phrases  as  a  hypochondriac  imagines  the  normal  symptoms  of  a  disease. 
Falsehouds  often  repeated  at  length  imi^ress  their  author  with  a  vague  belief 
of  their  veracity.  And  so  the  hypocrite  or  the  formalist  rehearse  the  spiiitual 
phraseology  of  faith  till  they  believe  themselves  believers.  During  the  last  century 
the  besetting  sin  of  tbe  Church  was  a  lifeless  formality.  Men  have  since  learned  to 
lay  stress  on  forms  of  words  in  lieu  of  forms  of  worship.  II.  Is  in  powee.  But 
what  kind  of  power  ?  Not  natural,  nor  moral,  nor  intellectual  power.  In  these 
all  men  vary,  but  in  the  power  of  the  text  ail  who  are  the  subjects  of  it  are  alike  ; 
for  "it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth."  Note — 1. 
Its  commencement  in  btlievers  in  Christ,  to  "  whoin  gave  He  power  to  become 
the  sons  of  God."  2.  In  its  continuance  in  them,  as  they  are  "kept  by  the  power 
of  God  unto  salvatii.n."  3.  Its  influence,  so  that  this  Divine  "strength  is  made 
perfect  in  our  weakness."  When  I  am  weak,  then  I  am  st)ong."  4.  Its  extent, 
inchiding  the  final  destiny  of  the  body,  which  is  "  sown  in  weakness,  but  raised  in 
power."  5.  Its  duration.  Christ's  people,  like  their  Lord,  being  kings  and  priests 
after  the  order  of  Melchisedek,  are  "made  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life." 
Conclusion  :  1.  By  this  power  St.  Paul  would  gauge  the  professions  of  his  rivals. 
Not  by  their  speech,  though  they  might  have  had  "  the  knowledge  which  puffeth 
up  " ;  nor  by  their  gifts,  for  they  might  have  gifts  without  grace,  or  they  m'ght 
have  grace  without  the  gifts.  So  he  would  try  professors  now  ;  for  "  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink, "  i-c.  And  the  solemn  inquiry  is.  Have  we  "  the 
form  of  godliness  without  the  power  "  ?  If  our  personal  religion  have  not  power 
enough  witJiin  us  to  subdue  our  besetraents,  with  all  its  tongues  of  men  and  angels, 
its  mysteries,  and  knowledge,  and  prophecy,  and  it  may  be,  "all  faith,"  it  is  the 
"  sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbal."  It  is  not  the  professing,  but  the  putting 
on  Christ,  and  by  necessary  consequence  "the  putting  off  as  concerning  the  former 
conversation  the  old  man  with  his  detds. "  6.  A  day  is  coming  when  tbe  critical 
inquiry  will  be,  not  what  doctrinal  system  we  i>rofessed,  but  what  was  its  influence 
on  our  hearts  and  lives?      (J.  B.  Oiceii,  3LA.)  The  kiin/duin  of  God  in  word 

and  in  power: — I.  Its  instrument — revealed  truth.  Although  the  word  may  be 
ipreseut  without  power,  wherever  the  power  is  put  forth  it  employs  the  word  as  its 
instrument:  although  the  letter  is  somelimes  dead,  it  is  by  that  letter,  when  it 
lives,  that  all  the  real  work  is  done.  II.  Its  essence — Christ  (chap.  i.  24).  Here 
is  the  fountain-head  of  all  the  force  which,  through  tbe  preaching  of  tbe  truth,  can 
be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  The  word  and  onlinances 
stand  ready  to  convey  the  power,  but  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  is  the  power 
which  must  be  led  to  men's  hearts  and  led  on.  HI.  Its  application  is  effected  by 
tlie  ministry  of  the  Spirit.  Before  His  ascension  our  Lord  promised  this,  and  at 
Pentecost  the  promise  was  fulfilled.  Then  the  kingdom  came  in  power  to  a 
multitude  who  had  i^reviously  known  it  in  word  only.  From  that  day  to  this,  with 
a  ministry  sometimes  silent  as  the  dew,  and  sometimes  terrible  as  a  tempest,  the 
same  Spirit  has  been  working  in  the  world.  IV.  Its  effects.  1.  It  subdues.  It 
seizes  Sanl,  and  in  a  moni'  nt  lays  him  prostrate  on  the  earth.  It  makes  him 
blind,  and  again  gives  him  lijiht.  It  strips  him  of  his  own  righteousness,  and 
forthwith  clothes  him  in  another.  The  soldier  is  compelled  to  change  his  side, 
and  without  even  putting  off  his  armorer  marches  under  another  Captain  to 
fight  ano'-her  foe.  The  conquest,  as  might  have  been  expected,  is  more  complete 
than  any  which  earthly  powers  can  achieve  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  Other  monarchs  rule 
men's  actions ;  Christ  is  King  of  thoughts.  2.  It  comforts.  It  is  as  much  the 
peculiar  iirerogative  of  royalty  to  make  peace,  as  to  declare  war.  "  Peace  I  leave 
with  you,"  &c.  These  aie  kngly  words;  only  One  has  the  right  to  use  them. 
3.  It  levies  tribute.  This  is  the  sure  mark  of  a  real  kingdom.  Once  the  king 
of  Britain  claimed  to  be  also  king  of  France.  In  France  his  kingdom  consisted 
m  word  only ;  in  Britain  and  Ireland  it  came  in  power.  Here  tribute  flowed  into 
the  royal  treasury  ;  there  not  a  penny  was  paid.  Christ's  kingdom,  wherever  it  is 
real,  puts  forth  the  taxing  power.  Tribute,  bearing  the  image  and  superscription 
of  earthly  kings,  flows  into  its  treasury  to  maintain  its  machinery  and  extend  its 
bounds;  but  the  self  of  tbe  subject  is  the  coin  in  which  the  King  best  likes 
the  tribute  to  be  paid.  (JT.  Arnot,  D.D.)  The  kimjdovi  of  God  in  power: — 
The  kingdom  of  God  is — I.  A  government  of  auihoritt  in  disiinction  from 
legislation  and  eepeesent.\tion.     a  government  of  absolute  authority  is  charac- 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  373 

terised — 1.  By  certainty  in  the  righteousness  of  ifs  requirements.  Human 
governments  cannot  be  certain  here  ;  they  arise  from  finite  intelh^jence  ;  but 
the  government  of  God  arises  from  infinite  intell^^!ence  and  righteousness,  and 
hence  it  is  absoUitcly  certain.  We  are  so  constituted  as  to  accejDt  with  entire 
confidence  that  condensation  of  the  Divine  government  known  as  tlie  Ten  Ciim- 
mandiuents.  If  a  reformer  were  to  propose  to  cliange  these  I;iws.  tlicy  could  not 
be  accejjted  by  the  human  cbaracter  wliich  God  has  created.  In  this  certainty  we 
see  the  distinction  between  the  Divine  and  a  merely  verbal  government.  2.  By 
certainty  in  the  reach  of  its  prerogative.  This  is  not  possible  to  human  govern- 
ments. There  are  of  necessity  questions  of  prerogatives  with  regard  to  territories 
and  dynasties,  and  consequently  wars  arise  over  questions  of  prerogative.  There  can, 
however,  be  no  doubt  with  regard  to  the  reach  of  the  Divine  prerogatives.  He 
is  the  creator  of  all  men,  and  hence  has  the  sovereign  right  to  govern  all.  And 
the  omnipresence  and  onmiscience  of  the  sovereign  power  settles  the  question. 
3.  By  cert-iinty  in  the  execution  of  penalties.  This  is  not  possible  of  humau 
governments,  for  witnesses  may  be  incompetent,  and  juries  may  be  mistaken. 
But  there  is  a  perfectness  in  the  administration  of  the  Divine  justice  which  renders 
evasion  and  error  impossible.  II.  It  is  a  goveuxment  of  absolute  and  of  avail- 
able    COXDITIOXS,     and     is     THEREFORE     REMEDY     IN     DISriXCTIO:^     FROM     IXEXOIJABLK 

DOOM.  It  is  one  kind  of  power,  having  imposed  penalties,  to  inflict  them;  it  is 
another  kind  of  power  to  maintain  the  authority  of  the  government,  and  yet 
extend  the  grace  of  God.  Because  Jesus  died  and  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us,  we  are  called  to  receive  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  When  the  pardon  is 
announced  from  God,  the  repenting,  believing  sinner  is  able  to  say,  "  F'>eing 
justified  by  faith,  I  am  at  peace  witli  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Tliere 
is  man  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  but  under  the  power  of  the  quickening  Spirit 
the  soul  is  brought  to  life  again.  There  are  the  stains  which  sin  has  made  upon 
our  souls,  but  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all  unrighteousness." 
This  is  the  remedy.  You  thus  see  the  p  iwer  of  God's  government  rising  above 
all  mere  nominal  definitions  in  the  great  change  of  heart  and  change  of  life  which 
the  gospel  works  upon  the  souls  of  men.  This  is  the  government  of  remedy,  and 
]ience  the  government  of  power.  III.  It  is  a  life  in  distinction  from  a 
DOCTRINE.  The  potency  of  the  Divine  kingdom  appeals  in  the  fact  that  it 
accomplishes  what  all  other  forms  of  power  fail  to  achieve.  It  is  the  power  not 
of  mere  creed,  but  tlie  power  of  God  within  the  soul ;  and  hence  springs  up  a  life 
that  is  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  It  is  a  new  life,  for  it  is  life  that  flows  from 
Jesus  Christ  through  the  faith  that  is  operative  in  the  soul.  "  Old  tilings  have 
passed  away,  and  behold,  all  things  have  become  new."  This  is  a  life  of  obedience, 
purity,  and  benevolence.  Let  me  not  be  misunderstood  as  depreciating  or  undervaluing 
dogmatic  tlieology ;  the  kingdom,  however,  is  not  the  doctrine  whatever  mav  be  its 
form  or  its  correctness.  To  take  in  the  woids  of  the  Lord  .Jesus  as  He  utters  them  is 
spirit  and  life,  and  inclusive  of  the  kingdom  ;  bat  the  words  of  which  we  speak  are  the 
words  of  men  having  only  a  representative  authority  with  regard  to  trnlh.  If  you  ask 
me,  Where  is  the  kingdom  ?  It  is  within  you.  If  you  ask  me.  What  is  the  kingdom  ? 
lanswer.  It  is  "righteousness  and  peaceand  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  (Bp.J.  T.Pfck.) 
The  nature  of  relifi'ion  : — I.  It  is  the  kixcsdoji  of  God.  A  kingdom  which  He  hath 
erected  in  the  hearts  of  men.  1.  Of  this  kingdom  God  is  the  Sovei'eign.  He  hath 
laid  the  foundations  of  it,  and  He  therefore  of  right  presides  over  it,  commanding 
a  ready  obedience  to  His  w'ill,  taking  effectual  care  of  its  real  interests,  and 
administering  all  its  affairs  with  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness.  2.  As  the  heart  is 
the  place  where  He  hath  erected  His  throne,  so  the  powers  of  it,  the  understanding, 
will,  and  affections,  are  tlie  proper  subjects  over  which  He  sways  His  sceptre.  3. 
Nor  need  we  be  at  any  loss  to  determine  what  are  the  means  or  instruments  by  which 
the  soul  of  man,  restored  to  the  dominion  of  its  rightful  Sovereign,  is  rul  d  and 
governed.  By  the  sacred  Scriptures  the  man  of  religion  would  have  his  opinions, 
affections,  and  conduct  directed,  governed,  and  tried.  4.  We  are  led  to  contem- 
plate the  beiuty,  order,  and  harmony  of  this  sjiiritual  kingdom,  which  is  another 
idea  the  metaphor  naturally  conveys.  5.  If  such  be  the  nature  and  tendency  of 
religion,  how  great  are  the  privileges  and  immunities  annexed  to  thi^s  spiritual 
kingdom  !  6.  Its  stability  and  duration.  It  is  a  kingdom  that  shall  not  be  moved. 
The  foundation  of  it  is  laid  in  the  purpose  and  grace  of  Him  who  wants  neither 
means  nor  inclination  to  support  and  defend  it.  II.  It  is  not  in  word,  but  in 
power.  It  is  not  "  in  word,"  it  does  not  consist  in  notions,  professions,  or  external 
forms — things  wherein  men  are  too  apt  to  place  the  essence  of  it ;  but  "  in  power," 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  iv. 

it  is  an  inward  spiritual  vital  principle,  which  takes  hold  of  the  heart  and  diffuses 
its  influence  through  the  life.  It  may  in  general  be  described  as  a  principle  of 
Divine  and  spiritual  life.  If  it  be  considered  in  reference  to  the  understanding  it 
expresses  itself  in  our  perceptions,  reasonings,  and  reflections  about  spiritual 
objects ;  if  in  regard  to  the  conscience,  in  a  lively  impression  of  the  truth  and 
importance  of  Divine  things  ;  if  as  respecting  the  judgment,  in  an  approbation  of 
the  things  which  are  excellent ;  if  the  will,  in  a  concurrence  with  whatever  appears 
to  be  the  pleasure  of  God,  and  in  one  word,  if  it  be  considered  in  reference  to  the 
affections,  it  consists  in  the  direction  of  them  to  their  proper  objects.  The  result 
of  all  which  will  be  such  a  course  of  behaviour  as  is  in  the  general  answerable  to 
this  state  of  the  mind.  And  now  with  how  much  reason  may  we — 1.  Appeal  to 
the  judgments  and  consciences  of  all  men,  whether  there  is  not  a  real  excel- 
lency in  what  we  have  thus  been  describing  !  How  much  then — 2.  Is  it  to  be 
lamented  that  so  little  of  real  religion  is  to  be  found  in  our  world !  3.  Of 
what  importance  is  it  that  we  each  of  us  seriously  examine  ourselves  upon 
this  question,  whether  God  hath  erected  His  king^tom  in  our  hearts,  and  in 
what  it  consists,  whether  in  word  or  in  power  !  {S.  Stennett,  D.D.)  The 
kinr/dom  of  God  in  'power  : — The  kingdom  of  God  is  the  substance  and  the  order 
of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  1.  In  a  kingdom  the  subjects  become 
connected  with  each  other  and  with  their  king.  Salvation  connects  man  with  man, 
and  man  with  God.  2.  In  a  kingdom  there  is  strength.  Many  kingdoms  are 
powerful,  but  this  is  more  so  than  the  whole  of  them.  3.  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
not  in  word;  it  is  not  in  "  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom."  Words  pertain  to 
the  kingdom,  but  they  are  not  its  power — words  are  the  clothing ;  power  is  in  the 
body  where  truth  lies.  Fallen  angels  are  mighty  and  have  possession  of  man's 
fallen  nature;  the  angels  must  be  subdued,  and  man  must  be  changed.  What 
words  are  adequate  for  such  a  performance?  4.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  like 
the  kingdom  of  men,  where  the  power  is  in  the  voice  of  the  people  :  here  the  power 
is  in  the  king,  and  of  the  king.  5.  The  power  of  this  kingdom  is  exercised  in  the 
people  of  God.  A  new  nature  is  formed  in  them  by  an  almighty  power.  Tiie 
power  that  will  raise  the  dead  in  the  last  day  is  now  exercised  in  raising  the  spiri- 
tually dead  into  a  life  of  holiness.  The  grace  received  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power  : 
the  man  does  not  talk  of  repentance  merely,  but  departs  from  iniquity:  he  does  not 
speak  of  faith  merely,  but  believes  in  Christ,  and  gives  himself  to  Him.  The  power 
of  the  kingdom  makes  strong  the  weakest.  6.  The  power  of  the  kingdom  is  engaged 
on  behalf  of  the  subjects.  The  power  of  their  King  was  engaged  for  the  subjects 
here  on  earth,  when  He  stood  as  their  surety.  Out  of  the  treasures  of  holiness  in 
Christ  the  power  of  God  draws  when  engaged  in  the  sinner's  sanctificatJon.  The 
might  and  the  holiness  of  God  are  alike  infinite.  7.  The  power  of  God  is  sovereign 
in  its  exei'cise.  A  greater  degree  of  success  attended  the  preaching  of  fishermen  in 
one  day,  than  had  been  produced  by  the  ministry  of  Cbrist  Himself  in  three  years 
and  a  half.  Paul  had  the  same  gifts  in  preaching  in  every  place,  but  not  the  same 
success.  8.  The  power  of  the  kingdom  is  exercised  against  the  enemies  of  the 
Church,  and  it  reduces  the  creation  into  order.  Sin  and  Satan  are  the  great  authors 
of  disorder,  and  this  kingdom  is  opposed  to  them ;  and  its  power  will  bring  down 
whatever  will  rise  up  against  it.  9.  It  will  be  the  power  of  the  kingdom  that  will 
appear  in  the  great  day.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  "  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead,  at  His  appearing  and  His  kingdom."  Thenceforththe  very  world  of  perdition 
will  be  in  order  :  then  the  chief  author  of  disorder  will  be  reduced  to  eternal  order. 
Not  many  words  will  be  used  on  the  occasion,  but  power.     {D.  Charles.)  The 

relation  of  ivnrd  to  power  : — God  has  put  truth  into  word,  and  so  given  us  a  Bible, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  the  Divine  a  practical  working  factor  inside  each  man's 
own  individual  life ;  so  that  by  virtue  of  it  we  become  organs  of  God,  and  young 
incarnations.  A  man  is  not  a  man  fully  and  fairly  until  his  own  energies  gain 
their  final  touch  of  effectiveness  through  the  power  of  God  working  within  him  to 
will  and  to  do  of  the  Divine  good  pleasure.  Inspiration  is  permanent ;  only  in  one 
case  it  covers  the  Spirit  of  God  going  forth  into  the  forms  of  lettered  truth  ;  in 
another  into  forms  of  thought,  feeling,  purpose,  and  power  through  personal 
instrumentality.  Inspired  power  to  write  a  Divine  Bible  ;  inspired  power  to  live  a 
Divine  life ;  inspired  power  to  conceive  or  achieve  a  Divine  purpose — each  of  tliem 
is  as  a  separate  coloured  ray  that  issues  into  the  air  after  its  passage  through  the 
prism  of  the  human  spirit ;  but  one  of  these  just  as  much  as  another  sprung  out  of 
the  original  white  beam  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  To  be  a  Christian,  then,  is  to  live 
with  a  Divine  life ;  and  to  secure  that  result  is  the  object  which  God  had  in  giving 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  375 

to  us  a  book — an  instrument,  therefore,  whose  prime  value  lies  only  in  its  com- 
petency to  contribute  to  the  realisation  and  maintenance  in  men  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  as  the  law  and  the  material  of  life.     (C  //.  Fai-lcliumt,  D.D.)  The  distinc- 

tion between  word  and  power  : — The  written  pages  from  Matthew  to  Revelation  did 
not  make  Christianity;  Christianity  made  those  pages.  Words  are  the  accident  of 
the  matter.  It  is  easier  to  carry  a  book  around  in  our  pocket  than  it  is  to  carry 
God's  Spirit  around  in  our  life.  But  gospel  is  power  ;  it  is  life,  Divine  life.  Christ 
is  "  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life  "  ;  the  whole  thing.  And  to  be  a  Christian  is 
not  to  know  a  book,  but  to  be  knit  into  the  Son  of  God.  There  was  no  book  in  St. 
John's  piety,  or  in  St.  Peter's,  or  in  St.  Paul's.  I  know  whom,  not  what  "  I  have 
believed."  This,  of  course,  is  not  to  depreciate  the  Christian  Scriptures.  They 
serve  a  necessary  purpose.  They  are  a  highway  over  which  men  are  to  be  led  to 
Christ.  The  error  does  not  lie  in  using  the  written  records  as  an  instrument,  but 
in  treating  them  as  a  finality,  as  a  substitute  for  Christ.  We  are  in  danger  of 
trying  to  live  on  an  inspired  description  of  Christ  and  a  verbal  photograph  of  Him 
instead  of  succeeding  in  living  on  Christ.  We  camiot  live  on  a  history — even  an 
inspired  history.  Christ  told  His  disriples  that  it  was  expedient  for  them  that  He 
go  away ;  to  their  advantage  that  He  go  away,  because  He  would  send  His  Spirit 
instead.  (Ibid.)  The  power  oj  the  gospel : — 1.  The  text  does  not  mean  that  words 
have  no  place  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  No  man  made  a  moi-e  marvellous  use  of 
language  than  St.  Paul.  A  man  who  has  a  perfect  command  of  words  has  a  very 
great  command  of  things,  because  words  are  things  in  reality.  2.  Yet  it  is  true 
that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  woi'ds  but  in  power,  as  it  is  tliat  the  glory  of  the 
picture  is  not  in  its  frame,  but  in  the  picture  itself.  The  gospel  is  in  power.  Men 
write  and  speak  about  it,  some  for  and  some  against  it ;  and  in  either  case  tliere  is 
evidence  of  its  power.  Nothing  in  Europe  to-day  has  such  power  over  the  minds  of 
men  as  the  New  Testament.  Millions  of  people  bnlieve  the  gospel,  and  are  endea- 
vouring in  a  manner  to  conform  their  lives  to  its  requirements.  Then  people  who 
are  in  trouble  all  love  it.  You  have  no  idea  what  a  po'.er  it  has  over  them.  What 
is  the  reason  ?  I  attribute  the  power  of  the  gospel — I.  To  the  charm  of  the  life 
OF  Jesds.  You  have  read  all  manner  of  lives,  but  as  a  rule  you  do  not  re>id  a  man's 
biography  twice.  But  how  many  times  have  you  read  the  life  of  Christ  ?  You 
say,  "  But  it  is  in  the  Bible,  and  is  inspired."  You  do  not  read  it  because  of  that. 
The  main  secret  is  in  the  charm  of  the  history  itself.  There  are  certain  elements 
of  it  that  must  always  have  a  wonderful  power  overman.  1.  Its  truth  and  natural- 
ness. Some  men  love  error,  but  our  nature  loves  realitj',  and  any  man  th'it  is  brave 
enough  to  be  natural  and  true  vi^ill  be  loved,  and  i^eople  will  gather  around  him. 
No  age  was  ever  more  real  than  this.  Everywhere  men  are  inclined  to  discover  the 
reality  of  things,  whether  in  the  heavens  or  in  the  earth.  Look  at  the  sorrowful 
earuestness  of  writers  in  the  daily  journals.  In  the  New  Testament  you  meet  a  man 
who  speaks  fresh  from  the  glory  of  God  ;  you  come  in  contact  with  reality  and  truth, 
qualities  which  will  always  have  a  charm.  2.  Its  perfect  goodness  and  love.  All 
that  is  rich,  sweet,  and  inspiring  in  the  vegetable  world  is  concentrated  in  the  fruit 
of  the  vine.  Jesus  said,  "  I  am  the  Vine";  and  ail  the  virtues  are  found  in  Him. 
It  is  this  that  gives  a  power  and  a  charm  to  the  gospel.  3.  Its  supernatural 
majesty.  Take  one  or  two  instances.  There  arose  a  great  storm,  and  He  said, 
"  Peace  be  still."  There  followed  a  great  calm.  He  sees  people  burdened  with  sin 
and  sorrow,  and  He  says,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are  heavy  Inden,  and  I  will  give 
you  rest."  When  sin  and  death  came  into  the  family  of  frienils.  He  said,  "  Lazarus, 
come  forth,"  and  the  man  came  forth  from  the  tomb.  Y"ou  may  write  splendid 
essays  to  prove  that  miracles  are  outside  experience  ;  but  as  long  as  you  have  this 
supernaturalism  mingled  with  goodness,  and  all  founded  upon  truth  and  naturalness, 
you  will  have  a  power  which  will  always  have  a  charm  for  the  minds  of  men.     II. 

To  THE  MANNER  IN  WHICH  ODR  LoRD  MAKES  GOOD  HiS  UOCTRINE  OF  THE  DiVINE  INTEREST 

IN  US.  Science  is  brin^'ing  marvellous  facts  to  light.  Why  then  not  make  a  religion 
of  science,  and  make  thoroughly  scientific  men  the  priests  of  that  religion,  and  let 
its  disciples  worship  the  cosmos  ?  You  cannot.  Science  does  not  touch  the  heart 
deep  enough.  Why  not  make  a  religion  of  philosophy '?  Why  not  worshi])  the 
Absolute  One  which  underlies  all  things?  The  answer  again  is  you  cannot.  Philo- 
sophy does  not  touch  the  heart  deep  enough  to  cause  it  to  worship.  Splendid  as  it 
is,  still  it  seems  cold  as  the  northern  lights  that  play  around  the  pole.  Why  has  the 
gospel  a  power  over  us?  It  brings  God  near  to  the  heart,  and  enables  us  to  believe 
in,  to  love,  and  to  worship  Him.  III.  To  its  doc  thine  of  eteenm.  life.  All  that 
we  are  and  all  that  we  have  are  summed  up  in  the  word  "life.''    Hence  men  love  life 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTllATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

FO  dearly.  "All  that  a  man  l)ath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  We  say  of  some  people 
that  they  love  riches,  but  it  is  not  gold  the  people  love.  It  is  the  posidon,  the 
influence,  the  enjoyments,  the  independency  that  wealth  gives.  Men  love  wealth 
because  it  can  make  their  life  deeper,  richer,  broader.  These  are  seeking  the  tree 
of  life  if  they  only  knew  it,  but  in  the  wrong  way,  in  a  way  in  which  they  never  can 
find  it.  The  gospel  has  a  cbarm  over  us  because  it  speaks  certainly  concerning  eternal 
hfe.  If  you  could  take  away  all  desire  of  knowledge  from  man,  then  you  might  shut  up 
all  the  libraries  of  the  world,  for  books  would  have  no  power.  Books  appeal  to  the 
love  of  knowledge.  If  we  could  lock  out  this  thirst  for  life,  if  we  could  reduce  the  human 
mind  to  contentment,  so  that  it  should  cease  to  desire  an  endless,  blessed  existence, 
then  might  the  gospel  become  a  dead  letter.  But  whilst  we  thirst  for  eternal  life,  the 
message  "  I  give  unto  you  eternal  life  "  shall  always  be  welcome.  (T.  Jo)ies,  D.D.) 
Profession  and  action: — These  words  may  be — I.  Abused.  1.  When  they  are 
employed  to  weaken  the  outward  institutions  of  piety.  Some  would  so  refine 
religion  as  to  render  it  unsuited  for  human  beings.  We  have  to  worship  God  in 
spirit,  but  we  must  not  forget  that  we  have  bodies.  There  may  be  the  form  of 
godliness  without  the  power,  but  while  we  are  here  the  power  cannot  be  manifested 
without  the  form.  Even  the  practical  duties  of  life  are  better  discharged  by  those 
who  wait  upon  God  in  His  appointed  means.  It  is  a  dangerous  dekision  that  leads 
people  to  tlie  neglect  of  those  means  and  forms  whifdi  GoJ,  who  knovveth  our  frame, 
has  enjoined  us  to  use.  2.  When  we  fail  to  regulate  our  religion  by  the  rule  of 
God's  Word.  Impulse  is  good,  but  requires  guidance.  Zeal  may  cause  our  good 
to  be  evil  spoken  of,  and  even  produce  evil.  One  duty  must  not  defraud  another. 
There  are  some  who  would  even  use  the  text  to  do  away  witli  social  distinctions. 
II.  IjrpKovEn  by  applying  them — 1.  To  judging  ourselves.  Is  religion  a  power  in 
our  lives  ?  Does  fnith  work  by  love  ?  Professions  or  intentions  do  not  make  piety. 
2.  To  judging  others.  Men  differ  in  temperament.  We  often  consider  an  indi- 
vidual who  speaks  much  on  religion  as  a  zealous  Christian,  when,  if  we  followed 
him  through  life,  we  should  find  him  as  zealous  in  worldly  concerns.  So  also  we 
meet  with  a  man  who  shrinks  from  notice,  and  set  him  doAvn  as  not  "fervent  in 
spirit,"  when  it  is  only  his  natural  timidity  that  restrains  bim  from  more  active 
exertion.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  The  spiritual  mind  : — I.  If  we  would  fokm  a 
JUST  notion  how  far  we  ape  influenced  by  the  power  of  the  gospel,  we  must  put 

ASIDE    EVERYTHING    WHICH    WE     DO    MERELY    IN    IMITATION    OF    OTHERS,    AND  NOT    FROM 

EELiGious  PRINCIPLES.  1.  Let  a  man  consider  the  number  of  times  he  has  attended 
public  worship  because  others  do  ;  or  the  number  of  times  he  has  found  himself 
unequal  to  temptations  when  they  came,  which  beforehand  he  and  others  made 
light  of,  and  he  must  own  that  his  outward  conduct  shapes  itself  unconsciously  by 
the  manners  of  those  with  whom  he  lives.  2.  Now,  I  am  not  condemning  all  that 
we  do  without  thinking  expressly  of  the  duty  of  obedience  at  the  very  time  we  are 
doing  it.  It  is  natural  to  a  religions  man  to  obey,  and  therefore  he  will  do  it  naturally, 
i.e.,  without  effort  or  delibei'ation.  Separate  acts  of  faith  aid  us  only  while  we  are 
unstable.  As  we  get  strength,  but  one  extended  act  of  faith  (so  to  call  it)  influf  ncesus 
all  through  the  day,  and  our  whole  day  is  but  one  act  of  obedience  also.  Our  will 
runs  parallel  to  God's.  We  are  moved  by  God  dwelling  in  us,  and  need  not  but  act  on 
instinct.  8.  How  different  is  this  high  obedience  from  thnt  random  unawares  way 
of  doing  right,  which  to  so  many  men  seems  to  constitute  a  religious  life  !  The  one 
is  obedience  on  habit,  the  ether  obedience  on  custom  ;  the  one  is  of  the  heart,  the 
other  of  the  lips  ;  the  one  is  in  power,  the  other  in  word  ;  the  one  cunnot  be  acquired 
•without  much  and  constant  vigilance, generally  not  without  much  pain  and  trouble; 
the  other  is  the  result  of  a  mere  jiassive  imitation  of  those  whom  we  fall  in  with. 
Have  we  then  received  the  kingdom  of  God  more  than  externally?     11.  We  may 

HAVE    received    IT    IN   A    HIGHER    SENSE    THAN    IN    WORD    MERELY,  AND    YET    IN  NO  REAL 

SENSE  IN  POWER.  Our  obedience  may  be  in  some  sort  religious,  and  yet  hardly 
deserve  the  title  of  Chiistian.  1.  It  is  possible,  according  to  St.  Peter,  to  fear  God 
and  work  righttousness  without  being  Christians.  Is  it  not  the  way  of  men  to 
dwell  with  satisfaction  on  their  good  deeds  ?  They  never  harmed  any  one,  they 
have  not  given  in  to  a  profligate  life ;  they  can  speak  of  their  honesty,  iiKhistry, 
conscientiousness,  etc.  Now  all  this  is  really  j)raiseworthy,  and,  when  a  niJin  from 
want  of  opportunity  knows  no  more,  really  acceptable  to  God  ;  yet  it  determines 
nothing  about  his  having  received  the  t-ospel  of  Christ  in  power.  2.  To  be  Chris- 
tians, surely  it  is  not  enough  to  be  that  which  we  must  be,  even  without  Christ ; 
not  enough  to  be  no  better  than  good  heathens.  I  am  not  wishing  to  fiighten  these 
imperfect  Christians,  but  to  lead  them  on  ;  to  open  their  minds  to  the  greatness  of 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  377 

the  work  before  them,  to  dissipate  the  meagre  and  carnal  views  in  wliich  the  gospel 
has  come  to  them,  to  warn  them  that  they  must  never  be  contented  witli  them- 
selves, but  must  go  on  unto  jierfection ;  that  till  they  are  much  more  than  they  are 
at  present,  they  have  received  the  kingdom  of  God  in  word,  not  in  power.  3.  What 
is  it,  then,  that  they  lack  ?  Read  2  Cor.  v.  14,  17  ;  Gal.  ii.  20  ;  Col.  iii.  12-16  ;  Gal. 
iv.  G;  Luke  ix.  23.  Now  it  is  plain  that  this  is  a  very  different  mode  of  obedience 
from  any  which  natural  reason  and  conscience  tell  us  of.  Observe  in  what  respect 
it  is  different  from  that  lower  degree  of  religion  which  we  may  jiossess  without 
entering  into  the  mind  of  the  gospel.  (1)  In  its  faith  ;  which  is  placed,  not  simply 
in  God,  but  in  God  as  manifested  in  Christ,  according  to  His  own  words,  "  Ye 
believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  Me."  (2)  We  must  adore  Christ  as  our  Lord  and 
Master,  and  love  Him  as  our  most  gracious  Eedeemer.  (3)  We  must,  for  His  sake, 
aim  at  a  noble  and  unusual  strictness  of  life,  perfecting  holiness  in  His  fear, 
destroying  our  sins,  mastering  our  whole  soul,  and  bringing  it  into  captivity  to  His 
law,  exercising  a  profound  humility,  and  an  unbounded,  never-failing  love,  and 
shunning  irreligious  men.  This  is  to  be  a  Christian.  {J.  H.  Newman,  I). I).) 
Valid  Cliristianiti/ : — -1.  This  "kingdom"  is  not  God's  government  ani'mg  the 
nations  ;  nor  the  outward  dispensation  of  the  gospel,  a  kingdom  which  is 
"preached"  unto  us;  nor  the  sphere  of  celestial  bliss,  to  which  we  are  "called." 
It  is  siiiritual.  "Itcometh  not  with  observation."  It  is  "within  us."  We  can 
only  "  see  "  it  and  "  enter  '"  it  by  being  "  born  again."  It  is  not  ceremonial  obser- 
vance, but  "righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holj'  Ghost."  Its  "mystery" 
can  alone  be  appreciated  by  subjection  to  it.  It  is  so  inestimable  that  we  must 
"  seek  it  first."  2.  This  kingdom  is  not  in  "  word,"  a  mere  proclaination — it  is  in 
power.  This  is  a  thing  very  dilHcult  to  define.  To  tell  us  that  it  is  ability,  capacity, 
strength,  is  idle  repetition.  It  will  better  reveal  its  true  meaning  in  the  facts  which 
the  text  will  identify.  I.  Eeligion  in  its  hold  and  operation  upon  the  heart  is 
NOTHING  LESS  THAN  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD.  1.  You  must  lay  asidc  all  notion  of 
empires  and  thrones.  You  must  remove  all  your  ideas  to  the  soul  which  once 
belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  Satan.  In  our  conversion  God's  reign  begins.  The 
atonement  slays  our  enmity,  and  gives  us  our  true  and  perfect  law  of  liberty.  We 
are  "  v.illine;  in  the  day  of  His  power."  2.  The  kingdom  of  God  supposes  the  con- 
stant operation  of  authority,  and  of  the  sense  of  law.  To  the  most  sinless  creatures 
this  is  the  ever-present  idea.  There  can  be  no  excellence  without  such  guide  and 
commandment.  In  keeping  such  commandment  is  heaven's  great  reward.  Heaven 
is  a  kingdom,  and  only  they  who  do  His  commandments  have  right  to  its  tree  of 
life.  3.  It  is  well  known  with  what  a  graceful  fervonr  human  fealty  has  often 
borne  itself.  A  generous  devotion  has  sustained  it.  The  darker  the  eclipse  which 
greatness  suffered,  the  steadit^r  was  its  faith.  And  does  not  such  loyalty  shame  our 
coldness,  little  short  of  treason,  to  Jesus  our  King  ?  Where  are  our  efforts  and 
sacrifices  for  His  throne?  Would  we  die  in  His  cause?  II.  This  kinudoii  rests 
IN  A  MIGHTY  INFLUENCE.  1.  Tile  Ultimate  sanction  of  every  government  is  force. 
But  that  force  is  indicated  by  pageantry  and  weapon,  l^et  is  it,  at  a  very  early 
stase,  a  barren  spectacle.  Carried  to  its  furthest,  it  can  kill  the  body.  Within  the 
still  smaller  limit  its  command  is  feeble.  It  cannot  decide  opinion  or  fetter  con- 
science. If  benevolent,  few  are  the  blessings  which  it  can  supply  ;  if  tyrannic,  as 
few  are  the  ills  which  it  can  inflict.  It  is  a  narrow  thing.  The  soul  defies  it.  But 
the  kingdom  of  God  in  an  embodiment  of  august  ascendency.  It  is  not  indebted 
to  the  adventitious  and  the  external  appendage.  It  wants  not  palacis,  courts, 
armies.  It  is  great  in  th«^  greatness,  it  is  strong  in  the  strength,  of  its  King.  2. 
Christianity  made  its  early  boast  of  this  attiibute.  A  s"gnal  power  attended  its 
outset.  The  Saviour  taught  as  having  authority.  His  favourite  disciples  did  not 
taste  of  death  till  they  had  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power.  Glorious 
victories  were  won.  It  was  the  visitation  of  a  new  life.  Nothing  withstood  it.  It 
grew  up  into  a  vast  intellectual  and  moral  dominion,  divers^  from  ev^-ry  other 
government,  having  no  local  confines,  brookinfr  no  selfish  jealousies,  converting  the 
rebel  soul  and  restoring  it  to  God.  It  was  in  power.  3.  We  would  not  for  a 
moment  suppress  the  fact  that  if  the  gospel  comes  not  in  word  only,  but  in  power, 
it  is  because  it  comes  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  "  Spirit  of  power  !  "  But  the  "  power" 
which  is  ascribed  to  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  text,  though  always  depending  upon 
the  Divine  influence,  is  not  the  same  witii  it.  It  belongs  to  the  theme  iiself.  It 
grows  out  of  it,  and  is  its  legitimate  due.  It  is  a  moral  power.  And  there  is  power 
of  the  highest  created  order  wherever  there  is  mind.  Knowledge  is  power  (Prov. 
xxiv.  5).     How  mind  acts  upon  mind !     It  is  impossible  to  measure  that  impet"!? 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv 

and  confirmation  wliich  Cbristianity  lias  given  already  to  human  intellect.  It 
alone  awakens  man.  Through  its  precepts  he  gets  understanding.  The  entire 
soul  is  linittcd  into  strength.  The  religion  of  Christ  alone  brings  out  the  stamina 
of  our  mental  and  moral  constitution.  We  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  Jesus 
strengthening  us.  4.  But  in  contending  for  the  moral  power  inherent  in  the  gospel 
of  the  kingdom,  we  may  be  asked,  What  can  be  the  influence  of  the  mere  word? 
Let  us  illustrate.  The  great  masters  of  antiquity  have  long  since  passed  away. 
But  their  lore  and  eloquence  have  found  some  record.  It  is  dead  letter,  it  is  mere 
word.  But  do  they  not  exercise  a  mighty  dominion  over  nations  of  which  they  had 
not  heard  ?  Paul  penned  his  arguments  and  censures.  "  His  letters,  said  they,  are 
powerful."  So  all  that  belongs  to  onr  religion,  even  that  which  is  most  external,  is 
in  power.  Its  words,  they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life.  III.  The  qualities  of  this 
POWER.  1.  It  is  a  power  of  truth.  "  Tlie  truth  "  is  its  sublime  designation.  The 
gospel  founds  itself  upon  facts.  "With  great  power,"  therefore,  "gave  the 
apostles  "  their  "  witness."  "  The  word  of  tlie  truth  of  the  gospel  "  impresses  its 
own  seal  upon  our  soul.  So  adapted  is  it,  that  the  Spirit  of  truth  exclusively 
employs  it  in  the  new  birth.  And  it  is  equally  operative  in  the  growth  of  Christian 
character  and  experience  ;  when  we  receive  it  "  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but,  as  it  is 
in  truth,  the  Word  of  God,"  then  "it  worketh  effectually  in  us  who  believe."  2. 
It  is  a  25ower  of  authority.  It  is  Divine  obligation.  (1)  The  authority  of  the  gospel 
alone  can  iujpart  confidence.  It  is  God's  provision ;  here  is  our  security  :  it  is  God's 
will;  here  is  our  warrant :  it  is  God's  command  ;  here  is  our  duty.  (2)  It  will  mani- 
fest itself  in  our  exertions  to  promote  it.  Content  yourselves  with  the  idea  that 
Christianity  wmld  be  a  general  blessing,  that  its  extension  is  therefore  desirable, 
fl.nd  what  would  be  the  vigour  of  our  missionary  institutions?  But  when  we  feel 
t'uat  "  the  mystery  is  to  be  made  known  to  all  nations  according  to  the  command- 
ment of  the  everlasting  God,"  we  cry,  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  us,"  &c.  3.  It  is  a 
power  of  realisation.  It  afi'eets  strongly  and  vividly.  It  arouses  every  earnest  feel- 
ing. It  substantiates  its  own  truths  and  places  them  in  a  distinct  perceptibleness. 
It  realises  God,  and  we  "  endure  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible."  It  realises 
futurity,  and  "  faitli  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not 
seen."  4.  It  is  a  power  of  intuition.  Though  man  is  grossly  self-ignorant,  yet  he 
feels  the  truth  when  brought  home  to  him.  We  see  ourselves  as  in  a  gla=s.  The 
secrets  of  man's  heart  are  made  man  fest.  He  wonders  at  the  detection  and 
exposure:  "Wlience  knowest  thou  me?"  "Come,  see  a  man  which  told  me  all 
things  ihat  ever  I  did."  5.  It  is  a  power  of  relief.  With  royal  liberality  Christi- 
anity make^  full  provision  for  all  the  wants  of  all.  There  is  no  escape  nor  exemption 
■which  the  sinner  needs,  but  it  secures.  There  is  no  remorse  nor  shame  which  he 
suffers,  but  it  soothes.  It  is  a  feast  for  the  hungry,  a  fountain  to  the  thirsty,  a 
wardrobe  for  the  naked.  6.  It  is  a  power  of  exemplification.  Sign  and  wonder 
atte-t  it.  But  there  is  a  still  more  decisive  corroboration.  A  change  has  ever  been 
going  on  in  coantless  minds  which  science,  legislation,  moral  suasion,  nfver  could 
achieve.  7.  It  is  a  power  of  absorption.  It  takes  hold  of  man's  soul,  occupies  and 
engrosses  it.  Like  the  leaven,  it  as-imilates  the  mass  into  which  it  is  thrown.  8. 
It  is  a  power  of  courage.  Christianity  is  the  jiarent  and  nurse  of  the  true  heroic. 
It  is  great  and  it  excites  greatness.  Its  language  is  to  reiteration,  Be  strong.  It 
trains  us  to  hardness  ;  to  the  sacrifice  of  life  when  higher  interests  are  at  stake. 
Pus  llanimity  may  be  too  natural  to  us,  but  it  belongs  not  to  onr  cause.  True  to  it, 
we  faint  not.  9.  It  is  the  power  of  support.  Afflictions  are  not  held  back  from  the 
Christian  :  but  "  strong  consolation  "  only  feebly  expresses  his  support.  He  glories 
in  tribulation.  He  is  more  than  a  conqueror.  We  are  partakers  of  the  afflictions 
of  the  gospel  according  to  the  power  of  God.  10.  It  is  the  power  o?  influence.  The 
gospel  clothes  its  believers  with  an  incalculable  ascendency.  It  i.*^  impossible  to 
limit  their  power  of  doing  good.  Who  can  measure  the  usefulness  of  a  thought, 
the  efficacy  of  a  prayer?  11.  It  is  the  power  of  diffusion.  In  Christianity  there  is 
nothhig  sluguisli  and  inert,  nothing  cold  and  narrow,  but  all  is  glowing,  intense, 
stirring,  and  expansive.  (/?.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Poliftli  without  poii-er  : — The 
other  Saturday  evening,  feeling  tired  and  overworked,  I  went  to  the  Turkish  Baths 
to  get  freshened  up  for  the  Sunday  services.  I  sat  in  the  beautifully-furnished  heating- 
room,  quietly  waiting  my  turn  to  go  tbrongh  the  mysterious  jjrocess  of  cleansing, 
when  my  attention  was  called  to  two  gentlemen,  whose  conversation  I  was  obliged 
to  hear.  "  Well,"  said  the  shorter  of  tlie  two,  "  I  don't  get  much  out  of  his  preach- 
ing now."  "  How  is  th-t  ?"  asked  the  other  ;  "does  lie  neglect  the  sermon  pre- 
paration ?  "     "  No.     I  think  he  prepares  too  much  ;  he  says  he  wants  mure  time 


CHAP,  v.]  I.   COIUNTHIANS.  379 

for  study,  and  he  can't  visit  the  old  folks  Hke  he  did  when  he  came  fresh  from 
college."     "  Perhaps  he  feels  runniii';;  dry,"  significantly  remarked  the  little  man, 

as  he  wiped  the  perspiration  from  his  face.     "I  tell  you  what  it  is,  Mr.  S ," 

said  the  first  speaker,  with  emphasis,  "our  minister  thinks  a  lot  too  much  about 
polish  ;  he  makes  splendid  sentences,  but  there's  no  power  in  them.  He  used  to 
quote  the  Scriptures  at  first,  now  he  puts  in  bits  of  poetry  :  all  are  very  nice  and 
pretty,  but  no  power.  What  is  the  good  of  preaching  when  there's  no  power  about 
it?  I  like  polish,  but  I  like  it  on  something."  I  went  to  take  my  turn  in  the  bath, 
but  not  to  forget  the  old  man's  words  about  polish  and  power.  {Sirord  and  Troirel.) 
The  power  nf  the  poxpel : — In  the  city  of  Shanghai,  a  convert  to  the  gospel  kept  a 
store  for  selling  rice  for  the  daily  food  of  the  purchasers.  When  he  was  received 
into  the  Church  he  was  told  he  could  not  sell  rice  on  the  Sabbath,  he  must  close 
his  store  on  that  day.  This  would  endanger  his  business,  as  his  patrons,  if  they 
could  not  l)uy  fit  his  ntore  on  the  Sabbath,  would  go  to  some  other  one,  and  would 
not  come  back  to  him.  He,  however,  kept  the  Sabbath,  and,  to  the  surprise  of 
others  as  well  as  himself,  his  business  increased  on  the  other  days  of  the  week,  and 
he  prospered.  As  he  gained  some  money,  he  determined  to  build  a  church  in  which 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  those  who  did  not  believe.  He  built  the  church  at  his  own 
expense  ;  and,  as  he  has  grown  in  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  as  well  as  prospered  in 
his  business,  he  him^^elf  preaches  in  this  church  every  Sunday,  and  thus  gives,  not 
only  his  money,  but  iiis  own  personal  labour,  to  the  extension  of  the  gospel  of  our 
Lord.  This  shows  that  this  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  wherever  it  is  preached,  to 
the  Gentile  as  well  as  the  Jew,  and  that  it  everywhere  brings  forth  fruit  to  the 
praise  of  Divine  grace.  {S.  S.  CJtronicle.)  What  will  ye  ?  Shall  I  coire  unto 
you  with  a  rod  or  in  love  ? — Observe — I.  The  occasion  of  this  appeal  ;  pride,  con- 
tention, &c.  (see  foregoing  chapters).  II.  The  spirit  of  it.  The  apostle  speaks  as 
a  fattier.  1.  With  love.  2.  With  authority.  III.  The  design.  Tc  produce — 1. 
Submission.  2.  Amendment.  (./.  I.i/th,  D.D.)  Discipliite  in  Ihe  Church: — 1. 
The  apostle  had  the  p  >wer  of  using  the  rod.  2.  This  is  sometimes  needful.  3. 
It  is  a  ministerial  duty.  4.  It  was  reluctantly  employed  by  Paul,  and  should  be 
spared  where  possible.     5.  Must  be  administered  in  the  spirit  of  love.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Veps.  1-13.  It  is  reported  that  there  is  fornication  among  you. — Gross  scandals 
— 1.  May  arise  within  the  Church.  2.  Occasion  grievous  reproach.  3.  Should  be 
instantly  iuve.-tigated  and  removed.  (■/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  the  Church  in 
cases  of  open  immorality : — I.  To  itself.  1.  Humiliation.  2.  Sorrow.  3.  Pur- 
gation." II.  To  THE  offender.  1.  Separation  from  the  Christian  fellowship.  2. 
Yet  in  earnest  hope  of  rejjentance  and  amendment.  [Ibid.)  "  That  xciclied 
person  "  (text,  and  2  Cor.  ii.  5-11 ;  vii.  8-13)  :— I.  His  sin.  1.  He  had  married  his 
stepmother.  Such  a  marriage,  though  forbidden  by  Moses,  was,  under  certain  con- 
ditions, permitted  by  the  Scribes.  Hence  it  has  been  thought  that  this  man  was  a 
Jew.  But  fnan  the  gravity  of  Paul's  censure  it  is  more  probable  that  he  was  a 
Gentile  who  had  availed  himself  of  the  easy  law  of  divorce  and  the  licence  of  Corin- 
thian manners.  In  itself  the  sin  was  not  so  heinous  as  many  which  were  com- 
mitted in  that  wicked  city  every  day.  2.  r>ut  there  were  circumstances  which 
aggravated  its  guilt.  (1)  The  father  of" this  young  man  was  alive  and  keenly  resented 
the  wrong  (2  Cor.  vii.  12).  (2)  Though  Eoman  law  and  manners  were  loose,  yet 
throughout  the  Empire  the  act  was  branded  as  a  public  scandal.  (3)  This  man  was 
a  churcli  member  and  therefore  bound  to  walk  by  a  higher  law  than  that  of  Eome  ; 
and  to  create  such  a  scandal  in  such  a  city  might,  be  fatal  to  the  Christian  society. 
3.  Let  us,  however,  do  him  bare  justice,  and  we  shall  find  him  a  manlike  ourselves. 
open  to  similar  temptations,  and  falling  before  them  as  we  fall.  From  St.  Paul's 
references  to  him  be  appears  to  have  been  of  a  sensitive  passionate  temperament. 
A  few  weeks  alter  his  expulsion  he  was  in  danger  of  being  "  swallowed  up  by  a 
swelling  and  excessive  sorrow  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  7),  and  the  apostle  trembled  lest  he 
should  sink  into  despair,  and  vehemently  urged  his  restoration  (2  Cor.  ii.  5-10). 
Now  a  man  of  such  temperament  might  be  led  almost  unwittingly  into  the  gravest 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

sin.  His  mother  is  dead  and  he  is  deprived  of  her  counsel  and  sympathy.  His 
father  brings  home  a  new  wife — a  heathen  apparently,  probably  young  and  fair, 
given  to  him  by  her  parents  because  he  is  a  man  of  wealth  and  position.  By  and 
by  we  discover  that  she  is  divorced  from  him  and  married  to  his  son.  Does  it 
require  a  novelist  to  suspect  that  behind  these  facts  lay  a  romance  or  a  tragedy? 
The  young  man  may  have  loved  this  girl  before  his  father,  and  while  she  favoured 
him  her  parents  may  have  favoured  the  elder  suitor.  Once  married,  she  may  have 
taken  out  a  divorce,  as  for  almost  any  reason  she  was  able  to  do,  and  have  given 
herself  to  the  man  she  loved.  Or,  having  willingly  married  the  elder  man,  her 
heart  may  have  gone  over  to  the  younger  before  she  knew  she  had  lost  it.  Or, 
more  probably  still,  she  may  have  been  one  of  those  fascinating,  fatal  women  with 
a  strange  power  for  taking  men  captive,  and  a  wicked  delight  in  using  it.  On  any 
one  of  these  hypotheses  the  man  at  once  becomes  human  to  us  and  alive,  and 
while  we  cannot  palliate  his  sin,  it  must  have  had  a  strong  motive,  and  being  a 
man  of  like  i^assions  with  us  he  does  not  stand  outside  the  pale  of  our  sympathy. 

II.  His  sextkxce.  1.  He  had  a  terrible  awaking  from  his  brief  passionate  dream. 
One  evening  he  leaves  the  fair  heathen  who  has  bewitched  him  and  goes  down  to 
church.  The  brethren  are  at  their  common  evening  meal.  An  unusual  animation 
prevails  among  them.  Titus  is  there  with  a  letter  from  Paul,  and  sits  at  the  board 
with  a  clouded,  anxious  face.  The  meal  over  he  unrolls  the  epistle  and  begins  to 
read.  We  know  how  the  letter  opens.  And  then,  after  all  this  kindly  weather,  the 
storm  breaks  (chap.  iv.  21).  Up  to  this  point  all  may  have  listened  with  tolerable 
composure.  No  one  had  been  singled  out  for  blame.  But  here,  surely  more  than 
one  back  must  have  shivered  with  prophetic  twinge.  Probably,  however,  the 
young  man  had  no  presentiment  of  what  was  coming.  If  so,  so  much  the  worse 
for  him  ;  for  now  the  rod  falls  in  earnest.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  agony  of 
shame  with  which  a  i-ensitive,  impulsive  man  would  listen  to  the  sentences  which 
follow.  2.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  St.  Paul  intended  to  supply  the  church  with 
a  formula  of  excommunication,  and  that  they  used  it.  After  due  consultation,  and 
when  the  vote  of  the  church  had  been  taken — not  an  unanimous  vote,  as  it  proved 
(2  Cor.  ii.  6) — we  must  suppose  that  the  young  man  was  summoned  before  the 
elders  of  the  church,  and  that  they  pronounced  over  him  the  solemn  words,  "  In 
the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  deliver  thee,  So-and-so,  to  Satan,  for  the 
destruction  of  thy  flesh,  that  thy  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
And  we  may  well  believe  that  the  sentence  fell  on  the  offender  like  the  doom  of 
death.  Not  that  the  apostle  meant  to  shut  him  out  from  the  common  requisites 
and  courtesies  of  life,  or  to  make  him  a  son  of  perdition  ;  he  meant — (1)  To  have 
this  open  offender  against  the  law  of  Christ  cast  out  from  the  communion  of  the 
church,  at  least  for  a  time,  and  so  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  his  sin  and  sincere 
repentance.  St.  Paul  habitually  conceived  of  the  heathen  world  as  the  domain 
of  Satan,  the  prince  of  this  world,  and  th"refore  to  cut  a  man  off'  from  the  church 
and  cast  him  bank  on  the  world  was  to  "  deliver  such  an  one  to  the  power  of 
Satan."  (2)  He  habitually  conceived  of  pain,  disease,  loss,  obstruction,  &c.,  as  the 
work  of  the  evil  spirit,  as  indeed  does  all  Scripture.  Is  any  good  purpose  crossed? 
Satan  hindered  (1  Thess.  ii.  18).  Is  he  tormented  with  a  disabling  malady?  An 
angel  of  Satan  buffets  him  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).  He  had  the  highest  authority  for  his 
conclusion  (Luke  xiii.  16).  Probably,  therefore,  just  as  Job  was  given  over  into 
the  hand  of  Satan  for  a  time  to  be  tried,  or  just  as  a  darkness  fell  upon  Elymas, 
so  also  when  the  Corinthian  was  excommunicated  there  came  on  him  a  succession 
of  cruel  losses.  Perhaps  even  the  loss  of  the  fair  heathen  woman,  or  some  disease 
which  purged  out  the  fever  from  his  blood  and  brought  him  to  himself.  How  all 
this  diffei's  from  the  ban  to  which  the  Church  has  again  and  again  exposed  the 
heretic,  and  from  the  mystic  spiritual  doom  which  some  have  discovered  in  this 
formula !  For — (.8)  The  apostle  expressly  says  that  the  "  destruction "  waa 
intended  not  for  damnation,  but  for  salvation  (see  also  chap.  xi.  32;  1  Tim.  i.  20). 

III.  His  ABSOLUTION'.  If  "  the  end  crowns  the  work,"  who  that  has  "seen  the  end 
of  the  Lord"  with  this  young  man  can  deny  that  even  his  excommunication  was  a 
work  of  mercy?  His  conscience  was  roused.  He  confessed  and  renounced  his  sin; 
his  sorrow  for  it  swelled  till  it  threatened  to  prove  fatal.  And  when  Titus  brings 
Paul  the  tidings,  the  heart  of  the  apostle  is  profoundly  moved  (2  Cor.  ii.  5-7). 
And  in  this  passion  of  furgiving  love  to  the  penitent,  Paul  was  a  faithful  expounder 
of  the  very  spirit  of  the  gospel.  If  there  was  mercy  even  for  the  wicked  person  no 
man  need  despair.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  socially  immoral  in  clnirches : — Note — - 
I.    That    the   socially    immoral   sometimes    find   theie     way    into     Cheistiax 


CHAP,  v.]  /.   CORINTHIANS.  381 

CHURCHES.     A  case  of  fornication  had  been  reported  to  Paul.     One  of  tlie  members 
bad    actually    married    his    stepmother.      Such  a  piece  of  immorality  \v(juld  be 
regarded  witli  the  utmost  abhorrence,  even  in  heathendom.     How  such  a  character 
became  a  church  member  must  have  been  through  imposition  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  lack  of  scrutiny  on  the  other.     It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  admission  of  the 
socially  immoral  into  churches  has  in  every  age  been  too  common.     How  many 
churches  are  there  in  England  entirely  free  from  those  who  evei'y  day  outrage  the 
golden  rule?     There  are  merchants  that  cheat  their  customers,  lawyers  their  clients, 
doctors  their  patients,  politicians  their  constituents;  masters  and  mistresses  that 
oppress  their  servants,  and  servants  unfaithful  to  their  employers.     Tlie  Church  is 
a  held  in  which  grows  tbe  tare  as  well  as  the  wheat,  a  net  in  which  there  is  the 
"unclean"   as  well   as  the   "clean."     II.    That    churches   in   their   internal 
RELIGIOUS  disputations  ARE  IN  DANGER  OF  OVERLOOKING  THESE  (ver.  21).     Probably 
there  were  those  who  were  proud  of  this  man  :  perhaps  he  was  eloquent,  rich,  or  influ- 
ential.    We  have  known  joint-stock  swindlers  who  have  been  marie  chairmen  of 
religious  meetings,  and  who  have  been  cheered  to  the  echo.     Party  feeling  was  so 
strong,  and  religious  disputation  so  rife,  that  such  immoralities  escaped  notice. 
Creeds  are  more  thought  of  than  character,  heretics  dreaded  more  than  rogues. 
Hence  the  saying,  sooner  trust  a  man  of  the  world  than  a  professor  of  religion. 
III.  That  the  exclusion  by  the  churches  of  such  is  an  urgent  duty.     A  true 
church  is  a  community  of  Christly  men,  and  the  presence  of  such  in  it  is  an  out- 
rage.     1.  Their  expulsion  should  be  practised  wiih  the  utmost  zeal.     It  would  seem 
that  no  sooner  did  Paul  hear  of  this  abomination  than  he  determined  to  put  an  end 
to  it  (ver.  3).     2.  The  expulsion  should  be  practised  not  to  destroy,  but  to  save  the  of- 
fender (ver.  5).   All  punishment  should  be  reformative  (Gal.  vi.  1).    {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Ecclesiastical  excommunication  : — Note  the  several  grounds  on  which  it  is  based.    I. 
KErRESENTATioN  (vcr.  4).     There  is  but  One  whose  condemnation  is  commensurate 
with  God's.     Kevertheless,  as  the  representative  of  that  ideal  man  which  Christ 
realised,  the  Church  condemns.    As  representative,  human  punishment  is  expressive 
of  Divine  indignation.    "  To  deliver  unto  Satan."   I  cannot  explain  such  words  away. 
I  cannot  say  the  wrath  of  God  and  the  vengeance  of  the  law  are  figurative,  for  it  is 
a  mistake  to  suppose  that  punishment  is  only  to  reform  and  warn.     In  our  own 
daj'  we  are  accustomed  to  use  weak  words  concerning  sin.     The  Corinthians  looked 
on   at  this  deed  of  iniquity,   and  felt  no   indignation.      They  called    it   perhaps 
"mental  disease,"  "error,"  "mistake  of  judgment,"  "irresistible  passion."     St. 
Paul  did  feel  indignation  ;  and  if  St.  Paul  had  not  been  indignant  could  he  have 
been  the  man  he  was?     And  this,  if  we  would  feel  it,  would  correct  our  lax  ways 
of  viewing  sin.     Observe,  the  indignation  of  society  is  properly  representative  of 
the  indignation  of  God.     So  long  as  the  Corinthians  petted  this  sinner,  conscience 
slumbered  ;  but  when  the  voice  of  men  was  raised  in  condemnation  conscience 
began  its  work,  and  then  their  anger  became  a  tyf)e  of  coming  doom.     But  only  so 
far  as  man  is  Christlike  can  he  exercise  this  power  in  a  true  and  perfect  manner. 
The  world's  excommunication  is  almost  always  unjust,  and  that  of  the  nominal 
Church  more  or  less  so.   II.  The  reformation  of  the  offender  (ver.  5).    Of  all  tbe 
grounds  alleged  for  punishment,  that  of  "an  example  to  others"  is  the  most 
unchristian.     Here  the  peculiarly  mei'eiful  character  of  Christianity  comes  forth ; 
the  Church  was  never  to  give  over  the  hope  of  recovering  the  fallen.     To  shut  the 
door  of  repentance  upon  any  sin,  and  thus  to  j^roduce  despair,  is  altogether  alien 
from  Christ's  Spirit.     And  so  far  as  society  does  that  now  it  is  not  Christianised, 
for  Christianity  never  sacrifices  the  individual  to   the  society.     Christianity  has 
brought  out  strongly  the  worth  of  the  single  soul.    Yet  it  would  be  too  much  to  say 
that  example  is  never  a  part  of  the  object  of  punishment.    The  severe  judgments  of 
society  have  their  use.   Individuals  are  sacrificed,  but  society  is  kppt  comparatively 
pure,  for  many  are  deterred  from  wrong-doing  by  fear  who  would  be  deterred  by  no 
other  motive.   III.  The  contagious  character  of  evil  (ver.  6).   Who  does  not  know 
how  the  tone  of  evil  has  communicated  itself  ?   Woiblly,  irreverent,  licentious  minds, 
leaven  society.     You  canmit  be  long  with  persons  who  by  innuendo  or  lax  language 
show  an  acquaintance  with  evil,  without  feeling  in  some  degree  assimilated  to  them, 
nor  can  you  easily  retain  enthusiasm  for  right  amongst  those  who  scoff  at  goodness. 
IV.  Because  to  permit  gross  sin  would  be  to  contradict  the  true  idea  of  the 
Church.     Let  us  distinguish.     The  Church  invisible  is  "the  general  assembly  and 
Church  of  the  First-born  "  (Heb.  xii.  23).    It  is  that  idea  of  humanity  which  exists 
in  the  mind  of  God.     But  the  Church  visible  is  the  actual  men  professing  Christ, 
and  exists  to  represent,  and  at  last  to  realise,  the  Church  invisible.     In  the  first  of 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

these  senses  tlie  apostle  says  "  ye  are  unleavened  "  ;  i.e.,  that  is  the  id^a  of  your 
existence.  In  the  second  sense,  he  describes  them  as  they  are,  "  puffed  up,  con- 
tentious, carnal,  walking  as  men."  Now,  for  want  of  keeping  these  two  things  dis- 
tinct, two  grave  errors  may  be  committed.  1.  Undue  severity  in  the  treatment  of 
the  lapsed.  Into  this  the  Corintliians  fell,  and  so  did  the  Church  in  ihe  third 
century,  when  Novatian,  laying  down  the  axiom  that  the  actual  state  of  the  Church 
ought  to  correspond  with  its  ideal  co^  sistently,  demanded  the  non -restoration  of 
the  lap-ed.  But  the  attempt  to  make  the  Church  entirely  pure  must  fail:  it  is  to 
be  left  to  a  higher  tribunal.  Cf.  the  parable  of  the  wheat  and  the  tares.  Only  as  a 
Chuich  visible  she  must  separate  from  her  all  such  foreign  elements  as  bear  unmis- 
takable marks  of  their  alien  birth.  2.  An  over-rigorous  puritanism  (vers.  9,  10). 
Note  the  dangerous  results  of  that  exclusiveness  which  affects  the  societv  of  the 
jehgious  only.  (1)  The  habit  of  judging.  For,  if  we  only  associate  with  those 
whom  we  think  religious,  we  must  decide  who  are  religious,  for  which  judgment 
we  have  absolutely  no  materials.  (2)  Consciousness:  for  we  must  judge  those  who 
are  not  religious,  and  then  the  door  is  opened  for  all  the  slander,  &c. ,  which  make 
rehgious  cliques  worse  than  worldly  ones.  (3)  Spiritual  pride;  for  we  must  judge 
ourselves,  and  so  say  to  others,  "  I  am  holier  than  Ihou."  {F.  IV.  Rohei  tsoii,  M.A.) 
DiKcijjIine  in  the  Corinthian  Church: — I.  The  occasion.  1.  Common  report  not 
always  reliable.  2.  In  this  case  was  lamentably  true.  3.  Was  aggravated  by  the 
conduct  of  the  Church.  II.  The  judgment  was— 1.  Easy.  2.  Authoritative.  3. 
Decisive.  III.  The  excommunication  was  carried  into  effect — 1.  By  the  assembled 
church.  2.  In  the  name  and  with  the  power  of  Christ.  3.  By  apos'olic  dirtction. 
4.  Included  a  special  penalty.  5.  Left  hope  of  recovery.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Church 
discijiline : — I.  Who  should  exercise  it — the  minister  in  connection  with  the 
church.  II.  How  far  it  extends — to  exclusion  from  the  Christian  fellowship  with 
its  consequencts.  III.  What  is  its  object?  1.  The  purity  of  the  church.  2. 
The  amendment  of  the  individual.  ( Ibid.)  Christianfi  ought  to  he  soUritojis  about 
the  Sfiiritiial  condition  of  others  .•^"  Tom,  you're  the  sort  of  (  hristian  I  like."  The 
speaker  was  a  young  man  of  no  religious  profession.  His  companion  was  a  church 
member  in  good  and  regular  standing.  "  You're  the  sort  of  Christian  I  like.  You 
never  seem  to  bother  yourself  about  a  fellow's  soul.''  The  words  were  lightly 
spoken,  but  they  pierced  like  an  arrow.  One  ^\ho  was  parsing  Tom's  chamber  door 
that  ni^'ht  heard  something  like  this  :  "  0  God,  forgive  me  that  I  have  seemed 
indifferent  to  the  welfare  ol  my  friends  !  Help  me  to  trouble  myself  more  and  more 
and  more  about  them  !  Make  me  hungry  and  thirsty  for  the  salvation  of  those 
about  me  !  Gi\e  me  a  passion  for  souls  !  "  Ch^trch  not  to  be  judged  by  her  hypo- 
crites : — Was  there  ever  a  club  in  all  the  world  without  disreputable  persons  in  it? 
Was  there  ever  any  association  of  men  tbat  might  not  be  condemned  if  the  fool's 
rule  was  followed  of  condemning  the  wheat  because  of  the  chaff?  When  with  all 
our  might  and  power  we  purge  ourselves  of  deceivers  as  soon  as  we  dett'ct  them, 
wliat  more  can  we  do  ?  If  our  rule  and  practice  is  to  sej  arate  them  wIk  Uy  as  soon 
as  we  unmask  them,  what  more  can  virtue  itself  desire?  I  ask  any  man,  however 
much  he  may  hate  Christianity,  what  more  can  the  Church  do  tliau  wat(  h  her 
members  with  all  diligence,  and  excommunicate  the  wicked  when  discovered?  It 
is  a  foul  piece  of  meanness  on  the  part  of  the  world  that  they  should  allege  the 
faults  of  a  few  false  professors  against  the  whole  Church  :  a  piece  of  meanness  of 
which  the  world  ought  to  be  ashamed.  Nevertht-less,  so  it  is.  "  Ha  !  ha  !  "  they 
say.  "  So  would  we  have  it!  "  The  daughter  of  Philistia  rejo'ces,  and  the  uncir- 
cumcised  triumphs  when  Jesus  is  betra\ed  by  His  friend,  and  sold  by  His  disciple. 
0  deceitful  professor,  will  not  the  Lord  be  avenged  upon  you  for  this?  Is  it 
nothing  to  make  the  enemy  blas|ihnne?  Oh,  hardened  man,  tremble,  for  this  shall 
not  go  unpunished.  (C.  H.  Sjntrgeon.)  And  ye  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not 
rather  mourned. — Tlie  deplorable  and  the  comnwiidable  in  a  Cinirch  : — I.  The 
deplorable.  Self-inflation,  viz.,  when  the  Church  prides  itself  on  tl  e  gifts, 
wealtb,  &c. ,  of  its  members,  and  when  the  members  boast  of  the  prestige  and 
power  of  their  Chun  h.  This  is  deplor»ble — 1.  In  itself.  (1)  It  is  opi-osed  to 
common  sense.  What  has  a  Church  which  it  has  not  received?  Tbe  richer  its 
gifts  the  greater  its  indebtedness.  (2)  It  is  a  flagrant  transgression  of  the  law  of 
Christ.  "  He  that  would  be  chief  among  you  let  him  be  your  servant."  (3)  It  is 
opposed  to  the  example  of  Christ  who  "  humbled  Himself."  2.  In  its  consequences. 
(1)  A  man  who  carries  his  head  too  high  is  apt  to  overlook  matters  that  mav  bring 
both  his  head  and  himself  to  the  ground.  So  with  an  intlated  Cliurch.  The 
Corinthians,  through  obliviousness  of  the  immorality  practised  by  some,  it  may  be, 


CUAP.  v.]  I.  COEINTHIANS,  383 

of  its  pifted  members,  have  been  a  bye-word  for  nineteen  centuries.  (2)  A  man 
inflated  by  his  self-conceit  of  health,  strength,  Ac,  may  easily  overlook  humble 
facts  and  conditions  which  may  easily  prove  fatal  to  the  strongest  and  healthiest. 
So  a  Church  conscious  of  its  antiquity  and  connection  may  ignore  certnin  little 
sources  of  weakuess  which  in  their  after  flow  cover  it  with  infamy.  A  little  leaven 
leavened  the  whole  lump.  What  is  the  reputation  of  the  Church  ui  Corinth  to-day? 
II.  The  coMJiENDABLE  is  set  before  us  rather  by  implication.  1.  Humility.  "He 
that  hunibleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  The  Church  must  stoop  to  conquer. 
Absolute  subordination  to  and  reliance  on  its  Divine  Head  is  the  secret  of  its 
triumph.  2.  Repentance  for  shortcomings.  The  manifest  duty  and  interest  of  the 
Church  is  to  face  the  facts.  A  fool's  paradise  is  a  desirable  abode  neither  for  the 
individual  nor  the  Church.  Having  faced  the  unwelcome  facts  it  is  the  duty  and 
interest  of  the  Church  to  lament  and  confess  them.  3.  Eeformation.  "  That  he 
that  hath  done  this  deed,"  &c.  Without  this  repentance  and  humility  will  be  vain. 
When  abuses  exist  the  Church  must  not  think  its  duty  is  done  when  the  members 
recognise  and  deplore  existing  evils.  Those  evils,  whether  they  consi>t  of  customs 
or  persons,  must  be  rigomusly  exp  lied.  (J.  ]}'.  Biiru.)  ]]'(nit  of  discijAine  in 
a  Church — I.  Is  a  sehious  evil.  1.  It  degrades  all.  2.  Ii  dicates  declension  of 
zeal,  watchfulness,  love,  purity.  II.  Is  commonlt  associated  with  pride.  1.  The 
offender  may  be  respectable ;  or — 2.  The  offence  ignored.  III.  Is  a  just  cause  of 
soKKow.  1.  For  the  dishonour  done  to  Christ.  2.  Q  he  injury  done  to  souls.  3.  The 
discredit  wrought  upon  God's  cause.  (J.  Lytli,  D  D.)  As  absent  in  body,  but 
present  in  spirit. — Absent  in  bodtj ,  hut  present  in  sj)ir it : — Much  as  I'aul  loved  his 
converts  he  could  not,  at  this  period,  think  of  visiting  them.  Their  conduct  so 
distressed  and  disappointed  him  that  he  felt  constrained  to  be  absent  from  them. 
But  this  did  not  imply  any  lack  of  interest  in  them  or  their  proceedings.  On  the 
contrary,  there  was  a  sense  in  which  he  was  really  with  them.  I.  Tub  special 
instance  of  this  piu>«ciple  fuknished  here.  In  what  sense  could  the  apostle  deem 
himself  present  with  them  "in  sprit"?  1.  By  his  teaching.  He  had  long 
laboured  here,  and  his  teaching  laid  the  foundation  on  which  Apollos  and  the 
others  had  built.  This  teaching  inelu'led  many  precepts  and  motives  to  holiness, 
and  had  sunk  into  the  hearts  of  the  spiritually  susceptible.  By  it  the  apostle  still 
summoned  them  to  purity.  2.  By  his  authority.  He  spoke  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord,  and  what  he  diiected  the  Corinthians  to  do  would  be  sanctioned  by  the  Head 
of  the  Cliurch.  In  vindicatii  g  the  purity  of  the  Christian  communion,  and  in 
cleansing  tlie  stained  robe  of  Christ's  Biide  they  weie  to  feel  that  Paul  was  with 
them  inspiiing  and  corroborating  their  action.  II.  Thi5  general  oPEXiATioN  in  tue 
IjIVIng  Church.  1.  Chiist,  its  Founder  and  Saviour,  is  absent  in  body,  but  present 
in  Spirit.  He  assured  His  disciples  that  it  was  expedient  for  them  that  He  should 
go  away,  &c.  2.  The  action  of  the  Church  when  in  accordance  with  Christ's  instruc- 
tions must  be  recognised  as  prompted  by  His  Spirit  and  sanctioned  by  His  authority. 
His  presence  is  promised,  and  should  be  realised,  to  teach,  comfort,  and  autliorise 
the  actions  of  those  who  do  His  will.  (I'rof.  J.  R.  Tltoiuson.)  In  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  ye  are  gathered  together  ...  to  deliver  such  an  one  unto 
Satan. — Exclusion  frojii  Cliristi  ■  u  fellowsliip  icliere  duly  iuflicted  : — I.  Is  a  terrible 
penai.ty.  Enforced — 1.  By  Christ.  2.  His  miuist^ts.  3.  Ttie  Church.  II.  Entails 
SERIOUS  consequences.  1.  Loss  of  privilege.  2.  Exposure  to  evil.  3.  In  this  cnse 
pof-sitdy  bodily  affliction.  III.  Is  merciful  in  its  design.  1.  To  condemn  the  sin. 
2.  To  save  the  sinner  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  pon-er  of  excoinmunicatio)i  ujust  be 
exercised — I.  In  the  name  of  Christ.  According  to  His  command  and  direction. 
II.  By  the  Church.  With  its  knowledge  and  consent.  HI.  In  the  apostolic 
spirit.  With  zeal  for  God's  honour  and  love  for  the  offender.  IV.  Wiih  the 
POWER  OF  Christ.  With  His  autliority.  V.  For  the  destruction  of  the  fl'  sh. 
Its  sinful  tendencies.  VI.  That  the  spirit  may  be  saved.  By  timely  repentance 
and  reformation.      {Ibid.)  The  extreme  pennlty  of  the  Church — 1.  Is  reserved 

for  notoiious  offenders.  2.  Implies  serious  consequences.  3.  May  be  mercifully 
overruled  for  good.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  6-13.  Your  glorying  is  not  good. — The  true  Church  a  feast : — These  verses 
lead  us  to  look  upon  the  true  Church — I.  In  its  internal  enjoyments.  The 
association  of  Christly  men  is  a  "  feast,"  becnuse  it  contains  the  choicest  elements 
for — 1.  Spiritual  nourishment.  The  quickening  and  elevating  ideas  current  in 
such  fellowshii'S  constitute  a  soul  bamuet,  "a  fe:ist  of  fat  things."  2.  Spiiitual 
gratification.     What  higher  delight  than  the  loving  intercouise  of  kindred  souls. 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  v. 

The  true  Church  is  not  a  melancholy  assemblage,  but  is  the  most  joyous  fellowshiii 
on  earth.  II.  In  its  exteiinal  relation  to  the  ungodly.  There  is  a  connection 
with  ungodly  men — 1.  That  it  must  avoid.  As  the  Jews  put  away  leaven  at  the 
Passover,  so  all  corrupt  men  must  be  excluded  from  the  Church  leists.  Their 
presence,  \We  leaven,  would  be  contagious.  No  Church  that  has  such  leaven  in  it 
has  any  occasion  for  exultation  (ver,  6).  2.  That  it  cannot  avoid  (ver.  10).  You 
cannot  attend  to  your  temporal  affairs  without  contact  with  the  ungodly,  and  as 
Christians  you  are  bound  to  go  among  them  to  do  them  good.  Over  such  you  have 
no  jurisdiction;  they  are  "  without,"  and  God  is  to  judge  them,  not  you.  But  if 
they  creep  into  the  Church  you  are  to  deal  with  them  (ver.  11).  Observe  here — (1) 
That  sin  takes  many  forms.  What  is  temptation  to  one  man  is  not  to  another.  One 
is  tempted  ti)  be  a  "  fornicator,"  another  a  "  miser,"  &c.  (2)  In  whatever  form 
this  leaven  shows  itself  it  must  not  be  tolerated  for  one  moment.  {B.  Thovias,  D.D.) 
The  evil  of  Helf-comflacency  : — I.  The  spirit  condemned.  1.  Self-complacency. 
2.  Vanity.  3.  Pride.  II.  The  evil  of  it.  1.  Foolish,  man  has  nothing  to  glory 
in.  2.  Sinful  in  itself,  often  in  its  occasion.  3.  Pernicious,  it  brings  shame, 
humiliation,  ruin.  (-/.  Lijth,  D.D.)  A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump. — 
T)ie  leaven  of  sin  works — 1.  Conttantly.  2.  Imperceptibly.  3.  Powerfully.  4. 
Perniciously.  (Ibid.)  Sin  a  malignant  leaven  : — I.  In  its  nature.  1.  Corrupt- 
ing. 2.  Spreading.  3.  Assimilating.  II.  In  its  effects — 1.  Upon  cotiimunities. 
2.  Upon  individuals.  (Ibid.)  Purging  out  the  leaven  : — "What  God  hath  joined 
together,  let  no  man  put  asunder."  Evermore  in  Scripture  the  doctrines  of  grace 
are  married  to  the  precepts  of  holiness.  Salvation  in  sin  is  not  possible,  it  always 
must  be  salvation  from  sin.  The  apostle,  while  he  was  showing  the  Corinthians 
how  wrong  they  were  to  tolerate  an  incestuous  person,  compared  the  spirit  of 
uncleanness  to  an  evil  leaven ;  then  the  leaven  suggested  the  passover,  and  turning 
aside  for  a  moment  he  applied  that,  so  as  to  make  his  argument  yet  more  cogent. 
Hard  by  any  Scripture  wherein  you  find  the  safety  of  the  believer  guaranteed,  you 
are  sure  to  see  needful  holiness  set  side  by  side  with  it.  The  purity  of  the  house 
from  leaven  went  side  by  side  with  its  safety  by  the  blood.  1.  The  happy  condition 
OF  all  true  believers  IX  Christ.  "  Christ  our  passover,"  &c.  The  habitual 
state  of  a  Christian  is  that  of  one  keeping  a  feast  in  perfect  security.  Observe  how 
the  apostle  puts  it:  Christ  is  our  passover — that  by  which  God's  wrath  passes  over  from 
us  who  deserve  its  full  vengeance.  Christ  is  sacrificed,  for  He  gave  Himself  for  us. 
No  new  victim  is  expected  or  required.  Let  others  offer  what  they  will,  ours  is  the 
Lamb  once  slain,  and  there  remaineth  no  more  saciifice  for  sin.  This  complete- 
ness of  sacrifice  indeed  is  the  main  part  of  the  festival  which  the  Christian  should 
perpetually  keep.  If  there  were  anything  yet  to  be  done,  how  could  we  celebrate 
the  feast  ?  "  Therefore,"  says  the  apostle — and  it  is  a  natural  inference  from  it — 
"let  us  keep  the  feast."  1.  The  paschal  lamb  was  not  slain  to  be  looked  at,  to  be 
laid  by,  or  merely  made  the  subject  of  conversation  ;  but  it  was  slain  to  be  fed 
upon.  So  it  is  your  daily  business  to  feed  upon  Christ,  whose  flesh  is  meat  indeed, 
and  whose  blo^d  is  drink  indeed.  At  the  paschal  supper  the  whole  of  the  lamb 
was  intended  to  be  eaten  ;  and  thou  art  to  feed  upon  the  whole  of  Christ.  No  i^art 
is  denied  thee,  neither  His  humiliation  nor  His  glory.  His  kingship  nor  His  priest- 
hood, His  Godhead  nor  His  manhood.  2.  A  feast  is  not  only  for  nourisliment,  but 
for  exhilaration.  Let  us  in  this  sense  also  keep  a  lifelong  feast.  The  Christian  is 
not  only  to  take  the  doctrines  which  concern  Christ,  to  build  up  his  soul  with,  but 
he  may  draw  from  them  the  new  wine  of  delight.  At  the  passover  the  Jews  were 
accustomed  to  sing.  Let  us  keep  the  fenst  in  the  same  way.  Let  your  praises 
never  cease.  3.  At  the  passover  the  devout  Jew  was  accustomed  to  teach  his 
family  the  meaning  of  the  feast.  Let  it  be  a  part  of  our  continual  festival  to  tell 
to  others  what  our  Picdeeming  Lord  has  done.  This  precept  does  not  refer  merely 
to  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  it  is  of  continuous  force.  Let  us  keep  the  feast  always,  for 
the  Lamb  is  always  slain.  II.  A  holy  duty  commended  to  us.  "Purge  out, 
therefore,  the  old  leaven."  "  Let  us  keep  the  feast ;  not  with  old  leaven,"  &c. 
1.  Leaven  is  used  in  Scripture  in  every  case  but  one  as  the  emblem  of  sin.  This 
arises  from — (1)  Its  sourness.  Sin,  which  for  awhile  may  seem  pleasant,  will  soon 
be  nauseous  even  to  the  sinner;  but  the  very  least  degree  of  sin  is  obnoxious  to 
God.  We  cannot  tell  how  much  God  hates  sin.  (2)  Its  corruption  and  corrupting 
influence.  Sin  is  a  corruption,  it  dissolves  the  very  fabric  of  society  and  the 
constitution  of  man.  (3)  Its  spreading  character.  No  matter  how  great  the 
measure  of  flour,  the  leaven  will  work  its  way.  Even  thus  it  is  with  sin.  One 
woman  sinned,  and  the  whole  human  race  was  leavened  by  her  fault.    If  the  leaven 


CHAP,  v.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  385 


of  evil  is  permitted  in  a  Church,  it  will  work  its  way  through  the  whole  of  it. 
(«)  A  little  false  doctrine  is  sure  to  pave  the  way  for  greater  departures  from  truth. 
The  doctrines  of  the  gospel  have  such  a  close  relation  to  one  another,  that  if  you 
suap  a  huk  you  have  broken  the  whole  chain.  "  He  tliat  offcndeth  in  one  point  is 
guilty  of  all."  (h)  The  leaven  of  evil  living,  too,  tolerated  in  one  it*  will  soon  be 
excused  in  another,  and  a  lower  tone  of  thought  with  regard  to  sin  will  lule  the 
Churcli.  Sin  is  like  the  bale  of  goods  which  came  fi'om  the  East  to  this  city  in  the 
olden  time,  which  brought  the  pest  in  it.  In  those  days  one  piece  of  rag  carried 
the  infection  into  a  whole  towu.  2.  This  leaven  must  be  purged  out.  In  con- 
sequence of  the  command  the  head  of  the  household  among  the  Jews,  especially 
when  they  grew  more  strict  in  their  ritual,  would  go  through  the  whole  of  the  house 
on  a  certain  day  to  search  for  every  particle  of  leavened  bread.  With  as  scrupulous 
a  cai^e  as  the  Israelite  purged  out  the  leaven  from  his  house  we  are  to  purge  out  all 
sin  from  ourselves  and  in  our  conduct.  (1)  The  Jewish  householder  would  very 
soon  put  away  all  the  large  loaves  of  leavened  bread,  just  as  we  gave  up  at  once 
all  those  gross  outward  sins  in  which  we  indulged  before.  (2)  Then  perhaj'S  the 
stray  crusts  which  the  children  had  left  were  put  away.  So  there  may  be  certain 
minor  sins  in  the  ju  Igment  of  the  world  which  the  Christian  man,  when  converted, 
may  not  put  away  the  first  week  ;  but  when  they  are  seen  he  says,  "  I  must  have 
done  with  these."  (3)  But  the  most  trouble  would  be  caused  by  the  little  crumbs. 
We  must  not  retain  even  a  crumb  of  the  evil  leaven  ;  we  must  earnestly  desire  to 
sweep  it  all  out.  (4)  The  whole  house  was  searched.  A  Christian  man  may  feel 
that  he  has  got  rid  of  all  the  leaven  from  his  shop,  yet  it  may  be  there  is  leaven  in 
his  private  house.  (5)  A  candle  was  used  to  throw  a  light  into  every  corner  of  the 
iiouse,  that  no  leaven  might  escape  notice.  Take  you  tlie  candle  of  God's  Word, 
the  candle  of  His  Holy  Spirit.  ((>)  To  purge  out  the  old  leaven  many  sweepings  of 
the  house  will  be  wanted.  For,  mark  you,  you  are  sure  to  leave  some  leaven,  and 
if  you  leave  a  little  it  will  work  and  spread.  It  is  hinted  in  the  text  that  there  are 
forms  of  evil  which  we  must  peculiarly  watch  against,  nnd  one  is  malice.  I  have 
known  believers  who  have  had  a  very  keen  sense  of  right,  who  have  too  much 
indulged  tlie  spirit  deprecated  here,  i.e.,  they  have  been  severe  and  censorious. 
Take  good  heed  also  that  e^ery  form  of  hypocrisy  be  purged  out,  for  the  apostle 
tells  us  to  eat  the  passover  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.  Let 
us  leave  off  talking  beyond  our  experience,  let  us  never  pray  beyond  what  we  mean. 
III.  The  H.ippiNESS  of  the  believer  acts  upon  nis  holiness,  and  his  holiness 
UPON  his  happiness.  1.  The  h;ippiuess  acts  upon  the  holiness.  (1)  If  I  feed  upon 
Christ,  who  has  been  sacrificed  for  me,  the  happiness  I  feel  leads  me  to  say,  "  My 
sins  slew  my  Saviour,  and  therefore  will  I  slay  my  sins."  (2)  Sitting  as  you  do 
within  the  house,  and  knowing  that  you  are  all  safe  because  the  blood  is  on  the 
lintel  outside,  you  will  say,  "  The  firstborn  sons  of  Egypt  are  slain,  and  I  am 
preserved.  Why  I  must  be  God's  firstborn,  and  must  belong  to  Him."  "Ye  are 
not  your  own,"  &c.  (3)  Moreover,  the  Christian  is  encouraged  to  put  away  his 
leaven  of  sin  because  he  has  the  foresight  of  a  profitable  exchange.  The  Israelite 
gave  up  leavened  bread,  but  he  soon  had  angels'  food  in  the  place  of  it.  (4)  The 
Christian,  too,  w  ho  knows  that  his  sin  is  forgiven,  feels  that  the  God  who  could  put 
away  Ins  load  of  sin  will  surely  help  to  conquer  his  corruptions.  2.  Holiness 
produce^  happiness.  Howqniet  doth  the  soul  become  when  the  man  feels,  "  I  have 
done  thiit  wliich  was  right,  I  have  given  up  that  which  was  evil."  What  is  it  that 
makes  God's  people  look  so  sad?  It  is  the  old  leaven.  "  Let  us  keep  the  feast"  ; 
but  it  is  useless  to  hope  to  do  so  while  we  keep  the  leaven.  Conclusion  :  There  are 
some  here  who  are  not  saved.  Notice  how  salvation  comes — not  through  purging 
out  the  leaven ;  that  operation  is  to  be  seen  to  afterwards,  but  because  the  Paschal 
La'iib  is  slain.  Do  not  begin  at  the  wrong  end,  begin  with  the  Cross.  (C  //. 
Spiirjieon.)  The  pnrification  of  the  Church: — I.  Its  necessity  arises  from — 1. 
The  existence  of  sin  (ver.  1).  2.  Pride.  3.  Disregard  of  the  corruptii  g  tendency  of 
sin.  II.  I'ls  means.  1.  The  removal  of  tbat  which  offends.  2.  Eenewal. 
3.  Through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  III.  Its  motives.  1.  The  full  enjoyment  of 
fellowship  in  Christ.  2.  Which  is  interrupted  by  malice  and  wickedness.  3.  But 
enhanced  by  sincerity  and  tiuth.  (J.  Lyth,  D.I).)  Little  .^im  : — No  man  reaches 
at  once  an  extremity  of  sin  ;  tlie  descent  is  not  abrupt,  but  sloped.  Little  sins 
must  creep  in  before  great  sins  can  find  room.  First  the  thin  end  of  the  wedge,  to 
uitike  «ay  for  the  broader  pait.  The  ordinary  laws  of  motion  seem  to  apply  to  the 
spiiituiil  case  ;  the  speed  increases  fast  after  a  time.  So  is  the  chain  of  sin  slight 
at  first  and  weak,  like  a  single  thread  that  seems  scarcely  to  hold  the  soul,  and 
VOL.  I.  25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

which  the  soul  hardly  feels ;  and  then  it  changes  into  a  twisted  skein,  and  then 
into  a  corded  rope,  and  then  into  liuks  of  iron.  So  it  is  like  a  little  leaven,  that 
works  on  from  part  to  part,  till  it  has  leavened  the  whole  lump.  Speak  of  a  murder 
to  a  boy,  and  he  will  start  in  horror  at  the  very  word,  and  his  blood  run  cold,  as  he 
thinks  of  tales  of  violent  death.  Yet  the  murderer  was  once  a  boy  shuddering  at 
the  sight  of  a  little  blood,  putting  his  hand  with  an  uneasy  conscience  to  some 
little  sin.  Little  sins  grow  into  great,  first  as  it  were  a  mere  scratch  on  the  flesh, 
and  then  a  putrefying  sore.  Satan  works  like  the  leaven,  not  spreading  his  net 
over  every  part  at  once,  but  stealing  his  way  to  the  dominion  of  our  souls.  So 
have  we  seen  a  little  stream  creeping  through  the  fields,  and  then  it  has  gathered 
other  streams  like  itself,  and  these  being  joined  to  one  another,  have  gone  down 
together  widening  into  a  mighty  river,  that  has  swept  down  to  the  sea  with  its 
broad  breast  of  waters  and  its  i-trong  rushing  tide.  Even  so  have  we  seen  a  small 
seed  cast  into  the  fruitful  earth,  and  before  long  the  seed  has  put  forth  its  arms 
and  opened  for  itself  a  way  through  the  yielding  soil,  and  the  little  stalk  has  risen 
with  its  preen  head  above  the  earth,  and  the  stalk  has  gradually  broken  forth  into 
a  strong  plant,  and  the  plant  into  a  tree  overshadowing  the  field.  Allow  little  sins, 
suffer  them  to  stay  for  a  moment  in  our  souls,  and  little  they  will  not  remain  ;  open 
the  door  of  our  souls  ever  so  little  to  any  sin,  and  the  sin  will  be  soon  master  of 
the  house  and  all  that  is  therein.  (.7.  Armstrong,  D.D.)  Little  sins — their 
iiijiirimisness  : — Some  brittle  gold,  having  been  accidentally  melted  with  a  quantity 
of  well-refined  and  t'^ugh  pold,  was  found  to  have  rendered  the  whole  mass  brittle 
with  a  higlily  crystalline  fracture,  and  therefore  useless  for  coinage.  The  impurity 
causing  brittleness  in  the  whole  75,000  ounces  was  a  small  fraction  of  an  ounce, 
probably  one  three-hundred-thousandth,  or  less,  of  the  original  weight.  It  will  be 
seen  from  this  that  the  saying  holds  good  in  metallurgy  as  well  as  in  morals,  "  A 
little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump,"  rendering  it  totally  unfit  for  current  uses, 
until  it  has  been  passed  through  a  purifying  process.     (/.  C.  Booth,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Purge  out  therefore  the  old  leaven. — The  old  leaven: — I.  Its  natube 
AXD  OPERATION.  II.  The  iiiPEKATivE  NECESSITY  OF  ITS  REMOVAL.  1.  By  repentance. 
That  ye  may  be  a  new  lump.  III.  The  means  and  jiotive — that  we  may  enjoy  Christ 
—  our  true  passover — sacrificed  for  us.  (J.  Lyt]i,D.D.)  Leaven  represented  the 
pollutions  of  the  idolatry  and  vices  of  Egypt  witii  which  Israel  had  broken  in 
conning  forth  from  it.  As  Israel  had  providentially  carried  to  the  deseit  that  night 
only  unleavened  bread,  the  permanent  rite  had  been  borrowed  from  the  historical 
circumstance  (Exod.  xii.  39  ;  xiii.  6-9).  The  apostle  spiritualised  the  ceremony. 
As  Israelites  at  every  passover  feast  were  bound  to  leave  behind  them  the  pollutions 
of  their  Egyptian  life,  in  order  to  become  a  new  people  of  God,  so  the  Church  is 
bound  to  break  with  all  the  evil  dispositions  of  tee  natural  heart,  or  that  which  is 
elsewhere  called  "  the  old  man."  The  desired  result  of  this  breaking  on  the  part  of 
each  one  with  his  own  known  sin  will  be  a  renewing  of  the  whole  Church,  "  that  ye 
maybe  a  new  lump. "  Another  allusion  to  Jewish  customs.  On  the  eve  of  the 
feast  a  fresh  piece  of  dough  was  kneaded  with  pure  water,  and  from  it  were  prepared 
the  cakes  of  unleavened  bread  which  were  eaten  during  the  feast.  "  New  "  does  not 
signify  quality,  but  time — "  recent."  The  whole  community,  by  this  work  of  puri- 
fication wrought  on  itself,  should  become  like  a  piece  of  dough  newly  kneaded. 
Has  not  the  awakening  of  a  whole  Church  been  seen  more  than  once  to  begin  with 
submission  to  an  old  censure  which  weighed  on  the  conscience  of  one  sinner?  This 
confession  draws  forth  others,  and  the  holy  breath  passed  over  the  whole  community. 
{Prof.  Godet.)  Old  leaven  to  he  purfjed: — There  is  a  test  point  about  you  some- 
where. Perhaps  it  is  pride  ;  you  cannot  bear  an  affront ;  you  will  not  confess  a 
fault.  Perhaps  it  is  personal  vanity,  ready  to  sacrifice  everything  to  display. 
Perhaps  it  is  a  sharp  tongue.  Perhaps  it  is  some  sensual  appetite,  bent  on  its  unclean 
gratification.  Then  you  are  to  gather  up  your  moral  forces  just  here,  and,  till  that 
darling  sin  is  brought  under  the  practical  law  of  Christ,  you  are  shut  out  from 
Christ's  kingdom.  [Bp.  Huntiuf/ton.)  All  sin  to  be  removed  : — If  a  physician  were 
called  to  see  a  patient  who  hsd  a  cancer  on  his  breast,  the  only  thing  to  be  done 
would  be  to  cut  it  out  from  the  roots.  The  physician  mi^ditgive  palliatives,  so  that 
the  patient  would  have  less  pain,  or  he  might  make  his  i^itient  believe  it  was  no 
cancer,  or  forget  that  he  had  a  cancer  near  his  vitals ;  but  if  the  physician  were  to 
do  this  instead  of  removing  the  evil,  he  would  be  a  wicked  man  and  tlie  enemy  of 
his  patient.  The  man's  case  was  such  that  the  only  favour  which  could  be  con- 
ferred upon  him  would  be  to  cut  out  the  cancer.     Now  all  agree  that  sin  is  the  great 


CHAP,  v.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  387 

evil  of  the  soul  of  man.  Nothing  can  make  man  more  spiritually  happy  here,  or 
tit  hiui  for  happiness  hereafter,  but  the  removal  of  sin  from  his  nature.  Sin  is  the 
plague-spot  on  the  soul,  which  destroys  its  peace,  and  threatens  its  destruction 
unless  removed.  It  is  therefore  certain  that  if  the  love  of  God  were  manifested 
towards  man,  it  would  be  in  turning  man  from  sin  wliich  produces  misery,  to  holi- 
ness which  produces  happiness.  (./.  B.  Walker.)  The  leaven  of  malice  to  be 
purged  : — It  is  said  of  the  serpent,  that  he  casts  up  all  his  poison  before  he  drinks. 
It  were  to  be  much  desired  that  herein  we  had  so  much  serpentine  wisdom  as  to 
disgorge  our  malice  before  we  pray,  to  cast  up  all  the  bitterness  of  our  spirits  before 
we  come  to  the  sacrament  of  reconciliation.  Fiirijiitg  out  the  old  leaven  :■ — A  friend 
once  described  to  me  this  process  as  he  saw  it  m  a  carpenter's  shop  in  Nwzareth. 
The  carptnter  would  not  allow  him  to  witness  the  search  in  the  house  lest  his 
presence  should  defile  the  home  ;  but  he  allowed  him  to  enter  the  shop  and  witness 
the  seai'ch  there.  The  man  went  about  the  work  with  a  will;  he  was  evidently 
thoroughly  in  earnest ;  he  girded  up  his  loins  as  if  he  had  a  day's  work  before  him, 
and  then  proceeded  to  search  with  the  utmost  zeal.  Carefully  and  conscientiously 
he  turned  over  every  board,  he  moved  all  his  tools,  he  swept  out  the  whole  place,  he 
opened  every  drawer,  looked  into  every  cupboard ;  there  was  not  a  crevice  or  a 
cranny  in  the  wall  that  was  not  inspected  lest  there  might  be  a  tiny  crumb  of  leaven 
anywhere  in  the  shop.  As  he  drew  towards  the  close  of  his  search  my  friend 
suddenly  heard  him  utter  an  exclamation  of  liorror,  and  looking  round  he  saw  him 
standing  as  though  he  had  seen  something  most  ahirming.  If  he  had  found  a 
viper  or  a  cockatrice  he  could  not  have  been  more  horrified  than  he  seemed  to  be. 
What  was  it  ?  In  the  last  corner  that  he  had  visited,  under  some  shavings,  he  had 
come  across  a  little  canvas  bag,  and  in  this  little  bag  there  were  a  few  crumbs  of 
leavened  brewd  ;  one  of  the  workmen  had  left  it  on  some  former  occasion.  It  was 
enough  ;  it  defiled  the  whole  place.  With  the  utmost  possible  gravity  and  solemnity, 
aud  with  a  most  anxious  expression  of  coiuileuance  as  though  it  were  a  most  critical 
and  important  business,  the  man  took  hold  of  two  pieces  of  wood,  and  using  them 
as  a  pair  of  tongs  he  raised  up  the  bag,  and  holding  it  off  at  arm's  length,  marched 
out  of  the  shop  and  dropped  the  leavened  crumbs,  bag  and  all,  into  the  centre  of  a 
fire  that  he  had  burning  outside  ready  for  such  a  contingency,  and  so  he  purged  out 
the  old  leaven.  (II'.  Hai/  Aitken,  M.A.)  For  even  Christ  our  passover  is  sacri- 
ficed for  us  :  therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast. — Cltrist  our  2>af<sover  : — I.  The  infer- 
ence. 1.  That  sin  has  the  true  (jualities  of  leaven.  (1)  Ofl'ensive  sourness. 
Nothing  is  so  dictasteful  to  God  ;  indeed  nothing  can  displease  Him  but  sin.  How 
can  it  be  otherwise  when  it  is  professeilly  opposite  to  Divine  justice  ?  Even  the  con- 
science, which  is  God's  taster,  finds  it  abominably  loathsome  :  how  much  more  God  ! 
Did  God  find  sin  in  His  angels?  He  tumbles  them  down  out  of  heaven.  Did  He 
find  sin  in  our  first  parents  ?  He  hurls  them  out  of  paradise.  Yea,  did  He  find  our 
sins  laid  en  the  Son  of  His  love?  He  spares  Him  not  (Isa.  liii.  5).  The  more 
loathsome  we  find  our  sins  the  nearer  we  come  to  the  purity  of  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  (Psa.  xlv.  7).  What  shall  we  say,  then,  to  those  who  find  no  savour  in  any- 
thing but  their  sins  ?  Let  us,  then,  hate  sin  (Fsa.  xcvii.  10)  and  take  heed  of  being 
leavened  with  it.  (2)  Diffusiveness.  It  began  with  one  angel  and  infected  legions. 
It  began  with  one  woman  and  infected  all  mankind.  Let  it  take  hold  of  one  faculty 
and  it  will  infect  soul  and  body.  Let  it  seize  on  one  person  in  a  family  and  it  will 
corrupt  the  whole  house.  From  thence  it  spreads  to  the  neighbourhood,  and  taints 
whole  cities  and  regions  (2  Tim.  ii.  7).  Since,  then,  our  wickedness  is  of  so 
spreading  a  nature — (a)  How  careful  we  should  be  to  resist  its  very  beginnings! 
It  is  much  easier  to  keep  the  floodgates  shut  than  to  drfiin  the  lower  grounds 
when  they  are  once  overtlown.  (h)  How  wary  we  should  be  of  joining  the  society 
of  the  infectious,  whether  in  op  uon  or  manners  (ver.  11;  Titus  iii.  10).  (c)  How 
much  it  concerns  all  publi  per;ons  in  Church  or  State  to  improve  their  authority 
to  the  utmost  for  the  prevention  of  vice,  and  the  expurgation  of  leav^  ned  persons 
(Psa.  Ixxi.  4,  Heb.).  2.  This  leaven  must  be  purged  out  if  we  wou  d  have  any 
interest  in  Christ  our  passover.  In  vain  should  any  Jew  talk  of  keeping  a  passover 
to  God  if  he  would  eat  the  lamb  with  leavened  bread.  In  vain  should  any  Chris- 
tian talk  of  applying  Christ  to  his  soul  while  his  heart  willingly  retains  any  of  the 
leaven  of  any  known  sin  (Psa.  xxvi.  6).  II.  The  pkoposition.  1.  That  Christ  is  a 
passover.  The  word  is  taken  fiom  the  time  of  the  solemnity  (Acts  xii.  4) ;  for  the 
sacrifices  offered  in  the  solemnity  (Deut.  xvi.  4)  ;  for  the  act  of  God's  transition 
(Exod.  xii.  11)  ;  for  the  lamb  to  b-  offered  and  eaten  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  11,  and  here). 
(1)  The  lamb  is  the  passover.     Which  may  appear  far-fetched.     Here  was  a  double 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

passing  over — Uiat  of  the  angel  over  Israel,  that  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt :  both  were 
acts,  one  of  God,  the  other  of  men.  The  explanation  is  that  the  thing  signed  is 
usually  put  for  the  sign  itself  (Gen.  xvii.  13  ;  1  Cor.  x.  4).  Now  what  a  mercy  was 
it  for  God  to  pass  over  Israel  when  He  slew  the  Egyptian  firstborn.  For  this  they 
were  indebted  to  the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb  sprmkled  on  their  doorposts.  Had 
they  eaten  the  lamb  and  not  sprinkled  the  blood  they  had  not  escaped.  The  reality 
of  this  figure  is  that  by  Christ's  blood  sprinkled  on  our  souls  we  are  freed  from  the 
vengeance  of  the  Almighty.  As  then  Israel  were  never  to  eat  of  the  pascbal  lamb, 
but  they  were  recalled  to  the  memory  of  their  deliverance,  so  neither  may  we  ever 
behold  this  sacramental  rei^resentation  of  Christ's  death  but  we  should  bethink  our- 
selves of  the  infinite  mercy  of  God  in  saving  us.  (2)  That  Christ  is  that  Paschal 
Lamb  in  regard  to — {(i)  Choice  as  to,  first,  nature.  A  lamb  is  noted  for  innocence 
and  gentleness.  Chri^t  is  the  Lamb  of  God.  What  perfect  innocence  and  admir- 
able meekness  He  displayed  (Isa.  liii.  7).  Secondly,  quality.  Any  lamb  would  not 
serve  :  it  must  be  a  lamb  without  blemish.  Could  Christ  have  been  capable  of  the 
least  sin,  so  far  from  ransoming  the  world.  He  could  not  have  saved  Himi-elf.  (b) 
Preparation  in  respect  to,  first,  killing.  The  lamb  to  make  a  true  passover  must 
be  slain  :  so  there  was  a  necessity  that  Jesus  should  die  for  us  (Luke  xxiv.  25,  26). 
Secondly,  sprinkling  his  blood.  Thirdly,  roasting.  So  did  the  true  Paschal  Lamb 
undergo  the  flames  of  His  Father's  wrath  for  o  ir  sins,  (c)  Eating.  Note,  first, 
it  was  to  lie  eaten  with  bitter  herbs  to  teach  us  that  we  may  not  hope  to  partake  of 
Christ  without  sensible  disrelishes  of  nature,  witliout  true  contrition.  Secondly,  the 
whole  lamb  must  be  eaten.  JMany  a  lamb  did  tlie  Jews  eat  in  the  course  of  the  year 
besides  ;  these  were  halved  and  quartered  as  occasion  served.  Whosoever  would 
partake  of  Christ  must  take  the  whole  Christ.  There  are  those  who  will  be  sharing 
and  quartering  Christ ;  one  will  allow  His  humanity,  but  not  His  Deity  ;  another 
His  prophetic  character,  but  not  His  priesthood,  &c.  In  vain  do  these  partake  of 
Christ  while  they  thus  set  upon  Him  by  piecemeal.  {Bp.  Hall.)  Christ  our 
passover : — I.  The  antecedent.  1.  What  is  meant  by  Pascha  ?  (Exod.  xii.  26.) 
Passing  over  is,  of  itself,  a  thing  indifferent ;  it  is  good  or  bad  according  to  what 
passes  or  is  passed  over.  If  any  good  pass  over  us  we  are  the  losers  ;  if  any  danger 
the  gainers.  Again,  if  we  pass  from  better  to  worse  it  is  a  detriment;  if  from  worse 
to  better  a  benefit.  This  is  a  benefit.  Evil — the  destroying  angel — passed  over 
Israel.  They  passed  out  of  Egypt  well,  but  tlie  Egyptians  ill.  2.  What  is  this  to 
us?  We  live  in  a  world  of  which  Egypt  is  but  a  corner  and  was  a  type;  our 
Pharaoh  is  the  devil ;  God's  wrath  is  the  destroying  angel ;  death  is  our  Ked  Sea 
through  which  all  must  pass,  some  well,  some  ill.  Our  abode  is  as  dangerous  as 
theirs  ;  we  m-ed  a  Pascha  to  escape  God's  wrath  and  to  pass  well  over  death.  Their 
passover,  again,  was  nothing  to  ours.  Theirs  was  but  the  deliverance  of  one  y>oot 
nation  from  a  passing  bodily  danger  ;  ours  frees  all  mankind  from  the  destruction 
of  body  and  soul,  and  that  for  ever.  And  what  comparison  is  there  between  Canaan 
and  heaven  whither  Christ  shall  make  us  pass  ?  3.  W^ho  is  it?  A  sacrificial  lamb 
— the  figure  of  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  became  our  passover  when  He  was 
offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  the  world.  What  is  sin  but  a  transgression  or  passing 
over  the  duty  set  before  us  in  the  Law  of  God  ?  But  for  it  no  destroyer  would  have 
power  over  us  :  Christ  was  a  passover  fiom  first  to  last.  His  birth  was  a  passing 
over  from  the  bosom  of  His  Fatber  to  the  womb  of  His  mother :  His  resurrection  a 
I^assing  over  from  death  to  life ;  His  ascension  a  passing  over  from  the  world  to 
the  Fatlier.  But  in  His  death  God  took  over  our  sins  from  us  and  laid  them  upon 
Hun.  II.  The  consequent.  "  Let  us  keep  the  feast. "  A  fast  rather,  one  would 
think;  but  by  His  resurrection  we  know  that  Christ  is  well  passed  over,  and  so  we 
may  keep  our  feast  with  joy.  And  a  double  feast  it  is.  By  His  death  He  made  the 
destroyer  pass  over  us  ;  by  His  resurrection  He  makes  death  passable  by  us.  In 
the  sacramental  feast  we — 1.  Eemember  Him  our  Sacrifice.  2.  Apply  the  sacrifice 
to  our  salvation.  (Bp.  Audrewes.)  Christ  our pa>;surer : — I.  We  are  in  danger  of 
DESTRUCTION.  The  augel  of  wrath  has  commission  to  destroy  all  the  workers  of 
iniquity.  This  destruction  is  certain,  fearful,  and  will  come  in  the  darkness  at  an 
hour  we  look  not  for  it.  II.  There  is  no  other  means  of  escape.  We  cannot  bar 
our  doors  or  windows  a_'ain-t  this  minister  of  wraih.  We  cannot  propitiate  or 
resist  him,  or  bear  up  under  his  avenging  stroke.  III.  Escape  is  provided  by  the 
BLOOD  or  Christ.  1.  This  is  the  only  means.  2.  The  efficacious  means.  The 
angel  entered  no  door  sprinkled  with  the  blood.  3.  It  must  be  applied.  It  is  not 
enough  that  it  has  been  shed.  4.  The  application  of  this  blood  gives  not  only 
security,  but  a  sen--e  of  safely.     Doubtless  all  degrees  of  contideuce  were  felt  by  the 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  38S 

Israelites.  Some  slept  without  anxiety ;  others  trembled  at  every  sound  ;  others 
pressed  their  firstborn  to  their  bosoms  and  longed  for  the  morning.  So  with 
sinners  sprinkled  with  the  blood.  All  are  secure,  but  the  measure  of  their  con- 
fidence is  very  different.  The>want  of  confidence  arises  from  the  want  of  faith.  IV. 
The  PASSOVER  secures  entranck  into  Canaan.  Christ  not  only  delivers  from  death, 
but  gives  an  abundant  entrance  into  heaven.  V.  The  passover  was  to  be  com- 
memorated as  long  as  the  old  economy  lasted.  The  death  of  Christ  is  to  be 
commemorated  till  He  come.  VI.  The  passover  was  celebrated  with  everything 
INDICATIVE  of  SEPARATION  FROM  Egypt.  The  old  leaveu  was  purged  out.  So  the 
death  of  Christ  binds  us  to  holiness.  What  would  have  been  thought  of  a  Hebrew 
who,  after  such  a  deliverance,  had  clung  to  his  fetters?  (C.  Hodge,  D.D.)  Christ 
our  pax^oi^er  : — I.  Christ  is  typified  here  dnder  the  paschal  lamb.  Read  Exod. 
xii.  Note — 1.  The  victim — the  lamb.  No  other  creature  could  so  well  have 
typified  Him  who  was  "holy,  harmless,"  etc.,  and  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  (1)  It  was  a 
lamb  without  blemish.  And  was  not  Jesus  Christ  even  such  ?  Born  of  the  pure 
Virgin,  begotten  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  His  soul  was  pure,  and  His  life  was  the  same. 
In  Him  was  no  sin.  Ye  who  have  known  the  Lord,  say,  can  ye  find  any  fault  with 
your  Saviour?  (2)  "A  male  of  the  first  year."  Then  it  was  in  its  prime.  And 
so  our  Lord  had  just  come  to  the  ripeness  of  manhood  when  He  was  offered.  He 
did  not  give  Himself  to  die  for  us  when  He  was  a  youth,  for  He  would  not  then 
have  given  all  He  was  to  be,  nor  in  old  age,  when  He  was  in  decay.  And,  moreover, 
at  His  death,  "  He  cried  with  a  loud  voice,"  cfcc,  a  sign  that  His  soul  was  strong 
within  Him.  And  does  not  the  thought  rise  up — if  Jesus  gave  His  all  to  me,  should 
I  not  give  my  little  all  to  Him  ?  2.  The  place  where  this  lamb  was  to  be  killed. 
The  first  passover  was  held  in  Egypt,  the  second  in  the  wilderness ;  but  there  were 
no  more  until  Israel  came  to  Canaan.  And  then  (Deut.  xvi.  5)  God  no  longer 
allowed  theai  to  slay  the  lamb  in  their  own  houses,  but  appointed  a  place  for  its 
celebration,  viz.,  Jerusalem.  In  Jerusalem  our  Lamb  was  sacrificed  for  us  ;  it  was  at 
the  precise  spot  where  God  had  ordained  that  it  should  be.  If  that  mob  at  Nazareth 
had  been  able  to  compass  His  death,  type  and  prophecy  could  not  have  been  ful- 
filled. 3.  The  manner  of  its  death.  It  was  to  be  slaughtered,  and  its  blood  caught 
in  a  basin.  Next  it  was  to  be  roasted,  but  it  was  not  to  have  a  bone  of  its  body 
broken.  Now  nothing  but  crucifixion  can  answer  all  these  three  things.  Cruci- 
fixion has  in  it  the  shedding  of  blood — the  hands  and  feet  were  pierced.  It  has  in 
it  the  idea  of  roasting,  which  signifies  a  long  torment.  Moreover,  not  a  bone  was 
broken,  which  could  not  have  been  the  case  with  any  othf-r  punishment.  II.  How 
we  derive  benefit  from  Him.  1.  By  having  His  blood  sprinkled  on  us  for  our 
redemption.  Note  that  the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb  was  not  sprinkled  on  the 
threshold,  but  on  the  top  of  the  door,  on  the  side-post,  for  woe  unto  him  who 
trampleth  under  foot  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God!  His  blood  must  be  on  our  right 
hand  to  be  our  constant  guaid,  and  on  our  left  to  be  our  continual  support.  It  is 
not  alone  the  blood  of  Christ  poured  out  on  Calvary  that  saves  a  sinner  ;  it  is  that 
blood  sprinkled  on  the  heart.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  "He  loved  the  world,  and 
gave  His  Son  "  ;  you  must  say,  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  There 
is  an  hour  coming  when  God  will  say,  "  Angel  of  death,  thou  knowest  thy  prey. 
Unsheath  thy  sword."  If  we  have  the  blood  on  us,  when  we  see  the  angel  coming, 
we  shall  senile  at  him.  "Bold  shall  I  stand  in  that  great  day,"  etc.  2.  Christ  is 
not  only  a  Saviour  for  sinners,  but  He  is  food  for  them  after  they  are  saved.  We 
must  live  on  Christ  as  well  as  by  Christ.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  our  pats- 
over : — I.  A  lesson  of  safety.  1.  Emerson  says,  "Commit  a  crime  and  the  earth 
is  made  of  glass.  It  seems  as  if  a  coat  of  snow  fell  on  the  ground  such  as  reveals 
in  the  woods  the  track  of  every  partridge  and  fox  and  squirrel  and  mole.  You 
cannot  recall  tlie  spoken  word.  You  cannot  wipe  out  the  foot-track.  You  cannot 
draw  up  the  ladder  so  as  to  leave  no  inlet  or  chie."  That  is  no  news.  "  Be  sure 
your  sin  will  find  you  out  "  is  written  in  the  Bible  of  the  moral  nature  and  in  the 
Scriptures.  2.  But  man  wants  to  know  something  more  than  Emerson's  philosophy 
can  teach  him.  This  is  man's  passionate  question — Is  there  nothing  which  can 
come  between  himself  and  the  doom  of  sin  ?  The  passover  was  God's  answer  in 
type ;  Christ  is  God's  answer  in  reality.  There  was  one  hindrance  on  that  fatal 
night  that  the  death-angel  could  not  pass — the  blood  of  the  lamb  on  the  door-posts. 
The  barrier  which  wards  off  the  penalties  for  sin  is  the  blood  of  Christ.  3.  Only 
there  must  be  personal  appropriation  of  the  atonement.  It  was  not  simply  the 
lamb  slain  in  general  sac-ritice  that  brought  safety.  And  this  involved  faith  in 
what  God  had  said,  and  obedience  correspondent  to  the  faith.     The  application  is 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  v 

evident.  II.  A  lesson  of  strength.  1.  Look  at  those  Israelites.  Their  staffs  are 
in  their  hands  ;  their  loins  are  girded,  &c.  Before  them  an  exhausting  niarcli, 
behind  them  a  sleepless  night.  But  God  has  provided  that  they  be  strengthened. 
The  slain  lamb  must  be  eaten.  The  Christian  life  is  a  pilgrimage.  It  is  under 
burdens  ;  it  must  meet  conflict.  But  Christ  is  our  passover  for  strength ;  we  mus.t 
subsist  on  Him.  Thus  in  Christ  shall  there  be  strength  for  us.  {Horn.  Monthhj.) 
Clirist  our  pn-'itiover  : — We  shall — I.  Trace  the  allusion.  Note — 1.  The  victnn. 
(1)  It  was  a  lamb — the  most  gentle  of  creatures  of  the  type.  (2)  "A  male  of  the 
first  year  " — that  is,  in  it^  highest  state  of  physical  perfection.  And  Jesus  was  led 
to  the  altar  in  the  flower  of  His  age.  (3)  "Without  blemish"  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14). 
(4)  The  paschal  lamb  was  previously  selected  and  set  apart  four  days  before  it  was 
slain.  The  service  required  forethought  and  preparation,  which  suggests  that  the 
Lamb  of  God  "  verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  and 
actually  entered  Jerusalem  four  days  before  He  suffered.  (3)  The  point  of  dis- 
similarity is  that  the  lamb  was  unconscious  of  iU  approaching  fate.  But  Jesus  saw 
the  end  from  the  beginning.  Yet  He  pressed  forward  with  unbending  resolution 
until  He  could  say,  "  It  is  finished."  2.  The  appropriation  of  the  blood.  (1)  The 
means  of  protection  to  Israel  was  the  blood.  Without  this  they  had  been  equally 
exposed  with  the  Egyptians.  And  what  is  it  that  affords  security  to  the  sinner 
against  the  more  fearful  judgments  of  the  Almighty  but  the  blood  of  the  heavenly 
Lamb  which  was  shed  upon  the  Cross  ?  (2)  But  the  blood  of  the  pa'-chal  victim 
affordeil  no  protection  till  it  was  sprinkled  with  a  bunch  of  hyssop.  And  here  we 
are  reminded  of  the  necessity  of  a  believing  application  of  the  gospel  remedy.  (3) 
The  bl'Od  sprinkled  answered  the  end  of  its  application  because  of  the  Divine  ordina- 
tion. If  the  sacrifice  of  the  Cross  were  merely  tlie  device  of  man,  it  would  possess 
no  virtue,  but  because  it  is  of  Divine  origin  and  appointment  it  will  ever  prove  "  the 
wisdom  of  God  and  ttie  power  of  God."  (4)  The  blood  of  the  victim  was  not  to  be 
cast  upoir  the  threshold,  to  be  trodden  under  feet  as  a  thing  of  nought.  And  beware 
how  you  treat  the  gospel  remedy  (Heb.  x.  28,  29).  3.  The  ceremony  of  eating  it. 
(1)  The  flesh  of  the  lamb  was  designed  for  food.  And  what  says  Christ?  (John  vi. 
53-57.)  (2)  The  whole  lamb  was  to  be  eaten.  And  Christ  must  be  received  in  all 
the  extent  of  His  official  character  and  relations.  (3)  It  was  to  be  eaten  with  bitter 
herbs  and  unleavened  bread.  The  benefits  of  Christ's  redemption  can  only  be 
enjoyt^d  in  connection  with  the  exercise  of  that  "godly  sorrow  which  worketh 
repentance."  And  "  the  old  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness  "  must  be  jiurged 
out,  that  we  may  "  keep  the  "  gospel  "  feast  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity 
and  truth."  (4)  It  was  also  to  be  eaten  in  haste  an.l  in  a  departing  posture. 
Chi'istians,  this  is  not  your  rest.  Ye  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth. 
Stand,  therefore,  having  your  loins  girded  about  with  truth,  &c.  II.  Examine  the 
FACT.  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us — is  slain  not  merely  for  our  good — 
that  we  might  have  the  benefit  of  His  example  and  the  confidence  arising  from  His 
testimony — but  in  our  room  and  place.  1.  This  principle  characterised  the  paschal 
sacrifice.  The  lamb  was  virtually  and  in  effect,  if  not  strictly,  a  substitutionary 
victim.  There  was  life  for  life.  Herein  is  typified  the  death  of  Christ,  by  which  a 
way  has  been  opened  for  our  escape  from  the  doom  to  which  we  are  exposed  and 
our  enjoyment  of  everlasting  life.  Hence  the  death  of  Christ  is  uniformly  repre- 
sented as  the  meritorious  cause  of  our  redemption.  All  the  blessings  of  the  gospel 
are  ascribed  to  this  as  the  means  of  their  procurement — the  reason  of  their  bestow- 
ment — and  the  consecrated  medium  through  which  they  flow.  Pardon  (Eph.  i.  7). 
Justification  (Rom.  v.  9).  Purity  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  Access  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  19). 
Victory  over  Satan  (liev.  xii.  10,  11).  Peace  and  joy  (Kom.  v.  1,  2,  11).  Final 
introduction  into  the  presence  of  God  in  heaven  (Rev.  vii.  14,  15).  2.  The  fact, 
then,  is  one  of  no  common  character  or  trifling  consequence.  For  if  Christ  was 
not  "  sacrificed  for  us,"  I  am  left  without  a  refuge,  with  no  ground  of  confidence  or 
of  hope  when  anticipating  the  transactions  of  the  last  great  day.  But  I  cannot 
thus  surrender  my  hope.  {Essex  Ctmrjrefjatioual  Rememhranccr.)  The  Christian 
jmssover  : — I.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is — 1.  Deprecatory,  or  designed  to  ward  off 
threatened  judgment.  Of  this  nature  was  the  paschal  sacrifice,  by  which  the 
Israelites  were  protected  from  the  destroying  angel.  2.  Expiatoiy,  in  which  the 
innocent  died  for  the  guilty,  and  thus  offered  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 
On  this  ground  God  can  justify  the  ungodly  without  relaxing  the  strictness  of  His 
law,  infringing  the  truth  of  His  word,  or  degrading  the  di^mity  of  His  throne.  3. 
Precatory.  Such  sacrifices  were  offered  to  secure  the  restoration  of  forfeited  bene- 
fits.    Hence  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  a  "  redemption  "  which  not  only  delivers 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  891 

from  merited  punishment,  but  recovers  every  forfeited  good.  4.  Vicarious.  Christ 
endured  death  not  merely  for  our  instruction,  or  that  He  might  seal  the  truth  of 
His  doctrine  with  blood,  and  set  us  an  example  of  the  spirit  with  which  we  should 
suffer.  No !  If  He  suffered,  it  was  for  our  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust.  5.  Eucha- 
ristic.  In  sacrifices  of  this  class  the  victim  w'as  eaten  with  thanksgivings.  Of  this 
kind  was  the  passover ;  and  Christ  is  the  true  paschal  lamb,  who  has  not  only 
sacrificed  His  life,  but  now  offers  Himself  in  every  promise  and  ordinance,  to  be 
received  by  penitent  faith,  as  the  living  bread.  Tiiis  is  particularly  represented  in 
His  last  supper.  II.  The  sacrifice  of  Chkist  a  passover.  Observe  the  corre- 
spondence between  the  type  and  antitype  more  particularly  in — 1.  The  si^rinkliug 
of  the  blood.  As  the  Israelites  sprinkled  the  blood  outside  the  door,  it  ought  to 
appear  that  we  are  inwardly  pure  by  our  being  outwardly  holy.  2.  The  eating  of 
the  lamb,  by  which  the  bodies  of  the  people  were  nourished  and  supported.  The 
teachings  of  Christ's  Spirit  satisfy  the  desire  for  spiritual  knowledge  ;  the  joys  and 
consolations  of  His  love  satiate  the  hungry  desires  after  happiness  ;  and  the  fulness 
of  His  spotless  mind  breathed  into  our  souls  meets  the  vast  capacity  of  our  nature ; 
■we  are  strengtheued  with  all  the  might  of  God,  and  grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things. 
3.  The  consequent  deliverance.  HI.  The  manner  in  which  we  must  celebrate 
THE  Christian  passover.  Let  there  be — 1.  Purity.  "  Purge  out  the  old  leaven." 
Every  one  who  would  receive  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  and  receive  worthily  His  supper, 
should  put  away  the  "  old  leaven."  The  leaven  of  tbe  Sadducees  was  error,  that  of 
the  Pharisees  was  hypocrisy ;  these  must  be  purged  out ;  so  must  the  old  leaven  of 
every  besetment  and  sin.  2.  Compunction,  typified  by  the  bitter  herbs  with  which 
the  paschal  lamb  was  to  be  eaten,  and  which  fitly  describe  the  sorrow  of  a  broken 
spirit.  Without  eating  these  bitter  herbs  we  shall  never  feel  the  nppetite  of  strong 
desire  which  hungers  after  Christ,  nor  taste  the  sweetness  of  His  salvation.  3. 
Sinceritj'.  We  must  embrace  Christ,  not  merely  that  we  may  escape  from  future 
condemnation,  but  with  sincere  desire  to  enjoy  Him  savingly,  to  know  Him  experi- 
mentally, to  love  Him  supremely,  to  submit  to  Him  cheerfully,  and  devote  ourselves 
to  Him  entirely.  4.  Unieserveduess,  i.e.,  Christ  must  be  taken  wholly.  Every 
family,  under  the  law,  was  required  to  sacrifice  a  lamb,  and  that  family  must  use 
or  burn  it ;  not  even  a  bone  was  to  be  broken.  So  every  soul  needs  a  full  Christ 
for  himself — all  His  power  to  save;  all  His  merit  to  cleanse;  all  His  wisdom  to 
guide ;  all  His  grace  to  invigorate ;  and  all  His  sacred  presence  to  fill  the  soul  and 
constitute  its  heaven.  5.  Promptitude.  The  Israelites  partook  of  the  passover  in 
haste,  their  shoes  on  their  feet,  and  their  staves  in  their  bands.  Now,  as  every- 
thing depends  on  the  present  moment,  receive  Christ  in  haste.  Just  now,  "  What 
thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  3.  Joy.  The  Jews  kept  their 
passover  as  a  season  of  great  joy,  because  instituted  iu  memory  of  their  greatest 
deliverance.  So  should  the  Christian  commemorate  the  death  of  his  Lord  as  the 
greatest  deliverance  earth  ever  saw  or  heaven  ever  witnessed.  {W.  Atherton.) 
Chrht  our  passover : — I  propose  to  present  some  of  the  shapes  in  which  this 
destroyiug  angel  appears,  and,  by  Christ  our  Eedeemer,  is  dismissed.  But,  first, 
I  must  meet  one  or  two  objections.  S'me  may  think  this  passing  over,  by  the 
destroying  angel,  of  a  part  of  the  world — that  part,  namely,  visited  by  the  light 
and  salvation  of  the  gospel  —  seems  partial  and  unequal.  To  this  I  can  only 
answer,  God  proceeds  in  His  revelation  as  He  does  in  all  His  providence.  We  feel 
God's  goodness  ;  and  for  His  equity  our  inmost  conviction  and  highest  intuition 
stands  voucher.  We  might  ask  why  God  has  made  one  of  His  creatures  an  angel, 
and  another  a  worm  ;  why  He  has  caused  one  to  dwell  under  the  tropic  line, 
and  another  at  the  frozen  pole  ;  why  He  has  ordnined  one  to  be  born  of  a  poor, 
and  another  of  a  prosperous  parentage  ;  why,  for  thousands  of  years.  He  delayed 
discoveries  so  important  to  darkened  and  suffering  humanity,  such  as  the  press, 
the  compass,  the  bright  sky-marks  of  a  trackless  voyage,  or  the  ether-breath  under 
which  the  piercing  knife  is  painless.  Enough  that,  at  length,  we  have  these 
passovers  of  the  Divine  mercy.  Enough,  above  all,  that  we  have  in  Christ  the 
chief  passover  of  the  keenest  agonies  of  the  human  heart.  But  this  doctrine  of  the 
passover,  marvelled  at  by  the  sceptical,  is  resented  by  the  proud,  fancying  they 
are  unwilling  to  receive  such  gratuity.  They  would  emancipate  themselves  from, 
the  miseries  that  assail  human  life  ;  they  would  slay  the  monsters  of  danger  for 
themselves  ;  nor  superfluously  accept  a  heaven  they  have  nut  earned.  Ah  !  poor 
pride,  empty  claim  of  independence,  infatuated  denial  of  that  grace  of  God  which 
is  the  source  of  all  we  have  or  enjoy  !  Truly,  we  should  have  begun  sooner  to  sign 
off  and  separate,  if  we  meant  to  complain  of  the  free  grace  and  unmerited  favour 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


of  God.  It  is  too  late.  We  are  baptized  in  goodness  and  inamersed  in  love  from 
our  infancy.  For  all  things,  temporal  or  spiritual,  we  are  beggars,  dependent 
on  God.  I3ut  it  is  important  to  observe  that  this  passover  is  no  contradiction  or 
exemption  of  true  morality.  It  is  no  jjassover  for  our  exertions  of  virtuous 
fidelity.  It  only  modifies  ttie  character  of  our  virtue  to  exalt  and  refine  it.  For 
that  show  of  wisdom  in  willwoi'ship,  which  the  apostle  rebukes,  it  substitutes  the 
at  once  gentler  and  holier  virtue  of  that  devotion  to  God,  to  right  and  duty,  which 
Christ  tlie  passover  inspires.  Indeed  there  is  nothing  immoral  or  dfingerous  to 
character  in  the  doctrine  of  the  text.  The  passover,  at  Christ's  bidding,  of  the 
destroying  angel,  is  for  no  license,  but  for  our  sanctity.  For  the  contemplation  of 
that  sacrifice,  producing  this  passover,  stirs  affections  in  the  breast  from  which 
flow  sweeter  virtues  and  more  winning  charms  of  spontaneous  worth  than  all  the 
self-confidence  of  sages  and  all  the  austerities  of  the  stoic.  Christ  our  passover, 
by  His  Spirit,  stimulates  us  to  leave  the  bondage  of  our  oppressive  sins.  Thus, 
seeing  the  idea  of  Christ  the  passover,  not  as  a  mere  figure  of  rhetoric,  but,  beyond 
all  obj^ctions,  resting  on  a  foundation  of  eternal  truth,  we  may  consider  its  practical 
applications  ;  for  we,  as  much  as  captive  Jew  or  old  Gentile,  need  the  Divine  pass- 
over.  The  destroying  angel  comes  in  many  ways  to  close  in  a  struggle  with  our 
safety  and  jjeace.  1.  As  we  meditate  in  solitude  or  muse  by  the  wavside  he  often 
springs  upon  us.  Sometimes,  a  gigantic  spectre  of  doubt,  he  fearfully  overhangs 
our  thoughts  and  duskily  obscures  our  path.  He  darkly  queries  with  us  whether 
all  these  spiritual  things  which  we,  in  our  words  of  fine  discourse,  make  such 
account  of,  are  not  mere  imagination  and  surmise.  The  shining  mansions  above 
fade  awHy  into  mist  and  vacuity;  and  t(^mples  and  closets,  songs  and  supplications, 
turn  to  a  vain  pretence  or  a  hypocritical  mockery.  But  Christ  the  passover  comes 
through  His  Spirit  to  make  the  heavenly  glory  shine  again  on  the  world,  and  gleam 
through  our  thoughts  by  His  truth.  2.  Again,  in  the  gloomy  and  menacing  shape 
of  remorse,  comes  the  destroying  angel.  He  arrays  before  us  all  our  wrong-doings 
and  omissions  of  duty.  He  throws  in  our  face  all  the  shortcomings  of  the  past. 
He  stings  our  memory  into  tlie  recollection  of  unworthine?s  we  had  forgotten.  He 
lifts  his  ghostly,  resistless  hand,  to  cast  us  down  into  hopeless  dejection  over  the 
remaining  sin  that  clings  to  our  nature,  and  into  utter  desj)air  of  the  mercy  of  God. 
But  Christ  appears  with  His  look  of  kindness  ;  He  speaks  the  i^ardoning  love  of 
God,  and  the  destroying  angel's  condemnation  is  silenced.  3.  In  the  shape  of  a 
mourner,  too,  as  well  as  a  doubter  nnd  accuser,  comes  the  destroying  angel.  He 
sits  by  the  fireside,  at  the  table,  and  the  grave,  when  dear  objects  have  gone,  and 
raises  a  miserable  cry  that  all  comfort  and  joj'  and  reciprocity  of  affection  are  gone 
and  lost  with  them.  But  Christ  comes,  and  the  destroying  angel  passes  over. 
The  Cross  of  Christ  rises  in  sight.  The  sepulchre  of  Christ  discL  ses  its  broken 
door.  Now  grief  may  do  its  worst.  We  are  superior  to  it.  It  can  lay  waste  the 
earth,  and  commit  havoc  in  the  abodes  of  men  ;  but  all  its  desolations  are  more 
than  repaired.  Ciu-ist  is  our  passover,  for  He  presents  God  as  our  Father.  Now 
no  father  wishes  his  children  to  die ;  least  of  all  the  real  Father,  the  Father  of 
spirits,  who  hath  power  to  give  His  children  life.  Therefore  death,  the  huge  but 
hollow  semblance,  must  pass  over.  Christ  hath  taught  us  that  we  can  love  (^od, 
and  how  to  love  Him.  But  love  is  a  bond  of  endurance  according  to  all  the  ability 
of  both  its  subject  and  object ;  with  God  it  is  a  bond  of  immortality.  Therefore 
death,  with  his  mere  masque  and  presumption  of  tyranny,  must  pass  over. 
Matter  ceases  to  be  all.  Knowledge,  love,  will,  becomes  all.  The  vnst  creation 
becomes  but  the  theatre,  wherein  the  intelligences  which  the  Great  Parent  for  ever 
inspires  act  out  their  thoughts  and  afi'ections.  (C.  A.  Bartol.)  The  Christian 
P'issovi-r : — "  Chiist  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."  The  human  mind  is  never 
more  elevated  with  joy  than  in  the  ca'^e  of  those  who  have  just  escaped  some  great 
damjer.  Almost  all  our  strong  feelinjjs  and  perceptions  are  due  to  strong  con- 
trasts ;  light  is  never  so  bright  as  when  it  arises  out  of  daikness  ;  health  never  so 
sweet  as  when  it  follows  upon  sickness  ;  and  safety  never  so  pre'-ious  as  when 
realised  in  the  presence  of  danger.  Conceive  tlie  children  of  Israel  on  tde  night 
when  the  first  passover  was  kept,  standing  with  their  staves  in  their  hands  and 
their  shoes  upon  their  feet,  eating  their  last  meal  in  the  hou?e  of  bondage.  Who 
was  there  that  did  not  feel,  as  on  no  previous  occasion,  the  blessed  security  of  being 
in  covenant  with  God  ?  Would  not  the  consciousness  of  the  awful  danger  that  was 
abroad  deepen  and  sobmnise  that  sense  of  security  ?  We  say,  "  Let  us  keep  the 
feast."  We  understand  this  to  be  something  more  than  an  exhortation.  It  was  a 
command  to  the  Israelites  of  the  most  j)  isitive  kind.     God  intended  to  distinguish 


CHAP,  v.]  7.   CORINTHIANS.  393 

them  by  an  act  of  special  mercy  from  tlie  Egyptians  ;  but  this  distinction  was  all 
made  to  hinge  upon  their  compliance  with  the  directions  about  the  paschal  lamb. 
If  it  be  possible  to  conceive  an  Israelite  so  infatuated  as  to  neglect  those  dirt-ctions, 
we  need  not  tell  you  wbat  the  consequences  would  have  been.  "How  shall  we 
escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation?"  Oh!  beware,  I  earnestly  beseech  you, 
beware  of  trifling  in  a  case  like  this  !  Eecollect,  "  it  is  not  a  vain  thing  for  you ; 
because  it  is  your  life  "  ;  it  is  the  life  of  your  souls.  Shall  we  put  this  matter  to 
the  proof  ?  We  have  described  the  feelings  of  the  Jewish  family  while  keeping  the 
passover  :  there  were  mingled  feelings — fear  of  the  danger  which  they  knew  to  be 
so  near,  gratitude  to  God  who  had  spread  the  shield  of  His  protection  over  them, 
and  reverence  for  that  mysterious  blood  which  God  had  appointed  as  the 
distinguishing  mark  between  those  whom  He  would  protect  and  those  whom  He 
would  destroy.  Now  on  this  great  day  of  the  feast  does  your  state  of  mind  resemble 
theirs?  Have  you  a  sense  of  the  nearness  of  appalling  danger?  No  one  can 
estimate  the  greatness  of  the  deliverance  wrought  who  has  not  felt,  personally  and 
deeply,  the  greatness  and  the  nearness  of  the  danger  incurred.  What  was  it  that 
made  the  feast  of  the  passover,  at  its  first  celebration,  so  intensely  interesting 
to  the  Israelites  ?  what,  but  the  knowledge  that  the  angel  of  death  was  at  their 
very  doors  ?  They  never  kept  the  passover  so  heartily  afterwards ;  they  never 
afterwards  had  such  a  sense  of  deliverance  from  actual  and  imminent  danger. 
(-/.   E.    Ha)ikiusoii,   1\[.A.)  Our  pa>:f<orer  : — I.    Ouk  passover  sacuifice.      The 

death  of  the  paschal  lamb  saved  at  le-ist  one  life  in  the  household,  and  was  the 
security  of  them  all.  Because  it  died,  the  firstborn  did  not  die.  The  blood 
sheltered  and  preserved  ;  and  the  angel  passed  over  the  household  whose  posts  were 
tinctured  with  the  ruby  pledge  of  safety.  And  so,  distinctly  and  clearly  in  the 
apostle's  mind  here,  the  one  conception  of  Christ's  death  which  answeis  to  this 
metaphor  is  that  which  sees  in  Christ's  death  a  death  of  expiation  ;  though  not 
so  distinctly  as  in  other  instances,  a  death  of  substitution.  Because  He  dies,  the 
destruction  and  punishment  does  not  fall  on  the  man  who  is  housed  behind  the 
shelter  of  His  blood.  II.  Our  passover  feast.  The  slaying  of  the  lamb  provided 
in  the  old  ritual  the  material  for  the  feast ;  and,  says  Paul,  in  effect,  so  it  is  with 
us.  The  Christ  who  has  died  as  a  sacrament  is  the  nourishment  and  food  of  our 
souls.  We  live  on  tlie  sacrifice  ;  "  let  us  keep  the  feast."  What  Paul  is  thinking 
about  here  is  the  whole  Christian  life  which  he  compares  to  that  passover  feast. 
And  his  exhortation,  "  Let  us  keep  the  feast,"  is,  in  fact,  first  of  all,  this — Do  you 
Christian  men  and  women  see  to  it  that  your  whole  life  be  a  participation  in  the 
sacrifice  of  the  slain  Lamb.  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of  the 
Son  of  Man,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."  And  how  are  we  to  feed  upon  a  slain  Christ? 
By  faith,  by  meditation,  by  continual  carrying  in  grateful  hearts,  in  vivid  memories, 
and  in  obedient  wills,  the  great  sacrifice  on  which  our  hopes  build.  Let  your 
minds  feed  upon  His  truth,  and  your  love  feed  upon  His  love  ;  let  your  wills  feed 
upon  His  commandment ;  let  your  consciences  feed  upon  His  great  cleansing 
sacrifice;  let  your  whole  hopes  fasten  on  His  faithful  promise;  and  bring  your 
spirits  in  all  their  parts  into  contact  with  His  Spirit,  and  the  life  will  pass  from 
Him  to  you.  As  our  Christian  life  should  be  all  a  feast  of  continual  participation 
in  Christ,  so  it  should  be  all  a  memorial  of  Him.  The  passover  was  the  perpetual 
calling  to  mind  year  by  year  of  that  great  deliverance.  What  tenacity  of  national 
memory  is  shown  in  that  continual  observance  of  it  till  this  very  day  1  So  should 
we  ever  carry  in  our  remembrance  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  whether 
we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever  we  do,  do  all  in  memory  of  Htm,  moulding  all 
our  lives  by  the  pattern  and  for  the  sake  of  His  dying  love.  III.  Our  Christian 
PUBiFYiNO.  "  Purge  out  the  old  leaven."  Think  of  the  scrupulous  Jewish 
householder  the  night  before  the  passover,  with  his  lighted  candle,  searching 
through  every  corner  of  his  house,  where  there  was  any  chance  of  a  bit  of 
leavened  matter  being  concealed.  That  is  the  sort  of  thing  we  have  to  do. 
Better  cultivate  a  conscience  that  is  over-scrupulous  than  one  that  is  over- 
indulgent.  And,  mind,  it  is  you  that  have  to  do  it.  God  will  do  it  if  you 
ask  Him  ;  God  will  he\p  you  to  do  it  if  you  will  let  Him  ;  but  God  cannot  do  it 
without  you,  and  you  cannot  do  it  without  God.  Therefore,  two  things,  a  large 
part  of  our  cleansing  must  be  our  submitting  ourselves  to  His  cleansing  and 
cultivating  the  faith  which  unites  us  to  the  cleansing  power.  Second,  a  part  of 
our  cleansing  must  be  in  reliance  upon  His  Divine  help,  ourselves  taking  the 
brush  into  our  hands,  and  ourselves  scrubbing  vigorously  till  we  get  rid  of  the 
pollution.      And,   bejoud    that,    remember   further,    that   this    self-purifying    is 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


an  absolutely  indispensable  condition  of  your  keeping  the  feast.  "  Blessed  are 
the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God  "  is  but  the  same  teaching  as  that  of  my 
text :  "  Purge  out  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  ke^p  the  feast."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Christ  our  j)assover  : — Observe — 1.  God's  greatest  mercies  to  His  Church  are  attended 
with  the  greatest  plagues  upon  their  enemies.  The  passover  was  the  salvation 
of  Israel  and  ruin  of  Egypt.  2.  God  provides  for  the  security  of  His  people, 
before  He  lays  His  wrathful  hand  upon  their  adversaries.  I.  Chkist  is  oub  pass- 
over.  Christ  is  only  designated  in  the  New  Testament  as  a  Lamb,  as  being  sig- 
nificant of  the  innocence  of  His  person,  the  meekness  of  His  nature.  His  sufficiency 
for  His  people.  1.  The  design  of  the  passover  was  to  set  forth  Christ.  All  the 
sacrifices  which  were  appointed  by  God  as  parts  of  worship,  were  designed  to  keep 
up  the  acknowledgment  of  the  fall  of  man,  and  to  support  his  faith  in  the  promised 
Redeemer.  Chri>t  is  the  real  accomplishment  of  all  ;  He  is  our  mystical,  spiritual, 
heavenly,  perfect  Passover.  And,  indeed,  if  we  consider  all  the  circumstances  in 
the  institution,  they  seem  not  worthy  of  the  wisdom  of  God  if  they  be  not  referred 
to  some  other  n)ystery  :  and  what  can  that  be  but  the  Redeemer  of  the  world 
represented  thereby?  Why  should  so  much  care  be  in  the  choice  and  separation 
of  a  lamb  ?  How  can  we  think  God  should  appoint  so  many  ceremonies  in  it,  lay 
such  a  charge  for  the  strict  observation  of  them,  if  He  designed  it  not  as  a  prop  to 
their  faith,  a  ground  to  expect  a  higher  and  spiritual  deliverance  by  the  blood  of 
the  Messiah,  as  well  as  a  trial  ot  their  obedience,  a  memorial  of  their  temporal 
deliverance,  and  a  sign  for  the  direction  of  the  angel  in  the  execution  of  his  com- 
mission ?  2.  The  believers  in  that  time  regarded  it  as  a  type  of  the  Messiah  (Heb. 
xi.  28).  3.  The  pascbal  lamb  was  the  fittest  to  represent  Christ.  It  was  a  sacrifice 
and  a  feast — a  sacrifice  in  the  killing  it  and  sprinkling  the  blood,  a  feast  in  their 
feeding  upon  it.  It  represents  Christ  as  a  victim  satisfying  God,  as  a  feast 
refreshing  ns  ;  He  was  offered  to  God  for  the  expiation  of  our  sins.  He  is  offered  to 
us  for  application  to  our  souls.  The  truth  of  this  proposition  will  appear — (1)  In 
the  resemblance  between  the  paschal  lamli  and  the  Redeemer,  (a)  A  lamb  is  a 
meek  creature.  It  hurts  none  ;  it  hangs  not  back  when  it  is  led  to  the  slaughter — 
no  greater  emblem  of  patience  to  be  found  among  irrational  creatures.  How 
strange  was  our  Saviour's  humility  in  entering  into  such  a  life  !  How  much  more 
stupendous  in  submitting  to  such  a  death,  as  shameful  as  His  life  was  miserable  ! 
From  this  paschal  lamb  typifying  the  Redeemer  the  Jews  might  have  learned,  not 
to  expect  a  Messiah  wading  through  the  world  in  blood  and  slaughter,  and  flourishing 
with  temporal  victories  and  prosperity,  but  one  meek,  humble,  and  lowly,  suiting 
the  temper  of  the  lamb  which  represented  Him  in  the  passover.  (b)  It  was  to  be  a 
lamb  without  blemii-h  (Exod.  xii.  .5).  It  was  to  be  entire  in  all  its  parts,  sound, 
without  bruisp,  scab,  or  maim  ;  and  the  reason  why  it  was  separated  four  days 
before  the  killing  of  it  was  that  they  might  have  time  to  understand  whether  it  had 
any  spot  or  defect  in  it.  So  is  the  Lamb  of  God  ;  He  was  ho'y  in  the  production  of 
His  nature  as  well  as  in  the  actions  of  His  life.  From  the  first  mouient  of  His 
conception  He  was  filled  with  all  supernatural  grace  according  to  tlie  capacity  of 
His  humanity ;  His  union  with  the  Di\ine  nature  secured  Him  against  the  sinful 
infirmities  of  our  nature,  and  made  all  supernatural  perfections  due  to  Him, 
whereby  He  might  be  fitted  for  all  holy  operations.  As  He  was  "  that  holy  thing  " 
in  His  birth  (Luke  i.  35),  so  He  was  righteous  to  the  last  moment  of  His  life.  The 
law  of  God  was  within  His  heart,  signified  by  the  tables  of  the  law  laid  up  in  the 
ark.  (c)  The  lamb  was  to  be  chosen,  aud  set  apart  three  days,  and  killed  the 
fourth  in  the  evening  (Exod.  xii.  6).  Our  Saviour  was  separate  from  men,  mani- 
fested Himself  in  the  work  of  His  prophetical  office  three  years  and  upwards,  before 
He  was  offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  in  the  fourth  year,  after  He  had  been  solemnly 
inaugurated  in  the  exercise  of  His  office.  It  was  ordered  by  God  to  be  killed  in  the 
evening,  to  signify  the  sacrifice  of  the  Messiah  in  the  evening  of  the  world.  He 
was  crucified  at  the  end  of  the  second  age  of  the  world,  the  age  of  the  law,  and  the 
beginning  of  the  third  age,  that  of  the  gospel,  whicli  is  called  in  Scripture  the  "last 
times  "  (Heb.  i.  2).  (d)  The  lamb  was  roasted  with  fire  whole  (Exod.  xii.  4,  8,  9), 
not  sodden.  To  put  them  in  mind  of  the  hardship  they  endured  in  the  brick- 
kilns of  Egypt,  and  as  a  type  of  the  scorching  sufferings  of  the  Redeemer.  Prol)ably 
aUuding  to  this  roasting  of  the  paschal  lamb.  He  bore  the  wrath  of  that  God  who 
is  a  consuming  fire,  without  any  water,  any  mitigation  or  comfort  in  His  torments. 
It  may  note  also  the  gradual  rising  of  the  suffering  (if  Christ.  As  His  exaltation 
was  not  all  at  one  time,  but  by  degrees,  so  were  His  suft'erings,  by  outward  wounds, 
cutting  reproaches,  and  inward  agonies,     (e)  Not  a  bone  of  the  paschal  lamb  was 


CHAP,  v.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  395 

to  be  broken  (Exod.  xii.  4G).  This  was  fulfilled  in  our  Saviour  (John  xix.  36). 
Death  had  not  a  full  power  over  Him,  He  was  not  broken  to  pieces  by  the  greatness 
of  His  sufferings.  (2)  There  is  a  resemblance  in  the  effects  or  consequents  of  the 
passover.  (<i)  The  diverting  the  destroying  angel  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood 
upon  the  posts,  to  be  a  mark  to  the  angel  to  spare  the  firstborn  of  such  houses,  was 
the  main  end  in  the  institution  (Exod.  xii.  12,  13).  It  is  only  under  the  warrant  of 
this  blood  that  we  can  be  safe.  The  Redeemer's  blood  shed  for  us,  and  sprinkled 
on  us,  preserves  our  souls  to  eternal  life.  As  the  destroying  sword  did  not  touch 
the  Israelites,  so  condemning  wrath  shall  not  strike  those  that  are  under  the 
protection  of  it :  death  shall  have  no  power  over  them,  {h)  Upon  this  succeeded 
that  liberty  God  had  designed  for  them  (Exod.  xii.  31).  As  it  secured  them  from 
death,  so  it  was  the  earnest  of  their  deliverance,  and  broke  the  chains  of  their 
slavery.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  foundation  of  the  full  deliverance  of  His 
people,  and  the  earnest  of  the  fruition  of  the  purchased  and  promised  inheritance. 
This  was  the  conquest  of  Pharaoh,  upon  which  soon  after  followed  his  destruction. 
The  Israelites'  slavery  ended  when  their  sacrifices  were  finished  ;  the  efficacy  of 
this  Divine  passover  delivers  men  from  a  spiritual  captivity,  (c)  After  this  pass- 
over  they  do  not  enjoy  their  liberty,  but  begin  their  march  to  Canaan,  the  promised 
and  delightful  land.  So  by  the  merit  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  the  true  Israelite 
turns  liis  face  from  earth  to  heaven,  from  a  world  that  lies  in  wickedness  to  an 
inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  and  travels  towards  Canaan.  Is  Christ  called 
our  passover?  Then — 1.  The  study  of  the  Old  Testament  is  advantageous.  The 
Old  Testament  delivers  the  types,  the  New  intei'prets  them  :  the  Old  presents  them 
like  money  in  a  bag,  the  New  spreads  them  and  discovers  the  value  of  the  coin  ; 
the  Israelites  in  the  Old  felt  the  weight  of  the  ceremonies,  believers  in  the  New 
enjoy  the  riches  of  them.  2.  Upon  what  a  slender  thread  doth  the  doctrine  of 
transubstantiation  hang !  Christ  is  here  called  the  passover — was  the  paschal 
lamb  therefoie  substantially  the  body  of  Christ?  3.  The  ancient  Jews  were  under 
a  covenant  of  grace.  Christ  was  the  end,  the  spirit,  the  life  of  their  sacrifices. 
The  passover,  rock,  sacrifices,  manna,  were  the  swaddling-bands  wherein  He  was 
wrapped.  They  had  the  sun  under  a  cloud,  we  the  Sun  at  noon-dny  in  His  glory.  4. 
In  the  secuiity  Ciirist  procures.  The  destroying  angel  was  not  to  enter  into  any 
sprinkled  house,  no  passage  was  afi'orded  to  him.  The  wrath  of  God,  or  the  malice 
of  the  devil  can  have  no  power  over  them  that  are  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of 
Christ.  In  the  efficacy.  The  blood  of  the  lamb  was  but  a  sign  of  that  deliverance 
of  the  Israelites,  but  could  not  purge  their  defiled  consciences  ;  but  the  blood  of 
our  Lamb  hath  merited  our  salvation,  can  cleanse  our  consciences  from  dead  and 
condemning  works  to  serve  the  living  God.  This  comfort  is  the  greater  by  how 
much  the  tyrant  we  are  delivered  from  is  more  dreadful  that  Pharaoh,  whose 
design  is  not  only  like  his  to  affiict  our  bodies  but  tumble  our  souls  and  bodies  into 
the  same  hell  with  himself.  It  is  from  the  wrath  of  God  our  passover  hath  delivered 
us  ;  and  what  is  the  anger  of  Pharaoh  to  the  fury  of  an  offended  Deity?  It  is  true 
deliverance  is  yet  but  begun  ;  it  is  not  yet  perfect ;  miseries  and  spiritual  contests  are 
to  be  expected.  Pharaoh  will  pursue,  but  shall  not  overtake ;  death  shall  not 
swallow  up  those  who  are  sprinkled  with  this  holy  blood.  1.  Thankfully  remember 
this  passover.  2.  Inquire  whetber  He  be  our  passover.  He  is  a  passover,  but  is 
He  a  lamb  eaten  by  us,  owned  by  us  ?  He  is  ours  by  the  gift  of  God,  but  is  He 
ours  by  the  acceptation  of  our  souls  ?  This  Lamb  is  ours  in  the  liberty,  life,  glory, 
and  rest  He  hath  purchased,  when  we  are  like  Him,  when  we  learn  of  Him.  3. 
Have  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  killing  the  lamb  signified  the  death  of 
Christ,  the  sprinkling  the  blood  signified  the  application  of  it  by  faith.  It  was  not 
the  blood  contained  in  the  veins  of  the  lamb  or  shed  upon  the  ground,  that  was  the 
mark  of  deliverance,  but  sprinkled  upon  the  posts  :  nor  is  it  the  blood  of  Christ 
circulaiing  in  His  body  or  shed  upon  the  Cross,  which  solely  delivers  us,  but  as 
applied  by  faith  to  the  heart.  That  was  sprinkled  upon  every  house  that  desired 
safety,  and  this  upon  every  soul  that  desires  happiness.  Had  an  Israelite's  family 
neglected  this  it  had  felt  the  edge  of  the  angel's  sword;  the  lamb  had  not  availed 
him,  not  by  a  defect  of  the  sucrifice,  but  by  their  own  negligence  or  contempt  of 
the  condition.  Or  had  they  used  any  other  mark,  they  had  not  diverted  the  stroke  : 
no  work,  no  blood  bst  the  blood  and  sufferings  of  the  Redeemer,  can  take  away  the 
sin  of  the  world.  4.  Let  us  leave  the  service  of  sin.  The  Israelites  after  this 
passover  did  no  more  work  at  the  brick-kilns  of  Egypt.  They  ceased  to  be 
Pharaoh's  slaves,  and  began  to  be  the  Lord's  freemen.  II.  Christ  is  a  sacrifice. 
I  shall  lay  down  some  propositions  for  the  illustrating  of  this  doctrine.    1.  Sacrifices 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

were  instituted  as  types  of  Clirist.     (1)  They  were  instituted  by  God.     (2)  No 
other  reason  cun  he  rendered  of  the  institution  of  them,  but  as  typical  of  the  great 
sacrifice  of  the  Eedeemer.     (3)  Clirist  did  really  answer  to  these  types.     2.  The 
sacrifices  thus  instituted  were  of  themselves  insufficient,  and  could  not  expiate  sin ; 
they  must,  therefore,  receive  their  accouii^lishment  in  some  other.     But  being 
shadows  by  their  institution,  they  could  make  nothing  perfect  (Heb.  x.  1,  11).     (1) 
It  was  not  consistent  with  the  honour  of  God  to  be  contented  with  the  blood  of  a 
beast  for  an  expiation  of  sin.     How  could  there  be  in  it  a  discovery  of  the  severity 
of  His  justice,  tlie  purity  of  His  holiness,  or  the  grandeurs  of  His  grace?     (2)  They 
have  no  proportion  to  the  sin  of  man.      The  sin  of  a  rational  creature  is  too  foul  to 
be  expiated  by  the  blood  of  an  irrational  creature.     (3)  The  reiteration  of  them 
shows  their  iiisufficinncy.     They  were  rather  a  commemoration  of  sin,  and  confes- 
sions of  it,  than  expiations  of  any — rather  accusers  than  atoners.     (4)  God  had 
often  spoke  slightingly  of  them.     He  resembles  them  to  the  cutting  off  a  dog's  neck, 
when  done  with  an  unholy  heart  (Isa.  Ixvi.  3).     He  professeth  He  had  no  delight 
in  them  (Psa.  xl.  6).     And  what  is  said  of  this  may  be  said  of  all  our  duties  and 
performances,  the  staves  upon  which  men  naturally  lean  for  acceptation  of  their 
persons.     3.  Such  a  sacrifice,  therefore,  is  necessary  for  a  sinful  creature.     No 
creature  can  be  such  a  sacrifice.    As  the  apostle  argues,  "  If  righteousness  be  by  the 
law,  then  was  Clirist  dead  in  vain  "  (Gal.  ii.  21).    (1)  What  is  a  sacrifice  for  sin  must 
be  pure  and  sinless.     God  will  not  accept  a  defiled  offering.     (2)  An  infinite  sacrifice 
is  necessary  for  a  sin  in  some  respects  infinite,  for  every  sin  entrencheth  upon  the 
honour  of  an  infinite  God.     (3)  Necessary  in  regard  of  tlae  justice  of  God,  which  is 
an  immutable  and  infinite  peifection  of  the  Divine  essence.     4.  Christ  only  was  fit 
to  be  this  sacrifice.     5.  It  was  necessary  in  regard  of  His  office  of  priesthood,  that 
He  should  be  a  sacrifice.      6.  Jesus  Ch>ist,  then,  was  a  sacrifice  in  His  human 
nature.      7.    That  whereby  this  sacrifice  was  sanctified,  was  the  Divine  nature. 
Every  sacrifice  was  sanctified  by  the  altar  (Mntt.  xxiii.  19).      8.  Upon  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  all  His  other  sacerdotal  acts  depend,  and  from  thence  tbey  receive  their 
validity  for  us.     (1)  This  was  the  ground  of  His  ascension  and  enti'ance  into  heaven 
as  a  priest.      The  high  priest  was  not  to  enter  within  tlie  veil  without  blood.     (2) 
This  is  the  foundation  of  His  intercession.     Tbere  are  two  functions  of  Christ's 
priesthood — oblation  and  intercession.     (3)  This  is  the  foundation  of  all  the  grace 
any  have.     The  conveyance  of  all  the  gracious  love  of  God  is  through  this  channel. 
In  redemption  by  His  blood  the  riches  of  the  grace  of  God  abounded,  and  that  with 
the  marks  of  the  highest  wisdom  (Eph.  i.  7,  8).      III.  Christ  was  sacrificed  for 
us — vTTip  when  joined  with  suffering  for  another,  always  signifies  in  another's  stead 
and  place ;  it  is  so  used  Rom.  v.  7.      This  will  be  cleared  if  we  consider — 1.  That 
Christ  could  not  be  a  sacrifice  for  Himself.     The  Messiah  was  to  be  cut  off,  but 
not  for  Himself  (Dan.  ix.  26).     He  needed  no  sacrifice  for  Himself.     2.  Sacrifices 
implied  this.     They  had  a  relation  to  the  offerer,  and  were  substituted  in  his  place. 
8.    The  whole  economy  of  Christ  is  expressed  in  the  whole  Scripture  to  have  a 
relation  to  us.      All  things  preparatory  to  His  sufferings  were  for  us.     4.  Our  sins 
were  imputed  to  Him  as  to  a  sacrifice.      Christ  the  just  is  put  in  the  p'ace  of  the 
unjust  to  suffer  for  them  (1  Pet.  iii.  18).     Clirist  is  said  to  bear  sin  as  a  sacrifice 
bears  sin  (Isa.  liii.  10,  12).     His  soul  was  made  an  offering  for  it.     (1)  It  cannot  be 
understood  of  the  infection  of  sin.     The  filth  of  our  nature  was  not  transmitted  to 
Him.      (2)  But  that  our  sin  was  the  meritorious  cause  of  His  punishment.     All 
those  phrases  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins  (chap.  xv.  3),  and  was  delivered  to  death 
for  our  offences  (Rom.  iv.  23),  clearly  import  sin  to  be  the  meriturious  cause  of  the 
punishment  Christ  endured  :  sin  cannot  be  said  to  be  the  cause  of  punishment  but 
by  way  of  merit.     If  Christ  bad  not  been  ju--t  He  had  not  been  capable  of  suffering 
for  us.      (3)  Our  sins  were  charged  upon  Him  in  regard  of  their  guilt.      Our  sins 
are  so  imputed  to  Him  as  that  they  are  not  imputed  to  us  (2  Cor.  v.  19),  and  not 
imputed  to  us,  because  He  was  made  a  curse  for  us  (Gal.  iii.  13).     (a)  The  apostle 
distinguishes  His  second  coming  from  His  first  by  this  (Heb.   ix.  28),  "He  shall 
appear  the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation."    (h)  He  cannot  be  well  supposed 
to  suffer  for  our  sins,  if  our  sins  in  regard  of  their  guilt  be  not  supposed  to  be  charged 
upon  Him.     How  could  He  die,  if  He  were  not  a  reputed  sinner  ?     5.  The  sufferings 
of  this  sacrifice  are  imputed  unto  us.     He  took  our  sins  upon  Himself,  as  if  He 
had   sinned,  and   gave   us   the   benefit  of   His   sufferings,  as  if   we  had  actually 
suffered.      The    redounding    of    these    sufferings    to    us,    ariseth — 1.    From    the 
dignity  of  the  person  undertaking  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  us,  and  the  union  of  our 
nature  with  hi-.     2.  From  union  with  this  infinite  Person  by  faith.     All  believers 


CHAP,  v.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  '337 

have  a  communion  with  Him  in  His  death  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  If  Christ  be  a  sacrifice — 
1.  We  may  see  the  miserable  blindness  of  the  Jews  in  expecting  the  Messiah  as  a 
temporal  conqueror.  2.  If  Christ  be  a  sacrifice,  it  shows  the  necessity  of  a  satisfac- 
tion to  the  justice  of  God,  and  a  higher  satisfaction  than  men  could  perform.  3. 
Christ  as  sacrificed.  Is  the  true  and  immediate  object  of  faith.  4.  It  is  no  true 
opinion  that  Christ  died  only  for  an  example.  5.  Comfort  to  evei-y  true  believer. 
He  was  sacrificed  for  us.  God  counted  Him  a  sinner  for  our  sakes,  that  He 
might  count  us  righteous  for  His  sake.  (1)  As  Christ  hath  been  sacrificed  for  them, 
so  He  has  been  accepted  for  them.  (2)  This  s.ictitice  unites  all  the  attributes  of 
God  together  for  a  believer's  interest.  (3)  This  sacrifice  is  of  eternal  virtue.  (4) 
The  ertects  of  this  sacrifice,  therefore,  are  perfect,  glorious,  and  eternal.  6.  We 
must  then  lay  hold  on  this  sacrifice.  7.  We  must  be  enemies  to  sin,  since  Christ 
was  a  sacrifice  for  it.  Unless  sla  die  in  us,  we  cannot  have  an  evidence  that  this 
sacrifice  was  slain  for  us.      (Thomas  Hacket.)  The  Christian  pansovtr  : — It  is 

remarkable  that  this  is  Paul's  only  allusion  to  the  Jewish  Passover.  Paul  has  been 
commanding  the  Corinthian  Christians  to  cast  out  from  their  midst  a  gross-ly 
profligate  person.  He  then  desires  to  enjoin  upon  them  to  get  rid  of  corruption  in 
themselves  as  well  as  in  others,  and  corruption  suggests  the  thought  of  leaven, 
secretly,  silently,  victoriously  spreading  through  the  mass.  And  leaveu  suggests— 
in  his  way  of  going  off  at  a  tangent — the  thought  of  the  scrupulous  search  of  the 
Jewish  householder  for  it  in  his  house  in  preparation  for  the  paschal  feast ;  and 
that  suggests  the  paschal  feast  itself.  And  so  without  explanation,  and  quite 
incidentally,  he  drops,  as  it  were  by  the  way,  this  great  thought.  I.  First,  then, 
Paul  thought  of  Christ's  work  as  a  sacrifice.  It  was  a  sacrifice,  though  of  a 
very  singular  kind.  The  i^assover  lamb  was  slwin  by  the  head  of  each  household. 
It  was  ottered  upon  no  altar  ;  it  was  prepared  by  no  priest,  but  for  all  that  it  was 
a  sacrifice,  and  that  of  an  expiatory  character.  You  may  call  it  a  gross,  low, 
infantile  conception.  Be  it  so  !  It  is  the  conception  of  the  rite  at  all  events.  Paul 
lays  his  hand  upon  that  sacrifice,  and  he  says  it  meant  Jesus  Christ.  So  he  implies 
two  things,  both  of  which  are  gravely  contested  by  many  to-day  :  the  one  that, 
whatsoever  the  date  of  these  Jewish  sacrifices,  they  had  not  only  a  symbolical  but 
a  prophetic  aspect ;  and  the  other  that  the  centre-point  of  their  prophetic  message 
in  reference  to  Jesus  Christ  was  His  death,  wherein  and  whereby  men  were  free 
from  the  penal  consequences  of  death  in  its  sternest  sense.  Is  there  any  theory 
about  Christ  and  His  death  which  warrants  the  application  of  these  words  "our 
passover  "  to  Him,  except  one  which  frankly  and  fully  recognises  the  sacrificial 
and  atoning  aspect  of  His  death?  Paul  may  have  been  right  or  he  may  have  been 
wrong.  That  is  what  he  believed,  at  any  rate.  But  I  have  yet  another  step  to 
take.  Paul's  Master  took  precisely  the  same  point  of  view.  I  claim  Christ  as  the 
first  who  taught  us  that  He  was  our  jiassover.  And  I  point  to  the  rite  that  He 
established  as  the  great  standing  token  that  His  conception  of  His  work  was  the 
same  as  the  apostle's.  Now  I  do  not  want  to  pin  you  down  to  any  doctrine  of  an 
atonement,  but  I  do  want  to  lay  upon  your  hearts  this,  which  I  for  one  believe  with 
all  my  heart,  that  no  conception  of  Christ,  His  nature.  His  work,  His  life  and  death, 
is  full  toned  and  in  accordance  with  His  own  teaching  which  does  not  proclaim 
Christ  is  our  passover.  And  I  ask  you.  Is  that  the  Christ  that  you  know  and  the 
Christ  that  you  trust  ?  II.  If  Christ  is  our  passover  our  lives  will  be  a  feast. 
If  He  indeed  has,  as  our  passover,  secured  for  us  safety  and  liberty,  then,  of  course, 
all  life  will  take  a  new  aspect.  And  if  we  recognise  the  fact  that  the  Lamb  slain  is 
the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  administering  Providence  and  guiding  the 
world  and  the  Church,  and  ever  present  with  each  of  us,  if  we  trust  Him,  to  bless 
and  keep  us,  then  a  flush  of  gladness  will  be  diffused  over  all  life.  Just  as  when 
the  year  turns,  and  the  sunshine  begins  to  gather  power,  even  a  grim  landscape 
undergoes  a  subtle  change,  and  is  a  prophet  of  the  coming  summer,  so  we,  if  Christ 
is  our  passover,  will  be  possessed,  in  the  fact  and  in  the  recognition  of  the  fact,  of 
a  charm  which,  if  it  does  not  annihilate,  at  least  modifies  all  burdens  and  troubles, 
and  which  will  bring  into  any  life  that  is  true  to  it  a  dcp,  quiet,  calm  joy  far  more 
real,  noble,  blessed,  and  the  ally  of  great  thoughts  and  deeds,  than  the  surface 
ripple  of  laughter  and  of  mirth  which  men  baptize  by  that  great  name.  But, 
brethren,  remember  that  the  words  ai'e  a  commandment,  and  that  implies  that  the 
realisation  of  this  gladness,  which  is  the  natural  fruit  of  the  conception  of  Christ's 
death  of  w'hich  I  have  been  speaking,  depends  very  largely  upon  ourselves.  I  do 
not  think  Christian  people  as  a  whole  realise  as  much  as  they  ought  to  do  the  sin 
of  sorrow  and  the  duty  of  rejoicing.     But  that  is  not  all  which  is  conveyed  in  this 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

thouglit  of  the  feast  which  life  becomes  ■when  Christ's  death  is  recognised  as  our 
expiation.  There  is  further  involved  the  duty  of  participating  in  the  fle:-h  of  the 
sacrifice.  You  have  to  feed  upon  the  Christ  who  is  sacrificed  for  you,  or  the  sacri- 
fice is  of  no  avail.  What  Christ  is  it  that  nourishes  a  man?  The  Christ  tliat 
taught  great  and  wonderful  things?  Yes,  in  some  degree.  The  Clirist  that  walked 
belore  men,  the  sweet  Examp'e  of  all  duty,  and  the  sum  of  whatsoever  things  were 
lovely  and  of  good  report?  Yes,  in  some  degree,  but  I  believe  that  the  Christ  who 
feeds  the  whole  man,  and  who,  being  partaken  of,  gives  immortal  life  to  the  man  who 
feeds  on  Him,  is  the  Christ  who  died  and  gave  His  flesh  and  His  blood  for  the  life 
of  the  woi-ld.  Ph\siologists  will  tell  you  that  it  is  possible  to  feed  a  man  on  foods 
which  have  so  little  jjower  of  supplying  all  the  constituents  necessary  for  the  human 
body  that  he  may  eat  them  and  be  starved.  And  there  is  a  version  of  the  Christ 
which,  if  men  live  upon,  they  will  live  a  very  feeble  life,  and,  as  I  believe,  will  come 
near  starving.  IH.  Lastly,  if  we  feed  upon  Chbist  our  passoveb  we  shall  be 
PURE.  There  is  no  way  of  getting  thoroughly  rid  of  the  old  leaven  except  tiie  one 
way  of  taking  Christ  for  the  food  of  our  souls.  If  He  is  our  bread  as  well  a-<  our 
sacrifice,  then  we  are  bound  to  serve  Him  in  righteousness.  What  did  He  liie  to 
deliver  us  from  ?  Sin.  What  did  He  die  to  make  us  ?  I'ure  and  righteous.  There 
is  no  reason  for  any  man  believing  that  .Jesus  Christ  is  his  passover  unless  He  is 
Ihat  man's  purity.  The  obligation,  the  inchnation,  and  the  ability  to  clennse  our- 
selves from  all  filthiuess  of  the  flesh  and  spirit  are  inseparably  wrapped  up  with 
the  conception  of  His  de  ith  as  the  means  of  our  life  and  safety.  The  Jew  had 
first  to  cast  out  the  leaven,  then  to  partake  of  the  passover.  We  have  a 
better  and  an  easier  tnsk;  first  to  partake  of  the  passover  aud  then  to  cast 
out  the  leaven.  Do  not  put  the  cart  before  the  horse,  as  some  of  you  do,  and 
try  to  make  yourselves  better,  in  order  that  you  may  have  a  right  to  a  shar -:  in 
Christ.  Begin  with  eating  the  bread,  and  then  in  the  strength  of  that  meat, 
rejoice  all  your  days,  and  purge  yourselves  from  all  iniquity.  [A.  Maclaren,  B.I',) 
Christ  our  passover : — The  Rrv.  Dr.  Bowman,  of  the  Church  Missionary  Society, 
was  enabled  to  erect  a  place  of  worship  in  connection  with  the  Calcutta  Leper 
Asylum,  and  an  aged  woman,  over  eighty-two  a  ears  old,  was  there  led  by  the 
preacher  to  the  Divine  Healer.  A  sceptic  asked  her  if  the  many  gods  and  god'lesses 
of  her  own  relif.'ion  would  not  suffice,  but  she  had  an  answer  ready  for  him  :  "None 
of  them  died  for  me."  ClirUfs  sacrifice  a  quickenini)  truth: — The  sacrifice  of 
innocence  for  guilt  is  the  profoundest  truth  which  God  has  ever  exemplified  in  a 
human  life.  Yet  not  mere  trutli,  but  duty,  not  theology,  but  practice,  is  the  end  of 
revelation.  Truth  is  not  revealed  or  offered  by  prophets.  Saviour,  or  ajjostles  for 
truth's  sake,  but  always  for  upbuilding  in  righteousness.  There  is  no  more  danger- 
ous falsehood  abroad  than  the  assertion  that  truth  should  be  sought  fur  its  own 
sake.  Yet  a  vast  deal  of  this  truth-seeking  and  hf  aring  is  an  intellectual  voluptu- 
ousness, a  spiritual  self-gratification,  a  selfish  indulgence  of  pleasurable  emotions, 
just  as  deadly  to  the  soul  a>;  bodily  sensualism.  It  is  as  truly  immoral  to  seek 
truth  out  of  mere  love  of  knowing  it  as  it  is  to  seek  money  out  of  love  to  gain.  It 
is  an  idobitry — setting  of  the  worship  of  abstractions  and  genernlities  in  the  place 
of  the  living  God.  Truth  is  valuable  to  the  degree  thit  it  mnkes  us  true.  Truth 
that  is  not  utilised  as  the  Divine  energy  of  one's  lueing,  that  is  not  converted  into 
agt^ressive  goodness,  is  a  smiting  curse.  Truths  not  taken  into  the  soul,  as  fuel  for 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  kindle  into  a  hurning  enthusiasm  for  service,  are  as  virtueless  in 
character-building  and  spiritual  empowering  qualiiies  as  so  many  bricks.  Further, 
it  is  ruinou^i  to  have  our  good  impulses  quiikened  by  truth,  as  it  is  manifested 
in  the  sacrificial  life  and  death  of  Jesus,  and  then  allow  those  impulses  t"  die 
without  being  wrought  out  in  Divine  being  aud  doing.  The  knowledge  th^it  Christ 
sacrificed  Himself  on  our  behalf  will  rise  up  in  judgment  as  our  condemnation 
if  we  evade  sacrificing  ourselves  for  the  same  end  for  which  He  offered  up  His  life. 
Let  us  keep  the  feast: — Contemplate  the  paschal  feast — I.  In  its  relation  to  the 
Lord's  Supper.  I  do  not  supp'  se  that  the  apostle  was  actually  referring  t"  this, 
but  he  was  speaking  of  that  experience,  to  the  necessity  and  importance  of  which  our 
sacramental  feast  bears  witness.  1.  The  word  suggests — (1)  The  idea  of  a  sacred 
season,  and  thus  the  o'd  distinction  is  no  longer  to  be  drawn  in  our  lives  between 
things  secular  and  things  sacred  :  all  is  to  be  sanctified.  (2)  Enjoyment.  Our  life 
is  to  be  a  season  of  continuous  festivity.  In  both  these  senses  our  lives  are  to  be 
festal,  and  this  holy  ordinance  has  been  appointed  to  keej)  ever  before  our  minds 
the  true  idea  of  wh  it  our  lives  are  to  be.  2.  Observe  that — (1)  Tlie  Jewish  pass- 
over  was  a  continuous  commemoration  of  a  deliverance  wrought  out  for  Israel.     So 


CHAP,  v.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  399 

the  Holy  Commmiion  is  designed  to  be  a  perpetual  remembrance  of  that  wonderful 
deliver  nice  wrought  out  for  us  on  the  Cross  of  Calvary.  Human  gratitude  is  apt 
to  be  short-lived,  and  only  too  many  of  us  get  out  of  the  sight  of  the  Cro>s.  This 
feast  was  instituted  by  one  wlio  knew  our  human  frailty,  so  that  should  we  forget 
how  much  we  owe  to  His  d\  ing  love  we  may  straightway  be  brought  back  again  full 
in  view  of  His  Cross,  and  obtain  deeper  aud  clearer  apprehensions  of  th-  benefits 
that  redemption  brings  within  our  reach.  (2)  The  paschal  feast  was  furnished  by 
the  very  lamb  whose  blood  secured  the  safety  of  the  household.  So  Jesus,  the 
victim,  is  Himself  the  feast.  («)  If  the  only  object  of  the  Holy  Communion  had 
been  a  commemoration,  it  would  have  been  enough  that  the  bread  should  be  broken 
and  the  wine  should  be  poured  forth ;  for  there  was  nothing  in  the  fact  of  our 
Lord's  crucifixion  to  answer  to  the  eating  and  the  drinking.  The  lesson,  then,  is 
that  as  our  physical  bodies  are  continuously  dependent  upon  the  material  world,  so 
the  new  life  of  the  human  spirit  is  constantly  dependent  upon  a  Divine  supply. 
(/;)  But  in  order  to  receive  real  benefit  something  more  is  needed  than  the  mere 
partaking  of  the  consecrated  elements.  The  outward  act  is  designed  to  bring  your 
faith  to  bear  upon  the  thought  that  God  is  then  and  there  through  Christ  com- 
municating the  Divine  life  to  you ;  and  as  you  bring  your  faith  to  bear  upon  that 
act  of  God's  love  towards  you,  you  will  be  indeed  a  communicant,  (c)  But  the 
question  may  occur.  What  is  meant  bv  the  words,  "  This  is  My  body,  and  this  is  My 
blood "  ?  The  words  must  be  used  in  a  spiritual  sense.  For  if  we  could  have 
partaken  of  Christ's  material  body  and  blood  at  the  time  of  the  crucifixion  that 
would  have  produced  no  spiritual  change.  The  substance  so  received  w.iuld  have 
simply  assimilated  itself  to  our  bodily  tissues  in  the  usual  way.  Similarly,  if  a 
supernatural  act  of  transubstantiation  were  to  transpire  at  that  holy  table  the  mere 
reception  of  these  would  leave  us,  so  far  as  our  spnitual  condition  is  concerned, 
just  where  we  were  before.     II.  As  an  emblem  of  the  CrimsTiAx  life.     It  was — 

1.  The  feast  of  safety.  The  destroying  a>igel  was  passing  through  the  land,  but 
the  Israelites  feasted  in  safetv,  because  they  knew  that  they  were  safe  under  the 
blood-stained  lintel.  They  did  not  hope  or  think  about  it;  they  knew  they  were 
safe,  because  they  had  God's  word  for  it.  And  if  your  life  is  to  be  a  festal  life  you 
need  a  similar  consciousness.  Many  religious  people  seem  much  more  like  keeping 
a  funeral  than  a  feast.  They  are  always  complaining  of  their  doubts  and  fears. 
They  are  not  quite  clear  as  to  whether  they  hive  sprinkled  the  blood,  or,  if  they 
have  done  so,  they  do  not  take  to  themselves  the  full  comfort  which  belongs  to 
those  who  have  ;  they  don't  rest  upon  the  distinct  declaration  of  eternal  truth — "  I 
will  pass  over";  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  eternal  life."  We  must 
thank  ourselves  for  our  miseries  if  we  insist  on  doubting  the  Divine  faithfulness. 

2.  A  feast  of  deliverance.  They  were  happy  not  only  because  they  were  safe,  but 
because  they  were  free.  Thev  were  in  the  "  house  of  bondage  "  still ;  but  they  felt 
the  throbbings  of  national  life,  and  their  anticipations  told  them  that,  in  spite  of 
appearances,  they  were  free.  And  it  is  even  so  with  us.  Romans  vi.  is  just  as  true 
as  Romans  V.  Tl)e  latter  tells  us  about  our  justitication  ;  the  former  about  our 
deliverance  from  the  tyranny  of  sin.  I  don't  say  that  you  are  to  have  no  more 
temptation.  The  Israelites  had  not  done  with  enemies  when  they  crossed  the  sea. 
Indeed,  they  had  hardly  got  out  of  Egypt  before  Amalek  attacked  them  ;  and  you 
will  not  have  gone  very  far  along  your  spiritual  journey  before  temptation  wiU 
attack  you.  But  it  is  a  very  different  thing  to  be  attacked  by  Amalek  and  to  be  kept 
in  the  slavery  of  Pharaoh.  From  the  hand  of  Amalek  they  had  to  be  delivered  by 
the  same  G  kI  tiiat  had  delivered  them  out  of  the  power  of  Pharaoh.  And  even  so 
now  you  are  free  in  Christ  you  will  have  to  guard  your  liberties  by  employing  the 
same  Divine  power  that  set  you  free  to  defend  you.  3.  The  feast  of  separation. 
The  Egyptians  were  not  allowed  to  keep  it.  Up  t.)  that  time  the  Egyptians  and  the 
Israelites  had  lived  as  neighbours,  but  now  there  was  a  line  of  separation  between 
them.  If  you  have  not  sprinkled  che  paschal  blood  you  have  no  ri.ht  at  the  table 
of  the  Lord.  Nor  can  you  participate  in  that  feast  of  life  which  the  Christian  is 
privileged  to  keep  ;  ior  y  ai  belong  to  the  world,  and  the  world  has  no  part  in  the 
paschal  feast.  And  Christians  cannot  properly  enjoy  it  unless  they  are  content  to 
be  separate  from  the  world.  I  meet  with  not  a  few  Christians  from  whose  life  all 
happiness  seems  to  have  departed  just  for  this  reason.  They  are  not  willing  to  be 
separated,  and  so  t"ey  cannot  keep  the  feast.  4.  The  feast  of  purification.  "Not 
with  the  old  leaven,"  etc.  Careful  search  was  to  be  made,  and  all  that  was  leavened 
was  to  be  excluded  from  Iheir  nabitations.  And  here  is  a  very  important  lesson. 
We  may  be  delivered  from  the  tyranny  of  sin,  and  yet  how  much  of  latent  evil  may 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

still  lurk  within !  But  there  is  a  Holy  Spirit  of  burning  who  can  and  will  consume 
the  dross  if  we  are  only  willing  to  be  cleansed.  5.  The  feast  of  wayfaring  nieu. 
They  were  to  eat  it  in  haste,  with  shoes  on  their  feet,  &c.  And  if  you  want  to  enjoy 
the  passover  you  must  realise  that  you  are  a  wayfaring  man,  and  shape  your  life 
accordingly.  {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The  C hristian  feast : — The  text  is  justly 
supposed  to  have  some  reference  to  the  institution,  which  has  tire  same  place  under 
the  gospel  which  the  passover  had  under  the  law.     The  Lord's  Supper  was  intended 

I.  As  A  MEiioRiAL  OF  THE  suJTFEKiNGs  OF  CuKisT  FOR  His  PEOPLE.     This  we  learn 

from  the  words  of  Jesus  at  its  first  institution,  and  that  we  are  to  "  remember" 
Him  particularly  as  saffermg  for  our  sins  is  evident  from  "  This  is  My  body  which 
is  broken  for  you,"  &c.  "  Show  forth  the  Lord's  death  till  He  come."  It  is  to  be 
looked  upon,  therefore,  as  a  token  of  love,  or  memorial  left  by  a  friend  at  parting 
among  his  friends,  that  whenever  they  see  it  they  may  remember  him.  This 
remeiiibrance  of  a  suffering  Saviour  must  be  attended  with — 1.  Suitable  affections. 
2.  Self-examination.  "  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  this 
bread,"  &c.  II.  As  a  badgr  of  oor  Christian  profession.  Baptism  is  appointed 
for  our  initiation  into  the  Cliristian  Church  at  our  first  assuming  that  profession  ; 
and  by  partaking  of  this  ordinance  we  declare  our  constancy  in  it,  and  that  we  do 
not  repent  of  our  choice  nor  desire  to  change  our  Master.  III.  As  a  seal  of  the 
COVENANT  of  grace,  BOTH  UPON  God's  PART  AND  UPON  OURS.  1.  It  is  a  standing 
evidence,  obvious  to  our  sens<  s,  that  God  is  unchangeably  willing  to  stand  to  the 
articles  on  His  part ;  that  He  is  ready  to  give  His  Son  and  all  His  blessings  to  such 
as  believe,  as  He  is  to  give  bread  and  wine  as  signs  and  seals  of  them.  2.  As  to 
our  part  in  receiving  these  elements,  we  signify  our  hearty  consent  to  the  covenant 
of  grace,  and,  as  it  were,  set  our  seal  to  it  to  confirm  it.  IV.  As  a  communion  of 
SAINTS.  Our  sitting  down  at  the  same  table,  partaking  of  the  same  elements,  and 
commemorating  the  same  Lord,  are  very  expressive  of  this  communion,  and  have 
a  natural  tendency  to  cherish  it.  In  such  a  posture  we  look  like  children  of  one 
family,  fed  at  the  same  table  upon  the  same  spiritual  provisions.  Hence  this 
ordrnHHce  has  been  frequently  and  justly  called  the  communion  (chap.  x.  16,  17). 
V.  As  A  fellowship  with  God  (1  John  i.  3).  This  communion  consists — 1.  In  that 
intercourse  which  is  carried  oo  between  God  and  His  people.  2.  In  the  com- 
munity of  property.  3.  In  the  interchange  of  property.  (S.  Davies,  A.M.) 
Tlie  feast  of  joy : — What  is  "joy"?  The  firstborn  of  love  and  the  parent  of 
peace — "love,"  joy,  peace."  And  what  was  the  far  end  of  all  our  Redeemer's  work 
on  enrth?  "  That  your  joy  may  be  full."  And  how  can  the  Church  reach  to  its 
deep  things  of  privilege  unless  it  takes  the  right  vessel  to  the  cistern  and  "draw 
water  with  joy  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation  "  ?  Let  us  ask,  Why  ought  we  to  be  hajjpy 
in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  ?  Because— I.  Our  Lord  is  happy.  From  the  moment 
of  His  rising  neither  His  body  nor  His  mind  appear  to  have  been  subject  to,  or 
even  capable  of,  pain.  When  He  said,  "  It  is  finished  1  "  His  sufferings  were  over. 
Now  in  proportion  as  our  sympathy  is  with  Him,  our  heart  will  ahyays  make  the 
tone  of  our  mind.  Be  glad,  then,  because  your  Lord  is  glad.  Jesus  is  not  "  a  Man 
of  sorrows"  now.  He  is  a  Man  of  joys.  II.  Truth  has  been  vindicated.  To  a 
well-ordi-red  mind  it  is  a  great  satisfaction  to  see  any  truth  thoroughly  established. 
The  resurrection  of  Christ  must  stand  or  fall  cm  revelation.  In  tbe  Old  Testament 
it  is  invcdved  in  the  types  and  prophecies.  Our  Lord's  own  teaching  showed  it, 
and  it  was  the  mainspring  of  His  whole  life.  And  the  apostles  are  emphatic— "If 
Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,"  etc.  So  that  it  is  the  end  of  all 
Divine  truth  ;  and  tbe  evidence  is  most  exact  and  clear.  The  Bible  is  verified  and 
the  truth  of  Christianity  placed  beyond  doubt.  III.  The  Father  has  accepted 
the  sacrifice  of  His  Son.  Christ  was  "  justified  in  the  Spirit,"  which 
"  quickened  "  Him.  And  in  that  He  was  justified.  His  atoning  work  is  justified, 
and  in  that  His  atoning  work  is  justified  I  am  justified,  and  God  Himself  is  justified 
to  forgive  me.  IV.  Honour  is  put  on  the  body.  Some  Christians,  wishing  to 
avoid  the  extreme  into  which  they  once  ran,  now  disparage  the  body  too  much. 
But  what  is  this  body?  The  broken  mirror  of  God,  to  be  recast  presently  into  a 
counterpart  of  the  form  of  Jesus  as  He  is  now  in  glory— the  temple  walls  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  This  reflection  is  full  of  comfort.  If  the  next  world  were  to  be 
peopled  only  with  spirits,  we  might  be  called  upon  in  vain  to  believe  in  the  com- 
munion of  saints.  It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  realise  anything  so  abstract ; 
but  now  "  in  our  flesh  we  shall  see  God."  V.  A  warrant  is  given  of  a  glorious 
resurrection.  Where  the  Head  is,  there  must  the  members  be.  The  tomb  is  not 
dark  now,  for  Jesus  left  a  light ;  not  degrading,  for  it  has  been  dignified  by  fellow- 


CHAP,  v.]  I.   COIilM'HIANS.  401 

ship  with  Him;  not  final,  for  it  is  open  the  otlier  eiul.  {J.  VatKjlian,  M.A.) 
The  Eucharigt : — I.  Its  natuise — a  feast,  because  of — 1.  Tlie  fellowsliip  it  affords. 
2.  The  feeUngs  it  inspires.  3.  Tlie  strength  wliich  it  imparts.  II.  Its  kequihitks. 
1.  Love  to  man.  2.  Sincerity  and  truth  before  God.  (•/.  LyiJi,  I). I).)  The 
obligation  of  Christians  to  observe  tlie  Lord's  Su/iper : — Let  us  keep  this  feast  because 
— I.  Its  obligation  rests  on  the  Kedeejier's  dying  command.  An  injunction 
is  always  rendered  more  bindinf; — 1.  When  it  comes  frum  the  lips  of  one  we  love, 
and  who  has  shown  a  deep  interest  in  our  welfare.  We  natuially  pay  a  respectful 
deference  to  the  request  of  a  neighbour  or  acquaintance ;  but  what  is  this  in  com- 
parison with  the  command  of  a  parent?  The  observance  of  the  Ijord's  Supper  is 
the  solemn  injunction  of  One  who  has  proved  Himself  to  be  infinitely  more  than 
the  best  and  fondest  on  earth.  2.  When  it  is  conveyed  at  some  exceptionally 
solenm  or  momentous  season.  Surely  if  there  be  a  time  more  sacred  or  impressive 
than  aniitiier  it  is  at  the  hour  of  death.  "  Po  this  in  remembrance  of  Me  "  was  as 
much  Christ's  dving  legacy  as  the  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you."  II.  It  is  a  befitting 
PUBLIC  declaration  OF  OUR  CHRISTIAN  PROFESSION.  Beautiful  must  have  been  the 
spectacle  when  Israel  assembled  to  give  public  testimony  on  the  slopes  of  Ebal  and 
Gerizim.  More  solemn  and  interesting  still  when,  year  by  year,  tliey  went  to 
celebrate  the  appointed  feasts,  'i'he  P;;almist  puts  special  eiiiplia--is  on  paying  his 
vows  "  in  the  presence  of  all  God's  people  "  (Psa.  cxvi.  14,  19).  Let  none  of  us  be 
guilty  of  false  shame  in  shrinking  from  an  open  declaration  of  the  infinite  debt  of 
gratitude  we  owe  to  redeeming  love.  Even  die  soldiers  of  pajan  Piome  gloried  in 
ascending  the  steps  of  the  Capitid  to  the  Temple  of  Victory,  with  their  votive 
offerings,  swearing  by  the  gods  alieuiancn  to  their  imperial  master.  And  shall  we 
Christians  be  found  cowards  to  Christ?  "Whosoever  is  ashamed  of  Me,"  &c. 
III.  By  not  keeping  it  we  incur  spiritual  loss.  We  never  can  be  careful 
enough  in  discarding  the  unscriptutal  idea  that  there  is  any  peculiar  grace  or  virtue 
in  the  S.-icrament.  All  grace  flows  from  Christ  (Zech.  iv.  12).  But  we  must  not 
undervalue  the  ordinance  as  a  means  of  grace.  It  is  doubtless  oue  of  the  Divine 
channels  for  the  conveyance  of  spiritual  good.  God  works  by  instiumentalities  ; 
and  if  we  neuleut  those  of  His  own  express  appointment  we  cannot  expect  otherwise 
than  to  suffer  spiritually.  Conclusion:  You  object.  We  are  not  warranted  to 
approach  the  table  of  Communion,  because — 1.  We  are  not  prepared  for  it.  My 
answer  is.  The  satne  reason  which  makes  von  unfit  for  the  Comnmnion 
renders  you  unmeet  for  death.  Is  it  not  because  we  are  sinners,  and  unworthy, 
that  we  are  invited  to  come  to  the  feast,  and  there  to  celebrate  the  infinite 
worthiness  of  "the  Lamb  that  was  slam"?  2.  Some  venture  who  have  no 
riglit  to  be  there.  But  your  duty  is  independent  of  any  such  intruders.  You 
are  not  responsible  for  the  sin  and  presumption  of  others.  {J.  7?.  BloediiJ)',  D.D.) 
'The  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  II  Christian  duty: — I.  That  Chuist  cuucified 

IS  THE  TRUE  PASSOVER,  OF    WHICH    THE    .IeWISH    WAS    A    TYPE.       1.    The  paSSOVei  was  of 

Divine  appointment.  It  did  not  originate  with  Mos"s  and  Aaron,  or  any  of  the 
el.lers  or  people  of  Israel.  It  was  not  the  offspring  of  human  policy,  but  of  God. 
2.  The  passover  was  appointed  for  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  from  bondage 
and  death.  3.  The  passover  would  benefit  none  unle-s  the  blood  were  applied.  4. 
Tlie  passover  was  not  only  to  be  slain,  and  its  blood  sprinkled,  but  it  was  also  to  be 
eaten.     II.  That  as  the  feast  of  the  passover  was  to  be  celebrated  by  thk  .Jews, 

so  THE  EUCHARIST  OR  LoRD's  SuPPER  IS  TO  BE  CELEBRATED  BY  CHRISTIANS.       The  JeWS 

were  to  celebrate  it — all  the  Jews  and  prosel.ytes  (Exod.  xii.  47,  4S) — but  none  else 
(ver.  43) ;  it  was  to  be  celebrated  as  long  as  their  dispensation  should  continue  (ver. 
24) :  as  a  memorial  of  their  deliverance  from  Kg.ypt  (ver.  27).  So  the  Lord's 
Supper  is  to  be  ceebrated  bv  all  Christians.     All  Christians  ought  to  celebrate  it. 

1.  Because  Christ  has  commanded  it  (Luke  xxii.  19).  Whatever  He  has  commanded 
must  be  implicitly  obeyed.  2.  Because  it  keeps  alive  the  important  doctrine  of 
salvation  through  the  death  of  Christ.  3.  Because  it  eminently  tends  to  excite  holy 
Hffections.  Godly  sorrow,  arising  from  a  conviction,  that  our  sins,  in  common  with 
tliosH  of  others,  occasioned  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ.  Ardent  love  to 
Christ.  Grateful  obedience.  III.  That  in  order  to  its  accept'ble  celebration 
sevi:ral  things  dejiand  ATTENTION.     1.  We  should  have  correct  views  of  its  nature. 

2.  We  should  not  ascribe  an  efficiency  to  it  which  it  does  not  possess.  Many 
substitute  it  in  the  place  of  regeneration.  3.  We  should  celebrate  it  with  suitable 
disposiiions.  Not  with  malice.  Not  with  wickedness.  But  with  sincerity  and 
truth,  with  purity  of  intention,  and  with  an  agreement  between  our  principles  and 
outward  profession.     Conclude  by  answering  a  few  objections.     1.  I  dare  not  keep 

VOL.  I.  26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


the  feast,  for  it  is  a  solemn  ortlinance.  For  the  same  reason  jou  should  neither 
pray,  read  the  Scriptures,  sing  God's  praises,  nor  hear  His  gospel  preached;  for 
they  are  suleinu.  2.  I  am  not  prepared  to  receive  it.  3.  I  have  kept  the  feast 
formerly,  but  since  then  I  have  relapsed  into  sin.  {Sketches  of  Sermons.)  Let  us 
keep  the  feast : — I.  It  is  to  be  kept  for  the  geeat  and  general  purpose  of  com- 

MEMOBATJNG  ChRISi's  LOVE.  II.  FoR  TH£  MORE  ESPECIAL  PURPOSE  OF  HOLDING  IN 
EEJIEMBRANCE  HlS  DEATH.  III.  FoR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  MAKING  A  PUBLIC  PROFES- 
SION OF  OUR  BELIEF  IN  Christ,  AND  OUR  DEVOTION  TO  His  SERVICE.  When  the  Chris- 
tian kneels  at  the  table  of  the  Rcdeemtr,  he  virtually,  in  the  view  of  God,  of 
angels,  and  the  Churcb,  declares  that  he  believes  in  the  mysterious  constitution  of 
the  Saviour's  jDerson,  and  that  he  confides  on  Him,  and  on  Him  only,  for  deliver- 
ance from  hell  and  elevation  to  bliss.  He  attaches  himself  to  the  standard  of  the 
Leader  of  the  Faithful ;  he  engages  to  figbt  against  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  in 
the  interest  of  heaven.  [W.  Craig.)  Sincerity  and  truth. — Sincerity  : — I.  The 
NATURE  OF  GOSPEL-SINCERITY.  1.  A  single  iutentioii  and  aim  to  please  God,  and 
approve  ourselves  to  Him  tlirough  our  whole  course.  2.  An  imi)artial  inquiry  into 
our  duty.  3.  An  entire  and  univtrsal  ajjplii-ution  to  the  practice  of  duty,  as  far  as 
it  is  known,  without  stated  and  allowed  reserves  and  exceptions.  4.  A  corre- 
s|ioudence  and  harmony  between  inward  sentiments  and  the  words  and  actions.   II. 

Of  what  IMPORTANCE    11    IS    THAT    TUIS    QUALIFICATION    SHOULD    ATTEND    US    IN  Al  L  THE 

EXERCISES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  TEMPER  AND  DUTY.  1.  It  Is  expressly  required  by 
Divine  precept  in  the  several  branches  of  our  duty.  The  new  man  in  general, 
which  Christianity  teaches  us  to  put  on,  is,  "  after  God  created  in  true  hohness  " 
(Eph.  iv.  24).  The  first  and  great  commandment  of  g  h1  mess  is  thus  prescribed 
(Matt.  xxii.  37).  2.  It  is  indispensably  necessary  to  our  acceptance  with  God.  How 
can  that  be  expected  to  meet  with  a  favourable  regard  from  God,  which  was  not  in 
intention  done  to  Him?  3.  Tbis  qualification  alone  can  minister  solid  satisfaction 
to  ourselves  upon  reflection.  One  man  may  possibly  reach  his  ends  with  another 
by  disguise  ;  but  how  low  and  empty  a  satisfaction  will  that  produce,  if  he  cannot 
be  satisfied  from  himself?  So  ti.e  truly  good  man  alone  is  (Prov.  xiv.  14).  4. 
Sincerity  will  be  the  easiest  methid  of  conduct.  What  art  and  pains  are  needful 
to  wear  a  disguise  tolerably  !  5.  Herein  we  shall  copy  after  the  most  illustrious 
and  excellent  examples.  Insincerity,  on  the  other  hand,  is  most  directly  the  ini.ige 
of  the  devil,  that  false  nnd  lying  spirit,  who,  from  his  craft  and  deceitfulness,  is 
called  "  the  old  serpent,"  and  represented  as  assuming  all  shapes  and  disguises  to 
carry  on  his  designs.  This  subject  may  very  titly  be  applied  various  ways.  1.  As 
a  subject  of  sorrow  for  the  evident  violations  of  sincerity  among  those  who  wear 
tbe  name  of  Christians.  2.  As  a  measure  of  judging  ourselves,  whether  we  are  in 
a  state  of  acceptance  with  God.  3.  As  a  ground  of  humiliation  to  the  best  for  the 
defects  in  tbeir  sincerity,  as  well  as  in  every  particular  branch  of  goodness.  4.  As 
an  engagement  to  cultivate  and  advance  in  this  excellent  qualification.  {J.  Evans, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  9-13.  I  wrote  unto  you  in  an  epistle  not  to  company  with  fornicators. — 
Avoid  the  comnany  of  sinners  : — I.  Is  this  practicable?  1.  Xot  absolutely:  we 
must  have  intercourse  with  the  world.  2.  Yet  practically :  we  need  bave  no 
fellowship  or  familiarity  with  them.  II.  Is  it  necessary  ?  1.  Not  indispensably, 
in  reference  to  the  world,  whom  we  may  not  judge,  but  must  leave  to  the  judgment 
of  God.  2.  Yet  positively  in  reference  to  false  j)rofessors,  who  must  be  exposed 
and  excluded.  [J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  company  of  sinners  to  he  avoided  : — When 
a  man  is  known  to  sulicr  from  a  sadly  contagious  disease  none  of  his  friends  will 
come  near  the  house.  There  is  little  need  to  warn  them  ofi",  they  are  all  too 
alarmed  to  come  near.  Why  is  it  men  are  not  so  much  afraid  of  the  contagion  of 
vice?  How  dare  they  run  risks  for  themselves  and  childien  by  allowing  evil 
companions  to  frequent  their  house  ?  Sin  is  as  infectious  and  far  more  de.dly 
than  the  smallpox  or  fever.  Flee,  tben,  from  every  one  wbo  might  lead  you  into 
it.     (C  H.  Spuryeon.)         The  Christian  law  of  association  with  evil: — I.  Common, 

EVERY'DAY     ASSOCIATIONS     WITH      EVIL      HAVE       TO      BE      MAINTAINED     ill  1.    Family. 

2.  Business.  3.  Society.  Yet  in  all  these  the  earnest  Christian  need  never  find  it 
difficult  to  make  a  tirm  witness  for  truth,  righteousness,  and  charity.  II.  Special 
RELATIONS  WITH  EVIL  WE  MAY  NOT  MAKE.  1.  FoT  OUT  own  Sake.  2.  For  our  friends' 
sake.  3.  For  the  sake  of  others  who  may  observe  our  friendship.  4.  For 
Christ's  sake,  who  said  through  His  servant,  "Come  out  from  among  them,"  &c. 
(2v.  'Tuck,   B.A.)         The  limits   of  fellowship  : — "No  man  liveth  unto  himself." 


CHAP,  v.]  J.   COrdNTIHANS.        .  403 

Attempts  have  been  made  to  build  a  science  of  hninan  nature  and  a  scheme  of 
human  life  on  individualism,  but  they  have  failed.  Man  is  born  into.  lives  in,  and  is 
inexplicable  apart  from  society.  For  good  or  for  evil  we  are  with  one  another. 
I.  Christians  are  not  limited  to  the  society  of  their  fellow-Christians. 
Paul  was  full  of  "  sanctified  common  sense."  He  saw  clearly  that  if  a  man 
eschewed  all  intercourse  with  those  who  dilfered  from  him  he  would  have  to  "go 
out  of  the  world."  1.  The  example  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  sanctions  inter- 
course with  general  society.  2.  The  assumption  of  superior  sanctity  repels,  while 
such  intercourse  may  lend  to  a  desire  for  the  gospel.  3.  Opportunities  occur  in 
social  intercourse  for  introducing  directly  or  indirectly  the  truths  of  religion.  "A 
word  spoken  in  season,"  &c.  11.  Christians  are  restrained  from  free  inter- 
course WITH  unworthy  fellow  ptiOFEs>ons.  1.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  we 
are  confined  to  the  fellowship  of  those  whose  character  is  mature  and  blameless. 
This  would  be  t)  set  up  in  the  Church  an  aristocracy  of  the  worst  kind.  2.  Those 
whose  company  is  forliidden  are  such  as  by  their  violation  of  the  moral  law  pruve 
their  insincerity.  3.  The  reasons  for  this  prohibition  are  obvious.  Intimacy  with 
such  would— (1)  Be  injurious  to  our  own  moral  nature.  (2)  Be  interpreted  by  the 
world  as  a  condonation  of  sin.  (3)  Encourage  the  sinner  in  his  sin.  (Prof.  J.  L'. 
Tliomsou.)  Cunvei;-<e  2cith  the  nnfjodbj  : — I.  I>j  odr  ordinary  life  we  must 
associate  more  or  less  with  the  ungodly.  Our  legitimate  business  and  our 
duties  as  citizens  lead'^  us  amongst  such.  If  we  kept  ourselves  apart  we  should 
have  "to  go  out  of  the  world."  1.  Christianity  is  not  desi>;ned  to  drive 
us  out  of  the  world.  We  are  to  live  among  men  righteously.  Here  we 
have  an  argument  against  monasticisra.  2.  Christ  mixed  freely  among  men. 
3.  We  have  many  opportunities  for  witnessing  for  Christ  in  tire  world.  Private 
Christians  may  thus  be  -ome  missionaries,  and  roach  classes  beyond  the  ordinary 
means.  Still  any  association  with  the  ungodly  has  its  perils,  and  we  nnist  not  shut 
our  eyes  to  them.  When  we  go  into  the  world  we  should  go  armed,  and  never  with- 
out Clirist.  II.  We  are  not  to  associate  with  a  professor  who  walks 
disorderly.  1.  The  case  is  here  altered.  Those  outside  are  strangers,  though  we 
mix  with  them  ;  this  one  we  know  and  have  been  identified  with.  Those  outside 
are  left  to  the  judgment  of  God;  but  we  have  jurisdiction  in  the  case  of  our  offend- 
ing brother  (vers.  4,  5).  If  this  were  not  so — (1)  The  force  of  Church  discipline 
Would  be  seriously  wenkeued.  (2)  The  effect  upon  the  offcn  ler  would  be 
les-ened.  Church  discipline  does  not  lose  sight  of  his  welfare  :  it  is  directed 
towards  his  recovery.  (3)  It  would  seem  as  though  the  evil  were  lightly  esteemed, 
which  would  bring  grpat  scandal  amd  contempt  on  Christianity.  (4)  There  would 
be  much  peril  to  the  other  members  of  the  Church — (n)  In  the  association.  There 
is  often  more  peril  in  the  society  of  a  false  professor  than  in  that  of  an  open  evil- 
doer, (/i)  In  the  conviction  thit  they  could  sin  with  comparative  impunity  so  far 
as  the  Church  was  concerned.  III.  What  kinds  of  sin  involve  separation. 
The  apostle  gives  a  list  of  trau^gressors.  1.  Fornicators.  The  unclean  :  professing 
purity,  practising  impurity.  2.  The  covetous.  Those  who  made  a  god  of  the 
things  of  sense.  Heart  idolatry.  3.  Idolaters.  Those  who,  being  professing 
Christians,  compromised  like  Naaman,  and  like  those  who  now  pny  homage  to  "  the 
god  of  this  world."  4.  Eaile's  or  rovilers.  Those  who  say  they  have  a  clean 
heart,  but  keep  a  foul  mouth.  5.  Diunkards.  6.  Extortioners.  Greedy  souls 
wtio  overreach  others,  but  overreatdi  themselves  pre-eminently.  We  miy  not 
compmy  with  such, but  we  may  pray  and  labour  for  them.  [W.  E.  Uurndall,  M.A.) 
The  siia>e  of  icorldhj  conformity : — There  is  something  ominous  in  the  good  terms 
on  which  Cliristiaus  are  now  able  to  live  with  their  worldly  neighbours,  when  they 
a  e  not  only  tolerated  in  worldly  cirides,  but  can  make  bosom  companions  of,  and 
even  be  united  in  marriage  to,  those  who,  knowing  nothing  of  spiritual  life,  and 
being  halutually  and  ost>-ntatious!y  regardless  of  unseen  realities,  are  stdl  of  the 
Vf  'rid,  in  the  truest  and  strongest  sense  of  these  words.  The  cause  of  these  amicable 
relations  is  not  that  the  world  has  changed  its  character  essentially ;  for  that  it  will 
never  do  until  it  ceases  to  be  the  world,  by  being  born  of  God.  And  must  it  not 
be,  th  rcfore,  that  in  the  Christians  who  live  with  it  on  such  intimate  terms,  there 
is  httle  or  nothing  of  the  spirit  of  Christ?  I  would  utter  no  sweeping  assertion. 
But  there  is  in  this  new  bearing  of  the  world  to  the  Church  enough  to  awaken  the 
gravest  inquiry  in  all  who  are  really  di-cip'es  of  Clnist,  and  jealous  for  the  honour 
of  their  Lord.  Nor  is  it  evident  that  such  intiuiry  honestly  conducted  would  not 
lead  to  the  conclu-^ion,  that  w*  ile  Christian  principles  have  somewhat  influ  need 
the  world,  the  spii  it  of  tne  world  has  farmore  powerfully  influenced  ihe  Church ;  and 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


that  we  have  secured  the  world's  favour,  by  comijromising  our  Christian  character  in 
compliance  with  the  world's  demands.  Good  John  Bunyan,  were  he  now  to  visit 
Vanity  Fair,  would  tind  it  very  different  from  what  it  was  when  he  conducted  hia 
pilgrims  through  it,  and  described  the  cruel  treatment  they  received.  He  would 
find  its  hostility  to  the  pilgrims  wonderfully  abated,  but  he  would  also  tind  the 
spirit  of  the  pilgrims  wonderfully  changed  ;  and  that  the  truce  between  the  two 
has  been  procured,  not  by  the  concessions  of  Vanity  Fair  only,  but  by  the  conces- 
sions of  the  pilgrims  as  well.  He  would  find  that  while  the  inhabitants  of  Vanity 
Fair  have  little  objection  to  going  to  church  as  the  best  place  for  displaying  their 
vanities,  many  of  tbe  pilgrims  have  become  much  less  like  travellers  through  the 
town,  than  residents  in  it ;  that  some  of  them  do  a  very  flourishing  trade  there,  and 
can  scarcely  be  distinguished  from  other  traders  except  from  their  occasional  use  of 
a  religious  phra^-eology,  not  at  all  from  the  principles  on  which  their  trade  is 
conducted;  that  they  patronise  their  places  of  amusement,  scarcely  avoiding  even 
the  most  disreputable,  and  appear  there  in  the  attire  common  to  t'nose  who 
fre(iuent  them  ;  that  they  build  their  villas  and  mansions  there,  and  enjoy  the  good 
things  of  the  place,  and  altogether  seem  more  likely  to  spend  their  days  in  Vanity 
Fair,  than  to  induce  the  inhabitants  of  Vanity  Fair  to  accompany  them  in  their 
j'urney  to  the  celestial  city.  And  though  he  might  find  it  difficult  to  say  bow  far 
the  pilgrims  ought  or  ought  not  to  avail  themselves  of  the  altered  feeling,  and  take 
their  share  of  the  good  things  which  the  place  supplies,  I  fear  he  would  not  think 
the  present  an  unqualified  improvement  on  the  time  which  he  so  graphically 
descrihed.  (J)'.  Laiidels,  D.D.)  Danger  of  u-orldhj  intercourse : — None  can 
pretend  to  say  how  far  you  may  intermix  in  worldly  company,  says  the  Rev.  E. 
Cecil,  and  get  no  stain  or  soil.  Situa  iou,  circumstances,  etc.,  must  all  be  taken 
into  consideration.  But  this  mav  be  said,  that  he  only  mixes  with  the  world  with 
safety  who  does  it  not  from  inclination,  but  necessity.  As  to  amusements,  and 
what  are  called  recreations,  a  really  awakened  Christian  will  neither  find  taste  nor 
leisure  for  them.  Religion  furni-hes  the  mind  with  objects  sufficient  to  fill  up 
every  vacancy.  Yet  as  you  name  them  I  would  have  you  mark  carefully  everything 
that  disposes  or  indisposes  the  mind  to  holy  pur>uits.  Persons  of  tender  health 
are  very  careful  to  avoid  wh  itever  is  hurtful,  such  as  damp-,  infectious  rooms, 
blighting  winds.  They  attend  to  the  injunctions  of  their  physicians,  the  cautions 
of  their  friends,  &c.  If  people  were  but  as  careful  ahout  their  spiritual  health  as 
they  are  of  their  bodily  health,  we  should  see  much  stronger  and  taller  Christians. 

Vers.  12-13.  For  what  have  I  to  do  to  judg-e  them  also  that  are  without  ? — 

Without  and  icitliin  : — I.  Those  without.  1.  Have  no  share  in  Church  privileges. 
2.  Are  exempt  from  Chui-ch  jurisdiction.  3.  Ai'e  liable  to  the  judgment  of  God. 
II.  Those  within.  1.  May  be  unworthy  of  fellowship.  2.  Are  subject  to 
discipline.  3.  Must  be  excluded  when  their  wickedness  is  proven.  (J.  Lijth,  D.D.) 
The  judgment  of  God  and  the  ju(l<iineiit  of  the  Church: — 1.  The  one  is  limited,  the 
other  universal.  2.  The  one  is  partial,  the  other  abpolute.  5.  The  one  is 
disciplinary,  the  other  infallible.  4.  The  one  is  provisional,  the  other  will  be  final. 
6.  The  effects  of  the  one  are  temporary,  of  the  other  eternal.  (Ibid.)  Limitations 
of  apoi<tolic  discipline  : — 1.  Even  in  that  age  of  Divine  intuitions  and  preternatural 
visitations  Paul  limits  the  subjectsof  expu'sionfrom  the  Christian  society  to  gross  and 
definite  vices.  No  encouragement  is  given  to  pry  into  the  secret  state  of  the  heart 
and  conscience,  or  to  denounce  m'^re  errors  of  opinion  or  judgment,  2.  Even 
when  insisting  most  strongly  on  entire  separation  from  heathen  vices,  he  still 
allows  unrestricted  social  intercourse  with  the  heathen.  He  foi  bears  to  push  his 
principle  to  an  Utopian  extravagance:  he  acknowledges  the  impracticability  of 
entire  separation  as  a  decisive  reason  against  it,  and  regards  tbe  ultimate  solution 
of  the  problem  as  belonging  not  to  man,  but  to  God.  3.  Whilst  strongly  condemn- 
ing the  Christian  quarrels  as  in  themselves  unchristian  (chap  vi.)  he  >et  does  not 
leave  them  without  a  i-emedy,  and  so  drive  them  to  the  objectionable  course  of 
goiuK  before  heathen  judges.  He  recognises  the  fact, and  appeals  to  their  own  self- 
respect  to  induce  them  to  appoint  juilges  of  their  own,  thus  giving  the  first 
apostolic  sanction  to  Christian  courts  of  law;  in  other  words,  departing  from  the 
highest  ideal  of  a  Christian  Church  in  order  to  s' cure  the  purity  of  its  actual 
condition.  4.  He  lays  down  the  general  truth  that  between  all  other  outward  acts 
and  the  sin  of  sensuality  there  is  an  essential  difference  •  that  the  liberty  which 
Christianity  concedes  to  the  former,  it  altogether  withho'ds  from  the  latter;  that 
those  sins  are  utterly  inconsistent  not  merely  with  any  particular  relation  existing 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  405 


between  Christianity  and   lieatlienism,  but   with  the   very  idea  of   Christianity 
itself.     {Dcaii  Stanley.) 


CHAPTER  YI. 


Veks.  1-S. — Dare  any  of  you,  having'  a  matter  against  another,  go  to  law 
before  the  unjust? — On  aoing  to  law  : — The  Greeks  were  not  only  quarrelsonie,  but 
derived  an  excitement  pleasant  to  their  frivolous  nature  in  going  to  law.  The 
Christians  seemed  not  to  have  discarded  this  taste.  St.  Paul  has  been  telling 
them  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  judging  the  henthen  ;  he  now  proceeds  to  remind 
them  that  they  ought  not  to  be  judged  by  them.  How  could  he  preach  the  superiority 
of  Christianity  if  Christians  had  so  little  common  sense,  so  little  exprit  de  corpa,  tliat 
they  must  call  in  a  heathen  to  settle  their  disputes  for  tliem  ?  St.  Paul's  reasons 
are  important.  I.  The  SAixrs  are  destinkd  to  jldge  the  world  and  angels. 
Shall  they  not  then  be  considered  fit  to  judge  little  worldly  matters  of  £  s.  d.  ? 
1.  St.  Paul  meant  that  ultimately  holy  men  will  be  at  the  head  of  affairs,  acknow- 
ledged as  the  fittest  to  discern  between  right  and  wrong.  We  shrink  from  such  a 
thought;  not,  indeed,  that  we  are  slow  to  pronounce  judgment  upon  our  fellow- 
men,  but  to  do  so  odicially,  with  definite  results,  seems  too  heavy  a  responsibility. 
Butwliy?  If  we  submit  ourselves  now  to  tho-;e  who  have  knowledge  of  law  we 
may  well  be  content  to  be  judsed  by  the  perfectly  holy  by  and  by.  2.  If  holiness 
shall  eventually  be  supreme,  it  ought  now  to  be  regarded  as  competent  to  settle  the 
petty  disputes  which  arise  among  us  (ver.  3).  The  future  kingdom  of  God  can  only 
be  perfect  as  its  subjects  carry  into  it  characters  tending  towards  perfection.  Tlie 
future  is  not  to  nuike  us,  but  we  the  future.  Earlli  is  not  heaven  only  because 
men  decline  to  make  it  so.  And  as  all  possible  differences  in  heaven  will  be 
adjusted  by  an  all-reconciling  authority,  there  ought  to  be  among  the  heirs  of 
heaven  no  going  to  law  now.  3.  A  vast  proportion  of  legal  business  is  created  by 
changes  from  wlrich  the  future  life  is  exempt :  death,  marriage,  disasters,  &c.  It 
is  often  in  the  power  of  a  lawyer  to  give  a  man  advice  which  will  save  his  con- 
science and  bring  comfort  into  a  fanrily  instead  of  heart-burning  and  peuuiy.  If 
the  legal  mind  deals  wiih  the  reality  of  things,  and  tries  to  see  what  equity 
requires,  and  seeks  to  forward  the  well-being  of  nu^n,  then  surely  there  is  no  pro- 
fession with  such  opportunities  of  earning  the  beatitude  of  the  peacemakers,  none 
in  which  men  may  better  be  prepared  for  the  higher  requirements  of  a  heavenly 
society  in  which  some  are  made  rulers  over  ten  citie'?.  II.  Is  there  not  a  wise 
MAN  among  yourselves?  "  A  wise  man"  was  the  technical  term  for  a  judge  in 
the  Hebrew  courts.  1.  Among  the -Jews  there  was  no  distinction  between  Church 
and  State.  In  the  synagogue  and  by  the  eldership  offenders  were  both  tried  and 
punished.  The  rabbis  said,  "  He  who  brings  lawsuits  of  Israel  before  a  heathen 
tribunal  profanes  the  Name,  and  does  homage  to  idolatry  ;  for  when  our  enemies 
are  judges  (Deut.  xxxii.  31)  it  is  a  testimony  to  the  superiority  of  their  religion." 
This  idea  passed  over  from  Judaism  to  Christianity.  And  even  a  century  after 
Paul's  time  the  rule  of  the  Church  was,  "  Lot  not  those  who  have  disputes  go  to 
law  before  the  civil  p  )wers,  but  let  them  by  all  means  lie  reconciled  by  the  elders  of 
the  Church,  and  let  them  readily  yield  to  their  decision."  And  as  late  as  our  own 
day  we  find  an  Arab  sheikh  complaining  that  Christian  Copts  come  to  ijim,  a 
Mohammi  dan,  to  snttle  their  disputes,  anil  "  won't  go  and  be  settled  by  the  priest 
out  of  the  Gospels."  2.  Did  Paul,  then,  mean  that  such  legal  cases  as  are  now  tried 
in  our  civil  courts  should  be  settled  by  non-professional  men?  Did  he  foresee 
none  of  the  great  evils  that  have  arisen  wherever  Church  or  State  has  not  respected 
the  province  of  the  other?  No  one  can  suppose  that  this  was  his  meaning.  He 
taught  men  to  submit  themselves  to  the  powers  that  then  were,  and  he  himself 
appealed  to  Cassar.  He  had  no  notion  of  subverting  civil  courts,  but  he  would  fain 
have  deprived  them  of  much  of  their  piactice.  He  thought  it  might  be  expected 
that  Christians  would  never  be  so  rancorous  or  covetous  but  that  their  disputes 
might  be  settled  by  private  and  friendly  advice.  Courts  of  law  are  necessary  evils, 
which  will  be  less  and  less  patronised  in  proportion  as  Chris' ian  feeling  and 
principle  prevail.  3.  This  rebuke  is  npplicable  even  to  a  cnnmiunity  like  our  own, 
in  which  the  courts  of  law  are  Christian.  It  is  felt  even  by  nations  that  if  a  dis- 
pute can  be  settled  by  arbitration  this  is  the  better  way  of  getting  justice  done, 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


Christian  people  may  need  legal  advice ;  but  wben  two  Christians  go  to  law  in  a 
spirit  of  rancour  this  only  proves  that  their  worldliness  is  stronger  than  their 
Ctiristianity  4.  But  some  one  will  say,  "  All  this  is  romance."  Just  as  if  the 
world  couid  be  regenerated  by  anything  that  is  not  apparently  romantic  !  If  a 
greater  good  is  to  be  reached,  it  munt  be  by  some  way  that  men  have  not  tried 
before.  And  if  any  one  says,  "  But  if  there  is  to  be  no  going  to  law,  we  must  con- 
tinually be  losers,"  the  reply  of  a  Kincardineshire  lawyer  might  suffice,  "  Don't  go 
to  law  if  yielding  does  not  cost  you  more  than  forty  S'dllings  in  the  pound."  And 
from  a  different  point  of  view  St.  Paul  replies,  "  Well,  and  what  though  you  be 
losers?  The  kingdom  you  belong  to  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness." 
If  a  man  says,  "  We  must  have  some  redress,  when  a  man  takes  a  coat  we  must 
summon  him,  or  he  will  take  our  clonk  next,"  St.  Paul  replies,  "It  is  quite  pro- 
bable tliat  if  you  act  as  your  Master  did,  you  will  be  as  ill  off  in  this  world  as  He 
was.  But  is  tlat  any  reason  why  you  should  at  once  call  Him  your  Master  and 
refuse  to  obey  His  precepts  and  follow  His  example?"  St.  Paul  then  shows  no 
hesitation  about  pushing  his  doctrine  to  its  consequences.  He  sees  that  the  real 
cure  of  wrangling,  of  fraud,  and  of  war  is  not  litigation,  but  meekness  and 
unselfishness.  The  world's  remedies  have  utterly  failed.  Law  is  necessary  for 
restraining  the  expressions  of  a  vicious  nature,  but  is  insufficient  to  remove  the 
possibility  of  these  expressions  by  healing  the  nature.  This  can  only  be  done  by 
the  diHusion  of  unworldliness  and  unseltishuess.  And  it  is  Christiitns  who  are 
responsible  for  diffusing  this  unworldly  spirit.  Conclusion.  1.  Those  laws  which 
are  to  be  our  sole  rule  when  we  are  perfect  cannot  always  be  immediately  applied 
now ;  but  there  must  be  a  striving  towards  the  perfect  state  in  which  there  sl;all  be 
no  going  to  law.  2.  Paul  knows  that  the  Christian  conscience  is  with  him  when 
he  declares  that  men  should  rather  suffer  wrong  than  bring  reproach  on  the 
Christian  name  (ver.  0).  And  yet  how  little  do  men  seem  to  take  to  heart  the  great  fact 
that  they  are  travelling  forward  to  a  state  in  which  nothing  uncongenial  to  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  can  possibly  find  place!  (M.  Dods,  D.D.)  Law,  going  to: — A 
sheep,  separated  from  the  flock,  was  overtaken  by  a  storm.  To  shelter  itself  from 
the  rain  it  crept  into  a  thorny  bush,  and  remained  there  until  the  rain  had  ceased. 
It  had  much  trouble  in  getting  rid  of  the  thorns.  It,  however,  brought  it  about 
after  many  efforts,  and  got  out  from  the  bush  without  being  wet;  but  che  poor 
creature  lost  almost  all  its  wool.  A  like  fate  is  his  who  seeks  redress  in  law. 
Why  a  Christian  should  not  go  to  law  ivith  his  brethren  : — I.  It  is  to  demean 
Christianity  before  the  world,  which  teaches  peace,  forbearance,  unity,  love. 
II.  It  is  to  cepe  to  worldly  men  an  opportunity  op  judging  Christian  cha- 
KACTER — the  complainant  as  well  as  the  defendant.  III.  It  is  to  deny  the 
competency  of  the  Church  to  adjust  differences  among  its  own  mejibers. 
IV.  It  is  to  prefer  l»  w  to  equity.  V.  It  is  totally  opposed  to  the  spirit  of 
Christ.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  The  litigious  spirit  in  the  Church: — This  the  apostle 
rebukes  because — I.  The  Church  should  decide  iisi-lf  the  difficulties  of  its 
MEMBERS.  "  The  saints  shall  judge  the  world,"  i.e.,  this  earth  shall  be  one  day  a 
kingdom  of  God.  1.  We  cannot  tell  how,  but  one  day  ''  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God."  &c.,  and  legislation  become  Christian. 
And  more,  a  time  is  comin;^  when  statute  law  shall  cease,  and  sell-government 
supersede  all  outward  or  arbitrary  law.  That  will  be  the  reign  of  the  saints.  Let 
us  examine  the  princii  les  of  this  kingdom  which  is  to  be.  1.  The  supremacy  of 
goodness.  The  word  "judge"  does  not  mean  that  the  saints  shall  be  assessors 
with  Christ  at  the  day  of  judgment,  but  that  they  shall  rule  the  world  as  Gideon, 
&c.,  "judged"  Israel.  Successively  have  force,  hereditary  right,  talent,  wealth, 
been  the  aristocracies  of  the  earth.  But  in  that  kingdom  to  come  goodness  shall 
be  the  only  condition  of  supremacy.  2.  The  liest  shall  rule.  The  apostles  "  shall 
sit  on  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,"  which  is  not  to  be  taken 
literally  ;  you  lose  your  time  in  investigating  tlieories  about  the  restoration  of  the 
ten  tribes,  etc.  The  spirit  of  the  passage  means,  and  typically  exp^ess^'S,  that  in 
that  kingdom  the  best  shall  rule.  '6.  That  there  each  shall  have  his  place  accord- 
ing to  his  capacity  (see  chap.  xii.  28).  Each  man  took  his  position  in  the  Church 
according  to  his  gift.  Here  was  a  new  principle.  So  in  the  kingdom  to  come  we 
shall  not  have  the  anomalies  which  now  prevail.  Men  are  ministers  now  who  are 
only  fit  to  plough  ;  men  are  liidden  now  in  professions  where  there  is  no  scope  for 
their  powers.  But  it  shall  all  be  altered  there.  These  are  the  things  that  must  be 
hereafter.  And  it  i^;  only  in  such  a  belief  that  human  life  becomes  tolerable.  4. 
This  is  the  future  destiny  of  the  Church.     Are  these  principles,  then,  to  be  alto- 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.  COraNTHIANS.  407 

gether  in  abeyance  now?  In  the  highest  spiritual  matters  the  Cliurch  shall  decide 
hei-eafter.  Therefore,  in  questions  now  of  eiirthly  matters,  Panl  argues,  tlie  least 
esteemed  among  them  sliould  be  able  to  decide.  "  I  speak  to  your  shame  ;  where 
are  your  boasted  teachers?  Can  they  not  judge  in  a  matter  of  jiiltry  quarrel  about 
property?  "  (1)  Let  us  not,  however,  mistake  the  apostle.  He  did  not  mean  to 
say  that  the  Corinthians  should  have  ecclesiastical  instead  of  civil  courts.  The 
question  here  is  not  between  ecclesiastical  and  civil,  but  between  law  and  equity, 
litigation  and  arbitration.  The  difference  between  the  worldly  court  of  justice  and 
the  Christian  court  of  arbitration  is  a  difference  of  dinmetrical  opposition.  Law 
says.  You  shall  have  your  rights  ;  the  spirit  of  the  true  Church  says.  Defraud  not 
your  neighbour  of  his.  Law  says,  You  must  not  be  wronged  :  the  Chm-ch  says.  It 
is  better  to  suffer  than  to  do  wrong.  (2)  And  now.  Can  any  princij^le  but  this  heal 
the  quarrels  of  the  world?  While  one  holds  out  as  a  matter  of  principle,  the 
other  aijpeals  to  law,  and  both  are  well  assured  of  their  rights,  what  must  be  the 
end  ?  "  If  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one 
of  another."  Whereas  if  we  were  all  Christianised,  and  ready  to  endure  injuries, 
law  would  be  needless — there  would  be  no  cry  of  "my  rights."  You  will  say, 
perhaps,  "But  if  we  Ijear,  we  shall  be  wronged."  You  forget  if  all  felt  thus  there 
would  be  no  wrong.  There  is  no  remedy  for  the  world's  miseries  but  the  cure  of 
its  selfishness.  Men  have  attempted  to  produce  a  peaceful  and  just  state  of  society 
by  force,  by  law,  by  schemes  of  socialism,  and  nil  have  failed,  must  fail.  There 
remains,  then,  nothing  but  the  Cross,  the  Spirit  of  Him  who  conquered  the  world 
by  being  the  victim  of  its  sin.  II.  It  contkamcts  the  chahacter  op  the 
KINGDOM  OF  GoD.  A  true  kingdom  of  Christ  should  be  altogether  free  from 
persons  of  this  character.  His  argument  runs  thus: — "You  ask  me  how  quarrels 
are  to  be  decided  except  by  law ;  how  the  oppressed  are  to  be  freed  from  gross 
oppressors,  except  by  an  appeal  to  legal  justice?  I  answer,  the  Church  does  not 
include  such  persons  in  the  idea  of  its  existence  at  all.  The  Church  consists  of 
men  washed,  sanctified,  justified,  &c.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  to  legishite  for 
drunkards,  revilers,  &e..  for  such  ought  not  to  be  in  your  society  at  all.  This  is 
what  you  were  as  heathens;  this  is  not  what  you  are  to  be  as  Chri-tians."  St. 
Paul  insists  on  man's  dignity.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Litigation  among 
Christians:  ei'il  of: — I.  It  degeadks  CiiaisTiAN  chahacter.  1.  By  subject- 
ing it  to  an  earthly  tribunal.  2.  By  denying  tlie  competence  of  Chri-tian 
men  to  judge  in  the  smallest  matters.  3.  By  ignoring  the  dignily  which 
Christ  has  conferred  upon  His  saints.  4.  By  jiuttiiig  Cluist's  cause  to  shame 
before  unbelievers.  II.  It  indicates  a  selfish  and  UNcur.isTiAN  spirit.  Liti- 
gation— 1.  Would  often  be  spared  by  concession,  by  a  litile  sacrifice  of  per- 
sonal right,  although  this  must  liave  its  limits.  2.  Is  usually  occ^isioned  by 
a  selfish  desire  to  overreach  another  ;  which — (1)  Is  opposed  to  brothcly  love. 
(2)  Excludes  a  man  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  (;})  Makes  the  grace  of  Christ 
of  none  effect.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Litif/iition  amoiui  Christians  to  be  avoided: — 
I.  Why?  Because  it  is  inconsistent  with — 1.  Their  profession  (^er.  1).  2. 
Their  dignity  (vers.  2,  3).  3.  fteF-re-pcct  (vers.  2,  3;.  II.  How?  (vers.  4-G).  1. 
By  not  appealing  to  a  worldly  tribunal;  this  occasions  reproach.  2.  By  refeiring 
the  matter  to  Christian  brethren  ;  that  will  bring  honour.  3.  By  abstaining  from 
open  strife.  III.  In  wii.vr  spirit  ?  The  spirit  of  love,  which — 1.  Excludes 
selfishness.  2.  Prefers  patient  sacrifice  to  contention.  3.  Gives  no  just  ocasion 
of  offence.  IV.  On  what  grounds?  (vers.  9-11).  Because  every  act  of  un- 
righteousness—!. Must  exclude  a  man  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  Encouiages 
self-deception.  3.  Is  totMlly  oppnscd  to  all  Christian  experience.  (Ibid.)  Litiija- 
tion  to  be  avoided : — A  very  learned  judge  was  once  a^k^d  what  lie  would  do  if  a 
man  owed  him  ten  pounds  and  refused  to  pay.  His  reply  was  worth  remembering. 
He  said,  "  Rather  tiian  bring  an  action  against  him,  with  its  costs  and  uncertainty, 
I  would  give  him  a  reci-ipt  in  full  of  ull  demands  ;  yes,  and  I  would  send  him  five 
pounds  over,  to  cover  all  possible  expenses."  Litifiation  to  be  avoided: — Lord 
Erskiue,  when  at  the  bar,  and  at  the  time  when  his  profi  s-ional  talents  were  niost 
eminent  and  popular,  having  been  applied  to  by  his  friend  Dr.  Parr  f'lr  his  opinion 
upon  a  subject  likely  to  be  litigated  by  him,  after  recommending  the  doctor  "  to 
accommodate  the  difference  amicably,"  concluded  his  letter  by  observinft,  "  I  can 
scarcely  figure  to  myself  a  yit.iation  in  which  a  lawsuit  is  not,  if  possible,  to  be 
avoided."  A  lawsuit  discoHraged : — Dr.  Miner,  of  Trenton,  N..J.,  who  was  former'y 
a  pastor  at  Springfield,  relates  that  when  Abraham  Lini-oln  was  pract'sing  law  in 
that  city  a  farmer  went  to  him  to  stcure  his  services  in  a  lawsuit  pending  between 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

himself  and  a  neighbour.  Lincoln  said,  "  Now  if  you  go  on  with  this  it  will  cost 
both  of  you  your  farms,  and  will  entail  an  enmity  that  will  last  for  generations, 
and  perhaps  lead  to  murder.  The  other  man  has  just  been  here  to  engage  me. 
Now  I  want  you  two  to  sit  down  in  my  office  while  I  am  gone  to  dinner,  and  talk 
it  over  and  try  to  settle  it.  And  to  secure  you  from  any  interruption  I  will  lock 
the  door."  He  did  so,  and  he  did  not  return  all  the  afternoon.  The  two  men, 
finding  themselves  imprisoned,  burst  out  laughing,  and  being  thus  put  in  good 
humour,  came  to  a  settlement  before  Mr.  Lincoln  returned.  The  example  may  be 
commended  to  the  attention  of  Christians.  Laivsuits  prevented : — Mr.  Oatts 
remarks :  "  Peter  the  Great  frequently  visited  the  magistrates  in  the  various  cities 
of  his  vast  empire  without  giving  them  any  previous  warning  of  his  intention. 
Having  in  this  way  arrived  at  the  city  of  Olonez,  he  went  first  to  the  governor  and 
inquired  of  him  how  many  suits  were  pending  in  the  Court  of  Chancery.  "  None, 
sire,"  was  the  reply.  "  What  1  none  ?  How  does  that  happen  ?"  "  Sire,  I  endea- 
vour to  prevent  lawsuits,  and  to  conciliate  the  parties.  I  act  in  such  a  way  that  no 
traces  of  quarrels  remain  on  the  archives.  If  I  be  wrong  your  indulgence  will 
excuse  me."  "Wrongl  No.  I  wish,"  exclaimed  the  Czar,  "that  all  governors 
would  act  on  yoiir  principle.  Go  on  as  you  are  doing.  God  and  your  sovereign 
are  both  satisfied."  The  work  of  every  child  of  God  should  be  that  of  a  peace- 
maker, reconciling  man  to  God,  and  man  to  his  fellow  man.  Do  ye  not  know 
that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ? — Tlie  icorkl  judged  l>y  tlie  naint!;  : — 
The  apostle  condemns  their  going  to  law,  and  would  have  them  cease  their 
quarrels  one  against  another  before  the  unjust  and  unbelieveis,  and  that  by 
four  arguments.  First,  by  the  shamefulne.-s  of  it  (ver.  5).  "  I  speak  it 
to  your  shame."  Are  you  such  fools  that  you  cannot  take  up  these  maiters 
among  yourselves?  Secondly,  from  the  scandalousness  of  it.  It  is  a  thing  so 
scandalous  and  offensive  to  those  that  are  without  that  I  wonder  any  of  you  dare 
be  so  bold  as  to  go  to  law  one  with  another.  What  will  the  world  think  ?  Wiiat ! 
Are  these  the  men  that  profess  the  gospel  ?  Are  these  they  that  have  the  wisdom 
of  God  in  them  and  that  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  Thirdly,  from  the  unseemli- 
ness of  it  in  the  second  verse.  Do  you  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the 
earth  ?  What !  hath  God  made  you  judges  of  the  world,  and  do  you  go  to  be  ju  'ged 
by  the  world  ?  Fourthly,  from  the  strangeness  of  it.  Dare  any  of  you?  What! 
is  there  never  a  wise  Christian  amongst  you  ?  never  an  understanding  professor, 
that  is  able  to  take  up  a  controversy,  or  judge  between  his  brethren?  What  a 
strange  thing  this  is  1  Then  he  backs  it  with  four  arguments.  1.  Bei-ause  they  were 
brethren  (ver.  G).  2.  Because  it  was  about  things  of  this  life.  What !  hath  God 
made  you  judges  of  heavenly  things,  of  angels,  and  are  you  unfit  to  judge  of  the 
things  of  this  life?  3.  It  was  about  small  matters  (ver.  2),  whereas  you  shall  sit 
upon  men  and  angels,  and  the  weightiest  matters  in  the  woild,  the  greatest  things 
of  God's  law,  judging  them.  4.  And  lastly,  because  it  was  about  such  things  as 
the  meanest  Christian  in  the  town  might  have  taken  up  and  have  ended :  set  up 
them  that  are  least  esteemed.  Do  you  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the 
world  ?  The  doctrine  is,  tliat  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world.  It  is  an  old  truth, 
yea,  as  old  as  the  world  itself :  you  may  read  it  iu  the  fourth  verse  of  Judes  epistle. 
That  Enoch,  the  seventli  from  Adam,  projDhesied  saying,  Behold  the  LtirJ  cometh 
with  ten  thousands  of  His  saints.  God  will  not  only  come  to  judgment  Himself, 
but  He  will  come  attended  with  all  His  saints,  even  with  all  the  godly,  to  execute 
vengeance  upon  all  the  world,  so  our  Saviour  told  St.  Peter  (Matt.  ix.  18).  How  shall 
the  saints  judge  the  world  ?  Not  by  prououncing  of  jatlgment  upon  the  world,  for 
that  Christ  only  shall  do.  But  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  these  four  ways.  1. 
They  shall  judge  the  world  by  their  consent  unto  Christ's  judgment.  God  trains  up 
His  children  in  this  world  and  teacheth  them  how  they  may  judge  the  world  here- 
after ;  He  teacheth  them  in  this  lile  how  to  assent  witli  His  proceedings  in  the 
world,  so  that  they  are  able  to  say,  "  Eighteous  arc  Thou,  0  Lord,  aud  just  are  Thy 
judgments  "  (Psa.  cxix.  187).  Now  the  law  saith  that  consenters  are  agents,  and 
therefore  because  the  saints  shall  consent  to  the  judgment  of  Clirist,  theiefore  they 
are  said  to  judge  the  world.  2.  The  saints  shall  judge  the  world  by  their  npp  ause  of 
Christ's  judgment  ;  they  shall  not  only  give  consent  unto  the  judgment  of  Christ,  but 
they  shall  also  commend  it.  They  shall  sing, "  Hallelujah,  salvation,  and  honour,  and 
power,  be  to  the  Lord  our  God,  for  true  and  lighteous  are  His  judgments  "  (Be.v.  xix. 
1,  2).  Let  the  wicked  go  accursed  as  they  are,  for  it  is  a  righteous  sentence  passed 
on  them.  3.  They  sluill  judge  the  world  by  their  majesty.  Then  shall  the  righteous 
shine  as  the  stars  in  the  firmament,  and  the  wicked  shall  be  astonished  at  the  sight 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  400 

of  them.  4.  Tlipy  shall  judge  the  world  by  their  lives  and  conversation.  Then  in 
the  world  judijed  by  them  when  as  the  courses  and  manners  of  the  world  are  not 
found  upon  them.  Their  faith  shall  judge  the  world's  infidelity;  their  repentance 
shall  judge  the  world's  impenitency  ;  their  accepting  of  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  judge 
their  rejeclion  and  neglect  of  Christ  Jfsus;  their  zeal  shall  judge  the  world's  luke- 
warmness,  and  their  holiness  shall  judge  the  world's  profaneness.  1.  Because  of  tlie 
mistical  union  that  is  betwixt  Ciirist  and  His  saints.  He  is  the  Head  and  they  are 
His  members.  Nov\f  that  which  the  head  doth  we  ascribe  it  to  the  whole  body. 
Secondly,  in  regard  of  compassion.  I  speak  not  of  j)ity  but  of  compassion,  of 
suffering  with  Christ,  seeing  that  Christ  was  reproached,  hated,  and  condemned  by 
the  woild,  the  saints  are  likewise  with  Him  ;  seeing'  they  partake  of  the  afflictions 
of  Christ  here  they  shull  also  be  made  pai  takers  with  Christ  in  His  glory.  Thirdly, 
for  great  terror  to  all  wicked  men  at  the  day  of  judgment ;  for  as  it  is  with  a  thief, 
not  only  when  the  judge  shall  command  to  hang  him,  but  all  the  justices  and  all 
the  country  shall  cry  out.  Hang  him  !  he  is  judged  tlie  more  terrildy.  Fourthly,  the 
saints  shall  judge  tlie  worM  because  God  shall  so  convince  them  that  their  mouth 
shall  be  stopped,  they  shall  have  never  a  syllable  to  excuse  tliemselves  withal  when 
they  shall  see  men  as  themselves  are,  that  have  lived  in  the  same  town,  enjoyed  the 
same  ordinances  of  God,  lived  in  the  same  family  that  did  partake  of  the  same 
blessings  and  of  the  same  crosses  and  afflictions  witii  themselves,  subject  also  to 
the  same  corruptions  and  sins  as  themselves,  when  they  shall  see  these  at  Christ's 
right  hand.  The  first  use,  then,  is  for  instruction,  whereby  we  may  learn  that  the 
saints  by  their  now  being  saints  do  now  judge  the  world  (Heb.  xi.  7).  Secondly,  this 
teacheth  us  that  when  there  is  one  sinner  converted  from  the  wickedness  of  his 
ways,  and  is  become  a  saint,  then  all  the  world  may  know  that  there  is  a  new  judge 
come  to  sit  upon  them.  It  may  he  God  hath  converted  thy  brother  and  sister,  and 
thou  art  not  converted,  thy  own  brother  and  sister  shall  condemn  thee  if  thou  do 
not  repent  and  come  out  of  thy  sins.  Thirdly,  we  may  learn  that  it  concerns  all 
the  world  to  take  notice  of  every  grace  in  God's  childien.  There  is  never  a  grace 
of  God  in  any  of  His  saints,  but  it  shall  condemn  the  world  if  it  be  void  of  it.  The 
ways  of  the  Lord  are  all  judgments,  because  they  judge  them  that  will  not  walk  in 
them.  You  may  know  a  crooked  thing  by  laying  it  to  a  straight  line,  and  by  that 
it  is  judged  to  be  crooked.  Is  the  child  of  God  humble  ?  His  humility  shall  judge 
thy  pride.  Is  the  child  of  God  meek  and  patient  in  suffering  wrong  and  injuries? 
His  meekness  and  patience  shall  judge  thy  revenge.  Hath  the  child  of  God  the 
spirit  of  prayer  given  liim  ?  It  shall  condemn  thee  that  ptayest  only  with  thine  own 
spirit.  Doth  his  speech  and  communication  administer  grace  to  the  hearers?  It 
shall  condemn  thee  that  speakest  of  vain  and  idle  things.  Fourthly,  learn  hence, 
that  all  the  texts  of  Scripture,  all  the  whole  Word  of  God,  that  is  it  that  begets 
these  saints,  and  therefore  they  must  needs  judge  the  world.  The  Scriptines  are 
called  judgments  (I'sa.  cv.  5),  and  our  Saviour  saith,  "  The  word  that  I  have  spoken, 
the  same  shall  judge  you  in  the  last  day  "  (John  xii.  4S).  Fifthly  and  lastly,  hence 
it  follows,  that  all  the  ministers  of  the  Word  of  (iod  shall  also  judge  the  world. 
Son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody  city?  "  Yea,  thou  shalt  show  her  all  her 
abominations"  (Ezek.  xxii.  2).  This,  then,  serves  to  condemn  three  sorts  of  men 
in  the  world.  First,  all  those  that  despise  the  saints,  and  that  see  not  amiableness 
in  their  faces.  All  the  country  doth  reverence  the  face  of  the  judge  when  he  rides 
his  circuit.  2.  Shall  the  saints  judge  the  world  ?  Then  what  fools  are  the  wicked 
that  prepare  not  for  these  judges  !  When  the  judge  conies  to  an  assize  all  men 
prepare  for  him.  Lastly,  it  condemns  all  those  who  do  not  see  glory  and  majesty 
in  the  faces  of  God's  saints.  There  is  majesty  in  the  face  of  a  jud^e  ;  yea,  a  man 
may  discover  in  them  a  kind  of  sovereign  majesty.  Surely  the  wicked  shall 
never  escape  condemnation,  for — 1.  God  the  Fatlier,  who  judgeth  by  way  of 
authority.  He  will  condemn  thee;  all  judgment  coineth  originally  from  Him.  2. 
God  the  Son,  He  will  judge  thee,  who  judgeth  by  way  of  dispensation  (Act-  x). 
First,  Christ  preacheth  to  thee  repentance  and  remission  of  sins,  to  which  if  thou 
yield  not,  then  know  that  there  is  a  day  appointed  wherein  He  will  judt;e  thee.  8. 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  will  judge  thee;  that  Spirit  thnt  now  thrives  with  thee.  4. 
The  Word  of  Gcd  shall  judge  tliee,  and  that  by  way  of  form,  it  being  the  platform 
according  unto  which  Christ  will  judge  the  wliole  world.  There  is  never  a  text 
throughout  the  whole  Scripture  that  commands  you  to  leave  and  forsake  your  sin-, 
but  it  shall  judge  you  if  you  do  not.  5.  All  the  ministers  of  God  shall  sit  as 
justices  in  common,  from  the  first  preacher  of  righteousness  unto  the  Inst;  Moses 
shall  judge  thee,     Joshua,  David,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Hosea,  Daniel,  Paul,  1  eter. 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vi. 

&c.,  they  shall  judge  you.  There  will  be  no  way  for  the  wicked  to  put  off  theit 
judgment ;  then  the  sons  of  Eli  shall  have  none  to  advocate  between  God  and  them, 
none  to  cloak  their  wickedness.  Would  they  send  out  excuses  ?  The  saints  shall 
cut  them  off.  Would  they  in  the  first  place  say,  Alas  !  I  was  ignorant,  I  knew  not 
how  to  pray,  or  to  I'cad,  or  to  meditate  on  the  Scriptures,  nor  to  catechise  my 
family  ?  A  second  excuse  is  poverty.  I  have  no  means  to  live  on  ;  if  I  should  run 
after  sermons  I  should  beg  my  bread.  Thirdly,  they  shall  have  no  excuse  by 
emjiloyment.  I  am  a  servant,  I  am  commanded  to  do  this  or  that,  I  find  so  much 
business  to  follow  that  I  cannot  bnd  anytime  for  such  things.  Fourthly,  they  shall 
have  no  excuse  from  their  callings  and  trades.  I  am  an  innkeeper,  and  if  I  should 
not  suffer  drinking  and  swearing  and  gaming  I  should  not  live.  Another  faith  :  I 
am  a  tradt-sman,  and  if  I  should  ask  at  first  jnst  so  much  as  I  conld  take,  I  should 
never  brine  customers  to  my  price,  and  so  I  should  not  live  of  my  trade.  Fifthly, 
they  shall  have  no  excuse  from  the  times  they  live  in.  Alas  (saith  one) !  I  live  in 
wretched  times,  ail  the  world  is  given  to  sin.  This,  then,  first  condemns  all  unholi- 
ness  in  the  livfS  of  them  that  be  saints.  Beloved,  if  we  did  but  live  like  the  saints 
of  God  in  holiness  and  jjurity  the  Lord  would  put  such  si^lendour  upon  us  that 
would  even  daunt  the  very  face  of  our  enemies  and  make  them  stand  amazed  at 
saints.  Secondly,  this  condemns  the  little  diffeience  that  is  betwixt  the  wicked  of 
tlie  world  and  some  saints  in  their  lives  and  manners.  Beloved,  is  there  so  little 
difference  between  the  judge  and  the  prisoners  that  any  one  need  to  come  and 
say,  "  I  pray  you,  sir,  show  me  which  is  the  judge  and  which  is  the  malefactor  "  ? 
Thirdly,  it  condemns  the  scandalousness  of  many  professors  in  their  behaviours 
and    actions.      {W.    Fenvers.)  .Jiidijment    given   to    the   saints  : — The    apostle 

seems  to  refer  to  something  in  Chri^tian  doctrine  well  known  then,  but  very 
obscure  now.  He  ;isks  with  a  tone  of  surprise,  "  Do  not  ye  know?  "  We  always 
look  forward  to  being  judi,'ed,  not  to  judging  others,  and  if  the  words  stood  alone, 
indeed,  we  might  think  that  tbey  only  sjjcke  of  "  judging  "  in  the  sense  of  "  con- 
demning" by  contrast  or  example,  as  the  men  of  Nineveh  the  generation  in  which 
Christ  lived.  But  this  reference  to  future  judgment  does  not  stand  alone  (see  Dan. 
vii.  22;  Matt.  xix.  28:  Eev.  xx.  4  ;  ii.  26).  Looking  to  all  that  is  sa'd  about  the 
judgment  to  come,  I  suppose  that  Christi  ms  will  first  be  judged  according  to  the 
new  nature  of  which  they  have  been  made  partakers,  and  the  new  light  which  has 
been  accorded  to  them  ;  that  afterwards  the  hraiheii  "  world,"  according  to  other 
standards  and  other  nectssities;  and  that  in  this  judfjment  the  saints  will  bear 
a  pait.  Now,  if  it  be  so,  does  it  not  antiripate  a  frequent  difficulty,  the 
eternal  fate  of  the  heathen?  Know  this,  thou  shalt  be  consulted  concerning 
these  very  heathen,  if  only  thou  be  found  worthy  as  a  Christian.  Only  live 
as  it  becometh  snints,  and  no  sentence  shall  be  passed  without  thy  consent, 
or  contrary  to  thy  sense  of  justice,  for  the  saints  shitll  judge  the  world.  The 
saints  are  also  to  judge  angels,  bad  angels  ;  for  it  dcies  not  appear  how  the 
others  would  be  liable  to  any  judgment  at  all.  If  it  be  asked  wiry  this  should 
be  so,  it  may  be  replied  that  their  probation  and  fate  has  ever  been  mixed 
up  with  our  own.  In  the  days  of  our  Lord  they  found  a  solace  and  a  certain 
fierce  jny  in  pos-^essi!  g  themselves  of  the  bodies  of  men,  and  only  abandoned  them 
at  His  almighty  word.  And  these  are  now  finally  cast  down  to  Tartarus  and 
reserved  under  chains  of  darkness  for  the  judgment  of  the  la-t  day.  Contem- 
plating their  long  connection  in  guilt  and  degradation  with  us  children  of  men, 
shall  we  wonder  if  their  final  sentence  also  i-hall  not  be  jjassed  without  us? 
(R.  Winterbotham,  ]\I.A.)  Now  therefore  there  is  utterly  a  fault  among'  you, 
Toecause  ye  go  to  law  one  with  another. — Cliii.-<ti(in  faitltiness : — The  word  may 
mean — 1.  A  moral  defeat  sustained  by  the  Christian  soldier  in  his  campaign  and 
spiritual  march  for  the  heavenly  prize  of  the  kingly  crown  and  judicial  throne.  2. 
The  loss  or  damage  to  the  Church,  more  litigant  than  militant  in  the  eyes  of 
observant  heathendom.  {Canon  Evans.)  Lawsuits  among  Christians  mdicsi\e  a 
want  of — 1.  Brotherly  love.  2.  Christian  sacrifi-e.  3.  Christian  morality-. 
(J.  Lijtli,  D.D.)  Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong? — A  true  Christian  may 
not  ahcays  insist  on  Itis  own  ritjlit : — T.  Jt  may  indicate  a  want  of  Christian 
LOVE.  1.  This  is  evident  where  brethren  sue  each  other.  2.  Even  the  party 
wronged  should  rather  yield  than  encourage  strife  and  hatred.  3.  To  press  his 
cause  before  the  world  is  to  dishonour  Christ.  II.  It  is  the  first  step  to 
actual  sin.  1.  It  breeds  selfishness,  wrong,  fraud.  2.  And  that  among  brethren. 
[Ibid.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Know  ye  not  that  the  ixnrigh'eous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   CORINTIIIAXS.  41] 

of  God? — Peisistent  self-deception  : — Sometimes  we  persistently  deceive  ourselves. 
We  insist  upon  pursuing  a  policy  for  onr  benefit  which  all  but  ourselves  clearly  see 
to  be  absurd  and  useless.  We  cling  to  a  pet  jDroject  and  nurse  a  worthless  conceit 
long  after  the  folly  of  both  is  recognised  by  everybody  else.  But  we  are  not 
altog.  ther  to  be  blamed.  For  instinct  itself  is  sometimes  at  fault,  and  its  powers 
are  usele^ssly  applied.  A  hen  will  sit  with  the  greatest  tenacity  on  rounded  j)ieces 
of  chalk  ;  and  the  Hamster  rat  bi'eaks  the  wings  of  dead  birds  as  well  as  of  living 
ones  beore  it  devours  them.  Insects  also  occasionally  err  on  the  same  principle, 
as  vi'hen  the  blow-tly  lays  its  eggs  on  the  Hower  of  the  stapelia,  deceived  by  its 
carrion-like  odour.  A  spider,  deprived  of  its  egg-bag,  will  cherish  witli  the  same 
fondness  a  little  pellet  of  cotton  thrown  to  it.  (Scieiitijic  HlKsiratioiis  and  S>jmbuls.} 
Who  sJiall  eider  into  the  kingdom  of  God  : — 1.  The  kingdom.  2.  The  danger 
of  delusion  in  reference  to  it.  3.  The  certain  exclusion  of  nil  unrighteousness. 
4.  The  necessity  of  a  change  in  those  who  enter  it.  5.  The  means  by  which 
this  change  is  effected.  {J.  LytJi,  D.D.)  Our  inheritance  m  jieril : — I.  What 
OUR  INHERITANCE  IS — "the  kingdom  of  God,"  present,  but  chiefly  future  (2  Pet. 
iii.  13).  Heaven  is  rest,  joy,  purity,  vision.  This  inheritance  is  in  a  sense  the 
inheritance  of  all,  since  Christ  died  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  We  disinherit  our- 
selves. II.  The  HINDRANCES  TO  IT.  1.  Sins  of  sensuality.  2.  Idolatry.  If  we 
serve  false  g  ds  how  can  we  expect  a  reward  from  the  trun  ?  Some  have  keen  eyes 
for  injuries  done  to  men  ;  idolatry  is  a  pre-eminent  sin  against  God.  What  is  it  that 
occupies  the  throne  of  our  heart  ?  3.  Theft,  covetou>ness,  extortion.  These  are 
much  Ujion  a  p^ir.  Yet  many  a  man  who  would  be  horrified  at  the  thought  of  being 
a  thief  thinks  nothing  of  covetousness  or  extortion.  But  what  is  covetousness  but 
theft  in  the  bud?  and  extortion  but  theft  in  the  bl 'ssom  !  A  man  who  steals 
mentally  is  as  guilty  as  if  he  stole  adusillv  ;  for  nothing  but  the  restraints  of 
society  and  the  dock  keep  his  hands  still.  Msiny  a  theft  is  commited  in  a  court 
of  justice  with  the  assistance  of  counsel:  e.g.,  when  a  man  is  striving  to  get  more 
than  his  due.  4.  Drunkenness.  The  curse  of  our  land.  What  men  lose  by  it — 
health,  respect,  friends,  wealth,  and  the  kingdom  of  God.  5.  Foul  lanj-'unge. 
Reviling,  railing,  sins  of  the  tongue.  Foul  lips  speak  a  foul  heart.  Plainly  we  are 
here  t  mght  that  a  nominal  faith  cannot  save  us.  All  the  profession  in  the  world 
will  not  secure  our  inheritance.  III.  These  hindrances  may  be  removed.  Here  is 
consolat'on  for  great  sinners — and  who  are  small  ones  ?  When  a  man  is  deeply  con- 
vinced of  sin  he  is  often  tempted  to  despair.  Can  I,  the  unclean,  &c.,  enter  the 
holy  heaven  ?  It  seems  impossible.  But  the  apostle  turns  upon  his  converts  and 
says — "And  such  were  some  of  you."  Of  greatest  sinners  God  has  sometimes 
m  tde  the  greatest  saints.  The  barriers  insuperable  to  man  may  be  cast  down  by 
the  might  of  (iod.  No  sickness  is  beyond  the  skill  of  the  great  Physician.  IV.  The 
manner  of  removal.  Paul  speaks  of  "washing"  in  its  twofold  character.  1. 
Justification,  which  we  receive  through  Christ  (ver.  11).  2.  Sanctification,  which  we 
receive  througfi  the  operation  of  "  the  Spirit  of  our  Lord  "  (ver.  11).  V.  A  caution 
IMPLIED — "  And  such  were  some  of  you."  Are  ye  becoming  so  again  ?  Our  great 
inheritance  may  be  lost  after  all,  and  will  be  unless  we  endure  to  the  end.  (W.  E. 
Hurndalt,  M.A.)  Genuine  reformation  : — Beformation  is  an  object  most  earnestly 
pursued  by  all  who  are  alive  to  the  wrongs  of  life.  Some,  however,  are  of  question- 
able utility,  and  none  of  much  value  but  that  of  the  text.  This  reformation  is — I. 
Of  the  mor.vl  character  of  mankind.  Sin  which  may  be  defined  as  self-gratitica- 
tion  is  here  presented  in  a  variety  of  forms.  The  principle  of  sin,  like  holiness,  is 
one  and  simple,  but  the  forms  are  multif  a'ious.  These  morally  corrujit  Corinthians 
were  changed  in  the  very  root  and  fountain  of  their  character.  II.  Indispensable 
TO  A  happy  DESTINY".  "The  kingdom  of  God" — the  reign  of  truth,  purity,  love. 
To  inherit  that  empire,  to  be  in  it,  not  as  occasional  visitors,  but  as  permanent 
citizens,  is  our  high  destiny.  For  this  we  were  tuade.  Hence  Christ  urges  us  to 
seek  it  first.  There  is  no  petting  into  it  without  this  moral  reformation.  III. 
Effected  by  the  redemptive  agency  of  Christ.  They  had  been  cleansed  from 
their  moral  fodness,  "washed";  consecrated  to  holiness,  "sanctified";  made 
right  in  their  being  and  relUionships,  "  justified."  And  this  "  in  the  name."  &c. 
Nothing  on  earth  will  eiiect  this  moral  change  but  the  gospel ;  not  legislative 
enactments,    or   scientific   systems.      {D.    Thomas,   D.D.)  Nor   drunkards. — - 

Drunkemess  : — 1.  No  pestilence  has  ever  wrought  as  much  devastation  and 
misery  as  the  pestilence  of  drunkenness.  Even  its  physical  destructions  are 
simply  terrific.  It  is  the  origin  of  many  of  the  worst  forms  of  disease.  Nor 
are  the   moral    and   social    devastations   of    drunkenness   less  terrific    than    its 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 


physical  devastatioDS.  Drunkenness  extinguishes  the  fires  of  shame,  profanes 
the  shrines  of  self-respect,  enfeebles  the  forces  of  resistance  to  evil;  stifles  con- 
science. And  what  shall  we  say  of  drunkenness  in  its  ravages  upon  religion  ?  And 
what  is  true  of  Christian  work  in  foreign  lands  is  not  less  true  of  Christian  work  at 
home.  Drunkenness  is  a  fearful  hindiauce  to  Christian  enterprise.  It  counteracts, 
if  it  does  not  overweigh,  all  Christian  endeavour  to  ameliorate  the  moral  and  social 
condition  of  the  people.  2.  The  causes  of  drunkenness,  it  seems  to  me,  are  seldom 
sufficiently  inquired  into  and  considered.  Some  races  of  mankind,  e.g.,  are  consti- 
tutionally more  temperate  than  others ;  and  some  climates  foster  intoxication  more 
than  others.  Both  the  race  and  climate  of  Sweden,  e.g.,  are  eminently  favourable 
to  drunkenness.  The  Swedes  are  Goths,  and  the  Goths  are  a  proverbially  drunken 
race.  The  long,  cold,  dark  winter  of  Sweden  are  also  calculated  to  encourage 
habits  of  intoxication.  On  the  other  hand,  in  many  southern  climates,  where  the 
people,  under  the  genial  influences  of  the  radiant  sun,  feel  little  natural  desire  for 
stimulants,  a  strong  artificial  desire  has  been  created  by  the  facilities  with  which 
ardent  spirits  have  been  commercially  introduced.  There  are  also  two  other  causes 
of  drunkenness  which,  although  in  themselves  irremovable,  are  yet  capable  of  being 
brought  under  favourable  control.  Tbese  two  causes  are— (1)  An  hereditary  dis- 
position to  drink  ;  ami — (2)  A  highly  wrought  nervous  constiiution.  In  both  cases 
alike  total  abstinence  is,  I  believe,  essential,  and  moderate  drinking  impossible. 
And  when  I  speak  of  total  abstinence,  I  speak  of  it  not  as  an  irksome  restraint 
but  as  a  charter  of  freedom.  But  the  cause  of  temperance  is  not  exclusively  the 
cause  of  total  abstinence.  Total  abstainers  need  all  the  co-operation  they  can 
receive  from  non-abstaniers  in  their  crusade  against  drunkenness,  and  particu- 
larly in  removing  the  causes  of  drunkenness  wherever  those  causes  are  removable. 
It  is  said  that  "  people  cannot  be  made  sober  by  Act  of  Parliament."  Whether  this 
be  so  or  not  it  is  certainly  true  that  multitudes  are  made  drunk  by  the  unnecessary 
and  over-numerous  temptatioiis  which  are  permitted  by  Act  of  Parliament.  But 
the  Licensing  Laws  are  not  the  only  removable  cause  of  drunkenness.  The  most 
fruitful  of  all  causes  of  drunkenness  is,  I  believe,  wretchedness  ;  wretchedness 
social,  moral,  and  personal.  Look  at  the  way  our  poor  are  herded  together  in  our 
crowded  towns,  without  air  or  light,  with  no  comforts  or  recreations !  Can 
you  wonder  they  are  drunken  ?  Drunkenness  is  the  Nemesis,  the  avenging 
ipunishment,  of  the  utter  selfishness  of  modern  civilisation,  which  cares  so  little 
for  the  overcrowded  poor.  In  other  cases,  also,  wretchedness  is  the  cause  of 
drunkenness.  Think  of  the  wretched,  empty,  stagnant  condition  of  many  human 
lives.  Think  of  the  long,  dreary  hours  which  some  operatives  have  to  work  ;  hours 
which  leave  no  time  for  self-improvement  or  recreation.  Can  you  wonder  that  such 
persons  drink  ?  Nor  is  the  guilt  of  the  sin  wholly  theirs.  It  is  partly  yours  and 
mine  for  allowing  such  a  frightful  state  of  things  to  continue  to  exist.  'J  hree  other 
causes  of  drunkenness  only  will  I  mention  ;  viz.,  seliishness,  the  stings  of  an  uneasy 
conscience,  and  tbe  wretchedness  of  many  homes — homes  capable  of  comfort, 
peace,  and  joy,  but  homes  made  utterly  miserable  by  indolence,  stubbornness,  evil 
tempers,  artificial  worries,  and  want  of  love.  3.  These  are,  I  think,  the  principal 
causes  of  drunkenness ;  and  in  most  instances  the  remedies  suggest  themselves. 
We  reed  great  and  fundamental  reforms  in  our  Licensing  Laws.  We  need  to 
Christianise  our  civilisation  iu  the  direction  of  ameliorating  the  lives  of  the  multi- 
tudinous poor.  We  need  less  rush  and  more  repose  in  daily  life.  We  need  a 
sounder  and  more  inilignant  public  opinion  cone  rning  drunkenness.  We  need  also 
a  great  revival  of  the  Christian  ideals  of  marriage  and  domestic  li'e — ideals  which, 
when  wrought  in  practice,  make  home  the  mirror  of  heaven  on  earth.  We  need, 
lastly,  and  above  all  things,  to  inculcate  the  eternal  truth  that  wilful  and  deliberate 
drunkenness  is  sin  ;  sin  which  brutalises  every  part  of  man's  nature  ;  sin  which,  if 
unforsaken,  shuts  the  door  of  heaven  against  the  drunkard.     {Canon  Diggle.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  And  such  were  some  of  you,  tout  ye  are  washed  .  .  .  sanctified  .  .  . 

justified.— T/?e  great  contrast  .-—Note— I.  The  past  state  of  the  kedeemed.  "  And 
such  were  some  of  you."  1.  Th(-y  were  void  of  moral  rectitude.  Their  conscience 
was  burdened  with  guilt.  2.  They  were  subject  to  impure  influences.  Their 
alfections  were  defiled.  When  conscience  loses  its  authority  there  is  nothing  to 
prevent  the  soul  becoming  tbe  slave  of  the  most  debasing  influences.  3.  They  were 
slaves  of  wrong  habits.  "  Their  deeds  were  evil."  When  both  the  conscience  and 
affections  are  wrong,  the  deeds  must  be  inconsistent  with  truth  and  righteo-sness. 
4.  They  were  nicapable  of  spiritual  enjoyment.    "  Know  ye  not  that  the  unrighteous 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  413 


shall  not  inherit  the  king  lorn  of  God  ?  "  The  unrighteous  have  no  capacity,  taste, 
or  fitness  for  it.  II.  The  present  state  of  the  redeemed.  "  But  ye  are 
washed,"  &c.  Note — 1.  The  change.  (1)  An  initiatory  act.  "But  ye  are 
washed."  There  is  probably  an  allusion  here  to  baptism,  the  emblem  of  moral 
cleansing.  But  as  the  water  of  baptism  cannot  wash  away  sin,  the  apostle 
evidently  refers  to  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  heart.  (2)  A  progressive 
development.  "But  ye  are  sanctified."  This  does  not  implj-  faultless  p-rfectiou, 
but  consecration.  Christian  graces,  like  living  p'ants,  gradually  mature.  3.  A 
beautiful  completion.  "But  ye  are  justified."  This  act,  though  mentioned  last, 
is  generally  cunsidei-ed  the  first.  There  are  three  great  causes  at  work  in  man's 
justification.  (1)  The  merits  of  Christ.  "  Being  justified  freely  by  His  grace,"  cfcc. 
(2)  The  faith  of  the  believer.  "  ;\[an  is  justitied  l>y  faith  without  the  deeds  of  the 
law."  (3)  The  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "And  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 
Think  of  a  man  who,  having  fallen  overboard,  is  carried  away  by  the  current.  At 
last  a  rope  is  thiown  towards  him — he  eagerly  grasps  it — and  he  is  thereby  rescued. 
We  have  here  a  combination  of  causes.  The  kind  friend  who  threw  the  rope — the 
rope  itself— and  the  man's  own  eager  grasp.  Thus  the  Saviour's  merits,  the 
penitent's  faith,  and  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  are  necessary  to  secure  the  salvation 
of  the  soul.  2.  The  means.  "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  -Jesus."  Nothing  but 
that  has  suiScient  power  to  change  the  heart.  3.  The  agency.  And  by  "  the 
Spirit  of  our  God."  It  is  He  that  gives  effect  to  the  wurd  prrache'd— moves  the 
heart,  destroys  the  yoke  of  sin,  and  creates  the  man  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus. 
{J.  II.  Hufihes.)  The  j)oiver  of  the  ijoqjel  in  changing  the  liearts  and  lives  of 
men  : — I.  The  Gospel  of  Christ  is  abundantly  sufficient  for  saving  the  greatest 
SINNERS.  1.  The  salvation  of  a  sinner  consists  in  his  deliverance  from  the  guilt 
and  punishment  of  sin  ;  and  his  recovery  to  the  Divine  image,  i.e.,  his  justification 
and  his  sanctificatiou.  Let  either  of  these  bles!-ini:s  be  wanting,  and  Lis  salvation 
would  be  unfinished.  But  in  both  these  respects  the  gospel  remedy  is  abundantly 
suflicient.  2.  The  instance  in  the  text  is  to  the  point.  Surely,  if  there  could  have 
been  any  sinners,  whose  case  the  gospel  remedy  would  not  reach,  these  Corinthians 
would  have  been  the  persons.  If  you  require  any  more  witnesses,  look  at  many 
celebrated  in  the  Scripture  for  their  piety,  and  see  what  they  had  formerly  been. 
What  had  the  Ephesian  converts  been?  (Eph.  ii.  1,  3,  12.)  What  had  Matthew, 
Onesimus,  and  St.  Paul  himself  been  ?  But  for  all  these  the  gospel  proved  sufficient, 
for  the  thief  upon  the  cross,  for  the  jailer  at  Philippi,  for  thousands  among  the 
wicked  .Tews — for  tens  of  thousands  among  tlie  idolatrous  Gentiles.  3.  Let  us  then 
apply  the  truth — (1)  For  correcting  a  common  error  respecting  others.  When  we 
see  a  person  notoriously  evil,  how  apt  are  we  to  speak  of  him  as  being  past  recovery  ! 
But  remember  that  the  same  grace,  which  was  sufficient  for  the  Corinthians,  will 
be  suflicient  for  him.  (2)  For  consolation  and  encouragement  to  convinced  and 
humbled  sinners.  Are  you  filled  with  anxious  fears  for  your  safety?  Well, 
suppose  that  your  former  state  has  been  as  bad  as  that  of  the  Corinthians,  yet  He 
who  saved  them  can  save  you.  But  while  the  truth  speaks  comfort  to  the  penitent, 
it  leaves  the  impenitent  without  excuse.  Is  the  gospel  sufficient  for  saving  the 
greatest  sinners  ?  Then  why  do  any  of  you  continue  in  the  practice  of  sin?  Is  it 
not  plain  that  you  "  love  darkness  rather  than  light  "  ;  that  you  prefer  slavery  to 
freedom  ;  that  you  "  will  not  come  to  Christ,  that  you  may  have  life  "  ?  II.  A  man's 
RELIGION  IS  to  BE  TRIED,  not  by  what  he  was,  but  by  what  he  is.  1.  True  religion 
makes  a  real  change  in  a  man.  Would  we  then  know  whether  a  man  be  truly 
reliuious  or  not,  we  must  inquire  what  is  his  present  conduct.  2.  Let  this  truth 
then  correct  a  too  general  practice.  When  a  man  begins  to  take  up  a  serious  pro- 
fession of  religion,  nothing  is  moi'e  common  than  to  hear  all  the  irregularities  of 
his  former  life  charged  against  him  as  proofs  of  his  present  hypocrisy.  3.  But 
while  we  apply  this  ti  uth  for  correcting  our  wrong  judgment  of  others,  let  us  also 
use  it  for  forming  a  right  judgment  of  ourselves.  Are  we  still  the  servants  of  sin  ? 
Or  have  we  been  male  free  from  sin  ?  (E.  Cooper,  il.A.)  Triumphs  of  the  gospel 
at  Corinth  : — One  of  the  most  common  nnd  powerful  objections  against  Christianity 
is  that  many  who  profess  it  are  by  no  means  affected  with  it ;  that  such  professois 
cannot  tlicrefore  believe  it,  or  if  they  do,  it  must  be  destitute  of  moral  po^^er.  But 
the  badne  s  of  the  i-opy  is  no  proof  of  the  badness  of  the  original ;  the  baseness  of 
the  counterfeit  coin  is  no  proof  of  the  baseness  of  the  genuine.  Let  the  religion  of 
Jesus  be  compared  with  its  own  standards  ;  let  it  be  tried  by  its  own  rules.  With 
ihe  crimes  of  reli^'ious  professors  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  deplore  and  avoid 
them.     Wh-it  Corinth  was,  we  know.     To  this  focus  of  all  that  is  horrible  St.  Paul 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

went,  and  he  did  not  preach  in  vain.  What  these  Corinthians  had  been,  St.  Paul 
tells  us  in- the  context :  but  now  they  were  washed,  &c.  I.  The  feaefcl  state  op 
TJNcoNVERTED  MEN.  1.  Nothing  Can  be  more  clear  than  the  doctrine  of  universal 
depravity ;  but  this  depravity  exhibits  itself  under  various  aspects,  and  in  various 
degrees.  Ihese  Corinthians  had  been  uncommonly  vile.  Nor  they  only.  We 
know  of  the  thief  who  was  pardoned  on  the  tree.  This,  indet-d,  is  not  uniformly 
the  case.  For  in  the  chaiacters  of  multitudes  we  see  much  that  is  pleasing,  even 
the  grace  of  God.  Tliere  are  many  who  are  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom,"  and  who 
yet  appear  never  to  rea"h  it.  2.  We  oui^bt  to  regard  the  depravity  of  man  with 
deep  sorrow  and  compassion,  but  not  with  despair.  The  very  glory  of  the  gosj)el  is 
that  it  is  a  message  of  pardon  and  mercy  to  the  guilty,  the  bankrupt,  and  the  undone. 
But  j)erhaps  some  i>f  you  may  despair,  not  of  the  conversion  of  others,  but  of  your 
own.  Such  should  remember  these  Coriutlii.ins,  and  the  apostle  who  converted 
them.  II.  The  renewed  state  of  these  Corinthians.  1.  "Ye  are  v\aslied." 
Since  sanctificatiou  and  justification  are  mentioned  directly  afterwards,  peihaps 
this  reft-rs- to  baptism.  2.  "Ye  are  sanctified,"  i.e.,  j'eare  more  and  more  alienated 
from  the  world,  and  conformed  to  the  imnge  and  the  will  of  God.  3.  "Ye  are 
justified,"  i.e.,  your  sins  are  pardoned,  and  you  are  accepted  as  righteous  before 
God,  through  faith  in  Christ.  III.  The  Divine  method  of  sanctifica'iion  and 
justification  here  exhirited.  "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  means  — 1.  Doing 
anything  by  rfie  authority  of  Christ.  "  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in 
Thy  name."  2.  Doing  anything  for  the  honour  of  Christ:  thus  St.  Paul  sa> s — 
"  Wliatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,"  &c. 
3.  Receivin.' anything  from  the  Father,  through  His  dear  Son:  thus  our  Lord  says — 
"  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  name," on  account  of  My  merits,  "He 
will  give  it  you."  The  text,  then,  teaches  us  that  the  only  method  by  whirh  we 
can  approach  God,  the  only  method  by  which  God  can  display  His  grace  and  love 
to  man,  is  through  Christ.  [G.  Wciijltt,  M.A.)  Cleansed  by  the  Spirit: — There 
is  a  lonely  little  pool  of  water  on  the  mountttin  side  near  Tarbet,  Loch  Lomond, 
called  the  Fairy  Loch.  If  \ou  lodk  into  it  you  will  see  a  great  many  colours  in  the 
water,  owing  to  the  varied  nature  of  the  materials  that  form  its  bottom.  There  is 
a  legend  about  it  which  says  that  the  fairies  used  to  dye  things  for  the  people  round 
about,  if  a  specimen  of  the  colour  wanted  was  left  along  with  the  cloth  on  the  brink 
of  the  pool  at  sunset.  One  evening  a  shepherd  left  beside  the  Fairy  Loch  the  fleece 
of  a  bl  .ck  sheefi,  and  placed  upon  it  a  wi.ite  woollen  thread  to  show  that  he  wished 
the  fleece  dyed  white.  This  fairly  puzzled  the  go-  d  folk.  They  could  dye  a  white 
fleece  any  colour,  but  to  make  a  black  fleece  white  was  impossible.  In  despair 
they  threw  all  their  colours  into  the  loch,  giving  it  its  present  strange  look,  and 
disappeared  for  ever.  This  may  se^m  a  foolish  fable,  but  it  has  a  wise  moral. 
What,  the  fairies  could  not  do  beside  the  Fairy  Loch,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  do 
beside  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  He  can  make  the  blackest 
soul  white.  [Hugh  Macmillan,  D.B.)  The  great  change  : — A  I'iece  of  canvas  is 
of  a  trifling  value.  You  can  buy  it  fur  a  faw  ponnies.  You  would  scarcely  think  it 
worth  pickuig  up  if  you  saw  it  lying  in  the  street.  But  an  artist  takes  it  and  draws 
a  few  lines  and  tiguies  on  it,  and  then  with  his  brnsli  touches  in  certain  colours, 
and  the  canvas  is  sold  for  a  large  sum.  So  Godt  kes  up  a  ruined,  worthless  human 
life  which  has  no  beauty,  no  attr,.ctivenes3,  but  is  repulsive,  blotch>d,  and  siained 
hy  sin.  Then  the  fintie's  of  His  love  add  touches  of  beauty,  painting  the  Divine 
image  upon  it,  and  it  becomes  precious  and  glorious.  (J.  R.  Mdler.)  iMoral 
traust'onniition.'s : — There  are  marvellous  transformations  in  the  material  as  also  in 
the  moral  world.  Lo')k  in  the  material  world.  The  full-fed  mag^'ot,  that  his  rioted 
in  filth  till  its  tender  skin  seems  ready  to  burst  with  repL  tion,  when  the  appointed 
time  arrives  leaves  the  offensive  matters  it  was  ordained  to  assist  in  re-noving,  and 
gets  into  some  convenient  hole  or  crevice  ;  then  its  body  contracts  or  shoitens,  and 
becomes  e  g-sliaped,  while  the  skin  hardens,  and  turns  brown  and  dry,  so  that, 
under  this  form,  the  cre-iture  appears  more  like  a  seed  than  a  living  animal ;  after 
some  time  passed  in  this  inactive  and  equivocal  form,  during  which  wonderful 
changes  have  taken  place  within  the  seed-like  shell,  one  end  of  the  shell  is  burst 
off,  aud  from  tlie  inside  comes  forth  a  buzzing  fly,  that  drcp-s  its  former  filthy 
habits  with  its  cast-olf  diess,  and  now,  «ith  a  .^loie  refined  taste,  seeks  only  to  lap 
the  solid  viands  of  our  tables,  or  s'p  tlie  liquid  contents  of  our  cujis.  Look  again 
into  the  moral  world.  There  you  see  a  tran- formation  as  wonderful.  The  selfish 
debauchee,  whose  horrid  taste  has  giubbed  in  every  sort  of  imm  aal  filth,  and 
become  habituated  to  the  harsh,  the  cruel,  and  the  dishonourable,  has  been  brought 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   COniNTHIANS.  415 


into  contact  with  the  necessary  spiritual  conditions  for  a  change,  and  beheld  from 
one  stage  to  another  he  passes  until  at  last  his  tastes  are  entirely  altered,  his 
existence  is  changed,  and  even  he  is  able  to  soar  in  the  light  and  purity  of  the  world. 
Elsewhere,  behold,  the  miser  is  transformed  to  the  philanthropist,  the  coward  into 
a  hero.  We  watch  the  Hy's  aerial  circlings  in  the  sunbeam,  and  remember  with  wonder 
its  degraded  origin.  The  preacher  looks  over  his  congregation,  and  he  sees  those 
who  Lave  become  noble  and  virtuous,  he  is  able  to  take  heart  for  new  work  ;  for  as 
he  remembers  in  their  presence  the  debased  and  the  wicked  who  are  yet  to  be  trans- 
formed, he  says,  "And  such  were  some  of  you;  but  you  are  regenerated  by  the 
higher  Power,"  and  those  others  may  be  changed  likewise.  {Scieniijic  Illustra- 
tions and  Syinbuls.) 

Vers.  12-?0.  All  tilings  are  lawful  to  me,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient. — 
The  lawful  and  the  expedient: — I.  What  is  l..\wfui-.  fob  us  in  life?  All  things 
indifferent,  i.e.,  not  evil  in  themselves.  The  Chiistian  has  the  widest  liberty.  He 
is  not  under  the  restriction  of  the  older  economy.  To  him  every  creature  of  God 
is  good  (1  Tim.  iv.  4).  He  must  abide  within  the  limits  of  the  lawful ;  nothing 
that  seems  expedient  outside  those  limits  must  be  touched  by  him.  II.  What  is 
EXPEDIENT  WITHIN  THE  LIMITS  OF  THE  LAWFUL.  1.  The  Christian  must  not  use  his 
liberty  indiscriminately  ;  he  must  consider  probable  results.  The  end  does  not 
justify  the  means,  but  the  end  often  determines  whether  means,  justifiable  in 
tuemselves,  shall  be  used  or  not.  Means  good  euouj;h  in  themselves  may 
under  certain  conditions  lead  to  most  undesirable  ends.  'J'hose  ends  fore- 
seen determine  that  those  means  should  not  be  employed.  2.  The  Christian 
has  to  select  the  truly  expedient  out  of  the  truly  lawful.  Unlawful  means  ruin 
thousands  ;  lawful  means,  unlawfully  used,  tens  of  tliou-ands.  Nowhere  does  the 
devil  build  his  chapels  more  cunningly  than  by  the  side  of  the  temple  of  Christian 
liberty.  A  Christian,  before  availing  himself  of  his  liberty,  had  need  a-k  what 
will  be  the  effect — (1)  On  myself.  Shall  I  be  made  less  spiritual  and  useful  ? 
(2)  On  my  liberty.  Liberty  may  commit  suicide.  Undue  indulgence  of  liberty 
results  in  slavery.  Paul  was  anxious  "  not  to  be  brought  under  the  power 
of  any,"  even  lawful  things.  (3)  On  my  fellows.  Will  it  aid  or  hindei-  them? 
(chap,  viii.  13).  (4)  On  God.  Will  it  glorify  Him?  (iV.  E.  Hnrndall,  Al.A.) 
The  practical  distinction  between  tilings  law/itl  and  expedient : — The  text  leads  us  to 
the  contemplation  of  two  very  impoitant  particulars,  the  latter  illuslrative  of  the 
former,  and  closely  connected  with  it,  yet  demanding  separate  consideration.  The 
fiist  is  the  practical  distinction  between  things  lawful  and  Cipe  dent;  the  second, 
the  universal  inexpediency  of  all  those  things  which,  by  bringing  us  under  their 
power,  I  will  just  remark  that  while  the  former  of  these  particulars  leads  us  to 
guard  against  the  evils  arising  from  external  events  and  influences,  the  latter 
points  more  immediately  at  such  as  exist  within  us:  the  former  has  most  direct 
reference  to  the  eifettt  of  our  conduct  generally,  and  perhaps,  in  a  princ  pal  degree, 
to  its  effect  on  others ;  the  latter  has  relation  chiefly  to  its  operation  upon 
ourselves.  We  may  be  led  by  both  to  the  avoidance  of  one  and  the  same  evil ;  but 
they  will  present  it  under  different  asMCcts  :  the  first  as  manifestly  irreconcilable 
with  our  integrity  or  our  profession,  or  injurious  because  of  its  obstructing  the  great 
purposes  of  our  life  ;  the  Idst  as  insidious,  as  tending  to  lower  the  standard  of  our 
views  and  feelings,  abating  the  encgy  of  our  resolutions  ;  enfeebling  the  operation 
of  our  loftiest  motives ;  making  us,  in  short,  less  holy,  less  spiritual.  These 
remarks  will  be  confirmed  by  a  simple  reference  to  the  text,  which,  in  the  most 
forcible  manner,  places  the  two  points  unitedlv  in  our  view.  Of  lawful  things 
there  are  some  it  descrii'es  as  to  be  avoided  by  a  Christian,  because  they  are 
Hot  expedient ;  others  it  warns  us  to  shun,  because  they  would  bring  us  under  their 
power.  Bather,  perhaps,  we  ought  to  say,  it  speaks  of  the  same  ohjects,  and  leads 
us  to  regaril  them  as  connected  with  a  twofokl  evil ;  that  they  are  iinprotitable  in 
their  direct  influence,  and  calculate  d,  in  their  innirect,  to  impair  onr  spiritual  and 
mental  freedom.  We  may  apply  the  pas-age  in  either  way,  and  in  both  with 
manifest  advantage.  In  some  cas  s  these  evils  are  separate,  in  others  they 
coincide.  There  are  some  thini's  t  at  merely  hinder  and  obstruct  our  usefulness, 
and  are  for  that  reason  inexp'dient ;  there  are  otliers  that  have  a  perpetual 
tendency  to  debase  us,  and  lu  bring  us  into  v  ssalage  under  their  power  ;  but  the 
greater  numher  of  inconsistencies  unite  boih  these  etfects,  and  are  therefore  to  be 
axoided  not  only  as  improper  in  themselves,  but  lecause  they  will  make  us  feel 
enslaved  by  them  for  the  future.     Ha  ing  thus  glanced  at  the  general  bearings  of 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

the  subject,  we  shall  now  confine  ourselves  to  the  former  of  these  particulars.  Wo 
proceed,  therefore,  to  exhibit  the  ptactical  distinction  between  things  lawful  and 
things  expedient.  Is  it  asked,  then,  what  is  the  foundation  and  essential  nature  of 
virtue?  what  the  ultimate  standard  of  morality?  The  answers  to  this  question  are 
various,  and  each  appears  supported  by  an  array  of  the  most  specious  reasonings. 
All  cannot  be  true.  They  may,  and  do  in  many  points,  coalesce  ;  but  as  far  as  they 
differ,  they  afford  a  presumption  that  eacli  of  them  is  imperfect,  if  not  erroneous. 
It  is  said  the  standard  is  expediency ;  the  tendency  of  every  action  to  promote 
or  hinder  the  general  good  :  that  thos^e  actions  are  right  which  advance,  those 
unlawful  which  impede,  the  happiness  not  of  the  individual  only,  but  of  the  whole. 
Thus  morality  is  made  the  same  thing  with  expediency,  and  the  only  reason  for 
which  any  particular  conduct  is  riyht,  is  because  it  is  calculated  for  the  incrfa^e  of 
the  general  good.  No^^,  against  this  principle  there  are  very  strong  objections,  and 
some  which  involve  the  most  extensive  consefjuences.  When,  in  reply  to  su<h 
inquiries  as  these,  "  Why  am  I  obliged  to  speak  the  truth?  "  (proposed  bv  Dr.  Paley 
himself,  the  author  of  the  system  referred  to)  ;  or,  "  Why  is  falsehood  to  be 
accounted  criminal?  When  tins  limited  an!-wer  is  given,  "  Only  because  they  are 
contrary  to  the  general  good,"  we  apprehend  there  is  involved  a  serious  and 
fundamental  error,  the  substitution  of  what  is  secondary  and  adventitious  for 
what  is  primary  and  in  its  nature  essential.  Surely  there  is  a  (iistinction,  prior  to 
all  considerations  of  utility,  between  truth  and  falsehood,  justice  and  inju  tice, 
probity  and  baseness,  spotless  chastity  and  brutal  indulgence.  Surely  there  is 
another  and  an  earlier  reason  for  which  to  condemn  some  of  these  things,  and  to 
approve  the  opp^sitt^.  We  apprehend,  also,  that  even  if  the  principle  were  true,  it 
would  be  practically  inap[ilicable  and  useless  ;  for  it  could  be  known  only  to  God 
what  actions  were  really  calculated  to  advance  the  happiness  of  the  whole.  The 
ultimate  consequences  of  every  action  aie  obviously  beyond  our  knowledge,  demand- 
ing a  comprehensiveness  of  thought  not  less  than  that  of  Omniscience  itself. 
Again,  it  appears  to  us  to  imply  what  can  never  be  admitted  in  practice  :  that  such 
considerations  should,  in  many  cases,  prevsiii  as  relate  to  the  general  and  last 
consequences  of  our  actions,  in  oppo-ition  to  all  those  which  connect  themselves  with 
the  individual  and  his  jiresent  ciicumstances  ;  for  certainly  no  man  is  I  ound  to 
sacrifice  his  personal  welfare,  and  all  that  is  most  dear  and  necessary  to  himself, 
from  a  vague  regard  to  the  increase  of  the  general  happiness,  nor  yet  to  suspend  all 
reference  to  the  present,  whatever  its  charncter  may  most  imperiously  require,  till 
lie  shall  have  traced  out  the  issue  of  his  determinations  in  a  distant  and  unknown 
futurity.  Yet  this  impracticable  and  visionary  principle  is  truly  involved  in  the 
question  of  ultimate  expediency  as  the  law  of  our  conduct.  We  will  add  only  once 
more  that  this  standard  cannot  be  applied  to  the  actual  and  immediate  determina- 
tion of  men's  conduct,  and  hence  is  of  no  practical  utility  even  if  it  weie  ever  so 
well  established  by  argument.  Before  we  could  act  according  to  this  rule  we  must 
first  balance  and  examine  all  the  results  of  our  conduct,  through  the  wide  extent  of 
all  connected  being,  and  the  longseiiesof  all  even  collateral  and  accidental  eon- 
sequences.  But  this  is  impossible,  and  the  system  which  requires  it  cannot,  as  we 
think,  be  true.  It  is  worthy  of  observation,  then,  that  in  the  text  there  is  an 
evident  distinction  made  between  the  expediency  and  the  lawfulness  of  actions,  for 
it  affirms  that  those  things  may  be  lawful  that  are  not  expedient.  May  we  venture  to 
deduce  the  converee — that  some  things  may  be,  or  seem,  expedient,  which  yet  are 
not  lawful  ?  We  are  aware  that  the  advocates  of  the  system  to  which  we  now  object 
would  demur  to  this  suggestion,  and  say  that  nothing  can  be  truly  expedient,  that 
is,  truly  and  in  the  largest  sense  useful,  which  is  not  in  itself  good;  and  we  admit 
that  the  statement  is  well  founded,  but  it  will  not  prevent  the  most  mischievous 
mistakes  in  practice.  He  that  shall  make  expediency  alone,  whether  political  or 
religious,  or  of  whatever  kind,  his  guide  in  conduct,  will  be  betrayed  inevitably  into 
the  most  dangerous  errors.  When  what  is  useful  is  substituted  for  what  is  just,  or 
made  identical  with  it,  and  the  standard  of  rectitude  is  abandoned  for  that  of  utility, 
the  door  is  opened  to  a  thousand  evils.  There  are  not  wanting  those  who  will 
plead  for  the  worst  abuses,  the  greatest  perversions  of  principle  and  practice,  upon 
the  pretence  that  they  are  productive  of  advantage  more  than  sutticient  to  outweigh 
the  evil  of  their  own  nature.  What  other  plea  is  adduced  by  those  who  disguise  or 
modify  their  own  Christian  profession,  lest  they  should  give  offence  to  the  unthink- 
ing and  the  profane,  on  whom  they  may  choose  to  be  dependent?  Paul  resolves 
not,  "I  will  perform  those  things  that  are  expedient,  though  they  be  not  lawful; 
but  I  will  not  venture  even  upon  lawful  actions,  if  they  be  not  expedient."     I  fea,r 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  417 

there  is  but.  too  little  of  this  strictness  of  principle  amonpst  us.     Many,  alas  !  are 
willing  to  make  a  sad  commutation  uf  the  just,  the  honourable,  and  the  lawful,  for 
the  convenient,  the  j)rofitable,  and  the  agreeable,  both  in  religion  and  in  common 
life.     Suffer  me  now  to  call  your  attention  to  the  import  of  that  striking  expression 
in  the  text  employed  to  characterise  the  things  that  are  thus  to  be  avoided  :  they 
are  "not  expedient";  rather,  "  they  are  not  profitable."     They  will  not  coalesce 
with  that  great  jDurpose  of  the  Christian  life  which  alone  is  worthy  of  our  desii-e 
and  O'lr  ex''rtions :  that  we  may  advance  the  glory  and  the  cause  of  God  ;  that  we 
may  be  useful  to  our  fellow-creatures.     To  the  generous  mind  of  the  apostle  nothing 
else  seemed  honourable  or  happy.     Like  his  blessed  Lord  he  had  made  it  his  meat 
and  his  drink  to  do  the  will  of  God.     You  behold,  then,  illustrated  in  the  personal 
histoiy  of  the  apostle,  the  extent  of  his  own  language,  and  you  will  need  uo  further 
comment  on  the  phraseology  of  our  text.     Do  you  for  a  moment  ask  what  is  it  that 
he  disavows  as  inexpedient?    You  are  prepared  yourselves  to  reply  ;  all  tliat  is  thus 
unprofitHble  ;  or,  as  he  has  varied  the  expression  in  another  place,  "  All  things  are 
lawful  for  me,  but  all  things  edify  not  "  (chap.  x.  23).     All  things  are  inexpedient 
whirh  are  found  to   be  un))rofitab!c — not  those  alone  which  may  issue  in  direct 
injury.     ^Vhltever  hinders  his  preparation  for  the  exf-rcises  of  religion,  for  the 
duties  of  common  life,  for  the  endurance  of  the  Cross,  for  the  resistance  of  tempta- 
tion, and   lor  his  entrance,  even   in  its  very  performance   or   enjoyment,  into  the 
world   above,   is   thus   manifestly   unprofitable   and   inexpedient.      That,    too,    is 
inexpedi-nt  which  would  restrict  the  usefulness  eitber  of  our  direct  exertions  or  our 
general  example,  impairing  the  uniformity,  the  completeness,  and   the  accuracy  of 
our  representation  in  practice,  of  all  that  constitutes  the  Christian  character.     For 
the  same  reason  we  must  avoiil  what  would,  in  any  measure,  interfere  with  the 
fullest  and  most  unembarrassed   discharge  of    every   obligation,   whether    official 
or  personal.      There  ought  to   be   no  disguise,   no   mystery,   nothing    dark   and 
unintelligible,  in  one  who  is  not  of  the  night  but  of  the  dav.    ]\Iany  things  which  the 
meir  of  the  w'orld  allow  in  others,  they  deem  unsuitable  to  the  character  of  a 
Christian.     We  should  respect  their  judgment.     We  should  watch  over  our  actions 
with  a  godly  jealousy.     There  remains  one  other  class  of  cautions  more  momentous 
than  the  whole,  which  we  liave  not  hitherto  presented.     We  must  abstain,  then, 
from  the  things  that  we  have  specified,  not   merely  as  tending  to  diminish  our 
personal  happiness  and  piety,  or  to  lessen  the  effects  of  our  example  in  promoting 
that  of  othf^rs,  but  as  operating  in  a  pernicious  manner  upon  the  cause  of  God  and 
the  honour  of  tlie  liedeemer.     Little  do  we  often  think  how  much  our  conduct  is 
identified  witb  that  of  Christianity  itself,  in  the  estimation  of  the  world  around  us. 
We  shall  suppose  the  piinciple,  then,  to  be  admitted.     You  readily  subscribe  to  the 
sentiment  that  if  any  action  be  found  to  be  unprotitable  and  inexpedient  it  must 
therefore  be  avoided,  even  though  it  be  not  absolutely  unlawful ;  and  now  you  have 
no  other  duty  remaining  but  to  propose  to  your  own  conscience,  as  in  the  sight  of 
God,  the  following  practical  inquiries.   Is  the  indulgence  in  question  such  as  would, 
in  any  measure,  oppress  or  agitate  my  feelings,  and  indispose  me  for  the  duties  of 
the  sanctuary,  or  the  family,  or  the  closet  ?    Snould  I  reflect  on  it  with  approbation, 
or  with  regret,  upon  the  bed  of  sickness,  or  in  the  chamber  of  death  ?     Would  it 
tend  to  the  duninution  of  my  present  useftilness,  biinging  a  cloud  to  hide  the  lustre 
of  my  cbaracter  in  the  sight  of  tbe  world  ;  and  so  presenting  an  imperfect  and 
inadequate,  not  to  say  positively  erroneous,  view  of  the  Christian  life  ?    (It.  S.  McAU, 
LL.b.)        Liberty  in  the  vse  of  the  lawful: — Our  aim,  in  the  former  discourse, 
was  to  excite  you  to  Christian  vigilance  and  to  a  high  appreciation  of  the  obliga- 
tions and  effect  of  Christian  consistency.     We  now  pioceed  to  a  somewhat  different 
view  of  the  same  subject,  founding  our  remarks  not  on  the  former  but  the  latter 
clause:  "All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  btit  I  will  not  be  brouL'ht  under  the  power 
of  any"  ;  and  our  object  is  to  show  that  there  is  a  neces-ity  of  caution  in  the  use 
of  even  lawful  things  from  their  probable  effect  upon  ourselves;  that  many  may  be 
dnngerous  wbich  are  not  originally  criminal.     We  shall  endeavour  to  convince  you 
that  there  are  miny  things  which,  in  single  instances  and  acts,  may  not  be  very 
censurable,  which  yet,  when  suffered  to  become  habitual,  would  tend  to  diminish 
or  to  destroy  tlie  holiness  and  elevation  of  a  Ciiristian  character.     You  will  be 
reminded  that  all  the  poweis  of  men  are  in  a  state  of  imperfection  and  disorder; 
that  they  naturally  incline  to  the  corruptions  of  that  state  through  which  we  now 
are  passint?.     We  shall  call  on  you  to  recollect  how  hard  it  is  to  retrace  our  steps — 
to  regain  the  path  from  which  we  may  have  wandered.     The  design  which  we  shall 
principally  pursue  is  to  warn  you  against  yourselves — against  the  allowance  of  too 
VOL.   I.  27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

great  a  latitude  to  your  natural  tastes  and  inclinations.  There  may  be  some  to 
whom  the  exhortations  of  our  former  discourse  might  seem  inapplic  ible.  They 
may  reason  thus  :  "  It  is  true  that  such  indulgences  as  I  dehght  in,  and  think  it  no 
crime  to  enjoy,  might  be  most  unseemly  for  a  man  of  piety ;  but  I  have  made  no  such 
profession;  I  am  not,  and  I  wish  not  to  appear,  a  pious  man."  Now,  in  such 
circumstances,  our  text  is  fitted  to  afford  a  mo.st  instructive  lesson.  You  are  in  the 
greater  danger,  and  require  the  more  scrupulous  caution.  You  are  the  more  liable 
to  fall  beneath  the  power  of  those  indulgences  which  yciu  think  not  sinful.  What 
if  in  such  as  you  they  be  not  unlawful,  are  they,  therefore,  expedient?  Will  they 
involve  you  in  no  exposure  to  evil?  And  is  thnre  no  need  of  watchfulness  in  one, 
that,  even  according  to  liis  own  confession,  is  without  God  in  tbe  world — a  man  left 
to  himself?  Are  you  safer,  then,  while  you  are  destitute  of  the  grr.ce  of  God  than 
such  men  are  with  it?  But,  you  rei)ly,  it.  is  not  the  danger  to  their  principles  that 
would  render  such  things  inexpedient,  neither  is  that  danger  to  be  apprehended  to 
your  own  ;  it  is  the  incongruity  of  their  performance  with  the  name  they  bear,  and 
the  superior  s-trictness  they  are  pledged  ever  to  maintain.  Still,  the  sentiment  of 
our  text  applies  to  you  ;  for  that  sentiment  supposes  that  there  is  dangei'  even  iu 
lawful  things,  and  that  the  form  wheiein  it  is  most  to  be  apprehended  is  that  they 
bring  us  inseusibly  "  under  their  power."  And,  besides,  the  question  solennily 
recurs.  Why  are  you  nut  a  follower  of  Christ?  Is  sin  not  sin,  then?  Ave  trifling 
and  dissipation  and  folly  free  from  the  charge  of  evil?  But  I  must  recall  your 
attention  to  the  subjei;t  immediately  befoie  us.  There  may  be  some  who  retlect 
that  the  cautions  we  have  already  given  are  suiteil  only  to  the  circttmstances  of 
such  as  are  advance  1  in  life  ;  that  they  apply,  with  the  greatest  foi'ce  to  those  in 
public  stations,  and  of  a  conspicuous  character  ;  but  that  they  are  exempt.  Their 
state  of  life  is  humble  and  obscure,  or  their  age  excuses  them  from  the  burdtn  of 
so  gi'eat  a  responsibility.  Their  example  will  not  be  productive  either  of  injury  or 
good.  Now,  surely  there  is  no  man,  whatever  his  age  or  station,  that  can  jdead 
exemption  from  the  necessity  of  the  caution  we  would  thus  enforce.  It  is  often  a 
happiness  and  a  safeguard  to  feel  that  our  circumstances  call  on  us  for  vigilance. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  scarcely  know  a  more  fatiil  mistake  than,  from  under- 
valuing the  effect  of  our  example,  to  suppose  ourselves  at  liberty  to  relax  our 
watchfulness.  I.  We  will  biiefiy  glance  at  the  first  of  these  particulars.  It  may 
perhaps  surprise  some  to  hear  that  we  regard  the  text  as  presenting  an  enlafvGed 
AND  NOBi.E  VIEW  OF  CHRISTIAN  LIBERTY.  They  may  fear,  from  the  comprehensive- 
ness of  the  terms,  lest  we  are  about  to  loosen  the  obligations  of  all  morality,  and 
maintain  the  pernicious  dogma  that  theie  is  no  sin  to  a  boliever  in  Christ ;  that  his 
transgressions  are  so  fully  visited  upon  his  Surety,  in  their  guilt  and  jmnishnient, 
that  they  no  longer  attach  to  himself.  We  go  as  far  as  any  nan  in  maintaining 
the  extent  and  absoluteness  of  the  imputation  ef  our  sins  to  the  Bedeemer.  But 
far  be  from  us  the  impiety  of  saying,  that  in  their  case  morality  and  immorality 
cease  to  retain  their  opposite  and  immutable  nature.  "All  things  are  lawful  to 
them."  Surely  not  such  as  are  in  their  own  nature  criminal ;  but  all  that  are 
usually  regarded  as  indifferent.  To  be  a  Christian  is  to  be  delivered  from  the 
obligation  of  all  that  is  ritual  and  secular  in  the  ordinances  of  religion,  and  to  be 
brought  into  the  enjoyment  of  a  faith  the  most  pure,  simple,  spiritual.  Further, 
the  impositions  of  all  authority  which  is  merely  human  are  contrary  to  the  genius 
and  spirit  of  the  gospel.  Again,  a  Christian  is  not  to  be  subject  to  the  scruples  and 
su})  rstitious  fears  that  so  often  perplex  the  mind,  when  it  has  conceived,  iu  an 
inadequate  manner,  of  the  boundaries  of  its  obligations  and  duty.  Where  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is  lil)eity,  and  the  man  who  has  that  Spirit  is  to  preserve 
himself  from  bondage,  with  relntion  to  those  groundless  apprehensions  that  per- 
petually haunt  the  consciences  of  many  among  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  Niceties 
of  phrase  and  of  observance,  of  dress  and  manners  and  external  circumstances, 
reaching  not  to  the  vitals  of  Christianity.  Good  men  sometimes  encumber  them- 
selves with  an  unnecessary  yoke,  by  the  excess  of  their  suspicion  as  to  the  lawful- 
ness of  many  things  to  which  no  law  can  apply,  and  which  can,  in  the  strict  sense, 
constitute  neither  a  fulfilment  nor  a  violation  of  our  duty.  There  is  a  sicklj  tender- 
ness of  conscience,  an  excessive  and  shrinking  sensibility,  which  not  only  exposes 
us  to  a  large  amount  of  pain  such  as  it  was  never  the  design  of  our  Master  that  we 
should  be  called  to  endure,  but  which  also  incapacitates  us  for  the  vigorous  and 
efficient  discharge  of  our  duty.  We  may  go  on,  then,  upon  our  way  rejoicing  ;  and 
let  no  unnecessary  fears  harass  and  distract  us.  There  are  many  gratifications  and 
indulgences  which  the  law  of  Christ  has  not  forbidden,  and  of  them  therefore  His 


CH  iP.  vr.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  419 


followers  may  freely  and  innocently  partake.  Yet  they  have  hem  prouibited  as 
sinful  by  the  injudicious  zeal  and  false  prudence  of  some  who  call  themselves  His 
disciples.  Christianity  is  not  a  sy.-.tem  of  restriction  and  oppression.  There  is 
uothing  forbidden  us  but  what  is  evil  either  in  itself  or  in  its  influence.  II.  We 
proceed,  then,  to  the  second  of  the  particulars,  in  what  manner  that  CHKibTiAN 

LIIiEKTY    OF    WHICH    WE    HAVE    SPOKEN    IS    TO    BE    PIIACTICALLY   SECURED  ;     it    IS,    ip    One 

word,  by  tlje  exercise  of  Christian  moderation.  We  are  to  say,  with  reference  to 
every  enjoyment,  It  is  not  unlawful,  but  it  is  inexpedient,  and  I  will  not  be 
brought  beneath  its  power.  Are  you  solicited  by  gratifications  that  would  consume 
your  invaluable  time,  perhaps  not  in  a  very  extensive  degree  in  their  single 
instances,  but  in  their  almast  inevitable  repetition  ;  in  their  preparation  and  their 
consequences  ?  Then  stop  ;  consider  ;  calculate  the  results  ;  ask  yourselves  wliether 
you  vsill  gain  or  ultimately  lose  by  sul-Ii  indulgence  Say  if  you  have  arrived  at  the 
conclusion  that  they  will  be  hurtful  in  the  end.  They  are  lawlul  ;  I  forswcir  them 
not.  I  could  mingle,  like  others,  delightfully  in  all  the  raptures  they  are  fitted  to 
impart;  but  I  am  a  dying  man  ;  I  kni.w  not  how  soon  the  frail  thread  of  life  may 
be  cut  off  for  ever ;  I  must  work  while  it  is  called  to-day.  Is  the  character  of  the 
delights  you  are  tempted  to  participate,  such  as  to  excite,  to  undue  and  dangerous 
activity,  any  of  the  i^assions  of  our  nature  ?  Then  they  are  inexpedient  and  hurtful. 
Let  a  Christian  learn,  in  such  things,  to  restrain  his  freedom  that  he  may  be  truly 
free.  Tliere  are  forms  of  pleasure  which,  though  innocent  in  themselves,  yet  place 
our  conduct,  in  their  ulterior  consequences,  injuriously  in  the  power  of  others. 
They  cannot  be  enjoyed  alone,  and  hence  they  bring  us  into  associations,  the  effect 
of  which,  though  not  immediately  appareijt,  is  to  abiidge  our  personal  freedom  by 
placing  us  in  contact  with  the  opposite  sentiments  and  practice  of  those  whom  it  is 
not  safe  to  follow,  iu  matters  that  even  remotely  affect  religion  and  tlie  concerns  of 
the  soul.  But  for  such  enjoyments,  we  might  have  remained  in  a  happy  separation 
from  the  ungodly.  The  recurring  sight  of  what  is  evil,  or  even  the  hubit  of 
associating,  without  visible  discrimination,  with  those  who  practise  it,  will  tend  to 
abate  our  positive  disgust  at  its  comujission.  In  such  instances,  again,  we  behold 
the  necessity  of  acting  upon  the  salutary  maxim  presented  in  our  text.  It  must  be 
familiar  to  every  serious  and  reflecting  mind  tliat  there  are  many  pleasures  which, 
if  they  were  in  ;dl  other  resp-cts  free  from  reproach,  yet  are  on  this  account  to  be 
suspected ;  that  they  have  a  secret  tendency  t')  indispose  and  unfit  us  for  the  regular 
fulfilment  of  our  duty.  They  exhaust  the  feelings  ;  they  impair  our  spirituality  ; 
they  generate  other  and  uncongenial  habits;  tiiey  are  uufavuurable  to  retirement ; 
they  produce  a  vagrancy  of  tiiought.  I  thi>dc  it  will  be  readily  conceded  by  the 
candid  hearer  tliat  our  judgment,  relative  to  the  lawfulness  or  impropriety  of  many 
of  our  pleasures,  is  affected  in  a  degree  ii,  would  be  very  difficult  to  estnnate,  by  our 
natural  and  consiitiitiona'  temp^-rament ;  by  our  tastes  and  aptitudes  to  the  several 
diversities  of  sensitive  or  intellectual  enjoyment.  And  hence  Hrises  a  twofold 
fallacy.  Thee  aie  not  a  few  who  too  severely  condemn  those  whose  gratifications 
they  are  themselves  umble  to  participate.  There  are  others  who  will  at  all 
hazards  excuse  and  justify  their  own.  i\len  of  the  former  class  need  to  be  reminded 
that  moroseness  is  not  principle,  and  that  a  defective  or  a  failing  sense  is  a  far 
different  thing  from  Cnristian  self-denial.  And  those  of  the  latter  must  be  warned 
that  they  extenuate  not,  in  their  own  favourite  department,  what  they  would 
denounce  with  unmeasured  con  I.  mnation  in  every  other  ;  that  they  do  not 
substitute  the  impulses  of  natural  feelmg,  or  the  p'easures  of  pliysical  excitement 
for  the  joys  of  piety  and  the  dictates  of  religion.  Let  them  suppose  the  gratifica- 
tion in  question  to  be  one  of  another  class,  adapted  to  the  indulgence  of  a  different 
sense  or  a  faculty  which  they  have  not  cultivated,  and  then  judge  of  their  own  as 
they  would  of  that  which  their  fancv  has  thus  placed  in  its  stead.  Let  the  lover  of 
music,  for  example,  tlie  man  who  professes  himself  exalted  to  the  third  heavens, 
while  he  listens  to  ihe  deep  and  solemn  strains  of  ihe  pealing  organ  or  the  majestic 
choir;  let  him  then,  I  say,  while  he  feels  the  thrillinsj  luxury  of  magic  sound, 
and  calls  it  worship  and  religion,  ima.gine  only  that  the  lover  of  stat  ^ary  or  paint- 
ing should,  under  th-;  influence  of  the  like  excitement,  describe  the  ecstasy  of  his 
enjoyments  by  the  same  appellation,  and  plead  for  the  indulgences  from  whence 
they  arise  with  the  same  earnestness,  and  on  the  same  pretext.  Anrl,  if  he  should 
l)lead  by  arguments  like  these  for  the  introduction  of  objects  calculated  to  afford 
him  such  delight  in  the  same  ci  cumstances  and  on  the  same  occasions,  let  the 
supposed  devotee  of  music  decide  the  question  whether  his  plea  were  legitimate 
and  his  principles  well  founded ;  then  let  him  transfer  this  judgment  to  himself, 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

and  he  will  perhnps  discover  that  it  is  not  his  conscience  but  his  taste,  that  has 
hitherto  determined  him  with  reference  to  tliose  pleasures  that  he  has  accounted 
sacred  ;  and  he  may  tlius  be  guided  to  a  more  just  decision  ;  and  so  in  every  case. 
We  are  not  concerned,  then,  to  mnintain  that  no  emotions  of  piety,  no  senpe  of 
sacrednesa  and  reverence,  may  be  connected  witli  such  enjoyments  as  we  should 
account  unseemly  for  a  Cluistian,  and  from  which  it  would  be  our  counsel  that  he 
should  conscientiously  abstain,  lest  they  lead  him  into  danger,  or  fetter  him  in 
mental  vassalage.  From  the  whole  subject  we  would  briefly  deduce  the  following 
practical  exhortations.  Eear  ever  in  mind  the  intimate  connection  between  your 
general  consistency  and  the  satisfactory  evidence  of  your  Christian  character. 
Forge  Inot  that  such  consistency  has  an  equal  and  inseparable  connection  with 
your  habitual  preparation  for  heaven.  Eeflect  seriously  on  the  awful  cou.-equences 
of  being  involved,  through  our  unwise  and  dangerous  indulgences  in  the  ruin 
and  final  condemnation  of  our  brethren.  Does  any  man  object  that  we 
make  the  way  of  piety  glooniy  and  ditiicult  ?  We  reply,  this  is  at  least 
more    desirable    than    to    leave    it    insecuie.      (Ibid.)  The    Christian    rule 

in  things  indifferent: — I.  In  the  absteact  all  things  are  lawful.  Because — 
1.  Every  creature  of  God  is  good.  2.  May  be  used  with  thanksgiving.  II.  In 
PRACTICE  ALL  THINGS  ARU  NOT  EXPEDIENT.  1.  It  may  lob  US  of  iuHuence,  etc.  2.  It 
may  become  a  stumbling-block  to  another.  III.  In  genehal  all  things  must  be 
UNDER  CONTROL.  1.  Otherwise  we  become  slaves.  2.  Wliich  is  to  degrade  and 
imperil  Christian  character.  [J.  Lyth,  I).l>.)  The  limits  of  Christian  rifihts  : — 
Men  in  the  Corintiiian  Chuich,  having  heard  the  apostle  teach  the  law  of  liberty, 
pushed  that  doctrine  so  far  as  to  make  it  mean  a  right  to  do  wliHtsoever  a  man  wills 
to  do.  By  these  self-gratification  was  maintained  on  tlie  ground  of — I.  The  rights 
OF  Christian  liberty.  Their  watchword  was,  "  All  things  are  lawful."  It  is  easy 
to  undei  stand  how  this  ex^iggeration  came  iibout.  Wen  suddenly  finding  themselves 
freed  from  the  restrictions  of  Jewish  law  naturally  went  very  far  in  their  new 
principles.  St.  Paul  met  this  by  declaring  that  Chriistian  liberty  is  limited — 1.  By 
Christian  expediency.  There  are  two  kinds  of  "best."  It  is  absolutely  best  that 
war  should  cease.  Kelatively,  it  is  best  under  present  circumstances  that  a  country 
should  be  ready  to  defend  itself.  A  defensive  fieet  is  expedient,  and  relitively  best, 
but  not  the  absolutely  Christian  besf.  Now  that  which  limits  this  liberty  is  the 
profit  of  others.  2.  By  its  own  nature.  "  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power 
of  any."  It  is  that  free  sdf-det  tuiination  which  rules  all  things,  whirh  can  enjoy 
or  abstain  at  will.  This  lil  erty  cnn  manifs'-t  itself  under  outward  restrictions.  A 
Christian,  as  Christ's  freed  m»n,  had  a  right  to  be  free ;  but  if  by  circumstances  he 
is  obliged  to  remain  a  slave,  he  is  not  trouldeil.  He  can  wear  a  chain  or  not  with 
equal  spiritual  freedom.  Now  upon  this  the  apostle  makes  this  subtle  and  ex- 
quisitely fine  remark  :  —To  be  forced  to  use  liberty  is  actually  a  surrender  of  liberty. 
If  I  turn  "  I  may  "  into  "I  must,"  I  nm  in  bondage  agai]i.  For  observe,  there  are 
two  kinds  of  bondage.  I  am  not  free  if  I  am  under  sentence  of  exile,  and  must 
leave  my  country.  But  also  I  am  not  free  if  I  am  under  arrest,  and  must  not  leave 
it.  So  too,  if  I  think  1  must  not  touch  meat  on  Friday,  or  that  I  must  not  read 
any  but  a  religions  book  on  a  Sunday,  I  am  in  bondage.  But  again,  if  I  am  tor- 
mented with  a  scrupulous  feeling  tbat  I  did  wrong  in  fasting,  or  if  I  feel  that  I 
must  read  secular  books  on  Sunday  to  prove  my  freedom,  then  my  liberty  has 
become  slavery  again.  It  is  a  blessed  lilxn'ation  to  know  that  natural  inclinations 
are  not  necessarily  sinful.  But  if  I  say  all  natural  and  innocent  inclinations 
must  be  obeyed  at  all  times,  then  I  enter  into  bondage  once  more.  He  alone  is 
free  who  can  use  outvv-ard  things  with  conscientious  freedom  as  circumstances  vary; 
who  can  either  do  without  a  form  or  ritual,  or  can  use  it.  II.  The  rights  op 
nature.  There  is  some  difficulty  in  the  exposition  of  this  chapter,  because  the 
apostle  mixes  tog^'ther  the  ]3leas  of  his  opponents  with  his  own  answers.  1.  The 
first  pait  of  ver.  13  contains  two  of  these  pleas.  (1)  "  Meats  for  the  belly,  and  the 
belly  for  meats" — a  natural  correspondency.  "Nature,"  said  they,  "  herself  says, 
'Enjoy!'"  (2)  The  transitorincss  of  this  enjoyment.  "God  shall  bring  to  an 
end  both  it  and  them."  They  do  not  belong  to  eternity,  therefore  indulgence  is  a 
matter  of  indifference.  It  is  folly  to  think  that  these  are  sins,  any  more  than  the 
appetites  of  the  brutes  which  perish.  2.  To  these  two  pleas  St.  Paul  makes  two 
answers.  (1)  "  The  body  is  not  for  self-indulgence,  but  for  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord 
for  the  body,"  He  tells  of  a  more  exact  mutual  correspondency.  He  reveals  a  true 
and  higher  nature.  There  is  much  confusion  and  dispute  about  this  word  "  nature." 
The  nature  of  a  watch  is  correspondence  with  the  sun,  perfect  harmony  of  wheels 


CHAP.  VI.]  /.   CORIXTIIIANS.  421 


and  balance.  But  suppose  that  the  regulator  was  removed,  and  tlie  mainspring 
unchecked  ran  down,  throwing  all  into  confusion.  Then  two  things  might  be 
said.  One  might  say,  It  is  the  nature  of  that  watch  to  err.  But  would  it  not  be  a 
higher  truth  to  say,  Its  nature  is  to  go  rightly,  and  it  is  just  because  it  lias  departed 
from  its  nature  that  it  errs?  So  speaks  the  apostle.  To  be  gove-ned  by  the 
springs  of  impulse  only — your  appetites  and  passions — this  is  not  your  nature. 
For  the  nature  is  the  whole  man  ;  the  passions  are  but  a  part  of  the  man.  And 
therefore  our  redemption  must  consist  in  a  remimler  of  what  we  are — what  our 
true  nature  is.  (2)  To  the  other  pba  he  replies.  The  body  will  not  perish.  It  is 
the  outward  form  of  the  body  nlone  which  is  transitory.  Itself  shall  be  renewed — 
a  nobler,  more  glorious  form,  fitted  for  a  higher  and  spu-itual  exi-~tence.  Now  here  is 
the  importance  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  an  awful  a'giuuent 
against  sin.  Our  bodies,  which  are  "menibeis  of  Christ,"  to  bo  ruled  by  His  Si>irit, 
become  by  sensuality  unlit  for  immortality  with  Christ.     {F.  IT.  llobcrtioii,  M.A.) 

Vers.  13-16.  Meats  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  meats.— CJtrintlanifn  in 
relation  to  the  huilij  : — The  apostle  here  states,  perhaps  in  answer  to  a  question 
on  the  subject,  that  there  is  a  limitation  to  Christian  liberty.  As  the  liberty 
which  the  Corinthians  seemed  to  covet  was  to  gratify  the  bodily  appitites,  he  takes 
occasion  to  state  certain  things  in  relation  to  the  body.  Christianity  recognises 
— I.  Attentio:^  to  the  natural  needs  or  the  body  as  pkoper  (ver.  13).  1.  The 
body  has  appetites,  and  there  are  provisions  intended  to  satisfy  them.  To  act  thus  is  in 
harmony  witli  the  con-titution  of  nature.  All  aniujal  existences  act  in  this  way. 
Cliristianity,  instead  of  requiiing  you  to  starve  the  body  by  fastings,  and  to  exhaust 
its  energies  bj'  pi'grimages  and  self-mortifications,  says,  "Eat  and  be  satisfied  and 
strong  ;  take  care  of  your  Irodies. "  2.  Feeding  the  body,  however,  Chiistianity 
regards  as  temporary ;  both  the  food  and  the  body  must  perish.  They  are  not 
like  spiritual  existences,  and  spiritual  supplies  that  have  regard  to  an  unmeasured 
hereafter.  "All  flesh  is  grass."  II.  IxDur.c.ExcE  in  the  gkatiucations  of  the 
BODY  AS  wr.oNG.  "  Now  the  bady  is  not  for  f  irnication,"  &c.  This  is  not  a  neces- 
sity of  the  body,  like  eating  and  drinking,  but  an  immoral  indulgence  of  its  pro- 
pensities. Man  should  attend  to  his  bodily  j)ropensities,  as  reliefs,  not  as  gratifica- 
tions. Hence  intemperance,  whether  in  eating  or  drinking,  is  a  moral  outrage. 
The  crime  and  curse  of  men  in  all  ages  have  been  seeking  happiness  out  of  the 
gastric,  the  sexual,  and  other  propensities  of  their  jjhysical  being.     III.  That  the 

PROPER    treatment    OF    THE    ROUY    IS    TO    IDENTIFY    IT     WITH    ChRIST.         1.      It    is    the 

property  of  Christ.  It  is  not  ours  ;  we  are  its  trustees,  not  its  proprietors.  We 
hold  it  "  for  the  Lord,"  and  we  should  use  it  according  to  His  directions.  It  is  to 
let  in  God  to  the  soul,  and  to  reveal  God  to  our  race.  2.  It  is  a  member  of  Christ 
(ver.  15).  The  Christian's  body  has  a  vital  connection  with  Him.  He  had  a 
human  body  which  now  raised  to  heaven  is  the  modt^l  into  which  our  bodies  shall 
be  changed.  Tbis  being  so,  sensual  indulgence  is  an  outrage  on  the  body 
(vers.  1.5-17).  3.  It  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (vers.  19,  20)  in  which  He  is 
to  dwell,  be  revealed  and  worshipped.  (/).  'Thomas,  D.D.)  'The  permanent 
e.lement  in  n^ir  hodibf  or^janism : — The  apostle  distinguishes  two  op]>osite  elements 
in  our  bodily  organism:  the  organs  of  nutrition,  which  serve  for  the  support  of 
the  bodj%  and  to  which,  by  a  Divinely  established  correlati'Ui,  there  correspond 
external  meats.  The  morally  indifferent  character  of  this  domain  appears  Irom 
the  fact  of  its  approaching  destruction  ;  God  will  abolish  those  functions  in  the 
day  of  the  redemption  of  our  bodies.  But  it  is  not  so  with  our  bodies,  strictly  so 
called,  which  Paul  identities  with  our  personality.  This  is  the  permanent  element 
in  our  earthly  organism,  that  which  fi>rms  the  link  between  our  present  and  our 
future  body.  Now  this  element  is  that  which  is  involved  in  the  vice  of  impurity. 
And  I  ence  the  profound  difference  between  impu'ity  and  the  natural  functions  of 
physical  life.  There  exists  between  our  body  and  Christ  a  moral  relation  analogous 
to  the  temporaiy  relation  which  exists  between  the  stomach  and  meats.  The  body 
is  for  Christ,  to  belong  to  Him  and  serve  Him,  and  Christ  is  for  the  body  to  inhabit 
and  glorify  it.  In  consequence  of  this  sublime  relation,  the  body  will  not  perish. 
As  God  raised  up  Christ,  He  will  also  r  .ise  the  body  which  has  become  here  below 
the  property  and  the  sanctified  organ  of  Christ.  The  apostle  says,  "  Will  raise  us 
also"  ;  he  thus  expressly  identifies  our  personality  with  the  body  which  is  to  be  its 
eternal  organ.  As  the  Church  in  its  totality  is  the  body  of  Cinist,  the  organism 
■which  He  animates  with  His  Spirit,  and  by  which  He  carries  out  His  wishes  on 
the  earth,  so  every  Curistian  is  a  member  of  this  body,  and  consequently  an  organ 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  vi. 


of  Christ  Himself.  Hence  the  practical  conclusion  :  This  organ  of  Christ  must 
not  be  taken  from  Him  and  given  to  a  harlot.  Therein  is  a  double  crime  :  on  the 
one  hand  a  revolt,  an  odious  abduction  ;  on  the  other  an  act  of  ignoble  self-abase- 
ment and  the  acceptance  of  a  shameful  dependence.  And  hence  the  apostle's  cry 
of. indignation,  "Let  it  not  be  so!  "  {Prof.  Godet.)  Now  the  body  is  not  for 
fornication,  but  for  the  'LovA.— Fornication,  is— I.  Inexcusable.  On  the  ground 
of— 1.  Christian  liberty  (ver.  12).  2.  Necessity.  II.  Morally  evil.  It  is— 
1.  To  prostitute  the  property  of  God.  2.  To  incur  a  fearful  penalty  in  the 
resurrection.  III.  Degrading.  1.  To  all.  2.  Especially  Christian  professors, 
who  dishonour  Christ,  tbemselves,  and  their  bodies.  IV.  Sacrilegious.  1. 
The  body  designed  as  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Eedeemed  by 
Christ.      3.    Consecrated    to   God.      [J.    I.yth,    D.D.)  Fornication:—!.   In 

remonstrating  with  the  Corinthians  for  their  litigiousness,  Paul  was  forcibly 
reminded  how  imperfectly  they  understood  the  moral  requirements  of  tbe  kingdom 
of  God,  and  tliat  tliey  were  quoting  some  of  bis  own  sayings  in  defence  of  immoral 
practices.  If  "all  things  were  lawful"  to  thrm,  then  this  commonest  of  Greek 
indulgences  was  lawful ;  if  abstaining  from  t^ie  meat  which  had  been  killed  in  a 
heathen  temple  was  a  matter  of  moral  indifference,  then  this  other  common 
accompaniment  of  idolatry  was  also  a  matter  of  indifference.  2.  St.  Paul  there- 
fore la\s  down  two  principles.  First  he  insists  that  the  question  of  duty  is  not 
answered  by  simply  asceitaining  what  is  lawful ;  we  must  also  ask,  Is  it  expedient? 
The  Christian  is  a  law  to  himself ;  he  has  an  internal  guide  that  sets  him  above 
external  rules.  Very  true  ;  but  that  guide  teaches  him  to  consider,  not  how  much 
indulgence  he  may  enjoy  without  transgressing  the  letter  of  the  law,  but  how  he 
can  best  forward  what  is  highest  in  himself  and  in  others.  Again,  "  all  things  are 
lawful  for  me  "  ;  all  things  are  in  mv  power.  Yes,  and  therefore  "  I  will  not  be 
brought  under  the  power  of  any."  I  am  free  from  the  law  ;  I  will  not  on  that 
account  become  the  slave  of  indulgence.  There  are  several  practices  and  habits 
which  no  one  would  call  sinful,  but  which  enslave  a  man  quite  as  much  as  worse 
habits.  And  it  is  the  very  lawfulness  of  these  indulgences  which  has  ensnared 
him.  He  alone  attains  the  true  dignity  and  freedom  of  the  Christian  man  who 
can  say,  with  Paul,  "I  know  both  how  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,"  &c.  "All 
things  are  in  my  power,  but  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  power  of  any."  3.  Paul 
then°  proceeds  to  apply  these  principles.  The  Corinthians  argued  that  if  meats 
were  morally  indifferent,  so  also  a  man  was  neither  better  nor  worse  for  fornication. 
To  expose  this  error  Paul  draws  a  distinction  between  the  organs  of  nutrition  and 
that  body  which  is  part  of  our  permanent  individuality,  and  which  is  to  flower 
into  an  everlasting  body.  These  two  differ  from  one  another ;  and  if  you  are  to 
argue  from  the  one  to  the  other,  you  must  keep  in  view  the  distinction  as  stated  in 
vers.  13,  14.  The  organs  of  nutrition  have  a  present  use ;  they  are  made  for 
meats,  and  have  a  natural  correspondence  with  meats.  Any  meat,  therefore,  which 
the  digestive  organs  approve  is  allowable.  Besides,  these  organs  form  no  part  of 
the  future  spiritual  body.  They  pass  away  with  the  meats  for  which  they  were 
made.  They  serve  a  temporary  purpose,  like  the  houses  we  live  in  and  the  clothes 
we  wear  ;  and  as  we  are  not  morally  better  because  we  live  in  a  stone  house,  and 
not  in  a  brick  one,  or  because  we  wear  woollens,  and  not  cotton — so  long  as  we  do 
what  is  best  to  keep  us  in  life — so  neither  is  there  any  moral  difference  in  meats. 
But  the  body  as  a  whole— for  what  is  it  made  ?  "  For  the  Lord."  He  finds  in  it 
His  needed  instrument;  without  it  He  cannot  accomplish  His  will.  And  "the 
Lord  is  for  the  body."  Without  Him  the  body  cannot  develop  into  all  it  is  intended 
to  be.  Our  adoption  as  God's  children  is  incomplete  until  the  body  also  is  redeemed 
and  has  fought  its  way  through  sickness  and  death,  into  likeness  to  the  glorified 
body  of  Chri^^t.  But  this  cannot  be  believed,  far  less  accomplished,  save  by  faith 
in  the  fact  that  God  has  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  will  with  Him  raise  us  also. 
And  the  Spirit  of  Christ  within  us  inclines  us  while  in  the  body,  and  by  means  of 
it  to  sow  to  the  Spirit  and  thus  to  reap  life  everlasting.  The  only  future  of  the 
body  we  dare  to  look  at  without  a  shudder  is  the  future  it  has  in  the  Lord.  The 
Lord  is  for  the  body,  and  as  well  might  we  try  to  sustain  the  body  now  without 
food  as  to  have  an  endurable  future  for  it  without  the  Lord.  But  if  the  body  is 
thus  closely  united  to  Christ,  then  the  inference  is  self-evident  that  it  must  be 
carefully  guarded  from  such  uses  and  impurities  as  involve  rupture  with  Christ 
(ver.  15).  And  if  any  frivolous  Corinthian  still  objected  that  such  acts  went  no 
deeper  than  the  eating  of  food  ceremonially  unclean,  that  they  belonged  to  the  body 
that  was  to  be  destroyed,  Paul  says,  It  is  not  so;  these  acts  are  full  of  the  deepest 


CHAP.  Ti.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  423 

moral  significance  (ver.  18),  i.e.,  fornication  is  the  only  sin  which  by  its  very  nature 
alienates  the  botly  from  Christ,  its  proper  Partner.  Other  sins  indirectly  involve 
separation  from  Christ ;  this  explicitly  and  directly  transfers  allegiance,  and 
snnders  our  union  with  Him.  4.  These  weighty  reasonings  are  concluded  by  the 
statement  of  a  twofold  truth  which  is  of  much  wider  application  than  to  the  matter 
in  hand  (vers.  19,  20).  We  are  not  our  own  ;  we  belong  to  Him  who  has  loved  us 
most  ;  and  His  love  will  be  satisfied  when  we  sutTer  Him  to  dwell  in  us,  so  that  we 
shall  be  His  temples,  and  shall  glorify  Him.  And  it  is  the  consciousness  tl^at  we  are 
God's  temples  which  constantly  incites  us  to  live  worthily  of  Him.  In  nothing 
can  God  reveal  Himself  as  He  can  in  man.  It  is  not  a  building  of  stone  which 
forms  a  fit  temple  for  God  ;  nor  even  the  heaven  of  heavens.  In  material  nature 
only  a  small  part  of  God  can  be  seen  and  known.  But  through  us  God  can  express 
and  reveal  what  is  best  in  Himeelf.  Our  love  is  sustained  by  His,  and  reveals  His. 
Our  approval  of  what  is  pure  and  hatred  of  impurity  has  its  source  in  His  holiness. 
But  if  so,  what  a  profanation  is  it  when  we  take  this  bodj',  w-hich  is  built  to  be  His 
temple,  and  put  it  to  uses  which  it  were  blasphemous  to  associate  with  God  ! 
(M.    Dads,   D.D.)  Fornication   is   an  ainiil  crime  : — 1.    It   robs    God    of    His 

property.  2.  Dishonours  the  members  of  Christ's  body.  3.  Makes  a  man  one 
flesh  with  the  harlot.  4.  Degrades  a  man's  own  body.  5.  Profanes  the  temple  of 
God.  G.  Sins  against  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  7.  Devotes  body  and  soul,  which 
are  God's,  to  the  devil.  (-7.  Lyth,  D.D.)  And  God  hath  both  raised  up  the 
Lord. — The  resurrection  of  the  hndi/ : — I.  Is  possible.  Christ  is  risen.  If.  Ckktain. 
1.  God  has  revealed  it.  2.  Is  able  to  effect  it.  III.  Is  a  poweufcl  .^egujient  for 
THE  KiGHT  USE  OF  THE  BODY.  If  (iod  lionours  it,  shall  m^n  dishonour  it?  (ver.  13, 
Ac).  {Ibid.)  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  members  of  Christ? — 
Christ  and  the  hndij  : — I.  His  bight  over  it.  1.  Not  only  by  creation  and  redemp- 
tion. 2.  But  by  our  union  with  Him.  II.  The  consfqce.nt  obligation.  1.  To 
care  for  it.  2.  To  keep  it  pure.  3.  To  use  it  for  His  service.  (Ihid.)  The 
thought  of  the  love  of  Jesus  for  us  the  remedy  for  sins  of  tlie  body  ; — I.  "  The  Word 

MADE  flesh,"  changed  BY    THAT   ACT    THE    WHOLE    RELATION  OF  THE  CREATHBE   TO    THE 

Creator.  Before  they  were  distinct.  God  chose  man  to  knit  both  together. 
Could  there  be  envy  in  heaven,  surelv  the  angels  must  have  envied  our  race  ;  nay, 
it  has  been  believed  that  Satan  fell  through  envy  at  the  incarnation  revealed  b  -fore- 
hand. Nothing  .so  illustrates  the  self-forg^'tting  love  of  those  blessed  spirits,  as 
that  they  should  joy  to  be  passed  over,  and  to  see  us  the  fallen  preferred  to  them- 
selves. True!  the  purpose  of  God  is  to  unite  both  under  and  in  one  head  (Eph.  i. 
10).  Their  ranks,  it  is  a  pious  opinion,  bi-oken  by  the  fall  of  the  apostate  aniels, 
will  be  filled  by  redeemed  men.  But  even  this  equality  has  not  lie^n  enough.  God 
has  willed  to  give  us  a  closeness  of  union  witli  Himself,  which  He  gave  not  to  the 
Seraphim.  And  this  for  all  eternity.  II.  This  constitutes  the  claim  of  Jests  on 
ODR  love.  1.  This  is  more  than  com2)ensation  for  the  fall  of  Adam.  Jesus, 
in  this  special  wav',  is  ours  ;  He  is  our  near  Kinsman,  and  more  than  brother. 
Jesus  must  love  me  with  a  sjiecial  love,  for  He  has  not  the  nature  of  angels,  but 
this  of  mine.  2.  And  how  did  He  love  us?  Wliat  did  He  withhold  from  us,  for 
love  of  us?  His  glory  !  He  "  emptied  Hims"lf  "  (Phil.  ii.  7).  He  who  was  and 
is  one  with  the  Father,  entered  this  mortal  life.  He  began  it  an  outcast,  and 
ended  it  by  "  giving  Himself  to  be  numbered  with  the  transsressors."  In  those 
dread  hours  on  the  Cross,  what  part  of  His  sacred  body  did  He  reserve  from 
suffering  for  us  ?  (Psa.  xxii.  14).  And  His  Father's  face  was  hid  from  His  human 
soul.  And  wliat  doth  He  now^?  He  is  in  that  unspeakable  glory,  "  upholding  all 
things  by  the  word  of  His  power  ";  governing  also  the  Church  and  sanctifying  her 
by  His  presence.  But  as  something  nearer  to  ourselves  individually,  "  He  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  Calvary  lives  on  in  heaven,  and  plea'^s  for  us 
still.  And  all  this  has  been,  is,  shall  continue  to  be  done  for  us  through  the  body. 
By  taking  our  whole  human  nature,  soul  and  boily,  God  the  Son  gave  us,  in  His 
own  person,  that  special  pi'erogative  of  nearness  to  Himself.  III.  With  what 
SACEEDNESS  DOES  THIS  INVEST  OUR  BODIES.  1.  Limb  by  limb,  they  are  the  same 
bodies  as  that  which  God  tiie  Son  took,  which  for  us  was  crucifie  1,  which  now  is  in 
glory  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  All  sin  is  misery,  but  sins  of  the  flesh  have  yt-t 
this  sj)ecial  misery,  that  they  degrade  that  body  which  Jesus  took.  To  sin  as  to 
the  flesh  is  to  insult  Christ.  2.  Trials  you  have  or  will  have.  But  triiils  which 
ai"e  only  of  God's  allowing  injure  neither  body  nor  soul.  He  will  give  the  victory 
who  allows  them  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  But  now,  if  thou  art  liable  to  temptation,  from 
which  thou  mightest  have  been  blessedly  free,  or  over  which  thou  mightest  have 


421  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi 


had,  by  GjcI's  grace,  an  easy  victory — (1)  Observe  weH,  whence  mostly  it  beghis 
now  ;  from  imaginaiion  ?  or  from  tlie  eye  ?  or  from  past  memories?  or  from  over- 
fulness  of  food  ?  For  th.ere  the  entrance  of  tliy  battle  lies.  (2)  In  tlie  trial  itself. 
I  know'liut  of  one  effectual  remedy — to  clasp  the  hands  together,  and  pray  earnestly 
to  God  for  help.  And  wlien  thou  so  jiraye>t,  think  how  Je^ns  hallowed  this  poor 
bodv  ;  think  how  He  i-uffered  in  this  body  for  love  of  ns.  Look  well  at  that  holy 
frame,  racked  on  that  hard  bed  of  the  Cross.  But  above  all,  look  at  that  thorn- 
crowned  head,  and  that  yet  open,  mild,  forgiving  eye,  which  won  the  blaspheming 
robber  to  sue  for  pardon  from  his  Lor?!.  Does  it  not  say  to  thee,  "Poor  wanderer, 
this  have  I  endured  for  love  of  thee  ;  I  loved  thee  and  gave  Myself  for  thee.  Love 
Me  at  least  now"?  Wilt  thou  not  look  up  to  Him  and  say,  "  By  Thy  grace  hence- 
forth I  will  love  Thee  ;  let  me  rather  die  than  a'-^ain  profane  the  body,  which  Thou 
did-t  so  redeem,  and  wound  Thy  love"?  Or  look  up  and  gaze  on  tl'a.  gbaious  form 
at  the  right  hand  of  God.  All  else  is  spirit.  One  body  is  there,  above  all,  adored 
by  all.  There,  with  a  special  lustre  of  their  own,  stream  forth  the  rays  of  Divine 
light  and  love  from  those  two  pierced  hands,  those  once  wounded  feet,  that  opened 
side  and  heart.  There,  at  that  moment,  the  moment  of  thy  temptation,  they 
intercede  for  thee.  There  is  that  human  eye  resting  still  in  love  upon  thee. 
Christ  is  not  ashamed  to  wear  in  heaven  the  tokens  of  His  humiliation  ;  be  not 
thou  ashamed  of  Him  and  His  service.  Bemember  that  He  willeth  to  "  fashion 
this  our  "  now  "  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  made  like  unto  His  glorious  body,"  and 
resolve  by  His  gi'ace  to  degrade  no  more  the  body  which  He  so  longs  to  glorify  with 
Himself.  {E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Fornirntion  : — I.  Destroys  all  pretench;  to 
Christianity.  1.  The  body  belongs  to  Christ.  2.  Shoubl  be  employed  in  His 
service.  3.  To  give  it  to  another  is  to  deny  Him — and  court  destruct  on,  which 
God  forbid !  IL  Degrades  the  man.  1.  Tne  harlot  is  the  refuse  of  humanity. 
2.  To  be  joined  to  her  is  to  be  one  with  her— by  a  natural  law.  HI.  Is  impossible 
WHILE  WE  ARE  JOINED  TO  Chrxst — we  are  one  spirit  wiih  Him.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  He  that  is  joined  unto  the  Lord  is  one  spirit. — The  apostle  was  wont  to 
associate  the  commonest  duties  with  tbe  highest  motives.  In  dissuading  from  the 
sin  of  impurity,  he  might  have  adduced  considerations  drawn  from  physical  laws 
and  social  conditions ;  instead  of  this  he  appeals  to  the  loftiest  principles  of  Chris- 
tianity. Note — I.  The  bond  which  cnitks  believfrs  to  their  Lord  is  a  bond  of— 
1.  Faith,  "  Whom  having  not  seen,"  &r..  Christians  receive  with  cordiality  the 
gospel  concerning  Christ ;  they  receive  Christ  Himself  to  dwell  in  their  hearts  by 
faith.  2.  Love.  They  are  joined  to  Him  as  the  bride  to  tbe  biidegroom,  in  a 
spiritual  affection,  in  love  "  stronger  than  death."  3.  Affinity.  Drawn  to  Jesus  as 
sinners  to  the  Saviour,  they  remain  with  Him  as  friends,  congenial  in  character, 
disposition  and  aims.  II.  The  consequent  unity  between  Christians  and  their 
Lord.  1.  They  are  in  a  spirit  of  sibjection  to  the  Father,  whose  will  and  law  are 
authoritative  and  supreme.  2.  They  are  one  in  the  love  of  all  that  is  holy  and 
morally  admirable.  The  sympathy  that  exists  regards  the  principles  that  animate 
and  the  aims  that  dignify  the  moral  life.  3.  They  are  one  in  the  bonds  of  an 
immortal  feUowsbip.  "  That  they  may  be  with  Me  where  I  am."  III.  The 
practical  proofs  of  this  unity.  1.  Bepugnance  to  all  which  is  repugnant  to 
Christ;  as,  e.//.,  those  vices  to  which  allusion  is  mnde  in  the  context.  2.  Cultiva- 
tion of  the  spirit  of  brotherly  love.  The  "one  spirit"  must  needs  be  a  spirit  of 
true  love,  linking  together  the  members  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  and  dispos- 
ing them  to  a  sympathetic  and  harmonious  action.  {Prof.  J.  R.  Thomsim.)  The 
saint  one  vitli  his  Saviour  : — Note — I.  A  mystehious  deep.  1.  Tliere  is  a  joining 
to  the  Lord — (1)  In  election.  We  were  chosen  in  Christ  from  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  (2)  In  covenant,  when  Jesus  became  of  old  the  Hewd  of  His  Church. 
(3)  In  the  incarnation.  All  this  makes  up  a  glorious  joining  unto  the  Lord,  but 
the  union  taught  here  is  vital  and  spiritual  which  is  wrought  in  us  when  we  are 
born  again.  2.  But  what  does  that  word  "  one  spirit  "  mean  ?  The  union  between 
Christ  and  His  people  is  described  by — (1)  The  marriage  union.  It  is  said,  "  These 
twain  shall  be  one  flesh  "  ;  but  to  take  off  the  carnal  edge  of  the  metaphor  "  one 
spirit  "  is  here  substituted,  (n)  Christ  and  His  people  have  one  spirit.  The  Holy 
Spirit  who  quickens  us  anointed  Him.  The  foot  is  baptized  into  the  same  spirit  as 
the  head,  (b)  Wo  are  of  one  spirit  with  Him,  i.e.,  we  come  to  think  and  feel  as 
Jesus  does,  (c)  Yet  the  text  saith  not  that  we  are  of  one  spii  it,  but  we  are  one 
spirit.  This  is  a  matter  to  be  understood  only  by  the  spiritual  mind,  and  not  to  be 
expounded  in  words.     "  I  in  them  and  Thou  in  Me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect 


OHAr.  VI.]  I.   COEINTIIIANS.  425 

in  one.''  We  have  known  on  earth  friends  who  have  become  one  spirit;  intimacy 
and  mutual  admiration  have  ripened  friendsliip  into  unity,  till  the  one  seemed  to  be 
the  complement  of  the  other ;  one  soul  in  two  bodies.  (2)  The  branch  and  the 
stem,  which  are  one  vine,  and  are  nothing  separated  from  each  other,  their  life  one 
and  their  design  one.  (3)  The  member  and  tlie  body.  If  there  be  life  in  this 
finger,  it  is  identically  the  same  life  that  is  in  the  head  ;  and  so  in  the  whole 
Church  the  life  and  Spirit  of  Christ  are  the  life  and  spirit  of  His  people.  II.  A 
M.iNiKEST  Gr,.\cE.  1.  To  be  one  spirit  with  Christ  much  more  is  needed  than — (1) 
To  bear  the  Christian  name.  Call  a  poppy  a  rose  and  you  will  not  thereby  give  it 
perfume.  (2)  Mere  outward  profession.  Ye  may  be  baptized  in  water,  but  unless 
ye  are  baptized  into  the  Holy  Ghost,  ye  know  not  what  union  with  Christ  is,  for 
Simon  Magus  though  baptized  had  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter.  (.^)  The  perform- 
ance of  some  apparently  good  actions  and  the  use  of  religious  words  in  conversation. 
The  superficial,  the  nominal,  and  the  outward  will  not  suffice.  Deep  down  in  the 
very  vitals  of  our  being  must  this  union  with  Jesus  Christ  most  eminently  reside.  2. 
As  an  ilhistration  of  wli^it  unity  of  spirit  is  take  that  rare  conjugal  union  of  these 
who  I'ealise  the  higliest  ideal  of  the  married  life  founded  in  pure  love  and  cemented 
in  mutual  esteem.  Their  wishes  blend,  their  hearts  are  indivisible.  By  degrees  they 
come  very  much  to  think  the  same  thoughts.  Intimate  association  creates  con- 
formity. So  the  true  Christian  grows  to  think  as  Christ  thinks  till  the  teachings  of 
Jesus  are  pbdn  to  him.  Blessed  consummation  when  their  hearts  at  last  are  all 
wrapped  up  in  Jesus,  even  as  the  bush  at  Horebwas  all  on  fire  wiili  God!  3.  Where 
such  union  exists,  what  does  it  produce?  They  who  are  thus  one  spirit  with  Christ 
live — (1)  For  the  same  end — God's  glory.  (2)  For  the  same  reason— the  love  of 
the  Father.  (3)  By  the  same  means.  By  tlie  couversion  of  souls:  not  by  being 
made  a  king,  not  by  being  called  rabbi.  (4)  By  the  use  of  the  same  mndes — teach- 
ing, preaching,  living,  suffering,  and  dying.  Some  nowadays  seem  tired  of  Christ's 
plans,  and  hunt  up  more  rapid  methods.  Jesus  never  strained  after  effect  by 
animal  excitement.  (5)  With  the  same  emotions.  Oh  thnt  we  felt  as  He  did  the 
weight  of  souls,  the  guilt  of  sin,  the  terror  of  the  wrath  to  come,  and  the  tenderness 
of  Divine  mercy  !  4.  Let  me  add  that  if  we  are  fully  joined  to  our  Loid,  and  of  one 
spirit  with  Him,  we  shall  have — (1)  The  same  tastes.  What  He  loves  will  charm 
us,  what  He  hates  we  shall  loathe.  (2)  The  same  will.  (3)  Oneness  of  aim  in  our 
service  of  God.  We  have  a  dozen  aims  now,  but  if  we  were  of  one  spirit  with  Jesus 
we  should  have  but  one  object  in  life.  (4)  Great  force  and  fervour.  Our  prayers 
would  be  very  different  from  what  they  are,  and  our  public  service  of  God  would 
never  be  so  sleepy  as  it  now  is.  (5)  Abiding  pertinacity.  Defeated  in  one  jdace  we 
should  try  in  another.  (C)  Wonderful  serenity  of  spirit.  We  should  not  Le  dis- 
turbed with  little,  petty  remarks  of  men,  nor  should  we  even  be  moved  by  great 
calamities.  Conclusion  :  1.  A  word  of  rebuke.  We  have  been  joined  to  Christ,  but 
have  we  been  manifestly  one  spirit  with  Him  ?  Angry  —  was  that  Christ's 
spirit?  Worldly  —  was  that  Christ's  spirit?  2.  A  word  of  hope.  We  want 
to  have  the  same  spirit  as  Christ.  Well,  our  hope  is  that  we  shall  have 
it,  for  we  are  joined  to  the  Lord,  and  he  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one 
spirit.      (C.   H.    Spurgeon.)  Tlie   true  helicver^s  vnion  uith   Cluist: — I.    The 

EXPLICATION  OF  THIS  TRUTH.  1.  Who  are  "true  believers"?  (1)  Not  such  as 
are  united  unto  Christ  by  a  mere  external  profession,  sacramental  admission,  or 
presumptuous  persuasion  (John  ii.  23,  24).  These  are  dead  branches  (John  xv.2), 
sapless  stakes  in  the  Church's  hedge,  wooden  legs  of  Christ's  body  (2  Tim.  iii.  5  ;  Eev. 
iii.  1).  (2)  But  such  as  are  united  unto  Christ  by  internal  implantation.  Living,  fruit- 
bearing  branches  (John  xv.  5) ;  so  that  now  Christ  is  in  them,  and  they  in  Christ 
(John  xvii.  21,  23).  2.  What  kind  of  union  is  this?  (1)  Negatively,  {a)  Not  a 
corporeal  union.  Christ  is  in  heaven  (Acts  i.  11;  iii.  21),  we  on  earth,  (h)  Not  a 
hypostatical,  personal  union  ;  such  as  that  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  the 
person  of  Christ.  Believers  make  not  one  person  with  Christ,  but  "  one  body  "  (1 
Cor.  xii.  13)  ;  and  that  not  one  body  natural,  but  mystical,  (c)  Not  an  essential, 
substantial  union  ;  not  such  an  union  as  makes  believt-rs  in  any  wise  partakers  of 
the  substance  of  Christ's  Godher«d.  (d)  Not  sm-h  an  union  as  monnts  up  believers 
to  an  equality  w«h  Christ  in  any  respect.  "  In  all  things  He  hath,"  and  must  liave, 
"  the  pre-emiiien"ce  "  (Col.  i.  18).  (2)  Positively,  {n)  A  spiritual  union,  {h)  A  mystical, 
profound  union  (Eph.  v.  32  ;  John  xvii.  20).  (c)  And  yet  a  true,  real  union.  Not 
a  fancy  only  (Eph.  v.  30).  As  the  head  communicates  real  influences  to  the  body, 
so  Christ,  communicates  to  us  His  Spirit  and  graces  (John  i.  Ifi).  (</)  An  intimate 
union.     Like  that  of  the  food  with  the  body  which  it  nourisheth  (John  vi.  54).     (<■) 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

A  perpetual,  indissoluble  union  (Eom.  ^iii.  35).  3.  What  are  the  efficient  causes  of 
this  union?  Thev  are — (1)  Principal.  This  great  work  ascribed  —  (a)  To  the 
whole  Godhead  (chap.  i.  9  ;  1  Pet.  v.  10  ;  John  vi.  44,  4.5  ;  Eph.  ii.  C,  7).  (h)  But 
more  csiiecinlly  to  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  it  is  that  knits  this  jiiarriage  knot  (1  Cor. 
xii.  13  ;  Titus  iii.  5).  (2)  Less  principal,  or  the  means  or  instruments  of  union, 
(fl)  Outward.  Generally  all  the  ordinances  of  God  (Zech.  iv.  12).  More 
especially  —  Fiist,  the  word  read,  preached,  meditated  on,  believed,  improved. 
Second,  the  sacraments.  Those  spiritual  seals  and  labels  which  God  hath 
fixed  to  His  covenant  of  grace.  (/;)  Inward  faith.  Not  a  bare  historical,  dead 
faith;  but  a  living,  working,  justifving,  saving  faith  (Eph.  iii.  17;  John  i.  12; 
chap.  vi.  56;  Gal.  ii.  20).  II.  Cosfiumation.  That  there  is  such  a  union 
appears — 1.  From  those  many  equivalent  expressions  whereby  the  Scriptures 
hold  foith  this  union.  (1)  Christ  is  said  to  "be  in"  beli<-vers  (Col.  i.  27; 
Eom.  viii.  10),  to  "  dwell  in  "  them  (Eph.  iii.  17),  to  "  walk  in  "  them  (2  Cor.  vi.  16). 
(2)  Believers  are  suid  to  "  abide  in  "  Christ (Jolm  xv.  7),  to  "  dwell  in"  Christ  (John 
vi.  56;  1  John  iv.  16),  to  "put  on"  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  27).  2.  From  those  several 
similitudes  by  which  the  Scriptures  shadow  out  this  union.  Believers  are  said  to 
be — (1)  "Lively  stones  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  4-6),  Christ,  the  living  "  foundation,  fae  chief 
corner  stone,"  on  whii'h  they  are  built  (Eph.  ii.  20,  21).  (2)  "  Branches  "  of  Christ, 
"  the  true  vine,"  into  whom  they  are  engrafted,  and  in  whom  they  bring  forth  fruit 
(John  XV.  1,  5).  (3)  The  loyal,  affectionate  "  spouse  "  of  Christ  (Eph.  v.  31,  32  ; 
Cant.  ii.  16,  v.  1).  (4)  Christ's  "  body "  (Eph.  i.  23;  v.  30),  Christ  being  the 
believers'  "  Head"  (chap.  i.  22).  In  a  word,  the  Head  and  iry>tical  body  are  called 
"  Christ  "  (chap.  xii.  12).  3.  From  that  communion  which  there  is  betwixt  Christ 
and  true  believers.  (1)  Believers  communicate  with  Christ — («)  In  "  His  fulness" 
(John  i.  16).  (h)  In  His  merits  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  (c)  In  His  life  and  graces  (chap.  i.  2). 
(d)  In  His  privileges  and  dignities.  Is  He  a  King,  a  Prest  ?  So  are  believers  (Eev. 
i.  6  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  Is  He  a  Son,  an  Heir,  by  nature?  Saints  are  so  by  adoption 
(Rom.  viii.  17).  (e)  In  His  vict  a-ies  (Rom.  viii.  37).  (/)  In  His  triumphs  and 
glory  ;  they  share  with  Him  in  His  throne.  All  that  believers  are,  is  from  the 
graco  of  Christ  (chap.  xv.  10  ;  Phil.  iv.  13),  so  that  they  do  not  so  properly  live,  as 
Christ  in  them  (Gal.  ii.  20).  (2)  Cin'ist  communicates  in  the  believers'  graces.  All 
that  they  are  is  from  Christ ;  aU'l  therefore  all  that  they  have  is  to  Christ ;  what  they 
receive  in  mei'cy  they  return  in  duty.  III.  Application.  Infoimntion.  Are  believers 
thus  closely  united  unto  Christ  ?  Hence  see — (1)  The  crimson  dye  of  their  sin,  who 
oppose  and  persecute  them.  In  touching  them,  they  "  touch  the  apple  of  His  eye  " 
(Zech.  ii.  8).  (2)  The  iniality  of  Christ's  love  to  them  beyond  and  above  all  others 
(Eph.  iii.  18,  19).  (3)  The  high  honour  which  Christ  casts  upon  them — an  honour 
not  vouchsafed  to  heaven's  courtiers,  the  angels.  They  are  Clirist's  servants, 
subjects  ;  not  His  members.  (4)  Their  stability  and  perseverance  in  their  estate  of 
grace.  (5)  A  cogent  and  conclusive  argument  for  their  resurrection  (chap.  xv.  12- 
23).  If  the  Head  be  got  above,  surely  the  body  shall  not  always  lie  under,  water. '  2. 
Examination.  To  ascertain  whether  there  be  such  a  union  betwixt  our  souls  and 
Christ,  let  us  ask — (1)  Hath  Christ  given  unto  you  His  Holy  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  9  ; 
1  John  iii.  24).  Now  this  Spirit  is— («)  A  praying  Spirit  (Zech.  xii.  10).  (b)  A  mourn- 
ing Spiiit.  ((•)  A  sanctifying  Spirit  (chap.  vi.  11  ;  1  Pet.  i.  2).  (2)  Doth"  Christ 
dwell  in  thy  heart  by  faith  "?  (Eph.  iii.  17.)  Namely,  by  such  a  faith  as  purifies 
the  heart,  works  by  love  and  overcomes  the  world.  (3)  Dost  thou  "crucify  the 
flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts  "  ?  They  that  are  united  unto  Christ  do  so  (Gal. 
v.  24  ;  Eom.  viii.  13).  (4)  Art  thou  "  a  new  creature"  ?  He  that  is  in  Christ  is  so 
(2  C>.r.  V.  17).  Hast  thou  a  new  head,  heart,  lip,  life?  (5)  Dost  thou  bring  forth 
fruit?  Every  branch  in  Christ  is  a  fruit-bearing  branch  (.John  xv.  5  ;  Phil.  i.  11). 
3.  Consolation.  (1)  With  relation  to  Christ,  to  whom  believers  are  united.  On 
their  uuion  with  Him,  there  redounds  to  them  a  peculiar  interest — {a)  In  Christ's 
person.  Christ  Himself  is  theirs  (.Jer.  xxxii.  38  ;  Isa.  ix.  6).  (b)  In  Christ's  pro- 
perties. Has  Christ  an  arm  of  power?  It  is  for  your  protection.  Has  He  an  eye  o£ 
knowledge  ?  It  is  for  your  direction.  Has  He  a  stock,  a  treasury,  of  perfect 
rij^'hieousness?  It  is  for  your  justification,  &c.  (c)  In  Christ's  promises  (2  Pet. 
i.  4).  Which  are  the  believers'  Ma'jna  Charta,  to  the  confirmation  whereof  God  has 
been  pleased  to  add  both  His  oath  and  blood  for  seals  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18).  {d)  In  all 
Christ's  providences  (Eom.  viii.  28).  (e)  In  all  (chap.  iii.  22,  23).  (2)  With 
respect  to  believers  themselves.  In  a  threefold  regard  ;  namely,  of  their  persons, 
graces,  duties.  4.  Exhorta'ion.  (1)  To  sinners,  that  are  as  yet  "without  Christ, 
God,  hope  in  this  world"  (Ejjh.  ii.  12).     Be  persuaded  to  give  your  eyes  no  sleep 


CHAP.  VI.J  I.  COniM'IIIANS.  427 

till  you  are  united  to  Christ !  Consider — (a)  The  dreadful,  dismal  danger  of  thy 
present  estate.  A  soul  not  united  unto  Christ  lies  open  to  all  danger  imaginable. 
(b)  Christ's  condescending  willingness  to  be  united  to  thee.  (2)  To  saints  that  are 
united  to  Christ.  («)  Be  very  fearful  of  that  which  may  in  any  sort  weaken  your 
union  with  Christ,  (h)  Wisely  improve  it.  (e)  Labour  for  a  frame  of  spirit  suit- 
able to  it.     {(Z)  Walk  worthy  of  it.     (T.  Lye,  A.M.) 

Vers.  19-20.  What  ?  Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost? — Tiie  diiinilij  and  !<crrice  uf  tlw  budy  : — I.  The  iiignity  of  the  body.  The 
apostle  speaks  in  the  accents  of  surprise,  as  if  to  imply  that  they  ought  to  know. 

I.  Many  considerations  may  commend  the  sanctification  of  the  tlesh  to  God,  e.r/. — 
(1)  The  natuial  care  for  our  bodies.  (2)  The  possibility  that  the  angels  may  have 
b  dies  resembling  our  own,  since  every  angtlic  appearance  in  Serijiture  has  been  in 
human  shape.  (3)  The  fact  that  Christ  ascended  to  heaven  in  a  bodj'  of  "  flesh 
and  bones."  (4)  The  fact  that  the  flesh  is  included  in  His  redeeming  work  so  tliat 
in  lieaven  there  will  be  glory  and  happiness  for  the  body.  2.  But  the  apostle  takes 
higher  ground.  The  body  of  a  Christian  man  is  claimed  and  taken  possession  of 
by  the  God  who  has  redeemed  it — and  therefore  to  be  treated  with  the  same  respect 
with  which  a  heathen  would  regard  the  temple  of  his  idol,  or  a  Jew  the  holy  of 
holies.  3.  Of  course  this  is  not  true  of  all  men.  It  is  tme  that  the  body  is 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made  in  all,  that  there  dwells  within  it  an  immortal  soul 
full  of  noble  gifts,  that  body  and  soul  are  actuated  by  a  supernatural  power.  But 
in  natural  men  that  power  is  the  power  of  God's  enemy.  It  is  to  Ciirislians  alone 
that  the  text  applies.  4.  Now  the  idea  of  temple  implies — (1)  Presence.  In  the 
temples  of  idolatry  there  was  a  visible  shape  to  represent  the  spirit  supposed  to  be 
there.  In  the  Temp'e  at  Jerusalem  there  was  indeed  no  figure,  but  there  the 
visible  Sh'  kinah  dwelt  above  the  mercy-seat.  Thus  if  the  body  be  the  temp'e  of 
the  Holy  (ihost  it  must  be  because  He  is  actually  there.  What  a  solemn  thought 
that  is !  (2)  Presence,  not  by  permission,  but  by  right.  Thus  it  is  not  that  we 
ought  from  reverence  or  courtesy  to  render  to  God  the  use  of  a  body  which  is  our 
own,  but  it  is  that  God  assumes  the  use  of  a  body  w-hich  is  His— bought  with  a 
price.  We  were  God's  by  creation,  and  the  right  of  property  tl)us  derived  still 
exists.  But  we  have  given  to  Satan  what  is  really  God's  ;  and  the  Spirit  of  God 
will  not  come  back  into  a  body  where  Satan's  scat  is,  nor  by  force  take  the  flesh, 
while  the  affections  are  bestowed  elsewhere.  But  when  His  grace  has  won  the 
heart  back  agdn,  then  God  comes  back  to  His  own  and  takes  full  possession  of  the 
entire  man.     Try  to  realise  the  force  of  motive  which  this  fact  supplies  for  holiness. 

II.  The  service  of  the  body.  The  Christian  who  thus  thinks  of  his  fi^sh  as  the 
temple  of  God  cannot  fail  to  acquire  a  higher  respect  for  it,  and  it  is  evident  that 
this  higher  respect  will  show  itself  in  small  things  as  well  as  in  great.  Follow  the 
drunkard  or  the  profligate,  who  abuse  their  natural  health  by  sin,  and  see  if  the 
result  be  not  neglect  of  the  body,  and  misery  and  suffering  in  the  very  flesh  they 
pamper.  But  let  the  grace  of  God  change  that  man's  heart,  and  what  a  difference 
is  seen  I  Now  he  holds  his  head  erect  and  takes  his  place  among  his  fellow-men. 
1.  We  should  jealously  watch  our  bodies  lest  they  be  polluted  with  sin.  2.  Respect 
for  the  body,  as  the  temple  of  the  Huly  Ghost,  should  teach  propiiety  of  dress  and 
manner,  and  even  of  bodily  appearance.  A  saved  body,  destined  for  heaven,  is 
neither  to  be  neglt^cted  nor  to  be  male  into  an  idle  gewgaw,  but  is  to  he  treated 
with  the  serious  propriety  which  becomes  a  liouse  of  God  and  the  God  who  fills  it. 
3.  We  need  to  watch  over  all  cur  habits,  so  as  to  keep  the  body  in  the  fittest  state 
possible  to  do  God's  will.  This  is  the  highest  object  of  health,  that  the  members 
may  be  instruments  of  rightenusness  unto  holiness.  4,  Learn  the  due  use  and 
place  of  the  body  in  our  worship  of  God.  The  real  seat  of  worship  is  in  the  heart, 
but  when  the  heart  is  right,  the  body  must  share  the  service.  Hence  arises  the 
propriety  of  outward  forms  of  worship,  of  the  bended  knees,  Ac.  {Ca)io)t  Garbett.) 
The  temple  oftlie  Hohj  Gho^t : — 1.  There  is  a  sreat  danger  in  religion — as  there  is 
in  everything  else — of  a  want  of  proportion.  To  the  natural  mnn  the  body  is  much 
more  than  the  soul.  He  can  see  his  body ;  his  soul  is  a  matter  of  faith.  The 
body  can  give  him  immediate  pl^-asure ;  the  pleasures  of  the  soul  lie  chiefly  in  the 
future.  To  the  care  of  tlie  body  there  is  little  or  nothing  to  oppose  itself;  to  the 
care  of  the  soul,  the  opposition,  both  from  within  and  without,  is  very  strong. 
Hence,  to  provide  for  that  body  takes  by  far  the  greatest  part  of  a  man's  life. 
When  a  man  becomes  religious  these  two  thinps  change  places.  The  body  goes 
into  the  shade;  the  soul  is  everything.     The  bcdy  is  a  thing  to  mortify.     In  all 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

this  because  it  is  extravagant  there  is  a  clanger  that  there  will  follow  a  reaction, 
and  the  body  may  become  again  too  important,  because  it  was  made  too  insignificant. 
2.  Now  let  us  see  how  God's  truth  regards  "  the  body."  The  whole  man  is  "  a 
temple  "  :  the  body  its  walls  ;  the  senses  its  gates  ;  the  mind  the  nave  ;  the  heart 
the  altar-piece ;  and  the  soul  the  holy  of  holies.  And  yet,  as  in  common  life,  we 
call  the  walls  and  the  doors  the  house,  so  "  the  body  "  is  called  "  the  temple,"  so 
important,  so  sacred  is  "  the  body."  3.  Christ  wore  a  body  and  wears  itfor  ever. 
His  discourses  were  very  often  about  the  body,  and  His  miracles  were  chiefly  upon 
the  body.  The  body  fiords  a  place  in  our  daily  prayer—"  Give  me  this  day  my 
daily  bread."  4.  We  also  know  the  close  connection  between  the  body  and  the 
mind !  how  the  state  of  the  one  affects  the  condition  of  the  other ;  and  how  the 
body  reflects  the  inner  life  of  the  man.  ^^'hat  are  features,  however  deUcately 
formed,  without  expression  ?  And  what  makes  the  expression  but  thoughts — Ipve, 
tenderness,  sympathy !  Or,  equally,  on  the  other  side,  sin  lowers,  vulgarises, 
spoils,  even  distorts  the  countenance.  The  real  beauty  of  "the  teiriple  "  after  all 
is  its  consecration.  5.  And  when  you  are  dealing  with  some  fellow-creature,  what 
a  new  chai-acter  the  whole  transaction  would  assume — if  you  would  recognise  the 
fact  that  that  person  is  "a  temple."  However  poor,  wretched,  weak,  wicked. 
Notwithstanding,  the  Holy  Ghost  may  be  in  that  man— working,  striving. 
(J.  Vaughav,  M.A.)  Thi'  temple  of  the  Holy  GJiogt:—!.  God  does  not  influence 
us  merely  from  the  outside — play  upon  us  as  the  flame  flickers  on  the  bar  of  the 
grate,  but  rather  as  the  heat  penetrates  into  the  very  heart  and  core  of  the  iron. 
He  enters  the  very  centre  of  onr  being,  and  makes  His  influence  felt  throughout 
the  whole.  2.  This  indwelling  is  not  merely  that  natural  indwelling  which  is 
a  necessary  attribute  of  an  Infinite  Being;  it  is  gracious  friendly  indwelling 
(Isa.  Ivii.  15  ;  John  siv.  23).  The  apostle  employs  this  figure— I.  To  quicken  our 
ABHORKEXCE  OF  SENSUAL  VICE.  Nowhcrc  are  disorder  and  neglect  more  unseemly 
thau  in  a  temple ;  but  of  all  kinds  of  disorder  and  neglect  the  most  repulsive  is 
filth.  For  a  Christian  to  indulge  in  sensuality  is  to  commit  an  abomination  to 
be  classed  with  the  sacrilege  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  who  offered  a  sow  on  the 
altar  of  the  Temple.  II.  To  give  an  impulse  to  our  desires  for  gkeatf.p.  purity  of 
HEART  AND  HIGHER  SPIRITUAL  ATTAINMENTS — for  thoso  C'^pecially  wluch  imprint 
themselves  on,  and  give  elevation  to,  the  bodily  features.  Not  only  should  the 
sensual  look,  the  bloated  complexion  excite  our  loathing  :  we  should  seek  for  such 
a  state  of  soul  as  shall  give  a  pleasing  countenance.  Cathedral  builders  used  to 
spend  much  time  and  pains  on  the  doorway,  so  as  to  make  it  worthy  of  the 
building.  The  face  is  the  doorway  to  the  soul,  and  it  becomes  us  to  see  that  it 
does  not  discredit  the  temple.  Christian  men  and  women  should  feel  that  the 
dreary  look  of  care,  the  peevishness  of  discontent,  &c.,  do  not  befit  those  whose 
bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  To  stimulate  us  to  render  God 
His  due.  The  temple  is  a  place  of  worship.  Not  that  we  can  of  ourselves  provide 
offerings  worthy  of  God ;  we  must  ask  Hira  to  give  us  of  His  own  wherewith  to 
serve  Him.  But  if  He  dwells  in  us  He  will  inspire  with  the  feelings  and  produce 
in  us  the  fruits  that  constitute  the  most  acceptable  offerings.  His  presence  is  not 
like  that  of  a  star  in  the  firmament  which,  bright  though  it  be,  communicates 
nothing  of  itself  to  our  distant  planet.  It  is  rather  like  the  presence  of  the  sun, 
which  cjinnot  shine  without  brightening  earth  and  sky  and  sea;  without  giving 
its  colour  to  the  rose,  its  fragrance  to  the  lily,  its  flavour  to  the  peach  ;  without 
ripening  the  golden  grain  and  cheering  and  brightening  the  hearts  of  men.  God 
cannot  dwell  in  the  soul  without  corresponding  influences  ;  without  fostering  love 
and  purity;  without  making  sin  more  odious  and  holiness  more  attractive; 
without  giving  it  strength  to  banish  the  one  and  to  follow  the  other.  Conclusion : 
The  Holy  Spirit  may  be  resisted  and  grieved,  and  in  consequence  withdrawn, 
and  tlie  painful  discipline  of  separation  and  chastisement  may  be  substituted 
for  loving  fellowship  (Hos.  v.  1.5;  Isa.  Ivii.  17).  No  loss  can  be  more  grievous. 
Far  better  the  keenest  application  of  the  scoufge  than  the  sentence — 
"  Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols;  let  him  alone."  (TF.  G.  Blaikie,  D.D.) 
The  rexeemed  siinier  a  temple  of  God  : — I.  Whose  the  Christian  is.  Before  the 
apostle  tell-*  us  this,  he  makes  it  evident  that  we  must  have  some  master.  "  Ye 
are  not  your  own  !  "  You  are  bondmen.  And  this  is  no  mere  figure  of  speech.  I 
know  that  if  we  look  around  us,  it  does  not  appear  true.  Freedom,  independence, 
is  the  boast  of  earth  and  the  pride  of  man  ;  but  go  into  heaven,  and  the  very  sound 
of  it  would  dismay.  The  creature's  real  glory  and  happiness  consist  in  his  willing 
dependence  on  the  God  who  made  him.     And  this  the  Christian  feels.     While 


CHAP,  vi.l  I.  CORINTHIANS.  429 


others  are  proudly  asking  who  is  lord  ovor  them,  he  knows  himself  to  be  God's 
property.  And  this  is  true  of  the  Cliristian  at  all  times.  God  saj's  concerning 
every  living  soul  and  every  clay-built  dwelling-place  a  soul  has  occupied,  "  They 
are  Mine."  II.  How  he  isfx'aiih:  God's.  There  were  several  ways  by  which  one 
man  might  become  the  prcperty  of  another.  1.  He  might  be  born  of  a  slave,  and 
the  owner  of  liis  parent  would  have  a  right  to  him  also.  And  if  Cliristian  fathers 
could  entail  a  glorious  bondage  on  their  children,  what  pangs  and  fears  would 
many  be  spared  !  2.  He  might  be  purchased.  And  this  was  a  transaction  so 
common  that  all  would  enter  into  the  meaning  of  any  illustration  drawn  from  it. 
Money  transferred  the  Greek  slave  from  one  master  to  another ;  so  the  blood  of 
Jesus  is  the  meatus  whereby  the  sinner  is  rescued  from  his  native  thraldom,  and 
brought  "  into  the  glorious  libeity  of  the  children  of  God."  By  sin  he  became  the 
servant  and  pmperty  of  Satan.  The  blood  of  Christ  makes  an  atonement  for  the 
transgressor's  sin  ;  in  a  legal  sen.se,  it  does  away  with  it,  and  thus  annihilates  that 
on  which  Satan's  title  to  him  rests.  III.  What  God  jiakes  him.  A  temple,  which 
imports — 1.  A  rebuilding,  a  restoration.  Man  was  originally  the  temple  of  Jehoviih, 
but  sin  entered,  nnd,  in  one  short  hour,  this  noble  piece  of  Jehovah's  workmansLip 
became  a  mournful  ruin.  Some  traces  indeed  of  its  original  glory  may  still  be 
discovered,  but  to  wliHt  do  they  amount?  They  serve  only  to  show  the  greatness 
of  its  degradation.  His  lofty  understanding  overthrown;  his  affections,  which 
once  rose  to  the  skies,  now  grovelling  on  the  earfli;  a  spiritual  being,  and  yet 
bounded  in  his  ideas  and  enjoyments  by  material  objects.  But  the  blood  of  Christ 
having  ransomed,  now  the  grace  of  Christ  transforms  him.  In  the  very  liour  when 
he  becomes  the  Lord's,  a  work  of  restoration  is  commenced  within  him,  that  never 
ends  till  it  brings  shape  and  beauty  and  glory  out  of  a  mass  of  ruins.  And  this  is 
sauctification.  2.  Dedication.  It  is  this  which  distinguishes  a  temple  from 
every  ol;h  'r  building.  The  purchased  sinner  is  consecrated  to  holy  purposes.  3. 
Residence,  the  abode  of  the  Deity  within  it,  to  whom  it  is  consecrated.  We  must 
labour  to  take  in  the  idea  of  God  dwelling  within  us;  not  carrying  on  His  work  of 
mercy  in  the  heart  like  a  bystander,  but  as  leaven  works  in  the  meal,  mingling 
itself  with  the  mass  it  is  changing.  To  the  man  of  the  woild  this  is  all  a  mystery, 
perhaps  a  delusion.  And  no  wonder.  It  is  undeisloot  only  by  experience,  and  of 
things  like  this  he  has  had  no  eNperience.  To  the  man  of  God  it  is  a  blessed 
reality.  God  never  enters  the  heart  alone;  blessings  unspeakable  follow  in  His 
train — light  smd  purity  and  joy.  IV.  Wh.\t  God  expects  fhom  him — glory.  Now 
the  glory  of  God  is  not  such  a  glory  as  results  to  a  man  from  the  circumstances  in 
which  he  is  placed  ;  its  source  is  to  be  found  in  God's  intrinsic  excellences.  To 
glorify  Him,  therefore,  is  to  bring  the=e  excellences  into  light.  And  the  redeemed 
sinner  does  this.  1.  Passively.  His  very  redemption  is  an  amazing  exhibition  of 
the  Divine  attributes.  In  this  point  of  view,  the  creation  of  a  world  is  as  nothing 
to  the  salvation  of  his  lost  soul.  2.  Actively.  We  are  so  to  live  and  act  that  all 
who  see  us  may  be  reminded  by  us  of  God.  Now  it  is  by  the  body  chiefly  as  an 
instrument  that  the  work  must  be  done.  The  seat  of  religion  is  the  soul,  but  its 
effects  will  be  visible  in  the  frame  which  the  soul  animates.  (C.  Liradlry,  M.A.) 
'The  sacrc'diii'fs  of  the  iierson  : — 1.  Tlie  whole  person  of  the  believer  is  as  sacred  to 
God  as  the  Temjile  wa*.  Stronger  language  is  impossible.  (1)  In  buth  the  plnn  is 
Divine.  (2)  In  both  human  agency  was  called  into  requisition.  In  the  building 
of  the  Temple  and  in  the  salvation  of  the  soul  man  must  work  out  the  plan.  (3)  In 
both  the  work  is  transcendent.  (4)  But  the  chief  point  is  the  fact  that  the  Teniple 
was  the  dwelling-place  of  God  typical  of  His  indwelling  in  the  regenerate  heart. 
2.  Our  fndeavour  will  be  to  consider  the  sacredness  and  preciousnessof  the  persons 
of  the  saints  in  the  light  of  the  price  of  our  redemption.  That  we  should  take  our 
stand  by  the  Cross  in  order  to  obtain  the  highest  view  of  human  nature  may 
not  be  consonant  with  the  opinions  of  many.  There  are  other  standpoints.  (1) 
There  is  the  commercial  standpoint.  On  this  pinnacle  you  may  strtnd  for  a  lifetime 
to  witness  incessant  activities  in  the  hives  of  industry,  which  offer  their  tribute  of 
praise  to  the  greatness  and  dignity  of  human  life.  (2)  Look  also  at  the  results  of 
scientific  research  ;  what  a  mass  of  wonders  meets  your  eye !  (3)  There  is  also  the 
literary  standpoint,  whence  we  see  mind,  like  a  cataract,  pouring  its  contents  in 
numberless  volumes.  (4)  Art  is  no  less  wonderful.  But  to  none  of  these  lights  do 
we  now  ask  you  to  come.  Ascend  Calvary  where  the  noblest  view  of  human  life  is 
obtainable.  I.  The  pukpose  of  the  Saviour's  life  was  to  redeem  mankind.' 
Every  great  life  hws  its  parpose  bound  up  in  its  very  inclination  and  disposition; 
This  is  pre-eminently  true  of  the  life  of  Jesus.     The  purpose  to  save  men  preceded" 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vl. 

every  thought,  and  left  its  impress  on  every  act.     II.  To  eaxsom  mankind  was  the 
RULING  PASSION  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  Jbsus.     Thti  Ufe  of  the  Saviour  was  unique  in  the 
fultilment  of  its  liesijin.     1.   His  life  was  one   supreme  effort  that  men  may  feel 
that  the  salvation  of  the  soul  is  the  highest  of  all  objects.     2.  The  coLl  reception 
He  received  did  not  damp  His  ardour.      III.  To  kedeem  men  Jesus  laid  down 
His  life.     It  was  then  the  entire  surrender  of  the  price  became  apparent.     IV. 
What  jealous  care  must  be  taken  to  guard  this   temple  from   the   intrusion 
OF  SIN  !     God  dwells  in  you ;  let  no  unh  illowed  thought  enter.     Let  the  body  be 
pure.     There  are  two  steps  in  entire  ronsecration — the  Spirit  of  God  must  sanctify 
the   soul,  and   the  soul   must  sanctify  the  body.     Therefore,   touch  no  imcleaa 
thing.     (Weelchj  Pulpit.)         The  Christian'' s  obligation  to  a  Italy   life: — Note — 1. 
That  sinners  of  every  class  are  excluded  from  heaven  (ver.  9).     (2)  Tliat  sinners  of 
every  class  have  been  changed  (ver.  11).     3.  Tiiat  those  who  have  been  changed 
!ire  under  in)mense  obligations  to  cultivate  a  holy  life.     The  text  teaches  us — I. 
That  the  Christian's  body  is  the  tejiple  of  God.     The  body  is  frequently  called 
so   (chap.  iii.   16  ;  2  Cor.    vi.    16 ;   Eph.   ii.  22).     Three  ideas  are  suggested — 1. 
Special  connection  with  God.     God  is  everywhere  ;  but  He  had  a  special  connection 
with  the  Temple  of  olJ.     God  is  with  all  men,  but  "  Thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty 
One  who  inhabiteth  eternity,"  &c.     2.  Special  consecration  to  God.     3.  Special 
manifestation  of  God.     Though  the  universe  reveals  God,  yet,  in  the  Temple  was 
the  Shekinnh.     There  is  more  of  God  seen  in  a  good  man's  life  than  elsewhere 
throughout  the  world.     U.  That  the  Christian's  being  is  the  propekty  of  God. 
"  Ye  are  not  your  own."     1.  This  does  not  mean — (1)  That  your  jDersonality  is  not 
your  own.     You  will  never  be  absorlxd  in  God.     (2)  That  your  character  is  not 
your  owni.     Character  is  the  creation  of  a  moral  being  — an  untransferable  thing. 
2.  It  means  that  our  existence  is  absolutely  at  His  command  ;  that   He  has  a 
sovereign  right  to  do  with  us  whatever  is  pleasing  in  His  sight.     The  reason  of 
this  is  assigned.     "We  ate  bought  with  a  price."     Christ  has  redeemed  us,  and 
has  laid  on  us  the  strongest  conceivable  obligation  to  live  a  godly  life  (Rev.  xiv.  5). 
III.  That  the  C  ristian's   duty  is  to  gi  okify  Goi>.      Not  to  make   Him   more 
g'orious  than  He  is — this  is  impossible.     A  holy  mind  is  glorified  in  the  realisation 
of  its  ideals.     St.  Paul's  Cathedral  glorifies  architecturally  Sir  Christophi>r  Wren, 
inasm  ich  »s  it  is  the  reali>a'i(>n  of  his  idea.     Man  glorifies  God  when  he  realises 
in  his  life  God's  ideal  of  a  man.     All  beings  glorify  God  as  far  as  they  realise  His 
idea  of  their  existence.     This  includes  two  things — 1.  'I'hat  the  human  body  be 
under  the  absolute  government  of  the  soul.     The  crime  and  curse  of  humanity  are 
that  matter  governs  mind  ;  the  body  rules  the  soul.     2.  That  the  human  soul  be 
under  the  government  of  supreme  love  to  God.     Love  always— (1)   Seeks  to  please 
the  object.      (2)  Reflects  the  object.     (3)  Lives  in  the  object.     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
God's  Temple: — When  Pompey  captured  Jerusalem  he  entered  the  Temple.     On 
reaching  the  vast  curtain  that  hunt!  across  the  "  holy  of  holies,"  into  which  none 
but  the  high  priest  could  enter,  and  that  only  on  one  day  of  the  year,  he  wondered 
wliat  the   dark  recess   might  contain.     He  drew  the  veil  aside,  but  the  glory  had 
departed  and  tliere  was  nothing  there.     How  many  Christians  to-day  are  like  that? 
'I'emples  without  a  God.     All  beautiful  outsi  le.     But  when  we  lift  the  veil  and 
pass  beyond  it  to  where  the  gl"ry  should  be.  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen.    The  glory 
i-;  gone.     This  brings  to  our  remembrance  the  old  legend  which  tells  us  that  on  the 
night  before  the  temple  on  Zion  was  burnt,  the  solemn  words  of  the  retreating 
Divinity  were   beard   snuU'Ung  through  it,    "Let  us  depart."     "I  will  arise  and 
return  unto  My  place  till  they  acknowle^'ge  their  offences."     Should  this  voice  be 
heird  to-day  by  you,  let  your  cry  be,  "  Abide  with  me.  King  of  life  and  glory.    Leave 
me  not!"     And  the  answer  will  come,  "This  is  My  re-t  for  ever,  here — mystery 
of  love — will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired  it,  even  the  temple  of  thy  heart."         The 
temple  of  God  must  not  be  defaced: — What  right  has  anv  man  or  any  woman  to 
deface  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?    What  is  the  ear  ?   Why,  it  is  the  wh'spering- 
gallery  of  the  human  soul.    What  is  the  eye  ?    It  is  the  observatory  God  constructed, 
its  telescope  sweeping  the  heavens.    Wnit  is  theiiand?    Aniustrunif-nt  so  wonderful 
that   when   the   Earl  of  Bridgewater  bequeathed  in  his  will  £8,000  sterling  for 
treatises  to  be  written  on  the  wisdom,  power,  and   goodness  of   God,  an  i   Dr. 
Chalmers  found  his  subject  in  the  adaptation  of  external  nature  to  the  moral  and 
intellectual  constitution  of  man,  and  the  learned  Dr.  Whewell  found  his  subject  in 
astronomy.  Sir  Charles  Bell,  the  great  English  anatomist  and  surgeon,  found  his 
greatest  illustration  of  the  wisilom,  power,  and  goodness  of  God  in  the  construction 
of  the  human  hand,  writing  his  whole  book  on  that  subject.     So  wouderful  are 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  431 

these  bodies  that  God  names  His  own  attributes  after  different  parts  of  them.  His 
omniscience — it  is  God's  eye.  His  omnipresence — it  is  God's  ear.  His  omnipotence 
— it  is  God's  arm.  Tlie  upholstery  of  the  midnight  heavens — it  is  the  work  of  God's 
f:ngers.  His  life-giving  power — it  is  the  breath  of  the  Almighty.  His  dominion  — 
the  government  shall  be  upon  Plis  shoulder.  A  body  so  Divinely  honoured  and  so 
Divinely  constructed,  let  us  be  careful  not  to  abuse  it.  When  it  becomes  a  Christian 
duty  to  take  care  of  our  health,  is  not  the  whole  tenlency  toward  longevity?  If 
I  toss  my  watch  abimt  recklessly,  and  drop  it  on  the  pavement,  and  wind  it  up  any 
time  of  day  or  night  I  happen  to  think  of  it,  and  often  let  it  run  down,  while  you 
are  careful  with  your  watch,  and  you  never  abuse  it,  and  you  wind  it  up  at  just  the 
same  hour  every  night,  and  then  put  it  away  in  a  place  where  it  will  not  suffer 
from  the  violent  changes  of  atmo>phere,  which  watch  will  last  the  longer  ?  Common 
sense  answers.  Now,  the  human  body  is  God's  watch.  You  see  the  hands  of  the 
watch,  you  see  the  face  of  the  w;itch  ;  but  the  beating  of  the  heart  is  the  ticking 
of  the  watch.  Oh  !  be  careful  and  do  not  let  it  run  down.  (T.  De  Witt  Tahnage.) 
Keep  tlnjaclf  j)\n-e  (sermon  to  young  men) : — 1.  Do  not  be  surprised  at  the  intensity 
of  this  remonstrance.  Only  think  what  a  conception  St.  Paul  had  of  the  purity 
which  Chiist  reouired  ;  think  what  a  sink  of  iniquity  was  the  city  of  Corinth.  It 
was  London  and  Paris  in  one.  It  combined  the  worship  of  Plutus  and  Venus.  The 
extravagance  of  its  luxury  was  only  matched  by  the  depth  of  its  licentiousness. 
Corinth  was  at  that  time  the  Vanity  Fair  of  the  Iloman  Empire.  You  might  be 
tenipted  to  say — Ati  !  no  Christian  could  remain  pure  in  such  a  place.  So  some  of 
the  young  men  of  Cminth  thought,  and  the  apostle  wrote  to  them  that  it  was  an 
entire  mistake.  I  believe  some  of  you  young  men  have  just  the  same  notion  that 
these  Corinthians  had.  Y'ou  sayLondiai  is  quite  as  trying  to  one's  principles  as 
ever  Corinth  was.  Perhaps  so;  yet  even  in  Corinth  there  were  those  who  remained 
proof  against  contamination.  The  grace  of  God  proved  sufficient  for  them.  2.  Of 
course,  he  is  here  wiit^ngto  Christiin  men  (ver.  11).  It  was  of  little  use  to  exhoit 
others  to  a  life  of  puriry.  An  uiiconverte  I  man  regards  himself  as  his  own  property, 
and  naturally  feels  that  he  may  deal  with  that  property  as  he  chooses.  The  alter- 
native is  to  be  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (ver.  20).  Chiist  gave  His  life  for 
our  salvation,  that  all  who  accept  of  Him  should  be  saved  ;  and  if  we  believe,  He 
claims  us  as  His  own.  This  is  not  a  hardshij),  but  a  joyous  liberty.  And  the  secret 
of  it  is,  that  He  puts  His  Holy  Spirit  within  us,  making  us  new  creatures,  with  new 
desires,  new  likings,  new  motives.  3.  Our  body  then  becomes  the  "  temj^le  "  of 
this  Divine  Spirit,  and  all  its  members  are  under  His  control.  It  is  a  very  S'demn 
and  suggestive  metaphor.  There  is  no  consecrated  edifice  that  is  renlly  so  sacred 
as  the  body  of  a  Christian.  The  temple  at  Jtr'  salem  has  for  ages  been  laid  in 
ruins  ;  the  only  temples  God  now  owns  are  the  two  w-liich  Paul  so  clearly  defines 
in  this  epistle  ;  first,  the  spiritual  society  of  His  own  people  in  the  aggregate  (ihap. 
iii.  16),  and,  secondly,  the  fleshly  frame  of  each  individual  believer.  4.  Perhaps 
the  most  common  plea  with  which  th"  impure  quiet  conscience  is  that  which  the 
apostle  here  challenges,  "  Our  bodies  are  our  own  ;  we  may  do  with  them  what  we 
will."  But  they  are  not  your  own,  says  Paul;  your  bodies  are  the  purchased  pro- 
perty of  the  Lord,  and  are  consecr»ited  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  What 
an  argument  against  self-indulgence  in  any  form  !  These  are,  as  we  are  told  in 
this  chapter,  sins  "  against  the  body  "  ;  desecrations  of  God's  own  temple  !  And  if 
"  any  man  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy."  Y^ou  recollect  that, 
when  Ch'i'^t  was  about  to  visit  the  Jewish  Temple  of  old,  and  found  its  hallowed 
precincts  defiled,  He  made  a  scourge  of  coids,  and  drove  out  all  the  vile  intruders. 
There  are  young  men  in  some  of  our  mercantile  houses,  re-pectable  in  appearance, 
and  gentlemanly  in  bearing,  who,  throuiih  vicious  indulgence,  have  already  jjathered 
a  hell  around  them,  from  whose  tortures  they  can  find  no  escape.  How  did  they 
begin  ?  By  beinp;  irregular  in  their  habits,  careless  in  making  acquaintanceships, 
tampering  with  stimulants,  and  theatre-going,  and  gambling  ;  and  finally,  every 
conceivable  form  of  Satanic  revelry!  Ah!  let  me  ask,  "What  fruit  had  ye  then 
in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  for  the  end  of  those  things  is  death. "_ 
0.  Oh,  the  heartlessness  of  vice  !  It  is  not  so  long  ngo  since  a  young  man  of  good 
family,  excellent  prospects,  and  pleasing  af'dress,died  miserably  like  a  dog  in  Paris, 
with  not  one  to  shed  a  tear  over  his  cold  clay* of  all  the  depraved  proflijjates  that 
had  sponged  him  and  joined  in  his  hilarious  orgies.  6.  There  are  plenty  who  will 
try  to  persuade  you  that  it  is  a  sign  of  weHkness  to  be  pure,  and  call  you  verilant, 
or  puritanical,  and  ask  if  you  are  still  tied  to  your  mother's  apion-strings.  And, 
unless  you  are  prepared  to  stand  that  vulgar  bluster,  you  are  all  but  certain  to  be 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


caught ;  and  from  the  gates  of  hell  shall  ascend  another  shout  of  victory.  I  remem- 
ber what  a  thrill  went  tlirough  me,  as  I  fir^t  gazed  upon  the  gloomy  walls  of  the 
Prijon  de  la  lioquette,  in  Paris,  which  is  set  apart  for  criminals  tli^t  are  condemned 
to  be  executed,  and  read  over  those  huge,  hideous  gates  the  inscription,  "  Abandon 
hope  all  ye  who  enter  here  !  "  Eut  hardly  less  hopeless  are  those  who  once  enter 
upon  tbe  path  of  the  profligate.  Facilis  descensus  Averni.  Oh,  k-cp  a  th  aisand 
miles  from  the  verge  of  tlie  pit !  Avoid  everything  that  is  likely  to  act  as  an 
incentive  to  sin.  7.  Perhaps  you  think  of  these  bodies  as  mere  teinj^orary 
tabernacles,  soon  to  be  taken  down  and  dissolved.  There  i.:i  a  certain 
nieasui'e  of  truth  in  this,  of  course.  But  in  a  higher  sense,  the  Chrislian's 
body  is  not  a  tabernacle,  but  a  temple,  a  permanent  and  enduiing  structure  (Horn, 
viii.  11).  Oh,  with  what  a  magnitude  of  interest  and  importance  does  this  thought 
invest  these  fleshly  temples  !  Some  time  ago  an  aged  saint  was  being  botne  to  his 
burial.  He  had  been  very  poor,  and  with  indecent  haste  they  were  shul'lling  his 
coffin  out  of  their  way,  as  though  glad  to  get  rid  of  him,  when  an  old  minister  who 
observed  it,  said,  "  Tread  softly,  for  you  are  carrying  a  temple  of  tbe  Holy  Ghost." 
(./.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)  Ye  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price. 
—  \e  are  vot  your  own: — 1.  To  be  "our  own  "  is  our  very  greatest  ambition.  To 
be  our  own  masters,  that  is  nature.  To  feel  bouf.'ht  with  a  price,  tu  forego  all  inde- 
pendence, to  own  ourselves  God's  property,  and  to  seek  His  glory — that  is  grace. 
2.  When  Satan  tirst  attacked  our  first  parents,  nothing  could  have  done  so  well  as 
tills,  "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods  "  ;  snd,  in  that  reach  to  be  their  own,  they  perished.  3. 
God  has  been  pleased  so  to  order  it,  that  no  m-Mi  can  truly  say,  "  I  am  luy  own  "  ; 
"  Know  ye  nut  that  to  whom  ye  yield  yomselves  servants  to  obey,  his  servants  ye 
are,"  Arc.  Oh,  we  all  know  how  we  are  tratimielled  by  circumstances,  there  is  not 
a  sm^ile  action  in  our  life  that  is  perfectly  free.  In  what  a  higher  sense  this  word 
is  true  of  those  to  whom  it  was  said,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own."  4.  Of  all  the  hapt)y 
conditions  upon  earth,  the  happiei-t  is  to  give  up  the  whole  heart  to  an  authority 
which  the  whole  heart  can  quite  love  and  respect — an  authority  also  which  only 
needs  proprietorship  to  make  the  relationship  exquisite  and  the  engngeiiient  perfect. 
Note — I.  God's  property  in  yotj.  1.  Had  one  whole  world  been  given  for  your  sal- 
vation the  price  would  have  been  a  large  one  ;  but  the  whole  universe  would  not  have 
given  so  great  a  sum  as  the  death  of  Christ.  One  single  life  offered  for  you  would 
have  been  vast,  but  Essential  Life  Himself  was  the  ransom  of  your  S'jul.  Ought  you 
to  be  a  poor,  wretched  slave,  to  fear  sin,  death,  and  hell, when  the  Son  of  God  took 
fear,  sin,  death,  and  hell  into  His  own  heart  to  make  you  free?  2.  The  art  of  man 
may  contrive  a  thing,  and  he  has  a  right  to  anything  that  he  has  made.  But  he 
contrives  out  of  what  he  finds  ah'eady  made,  not  what  he  brings  into  creation.  But 
God  made  your  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  A  father  has  a  right  to  his  child,  but  God 
has  done  more  than  made  you  His  child,  for  He  has  given  you  the  spirit  of  a  child, 
to  cry  "  Abba  Father."  A  husband  has  a  property  in  his  wife- — but  marriage  is 
only  a  type  of  the  union  betv.'een  Christ  and  His  Church.  Every  man  h;is  a  right 
to  his  own  body — Christ  has  more  than  a  right  to  His  body,  being  the  Head,  and 
we  all  members  in  particular  ;  so  that  each  condition  of  life  teaches  us  wiili  one 
common  voice,  "  Ye  are  not  your  own  "  II.  The  consequences  akising  from  that 
FACT.  1.  The  great  privilege  which  attaches  to  being  the  property  of  God.  What- 
ever property  one  has,  it  entails  certain  duties  upon  the  j)ioprietors,  and  certainly 
God  will  not  fail  in  fulfilling  the  great  relationship  in  which  He  stands  to  His 
creatures.  Are  you  "not  your  own,"  but  God's?  Then  observe  "all  things  are 
yours,"  &c.  God  holds  Christ — Christ  holds  you — you  hold  everything.  Theu  if 
"  you  are  not  your  own,"  nothing  whicli  you  have  is  your  own,  not  your  eares, 
griefs,  or  sins.  God  has  undertaken  for  you  in  everything.  The  member  may  pats 
everything  up  to  its  Head — the  tiling  possessed  may  ref-^r  everything  to  its  possessor. 
2.  The  duties  which  spring  out  of  tliis  great  privilege.  (1)  God  has  made  you  a 
part  of  His  Church,  the  body  of  Christ.  In  that  Church  we  all  belong  one  to 
another.  Each  has  his  particular  gift  to  contribute  to  the  mutual  good,  one  lias 
love,  another  intelligence,  another  experience — all  belong  to  the  Church.  (2)  This 
claim  of  God's  proprietorship  is  not  perfectly  recognised.  We  mHy  assign  Him  a 
pa,rt  of  our  lives — a  part  of  our  money — a  part  of  our  time — a  part  of  our  enerj^ies — 
a  part  of  our  affections,  but  God  will  have  no  partnerships.  He  is  too  great  to  be  a 
partner,  He  requires  all  of  us.  God  is  worthy  of  everything — yield  all  yourself  to 
Him.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Man  acting  independent  of  God: — The  principle 
which  is  recognised  in  these  words  is  the  very  reverse  of  that  by  which 
all    men    are  naturally  actuated.     We    reason,   we   act,    not  as  if  our  bodies 


CHAP,  vr.l  I.  CORINTHIANS.  433 

and  our  spirits  were  God's,  but  as  if  they  were  our  own.  This  is  the 
fault  of  human  nature.  Man  is  a  fallen  creature,  in  a  state  of  apostasy. 
He  has  cast  off  his  allegiance  to  Gol.  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts  ;  God's 
authority  is  not  acknowledged,  His  glory  is  not  regarded,  His  law  is  not  obeyed. 
And  what  is  the  cause  of  all  this?  Does  he  not  know  that  he  is  God's?  Is  he 
ignorant  that  all  he  is,  and  all  he  has,  are  from  God  ?  If  the  authority  of  God  can 
only  be  established  in  the  conscience,  if  His  right  to  reign  in  the  heart,  and  to 
demand  all  we  are  and  have,  be  once  acknowledged,  wlut  solicitude,  what  sorrow 
for  sin,  what  opposition  to  self,  what  efforts,  what  prayers,  what  gratitude,  what 
submission,  will  be  the  result !  And  who  can  escape  the  conviction  that  the  whole 
iieart,  and  mind,  and  soul  and  strength,  should  be  given  unto  God?  l.  What  can 
more  clearly  show  that  we  think  ourselves  our  own,  than  I'UKsu^rI^•CI  to  devise 
OUR  own  beligion  ?  God  has  vouchsafed  to  us  a  communication  of  His  purposes. 
He  has  favoured  us  with  the  inestimable  blessing  of  revelation.  Now  what  is  the 
disposition  with  which  we  should  receive  it?  We  know  that  it  is  with  meekness 
we  ^hould  receive  the  engrafted  word.  Eut  where  is  this  meekness  to  be  found? 
Truly  not  in  natural  men.  It  is  not  the  reliuion  which  is  most  agreeable  to  the 
revelation  of  God,  but  most  consonant  with  tbe  opinions  of  the  woi Id,  which  they 
adopt.  There  is  an  amazing  msolence  and  im])iety,  and  casting  off  suhjectiou  in 
calling  goo  I  evil  and  evil  good,  in  adding  to  the  Word  of  God  or  in  taking  from  it, 
and  thus  in  virtually  finding  fault  with  the  instructions  of  Divine  wisdom,  which  is 
in  fact  finding  fault  with  God  Himself,  anil  expressing  a  wish  that  He  were  the 
reverse  of  what  He  is.  It  is  saying,  We  are  our  own,  and  we  will  have  a  religion 
according  to  our  own  wisdom  and  our  own  wishes.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing,  how- 
ever plausilile,  to  contend  for  the  right  of  private  judgment,  and  to  suppose  that  if 
we  only  follow  tlie  dictates  of  our  own  conscience,  and  adopt  sentiments  such  as  we 
think  to  be  sound,  we  must  be  r-^lit.  The  rule  of  faith  and  the  rule  of  practice 
remain  unintiuenced  by  the  ch.nges  of  conscience,  and  immutably  the  same, 
whether  conscience  approves  and  disapproves,  peifectly  or  imperfectly.  And  a 
man  is  equally  responsible  to  God  wheth^■r  his  conscience  is  enlightened  or 
unenlightened,  and  every  time  he  contends  for  the  authority  of  conscience  in 
opposition  to  that  of  God,  he  does  in  fact,  like  that  man  of  sin,  oppose  and  exalt 
himself  above  all  that  is  called  Crod,  or  that  is  worshipped,  so  that  he  as  God, 
Bitteth  on  the  throne  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God.  Error  is  far  from 
being  harmless.  It  has  a  most  pernicious  effect  upon  practice.  And  in  proportion 
to  the  importance  which  is  attached  to  sentiments  is  the  evil  which  those  ttiat  are 
erroneous  produce.  H.  We  act  as  if  we  were  on*  own  by  noixo.  ouk  own  will. 
A  respect  unto  all  God's  commandments  is  the  only  thing  which  can  pi'ove  our 
regard  to  His  will.  If  we  keep  the  whole  law,  with  the  exception  of  one  point,  we 
are  guilty  of  all.  Whether,  therefore,  we  are  moral,  or  immoral,  and  whether  we 
observe  religious  duties,  or  neglect  them,  we  are,  in  all  this,  consulting  our  own 
will,  and  acting  upon  the  supposition  that  we  are  oar  own.  Nor  is  the  case  at  all 
altered  by  our  good  conduct  proceeding  from  conscientious  motives  and  the  fear  of 
God's  wrath.  For  a  man's  conscience  may  be  awakened,  and  his  fears  excited,  so 
as  to  constrain  him  to  do  many  things  with  the  view  of  conciliating  God's  favour, 
and  saving  his  soul,  while  at  the  same  time  his  partial  obedience  furnishes 
abundant  evidence  that  his  own  will  is  still  preferred  to  the  will  of  God,  and  that, 
in  the  most  plausible  parts  of  his  conduct,  he  is  not  actuated  by  any  genuine 
principles  of  obedience,  III.  We  act  as  if  we  were  our  own  by  seeking  our  own 
KNDS.  Whatever  we  do  in  an  unregenerate  state,  whether  it  be  in  itself  good  or 
bad,  we  seek  in  it  an  end  that  is  not  worthy  of  God.  We  have  said  that  the  true 
end  of  man  is  to  glorify  God.  But  men  seek,  not  the  honour  of  God,  but  their  own 
honour.  Tliey  not  only  do  their  own  will,  but  they  do  it  for  their  own  purposes. 
The  original  depravity  of  man  is  so  entire  that  it  is  a  difficult  and  long-protracted 
musiuess  to  make  him,  with  all  his  new  and  Divine  nature,  propose  tbe  glory  of  God 
as  ihe  end  of  all  his  ways.  (M.  Jackson.)  God's  ririht  to  our  services  on  the 
^i/round  of  creation  : — I.  Because  we  were  made  by  Hiji.  The  more  we  know  of 
■the  structure  of  the  human  frame,  how  fearfully  and  wonderfully  we  are  made,  the 
more  are  we  persua'led  that  it  is  He  that  hath  made  us  and  not  we  ourselves. 
And  if  we  consider  that  we  are  made  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  that  if  God  had  not 
breathed  itjto  us  the  breath  of  life,  we  must  have  been  nothing  better  than  the  dust 
under  our  feet;  we  shall  see  the  propriety  of  glorifying  God  in  our  bodies  which  are 
His.  And  if  we  contemplate  the  rational  understanding,  the  immortal  spirit,  by 
which  we  are  distinguished  from  the  beasts  that  perish,  and  assimilated  to  angels, 
VOL.  X.  28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi. 


and  to  God,  we  shall  perceive  that  these  are  a  still  higher  ground  of  claim  upon  us 
for  services  the  most  spiritual.  When  human  creatures  use  their  bodies  and  their 
spirits  for  the  low  purposes  of  sensuality,  vanity,  and  ambition,  or  without  any 
view  to  the  seiviee  and  honour  of  Him  whose  they  both  are,  they  are  guilty  of  an 
injustice  to  Go  I  and  a  robbery  of  God,  which,  if  conscience  were  not  stupefied  or 
perverted,  would  fill  them  with  horror  and  overwhelm  them  with  fear.  Who  can 
calculate  the  value  of  an  immortal  existi-nce  and  of  a  capacity  for  happiness, 
exalted  as  its  Divine  original,  and  lasting  as  fternity  ?  W'ho  can  calculate  his 
obligations  to  God  for  such  an  existence  ?  AnJ  who,  then,  can  calculate  the  extent  of 
his  wickedness  in  habitually  forgetting  that  he  is  not  his  own  in  using  that 
existence  without  any  avowed  aim  to  the  will  and  glory  of  its  Author  ?  I  need  not 
say  that  the  bodies  of  them  whose  god  is  their  belly,  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame, 
and  who  mind  earthly  things,  are  not  used  for  the  purpose  of  honouring  God,  for  in 
all  this  Gud's  laws  are  violated  and  His  glory  given  to  another.  All  who  live  in 
pleasure  are  dead  while  they  live  and  dishonour  God  in  their  bodies.  And  it  is 
equally  clear  that  they  who  live  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one 
another,  as  well  as  they  who  argue  against  religion  and  would  di:^coura^e  piety, 
are  not  glorifying  God  in  their  spirits,  but  openly  dishonouring  Him.  Have  you 
considered,  and  do  you  act  upon  the  principle,  that  as  all  your  faculties  of  body  and 
of  mind  are  God's,  they  ought  to  be  employed  for  the  promotion  of  His  glory  ? 
II.  Wk  weke  made  for  God.  The  great  end  of  creation  is  the  glory  of  God. 
And  all  things,  but  men  and  devils,  do  glorify  Him.  Angels  in  heaven  glorify  Him, 
and  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  in  the  waters  under  the  earth,  glorify  Him, 
by  manifesting  His  perfections.  Fallen  men  and  fallen  angels  only  answer  not  the 
design  of  their  creation.  Now  let  this  truth  be  remembered — that  you  were  made 
for  the  purpose  of  glorifying  God.  And  would  you  oppose  and  defeat  the  end  of 
your  existence  ?  Shall  there  be  no  concurrence  between  the  design  of  God  in  giving 
you  life  and  your  design  in  living?  H.iw  great  must  be  that  gudt  which  is  con- 
tracted by  living  in  opposition  to  the  great  end  of  God  in  calling  us  into  being! 
Few  things  excite  more  opposition  in  the  human  mind  tlian  the  attempt  to  reinst  ite 
God  upon  His  throne,  to  assert  His  right  to  reign  in  our  hearts,  the  Sovereign  of 
our  thoughts  and  afi'ections,  and  to  maintain  that  it  is  our  duty  to  resolve  all  we 
think,  and  speak,  and  do,  into  His  will.  This  is  being  righteous  overmuch  ;  this 
is  enthusiasm.  Now,  can  anything  show  more  clearly  how  completely  we  have 
departed  from  God,  how  totally  opposed  to  Him  we  are  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  ? 
Eemember  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and  how  shall 
we  dare  to  appear  as  usurpeis  before  our  Sovereign  and  our  Judge?  If  you 
exalt  youi selves  against  God  He  will  bring  you  down,  and  who  shall  deliver? 
(Ibid.)  Not    your    men: — 1.    The    passion    for    freedom    is    i>r.  bably    the 

strongest.  Nothmg  is  more  wondeiful  than  the  secret  working  of  this 
passion  in  securing  gradual  emancipatiun.  There  have  been  times  when  ages  of 
serfdom  had  apparently  crushed  it  out ;  but  at  the  fir.st  impulse  fr.  m  without  it  was 
seen  that  the  tire  of  freedom  did  not  smoulder  ;  and  when  the  impulse  has  grown 
strong  the  passion  has  sometimes  maddened  men,  blinding  thtm  to  all  sense  of 
justice.  And  so  the  spirit  of  freedom  has  in  turn  made  slaves  .of  them.  It  was  so 
in  Paris  a  hundred  years  ago.  2.  A  large  proportion  of  the  members  of  this  church 
were  slaves.  You  can  imagine  what  a  gospel  the  life  of  Christ  would  be  to  these. 
And,  to  the  honour  of  those  who  organised  the  first  churches,  we  must  always 
remember  that  they  were  not  afraid  to  welcome  the  slave.  Well,  then,  you  may  say, 
"  Was  it  not  a  cruel  thing  of  the  apostle  to  remind  them  that  they  were  not  their 
own?  "  Have  you  ever  wondered  why  Paul  should  describe  himself  as  "  the  bond- 
slave of  Christ "  ?  Was  it  not  because  the  people  to  whom  he  was  writing  were 
slaves,  and  as  if  he  would  say,  "  I  too  am  a  slave ;  I  too  am  bound,  not  with  iron, 
but  by  love  "  ?  What  a  grand  revelation  that  was  to  the  slaves  !  "Ye  are  Christ's." 
No  chains  or  bondage  could  alter  that.  Better  the  fetter  and  the  chain  witti  Christ 
than  the  purple  and  the  throne  without  Him.  3.  And  now  these  words  have  just 
as  splendid  a  ring  for  us  to-night.  The  law  has  discovered  that  they  are  true  in 
part.  The  other  day  they  brought  before  a  court  of  justice  a  frightened,  miserable 
woman,  who  had  tried  to  drown  herself.  She  pleaded  that  her  life  was  not  worth 
preserving.  She  said  it  was  hers,  and  she  could  do  with  it  as  she  liked.  But  the 
law  stepped  in  and  said,  "  You  are  not  your  own.  Your  life  is  not  your  own.  Y'ou 
have  no  right  to  squander  it."  This  meant  that  the  law  is  founded  on  the  Christian 
principle  that  every  man's  life  belongs  to  his  fellow-men  as  well  as  to  himself.  And 
that  was  what  Christ  came  to  teach.    His  life  was  given  for  everybody.    4.  But  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  435 


idea  is  not  only  what  you  may  not  do,  but  what  you  must  do.  If  you  are  Cln-ist's, 
then  every  thou<.'ht,  word,  action,  niui-t  be  what  Clirist  would  have  them  be.  When 
Peter  and"  John  first  began  to  preach  in  Jerusalem  they  were  thrown  into  prison, 
and  strictly  commanded  nut  to  pnach  any  niDre  in  tliat  name.  But  Peter  answered 
"  We  muni."  It  is  not  a  question  whether  we  should  like  an  easy-going  life.  We 
must  obey  God,  though  it  leads  us  to  stripes,  imprisonment,  and  the  cross  (see  also 
Acts  xxi.  11-14).  5.  But  perhaps  you  think  that  such  claims  are  only  strong  when 
we  reach  manhond  or  womanhood.  But  think  of  Christ,  at  twelve  years  of  age, 
saying,  "  I  must  be  in  My  Father's  house. "  Twelve  years  of  age,  but  He  felt  the 
power  of  the  Divine  "  must,"  and  yet  that  One  was  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth. 
Surely  if  any  one  could  go  through  life  with  no  constraint  it  was  He  ;  but  He  saw 
that  to  redeem  mankuid,  even  Omnipotence  could  not  lefuse  to  take  the  cross  from 
childhood  to  the  grave.  "  Even  Christ  pleased  not  Him-elf."  6.  And  now  what 
part  has  that  Divine  "  must"  begun  to  play  in  your  life?  Do  you  feel  that  it  is 
stronger  than  the  "must"  of  men?  Young  man  in  bnsiness,  would  you  let  the 
word  of  an  eaithly  master  outweigh  the  command  of  the  heavenly  Master?  Do 
you  think  you  can  slight  Christ  on  the  week-day  and  make  it  up  to  Him  on  the 
Sunday  ?  ,Young  men,  newly  awakeninjj;  to  find  how  strong  the  streams  of  tendency 
are  in  this  world,  look  at  lite  in  the  light  of  Christ,  and  not  in  the  light  of  what 
everybody  says  and  does.  It  is  no  excuse  for  looseness  of  conduct  that  it  is  the 
fashion.  Christ  waged  relentless  war  against  many  of  the  fa-hions  of  His  day. 
Servants,  remember  whose  you  are  and  whom  yon  serve.  You  can  hire  your 
souls  out  and  no  wages  can  recompense  you  for  the  loss  of  them.  'J  here  may  be 
some  here  who  have  received  from  the  Master  on  trust  certain  talents  which  they 
have  been  hiding  in  the  earth.  If  you  are  letting  your  lives  rust,  remember  you 
are  abusing  another's  property,  for  "you  are  not  your  own,"  <i'c.  (C.  S.Horne, 
M.A.)  Not  our  oivn  : — 1.  The  first  motives  which  influence  us  in   Christian 

experience  are  usually  self-regarding;  and  it  is  natural  and  right  that  they  sdould 
be  so.  Salvation  stands  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  couise,  in  order  that  our 
self -regarding  interests  may  be  set  at  lest,  and  that  we  may  thus  be  left  free  to 
pursue  an  end  ihat  lies  outside  them,  and  yet  is  in  j)erfect  harmony  with  them. 
2.  We  are  not  only  redeemed  from  death,  but  purchased  unto  God.  So  long  as  we 
claimed  to  be  our  own,  Satan  possessed  a  certain  legal  right  over  us.  He  moved 
man  to  break  away  from  his  original  relations  with  God,  and  to  claim  himself  for 
himself.  In  doing  so  man  became  a  spiritual  outlaw,  and  as  Ruch  fell  under  the 
supremacy  of  the  prince  of  lawlessness.  The  great  enemy  held  him  by  rhht  as 
well  as  by  might,  because  it  is  God's  law  that  what  we  sow  we  reap.  3.  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  since  Satan  owes  his  power  against  us  to  the  operation  of  Divinely- 
ordained  law,  when  once  the  necessities  of  law  are  satisfied,  the  clauns  of  Satan 
against  us  are  cancelled.  Thus  we  are  ransomed  from  Satan  the  moment  that  we 
are  justified  before  God,  and  brought  back  to  that  position  from  which  man  fell 
of  beinu  God's  and  not  our  own.  Only  Adam  belonged  to  God  because  He  had 
made  him  for  Himself ;  we  belong  to  God  because  He  has  bought  us  back.  Thus  a 
new  element  is  introduced  into  the  case,  and  one  that  appeals  to  all  'he  strongest 
emotions  of  our  nature.  He  who  robs  a  Divine  Creator  of  that  which  He  has  made 
for  His  own  glory  commits  a  crime,  no  doubt ;  but  he  wlio  has  been  bronght  back 
frjm  the  fatal  effects  of  this  crime  by  the  death  of  his  Benefactor,  and  then  declines 
to  resoguise  his  obligation,  is  guilty  of  an  enormity  which  casts  that  other  crime 
into  the  shade.  4.  As  the  result  of  redemption  we  come  umier  tlie  intiuence  of 
Him  whose  will  is  law  throughout  tiie  universe,  and  whose  entra'ce  into  our  nature 
insures  our  true  moral  freedom.  Tlie  law  of  the  Spirit  of  liie  in  Christ  Jesus  makes 
us  free  from  the  law  of  sm  and  death.  But  here  is  a  new  property  claim,  a  claim 
de  facto  where  tiie  others  were  claims  de  jure.  His  presence  is  our  liberty,  for 
"  where  the  Spirit  of  God  is  there  is  liberty  "  ;  but  it  is  tlje  liberty  which  come*  by 
full  surrender  of  ourselves  to  Him.  He  d  es  not  enter  our  nature  either  as  a  con- 
queror, trampling  down  all  resistance,  nor  as  a  mere  auxiliary  to  help  us  out  of  a 
difficulty  ;  rather  as  a  constitutional  Sovereign  to  reign  according  to  the  true  laws 
of  our  ransomed  nature.  5.  But  it  is  not  by  any  means  the  rule  that  we  apprehend 
His  claims  all  at  once.  When  the  benefit  that  we  seek  has  been  obtained,  it  is  only 
natural  that,  having  been  greatly  forgiven,  we  should  greatly  love.  But,  ahis  ! 
these  warm  feelings  do  not  always  last,  when  they  subside  the  devotion  subsides 
with  them.  It  often  happens,  therefore,  that  after  a  considerable  time  has  passed 
from  the  moment  of  conversion,  the  Holy  Spirit  leads  us  back,  as  it  were,  to  the 
cross  to  learn  more  fully  the  lesson  which  we  only  partially  learned.      We  find 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


perhaps  that  we  have  been  acting  as  though  God  existed  for  us,  instead  of  reahsing 
that  we  exist  for  God;  and  then  conies  tlie  definite  question  leading  up  to  an  equally 
definite  tlecision,  Is  it  to  be  self  or  God  ?  When  the  Spirit  of  God  thus  induces  a 
crisis,  it  often  happens  that  a  veiy  marked  an  i  definite  act  of  consecration  ensueff, 
bringing  about  an  entirely  new  epoch  in  our  Christian  life.  (IF.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
Ye  are  bought  with  a  price. — God's  right  to  our  services  on  the  (iround  of  re- 
demption : — Vi  on  the  ground  of  creation  God  has  a  right  to  our  services  and  may 
demand  that  we  glorify  Him  with  our  bodies,  and  with  our  spirits  because  He  hath 
made  them,  it  must  be  evident  that  His  right  to  them  on  the  ground  of  redemption 
is  still  stronger.  I.  The  guilt  which  soul  and  body  had  contractkd.  Jesus 
Christ  hath  not  bought  us  with  a  price  when  innocent  and  deserving.  His  redemp- 
tion supposes  immeasurable  guilt,  the  violation  of  a  law  which  is  holy  and  just 
and  good,  the  rejection  of  Divine  authority,  the  contempt  of  Divine  majesty,  the 
impeachment  of  Divine  wisdom,  the  abuse  of  Divine  godness,  the  defiance  of 
Divine  vengeance,  the  crime  of  injustice,  and  ingratitude,  and  rebellion,  and 
sacrilege.  Liok  at  the  detiied  body  and  the  polluted  spirit,  see  in  theni  everything 
that  is  earthly  and  sensual  and  devilish,  and  say  if  tt-ere  is  in  them  any  quality  to 
attract  the  Divine  favour.  Is  there  not  everything  fitted  to  excite  the  abhorrence 
of  Him  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity?  And  yet  He  redeems  you! 
He  redeems  you  from  the  vileness  of  your  bodies,  and  the  apostasy  of  your  spirits. 
What,  then,  is  the  jiarverseness,  the  accumulated  ingratitude  and  sacrilege  of  using 
bodies  and  spirits  so  redeemed  for  the  purpose  of  still  dishonouring  Him!  II. 
But  cnnecteu  with  this  guilt  is  dangkb.  Every  sinner  is  exposed  to  the  curse 
of  God,  and,  but  for  redemption,  must  perish  eternally.  It  is  redemption  from 
ruin  by  which  yon  are  urged  to  glorify  God,  in  your  body  and  in  your  spirit,  which 
are  God's.  Who  does  not  feel  the  force  of  this  argument?  Who  can  feel  that  he 
owes  his  deliverance  from  ruin,  his  (ieliverance  from  even  temporal  distress,  to  the 
benevolent  exertions  of  a  friend,  without  feeling  himself  bound  by  ties  of  gratitude 
to  serve  him  to  the  utmost  of  his  power?  And  shall  that  be  withheld  from  Christ 
and  from  Gid  whi-  h  is  so  freely  yielded  to  man?  III.  Christ  kedeems  the  body 
AND  SOUL,  Nor  ONLY  FROM  RUIN,  BUT  RUIN'  IJIMEASUKABLE.  Who  can  Calculate  the 
misery  of  them  who  are  dest  oyed  both  body  and  soul  in  hell?  Is  a  cold  and 
reluctant  service  ah  appropriate  return  for  deliverence  from  everlasting  destruction 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power  ?     IV.  Christ  has 

NOT  ONLY  REDEEMED  BODY  AND  SOUL  FROM  EVERLASTING  DESTRUCTION,  BUT  BY  HiS 
KEDEJIPTION    HAS    PROCCRED    FOR    THEII     IMMEASURABI.E     FELICITY.       DoCS    the    cirCUm- 

stance  of  our  ears  being  familiar  with  the  sound  of  fulness  of  joy  in  the  presence  of 
God,  and  of  pleasures  at  His  right  liand  for  evermore,  render  the  felicity  of  heaven 
less  valuable?  Substantiate  all  this  felicity.  View  it  as  a  reality,  as  a  reality  at 
hand,  as  that  which  yourselves  must  possess,  or  not  possess,  in  the  course  of  a  few 
fleeting  moments,  and  then  say  whether  there  is  not  a  reasonableness,  a  suitable- 
ness in  glorifying  God  in  those  sjiirits,  and  in  those  bodies,  which  are  to  be  the 
subjects  of  this  felicity  through  the  efficacy  of  His  redemption.  V.  The  greatness 
OF  THE  PRICE  WITH  WHICH  YOU  HAVE  BEEN  BOUGHT.  You  Were  not  redeemed  with 
corruptihle  things  such  as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Chi'ist, 
as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot.  And  can  you,  after  this  pitrchase, 
question  His  right  to  your  bodies  and  your  spirits  ?  Can  you  think  that  you  are 
justified  in  withiiolding  your  services  from  .Jesus  Christ,  in  living  to  yourselves,  in 
not  inquiring  into  His  will,  in  not  devoting  yourselves  to  His  glory?  Why  should 
the  princip'es  of  justice  be  recognised  in  your  transactions  with  men,  and 
renounced  in  your  dealings  with  God?  But  God  demands  your  services,  not 
merely  because  He  has  bought  them  with  a  price,  but  because  in  buving  them  He 
extends  to  you — VI.  The  most  immeasurable  mercy.  It  is  infinite  mercy  that 
redeems  you  from  destruction  the  most  awful,  infinite  mercy  that  exalts  you  to 
happmes^s  the  most  inconceivable,  infinite  mercy  that  buys  you  with  a  price  the 
most  costly,  by  all  this  infinite  mercy  so  manifested  you  are  urged  to  glorify  God. 
How  fervent  should  be  our  love,  how  animated  our  exertions  !  Every  thought  and 
every  affection  should  be  God's.  Were  we  suitably  affected  by  His  love,  we  should 
see  sin  and  ingratitude  in  every  thought  and  word  and  work.  The  insensibility 
and  worldliness  of  our  minds  and  the  inadequacy  of  our  best  returns  would  humble 
us  in  the  dust.  And  our  disproportionate  humility  itself,  for  making  returns  so 
imperfect,  would  be  numbered  among  our  grievous  offences.  The  more  of  heart 
and  soul  we  put  into  our  services  the  more  of  freedom  and  delight  shall  we  enjoy.  We 
can  imagine  no  happiness  equal  to  that  of  living  as  not  our  own,  living  to  God  only,  con- 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   COrdNTIIIANS.  437 


strained  by  gratitude,  and  directed  by  justice  to  serve  Him  whose  we  are.  (M.  Jarl-.tnn.) 
Redemption  and  its  claims  (text  anil  chiip.  vii.  2o)  : — I.  "  Ye  ake  bought  with  a 
PRICE."     1.  Redemption  is  a  greater  mnrcy  than  creation.     It  is  no  mean  blessing  to 
have  been  made,  and  to  have  been  made  a  man  rather  than  a  dog,  to  have  been 
blest  with  intellect  and  an  immortal  spirit;  but  for  all  that  it  would  be  better  for 
thee  that  thou  hadst  never  been  born,  if  thou  art  rot  redeemed.     2.  Providence 
also  calls  before  our  minds  a  great  mass  of  mercies;  but  providence  is  second  in 
its  blessedness  to  redemption.     3.     Redemption  is  that  which  gives  eii'ect  to  all 
the  other  great  blessings  uf  God.     (1)    Election,  the  w.-11-head  of  grace,  needs  the 
conduit-pipe  of  redemption  to  bring  its  streams  down  to  sinners.     We  are  clios'  n 
of  God,  but  unto  obedience,  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.     (2)  Eedemp- 
tion  is  the  foundation  of  all  real  peace.     (3)  It  is  through  redeeming  grace  that 
we  expect  to  enter  heaven.     II.  Therefoue  redemption  is  tue  Lord's  paramodnt 
CLAIM  DPON  us.       Other  claims,  such  as   those  of    creation   and  providence,   are 
forcible,  but    this   claim    is    overwhelming.     The  love    of  Christ  constraineth  us. 
Think  — 1.    What    you    were    redeemed    from.      (1)    Sin.      (2)     Its    punishment. 
2.  Reflect  most  lovingly  upon  that  dear  friend  who  redf-emed  you.     Not  an  nngel, 
but  Christ,  who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.     3.  Then  think  of  the  price  He 
paid.     The  text  does  not  tell  us  about  it,  and    surely    the    reason  is  that  words 
cannot  express  the  mighty  sum.     The  famous  painter,  when  he  drew  tlie  picture  of 
Agamemnon    at   the   sacrifice   of  his   daughter,  fell  that  he  could  not  depict  the 
sorrow  of  the  father's  countenance,  and  therefore  he  wisely  put  a  veil  over  it,  and 
represented  him  as  hiding  his  face  from  the  fearful  sight.     So  the  apostle  seems  to 
have  felt.     This  price  has  been  fully  paid.     I  have  seen  lands  which  have  belonged 
to  men  who  were  reputed  to  be  rich,  but  there  was  a  heavy  mortgnge  upon  them. 
But  there  is  no  mortgage  on  the  saints.     "It  is  finished,"  said  the  Saviour,  and 
finished    it   was.      III.  The    extent    of    this    claim.      1.    Tlie    first    text    says — 
(1)  That  it  includes — («)  The  body.     This  body  of  yours  is  holy,  and  it  will  rise 
again  from   the  dead.     I  charge  you,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  never  defile  this  body 
either  by   drunkenness  or  by  lust,     (ti)  The   spirit.     Keep  that  pure  too.     Christ 
has  not  bought  thes-e  eyes  that  they  should  read  novels  calculated  to  lend  me  into 
vanity  and  vice,  such  as  are  published  nowadays.     Christ  has  not  bought  this  brain 
of  mine  that  I  may  revel  in  the  perusal  of  works  of  blasphemy  and  filthiness.     He 
has  not  given  me  a  mind  that  I  may  drag  it  through  tlie  mire.   Your  whole  manhood 
belongs  to  God  if  you  are  a  Christian.     Every  faculty,  talent,  possibility  uf  your 
being — all  were  bought.     (2)  That  consequently  "  Ye  are  not  your   own,"  which 
implies — (a)  That  I  may  not  claim  the  right  to  do  W'hat  I  please,  but  what  Christ 
pleases.     I  am  to  please  my  Master  in  everything,     [h)  That  I  may  not  follow  my 
own  tastes  if  in  any   way  I  should  so  biing  dishonour  to  the  name  of  Christ, 
(f)  That  I  must  not  trust  my  own  reasonings.     If  I  were  my  own  teacher,  then,  of 
course,  I  should  learn  my  lessons  from  my  own  boi'k  ;  but  I  hnve  a  Rabbi,  even 
Jesus,  and  I  am  resolved  with  meekness  to  learn  of  Him.     ((/)  That  I  must  not 
seek  my  own  ends.     I  must  not  live  in  this  world  that  I  may  trade  and  get  riches, 
but  it  must  be  that  I  may  use  than  tor  Him.     2.  In  my  second  text  tlie  apostle 
draws  another  inference:  "Be  not  ye   the  servants  of    men."     (I)  Do  not  even 
follow  good  men  slavishly.     Do  not  say,  "I  am  of  Paul ;  I  am  of  Apollns ;  I  am 
of  Calvin."     Who  is  Calvin  and  who  is  Wesley  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed 
as  the  Lord  gave  unto  you?     (2)  Do  not  pin  your  faith  to  anybody's  sleeve.     Keep 
close  to  Christ.      (3)  Do  not  give  yourselves  up  to  party  spirit.     (4)  Do  not  give 
yourself  to  any   scientific  speculation,  educational  effort,  or  to  any  philanthropic 
enterpiise  so  as  to  divert  our  minds  from  the  grand  old  cause  of  Jesus  and  our 
God.     (5)  Do    not    follow  the  fashions  of  the  world.     ((5)   Let  no  man  be  your 
master.     If  ye  have  masters  according  to  the  flesh,  serve  them  with  all  faithfulness  ; 
but  as  to  any  master  over  your  spirit,  allow  no  one  to  be  so  ;  consciences  were  made 
for  God  alone.     (C.  H.  Spurneoii.)         Eedemption  and  its  claims  : — There  is  within 
us  a  strange  tendency  to  the  acijuisition  of  property,  and  theiefore  there  is  some- 
thing startling  in  this  announcement.     We  have  been  gloating  upon  our  faticied 
proprietorship  ;  it  awakens  us  to   the  consciousness  that  we  are  only   stewards. 
Nay,  it  lays  hold  upon  ourselves,  "  Y"e  are  not  your  own."     And  this  may  perhaps 
account    for    the   ccmparatively   trifling   success   with   which   religion   has  been 
favoured.     It  allows  no  compromise,   it  claims  supreme   ami  undivided  homage. 
Notice — I.  The  great  fact  asserted,  that  we  are  purchased,  and  the  position 
INTO  which  we  are  BROUGHT  BECAUSE  OF  THAT  PURCHASE.     1.  While  we  would  insist 
upon  this  as  ,the  prime  cause  of  our  being  the  property  of  God,  we  would  not  be 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  vi. 


supposed  to  invalidate  others.  "  He  has  made  us,  and  not  we  our.=e]ves."  He 
has,  from  the  beginning,  even  until  now,  preser\ed  the  creatures  He  has  made. 
But  in  redemption  He  lias  so  impressively  displayed  His  interest  in  our  welfare,  His 
yearning  over  His  purchased  i^ossession.  The  apostle's  language  implies  an 
acknowledgment  of  our  fall,  an(!  refers  to  the  provision  of  that  covenant  i^y  which 
that  fall  was  to  be  remedied.  You  will  not  fail  to  remark  how  Christ  Himself  spoke 
of  those  who  believe  on  Him  as  peculirU'ly  His  own.  "  My  sheep,"  etc.  His  great 
purpose  WHS  that  He  "  might  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works."  If  that  people  are  spoken  of  in  the  r  collective  capacity,  they  are  as  the 
Church  of  God,  which  He  has  purchased  with  His  own  blood.  As  to  these  declara- 
tions, the  statement  of  St.  Peter  cnmes  as  a  hallowed  appendix.  "  Ye  were 
redeemed,  not  witki  corr  iptible  things,"  &c.  Now,  surely  there  can  be  no  more 
strictly  legal  title  to  property  than  this.  2.  Note  an  exquisite  fitness  in  the 
connection  between  the  purchase,  and  tire  position  into  which  that  purchase  brings 
us.  Su'-h  is  the  grasping  tendency  of  the  human  heart,  that  it  must  have  some- 
thing to  lay  hold  of  outside  itself,  and  it  will  never  willingly  denude  itself  of  any 
object  of  solicitude  and  love.  Hence,  if  you  would  dispossess  the  mind  of  one 
object,  yon|must  overbear  it  with  the  preference  of  another.  If  you  extirpate  one 
affection  you  must  introduce  another  into  its  room.  We  see  this  strikingly  illustrated 
in  the  pri  gress  of  human  life.  The  tastes  and  habits  of  childhood  depart,  but  the  heart 
is  not  bereft ;  new  tastt-s  acquire  their  influence,  new  affections  exert  their  ascendancy. 
So  it  is  in  reference  to  matters  of  a  higher  moment.  Y'ou  will  never  drive  from  a 
worldlng  the  pursuit  which  engrosses  him  by  a  mere  naked  demonstration  of  its 
worthlessness  and  folly.  All  that  you  say  is  true,  and  the  man  knows  it ;  but  the 
spell  is  over  him.  And  is  it  not  natural,  when  you  think  of  the  feelings  of  the 
man,  and  of  what  you  are  wishing  him  to  do  ?  Y'ou  tell  him  to  cultivate  religion  : 
it  is  his  abhorrence.  Y'ou  tell  Lim  to  renounce  the  world  ;  why,  it  is  all  he  has. 
Here,  then,  comes  the  question.  We  cannot  prevail  upon  the  heart  by  the  simple 
act  of  resi^^nation  to  give  up  everything  unpleasing  to  God.  May  we  not  induce 
it  to  admit  a  higher  affection  ?  Here  it  is  that  the  fitness  of  the  connection 
becomes  apparent.  "  Y''e  are  not  your  own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  The 
heart,  which  all  other  means  had  failed  to  ailect,  is  melted  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit,  applying  the  gospel  of  God.  We  can  deny  the  claim  no  longer  ;  we  acknow- 
ledge it  at  once  as  a  natural  and  inalienable  right,  and  we  are  bound  to  it  with  a 
tenderer  tie,  because  He,  to  whom  we  are  to  swear  our  fealty,  has  been  mysteriously 
one  of  ourselves.  Our  sense  of  possession  is  gratified.  3.  Does  not  this  point 
out  the  most  effective  method  of  preaching?  It  is  not  the  demonstration  of  the 
moral  law,  but  the  preaching  of  Christ  that  prevails.  This  is  the  master  spell ; 
this,  like  the  rod  of  the  prophet,  swallows  up  the  enchantments  of  opposing 
sorcery.  I  announce  it,  then,  as  a  natural  and  inalienable  right.  "  Ye  are  not  your 
own."  Everything  around  you  urges  to  a  recognition  of  the  claim.  Nature  reminds 
you  of  it,  as  in  the  fulness  of  her  gleeful  melody  she  wakes  her  hymn  of  praise, 
acknowledging  her  dependence  on  Him  by  whom  she  is  sustained.  Providence 
reminds  you  of  it.  It  sounds  from  the  tomb,  where  the  forms  you  loved  are 
sleeping.  Above  all,  grace  reminds  you  of  it.  "  1  beseech  you,  by  the  mercies  of 
God."     That  is  the  culminating  point  even  of  an  a^iostle's  motive.     II.  The  coukse 

OF  CONDUCT  WHICH  A    CONSIDERATION  OF  SUCH    POSITION   IS    CALCULATED    TO    INDUCE  YOU 

TO  PURSUE.  "  Therefore  glorify  God,"  &c.  We  need  not  remind  you  that  by  no  service 
of  yours  can  you  increase  God's  glory ;  but  you  may  make  it  manifest.  God  is 
always  glorified  whenever  He  is  seen.  1.  Let  your  devotedness  to  God  be  entire. 
(1)  Glorify  God  in  your  bodies,  for  they  are  His.  Beware  of  regarding  them  as  a 
numlier  of  organs  and  senses  to  be  pampered,  or  as  stately  forms  to  be  adorned  and 
admired.  Tlie  Spirit  dwells  not  in  an  unhallowed  temple.  In  your  bodies,  there- 
fore, glorify  God,  by  temperance,  chastity,  and  the  practice  of  every  Christian 
virtue  ;  by  doing  without  weariness,  and  by  suffering  without  murmuring  ;  by  letting 
your  hands  be  active  in  the  service,  and  your  feet  swift  in  the  way  of  His  command- 
ments. (2)  Glorify  God  in  your  intellects,  for  they  are  His.  How  often  has 
science  poured  her  treasures  before  hinr  who  knew  not  God,  and  how  much  of  the 
choicest  literary  art  is  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  devil !  In  the  midst  of  a 
perverse  generation,  bow  yourself  in  unconditional  allegiance  to  the  Bible.  Learn 
the  true  humility  of  knowledge.  Stand  out  in  all  the  nobleness  of  religious 
decision:  sj)irits  — students  of  the  great  Spirit ;  minds — drinking  in  the  lessons  of 
the  immortal  mind,  which  transforms  them  while  tfiey  listen.  (3)  Glorify  God  in 
your  whole  nature,  for  it  is  His.     Never  mind  the  opposition  with  which  you  may 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.   COEINTHIANS.  439 


have  to  contend,  nor  think  that  you  live  to  struggle  alone.  Your  Saviour  has  sent 
His  Spirit  to  help  you,  and  that  Spirit  now  worketh  in  you  to  will  and  to  do  of  His 
good  pleasure.  2.  Let  your  devotedness  be  benevolent.  Spend  yourselves  in 
energetic  effort  for  the  conversion  of  your  fellows,  and  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel 
among  them.  And  never,  certniuly,  were  we  called  upon  more  impressively  to  let 
our  devotion  be  benevolent  than  now — now,  when  the  conflict  between  sense  and 
faith,  between  the  ceremonial  and  the  spiritual,  between  the  idolatries  and  the 
ever-living  has  commenced,  and  a  thouFEiid  voices  of  the  universe  are  pealing  out 
the  challenge,  "  ^Vho  is  on  the  Lord's  side?"  (IC.  il/.  Pnii-^hon,  LL.D.) 
licdemption  and  its  ohlifjatioint : — I.  The  proposition:  "Ye  are  not  your  own." 
1.  Note  here  two  things  :  (1)  What  this  phrase  implies— viz.,  That  no  being  can  be 
simply  its  own,  but  what  is  supreme,  absolute,  and  independent ;  and  that  essence, 
which  is  its  own,  must  be  itself  tlie  end  of  sll  its  actions.  From  these  two 
principles  it  evidently  follows  that  there  is  no  being  simply  its  own,  but  that  which 
is  the  First  Cause  and  the  Last  End  of  all  beings — God.  All  others  are — 
((f)  Derivative  beings,  and  How  from  the  Source  of  Being,  (b)  Dependent  beings, 
and  owe  their  continued  preservation  to  the  goodness  of  God.  (c)  Subordinate  to 
the  First ;  made  for  His  ends  and  uses.  (2)  What  it  infers.  If  we  are  not  our  own, 
then — (a)  We  ought  not  to  seek  our  own.  But,  when  gain  shall  be  preferred 
before  godliness,  what  is  this  but  a  base  self-seeking  unworthy  of  a  Christian — 
nay,  of  a  man?  (b)  We  are  not  at  our  own  disposal.  And  this  should  teach  us 
patience  in  all  the  crosses  and  sad  occurrences  of  our  lives,  (c)  We  ought  not  to 
follow  our  own  wills  and  affections,  (d)  We  ouyht  not  to  look  upon  anj'thing  as 
our  own.  (c)  No  sin  should  be  our  own.  2.  Now,  lest  you  should  be  i^ut  to  seek 
for  an  owner,  the  apostle  informs  you  who  it  is  that  lays  in  His  claim  to  you,  even 
the  great  and  universal  Lord  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  whose  all  things  are  by  a  most 
absolute  and  indisputable  right:  Ye  are  God's.  (1)  As  He  is  your  Almighty 
Creator  and  Preserver.  (2)  Your  Governor.  (3)  By  covenant  engagement  and 
solemn  promise.  (4)  By  profession,  and  our  own  voluntary  and  free  acknowledg- 
ment. (.5)  By  the  right  of  redemption,  as  in  the  text.  Now  the  love  and  mercy 
of  God,  in  redeeming  us,  is  far  more  eminent  than  in  creating  us.  And  therefore 
His  right  and  title  to  us,  upou  this  account,  is  far  greater.  For — {a)  Creation  only 
gives  us  a  being,  and  in  this  our  sinful  condition  only  capacitates  us  for  woe.  But 
redemption  opens  a  way  to  hajipiness.  (b)  Kedemption  has  been  more  expensive 
to  God  than  creation.  H.  The  reason:  "For  ye  are  bought  with  a  price." 
1.  What  this  price  is  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  2.  To  whom  this  price  was  paid  ;  to 
our  great  creditor,  God.  3.  What  we  are  redeemed  from.  (1)  From  the  wrath  of 
God.  (2)  From  the  vassalage  of  the  devil,  (a)  His  tempting  power  is  restrained, 
(b)  His  accusing  pow'er  is  rebuked,  (c)  His  tormenting  power  shall  be  wholly 
abolished.  (3)  From  the  reigning  and  condemning  power  of  sin.  (4)  From  the 
curse  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  13).  IH.  The  inferknce  :  '•  Therefore  glorify 
God,"  &c.  1.  What  is  it  to  glorify  God?  2.  How  we  ought  to  glorify  God.  (1) 
By  a  most  devout  adoration  of  His  infinite  perfections.  (2)  By  declaration  of 
those  perfections.  (3)  By  conforming  ourselves  to  the  likeness  of  them.  (4)  By 
performing  those  duties  which  they  oblige  us  unto  ;  by  being  holy  as  He  is  holy,  &c. 
(1)  Now  the  true  notion  of  holiness  is  a  separation  from  all  sin  and  impurity. 
3.  What  force  and  influence  the  consideration  of  our  redemption  ought  to  have 
upon  us,  to  oblige  us  thus  to  glorify  God.  (1)  We  are  bought  with  a  price,  and 
therefore  it  is  but  justice  and  equity  to  glorify  God.  Consider — (a)  The  price  He 
paid  infinitely  exceeds  the  value  of  all  that  thou  art  and  hast,  {h)  All  the  use  which 
thy  Saviour  can  make  of  thee  is  only  that  thou  shouldst  glorify  Him ;  and,  by 
obedience  shouldst  serve  to  the  setting  forth  of  His  praise  (Titus  ii.  14).  (c)  If 
thou  livest  not  to  thy  Saviour,  who  by  His  dea*h  purchased  thee,  thou  art  guilty  of 
sacrilege,  the  worst  robbery  and  most  bianded  injustice  in  the  world,  (d)  If, 
instead  of  glorifying  Him  by  thy  obedience,  thou  dishonourest  Him  by  thy 
rebellions  and  impieties,  thou  not  only  defraudest  Him  of  His  servant,  but,  what  is 
infinitely  worse,  of  the  very  price  that  He  paid.  (2)  We  are  bound,  not  only  in 
justice  and  equity,  but  in  ingenuity  and  gratitude,  to  glorify  God  upon  the  account 
of  our  redemption.  For  consider — (a)  What  it  is  you  are  re<leemed  from. 
{!>)  With  what  price  He  hatli  bought  us.  For  consider,  first,  if  God  had  put  the 
terms  of  thy  redemption  into  thy  own  hands,  couldst  ihou  have  offered  less  for  the 
ransom  of  thy  soul  ?  Secondly,  that  Christ  hath  infinitely  abased  Himself  to  procure 
thy  redemption  ;  and  therefore,  at  least,  ingenuity  and  gratitude  should  engage 
thee  to    exalt  and  glorify  Hiua.     (3)    In  point   of   interest  and   advantage.     IV. 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


Application.  Consider — 1.  It  is  the  pieat  end  of  onr  beings  to  glorify  Clod,  and 
indei^d  the  noble'^t  end  that  we  could  be  created  for.  And  if  thou  dost  otherwise — • 
(1)  Tliou  degradest  thyself  from  the  dij-Miity  of  thine  own  being.  (2)  Thou 
degradesc  God  too,  and  exaltest  something  above  Him.  2.  That  God  wid 
certainly  have  His  glory  out  of  thee.  If  thou  wilt  not  glorify  His  hohness  by 
thy  obedience,  thoa  shalt  glorify  His  justice  by  thy  perdition.  3.  By  glorifying 
God  we  do  ipclcd  tut  glorify  ourselves.  For  He  hath  been  pleased  so  giaciously 
to  intwist  H  s  gl'iy  and  ours  together,  that,  wliilst  we  endeavour  to  promote  the 
one,  we  do  but  indeed  promote  the  other  (1  Sam.  ii.  30).  (E.  Hopkins,  D.D.) 
Oljcdieuce  the  fruit  of  redemption  : — Con-ider — I.  Your  state.  1.  "Ye  are  not 
your  own  !  "  You  are  not  the  masters  of  your  own  actions;  the  framers  of  your 
own  condition ;  the  proprietors  of  your  own  persons.  No  being  can  be  his  own, 
unless  he  be  supreme,  independent,  self-exi^tent.  2.  Y'e  are  "  bought  with  a  price." 
II.  Your  doty.  This  reminds  us — 1.  Of  our  complex  nature.  2.  That  the  body 
is  not  to  be  excluded  or  undervalued  in  religion.  It  is  the  workmanship  of  God, 
and  displays  much  of  His  perfection.  He  has  redeemed  it,  and  will  gl.rify  it. 
Eeligion  is  not  only  a  real,  but  a  visible  thing.  The  form  of  godliness  is  nothing 
without  the  power ;  but  when  the  foim  is  produced  by  the  power,  it  is  comely  and 
useful.  3.  That  in  all  the  duties  of  religion  we  are  indispensably  bound  to  glorify 
God  in  our  spirit,  as  well  as  in  our  body.  4.  That  we  are  to  gloiify  God  in  our 
corporeal  and  spiritual  powers  respectively  by  exertious  peculiar  to  each.  (1)  As 
to  tlie  body — we  are  to  ^dorify  God  in  guarding  our  health  ;  in  watching  our  senses ; 
in  regulating  our  appetites  ;  in  rendering  our  natural  refreshments  and  our  secular 
callings  subservient  to  religion,  "  \Yhether,  therefore,  we  eat  or  drink,"  cfcc.  (2)  As 
to  the  sp  rit.  lil.  The  connection  between  your  state  and  your  duty,  or  the 
DERIVATION  OF  THE  ONE  FROM  THE  OTHER.     "  Therefore."     The  inference  is  natural. 

1.  Does  not  Justice  demand  this  dedication?  2.  If  we  do  not  glorify  God,  are  we 
not  chargeable  with  the  vilest  ingratitude?  3.  Is  not  this  gloridcation  of  God  the 
very  end  of  your  redemption  ?  Were  you  rescued  from  bondage  to  be  lawless?  or 
to  become  your  own  masters?  4.  How  can  you  determine  your  actual  interest  in 
this  redemption,  unless  you  have  dedicated  yourselves  unto  God?  He  is  the 
Author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  Him.  {W.Jay.)  Redemption 
hy  price : — 1.  Attacks  have  often  been  made  upon  the  doctrine  of  redemption,  for  it 
is  well  known  to  be  the  Eedan  of  the  gospel.  These  onslaughts  have  in  many 
instances  professed  to  be  mere  corrections  of  our  phraseology.  True,  some  may 
have  carried  ideas  of  the  shop  and  the  counter  into  their  notion  of  rednnption, 
but  even  th^se  were  nearer  the  truth  than  those  who  reduce  the  ransom  paid  by 
Christ  to  nothing.  Paul,  at  any  rate,  was  not  afraid  of  the  mercantile  theory,  for 
he  writes,  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  And  did  not  Christ  say  that  He  came 
"  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many  "  ?  Though  we  were  not  redeemed  with 
corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  the  transaction  was  none  the  less  real  and 
effective.  2.  It  is  a  high  honour  to  our  fallen  race  that  man  is  the  only  redeemed 
creature  in  the  universe,  liebellious  angels  are  left  to  their  doom.  Hence  man 
cost  God  more  than  the  whole  universe  beside.  The  Lord  could  speak  worlds  into 
existence  ;  but  to  erect  the  lew  creation  of  rerleemed  men  He  must  endure  the  loss 
of  His  own  Son.  3.  This  work  of  redemption  is  many-sided.  We  have  been 
redeemed — (1)  In  ref^rsnce  to  Divine  justice.  We  are  justified,  or  reckoned  as 
just,  through  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ  Je.'us.  (2)  From  the  power  of 
evil  (Titus  ii.  14).  (3)  From  ourselves— as  the  text  suggests.  We  have  here — I. 
Compensation,  and  yet  gain.  1.  Comj)en--atiou.  You  have  surrendered  as 
believers  your  right  and  property  in  yourselves,  for — fl)  You  live,  whereas  you 
were  dead.  (2)  You  have  peace.  Y'our  sins  are  forgiven  for  Christ's  sake.  (3)  You 
have  joy.  (4)  You  have  a  grand  reversion — a  lio])e  of  glory  with  Christ  for  ever. 
You  have  received  for  your  little  the  fulness  which  is  in  Christ,  who  is  all  in  all. 

2.  Actual  gain.  Our  loss  itself  is  an  advantage.  We  are  set  fiee  from  self,  that 
worse  than  Egyptian  bondage,  whose  wage  is  death.  We  are  set  free  from 
Satan,  and  is  not  that  a  gain  ?  Once  the  world  was  our  lord,  but  what  gain  it  is  to 
feel  that  we  are  no  longer  the  servants  of  men  !  II.  High  value  and  yet  lowliness. 
1.  Value  is  clearly  here,  for  God  thinks  not  lightly  of  man,  but  esteems  him 
sufficiently  to  buy  him  with  the  richest  price  conceivable.  You  are  not  a  thing  to 
be  tiifled  with.  "Your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Never,  there- 
fore, give  up  your  body  to  idleness  or  uncleanness.  Use  yourselves  only  for 
honourable  j^urposes,  for  God  puts  honour  upon  you.  2.  Y'ou  are  precious,  but  you 
must  yet  be  lowly,  for  whatever  value  there  is  about  you,  you  do  not  belong  to 


CHAP.  Ti.]  I.  COniNTIIIANS.  441 

yourself.  You  are  the  goods  and  chattels  of  Christ :  as  you  were  once  sold  under 
sin,  so  are  you  now  "bought  with  a  piice."  Our  honour  lies  in  our  owner.  God 
forbid  that  we  should  glory  in  anything  except  that  we  belong  to  Christ.  III. 
Secukity  and  yet  WATCHFur.NESs.  1.  Security.  He  who  owns  you  is  able  to  keep 
you.  If  you  were  to  perish,  who  would  be  the  loser?  Why,  He  to  whom  you 
belong.  2.  Reason  for  watchfulness.  Take  great  care  of  yourselves,  for  you  are  a 
king's  treasure.  If  a  thing  is  my  own  I  may  do  what  I  like  with  it,  but  if  it  is 
entrusted  to  my  care  I  must  mind  how  I  behave  towards  it,  or  else  I  shall  be  an 
unfaithful  steward.  IV.  Conseckation  asdyet  peufectlibkkty.  1.  Consecration. 
You  aie  to  dedicate  yourself  wholly  to  the  Lord,  because  you  are  not  partly,  but 
wholly  redeemed.  Do  you  keep  back  any  faculty  you  jjossess  from  Christ?  Is 
not  this  robbeiy  ?  How  would  you  like  to  tliink  of  that  particular  reservation  as 
being  unredeemed  ?  Which  portion  is  it  which  is  to  be  unconsecrated  ?  The 
body  ?  What,  have  you  an  unredeemed  body?  never  to  rise  from  the  dust  ?  or  do 
you  give  to  Christ  your  heart,  but  reserve  your  mind  ?  Have  you,  then,  an 
unredeemed  intellect  ?  Withhold  not  your  voice,  but  sing  for  Jesus,  or  speak  for 
Him,  if  \ou  can,  *c.  2.  But  there  is  with  this  a  perfect  liberty.  To  be  conse- 
crated to  Christ  is  the  sure  way  to  give  to  all  our  faculties  the  fullest  play.  If  we  are 
encased  within  the  compass  of  the  law  we  are  no  more  restricted  than  a  bird  which 
is  imprisoned  in  the  air,  or  a  fish  in  the  ocean.  Obedience  to  Christ  is  our  element. 
V.  Submission  and  expectancy.  1.  Submission.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  and 
therefore  God  has  a  right  to  do  whatever  He  wills  with  you.  2.  Side  by  side  with 
that  comes  expectancy.  I  could  not  do  much  for  myself  if  I  were  my  own,  but  if  | 
I  am  Christ's  I  expect  that  He  will  do  gieat  things  for  me.  (C  H.  Spurrjeon.) 
Boitaht  with  a  price  : — lu  one  of  the  American  slave  markets  an  aged  negro  stood 
for  sale.  A  gentleman  asked  him,  "  My  man,  to  whom  do  you  belong  ?  "  The 
slave  glanced  for  a  moment  at  his  questioner,  and  then,  straighteuiug  himself 
as  best  he  could,  said,  "  My  flesh  and  bones  and  blood  belong  to  old  Massa  Carl ; 
but  Djy  spirit  am  a  free-born  child  of  God,  bought  by  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus." 
This  was  an  answer  which  thousands  who  sing  "Britons  never  shall  be  s'aves" 
could  not  give.  Consider  the  word — I.  Bought.  Learn  that  if  God  bought  man — 
1.  He  values  man.  God  has  bought  nothing  else.  All  else  belongs  to  Him,  but 
only  because  He  has  made  them.  2.  He  wants  man.  We  seldom  buy  what  we 
don't  want.  God  wants  the  worst  of  us  to  make  us  better.  II.  Price.  There  are 
many  things  we  cannot  value  in  money.  An  epidemic  was  raging  in  a  French 
town.  The  medical  men  resolved  that  a  post-mortem  examination  should  be  made 
of  the  body  of  one  of  the  victims.  Who  would  volunteer  and  thus  sacrifice  his 
life  ?  One  came  forward  ;  he  put  all  his  affairs  straight,  performed  the  operation, 
wrote  his  report,  put  it  into  prepared  spirit,  and  died.  Who  can  describe  the  price 
he  paid  for  the  welfare  of  others?  Again,  a  man  was  dying  of  poverty  of  blood, 
and  could  only  be  saved  by  the  infusion  of  healthy  blood  into  his  veins.  A  medical 
student  bared  his  arm  and  said,  "  Here  it  is  ;  taiie  what  you  want."  They  took  a 
large  quantity  of  his  blood,  and  soon  the  sick  man  revived.  By  what  system  cf 
accounts  can  you  describe  a  price  like  that?  Think,  then,  of  the  \mce  of  our 
redemption — "  The  precious  blood  of  Christ."  III.  Glorify.  In  olden  times 
men  believed  that  they  honoured  God  by  punishing  the  flesh  ;  but  are  we  quite 
free  from  this  error  ?  Have  we  not  eared  more  for  souls  than  for  bodies?  Could 
we  remember  that  the  body  should  be  used  only  for  such  purposes  as  God 
intends  it  would  save  a  world  of  sorrow.  Thousands  are  working  their  own 
bodies  as  they  would  never  work  their  horses.  Remember  that  they  are 
God's,  and  to  be  cared  for  as  instruments  for  H  s  service.  (C  Leach.) 
Bought  with  a  price : — 1.  With  what  ardour  does  the  apostle  pursue  sin  to  destroy 
it!  He  is  not  so  prudish  as  to  let  sin  alone,  but  cries  out,  in  plainest  language, 
"  Flee  fornication  !  "  The  shame  is  not  in  the  rebuke,  but  in  the  sin  which  calls  for 
it.  He  chases  this  foul  wickedness  with  arguments  (ver.  18).  2.  He  drags  it  into 
the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God  (ver.  19).  3.  He  slays  it  at  the  Cross.  "Ye  are 
bought  with  a  price."  Let  us  consider  this  last  argument,  that  we  may  find  therein 
death  for  our  sins.  I.  A  blessed  fact.  "Ye  are  bought  with  a  price."  1.  '"Ye 
are  bought. "  This  is  that  idea  of  redemption  which  modern  heretics  dare  to  style 
mercantile.  Redemption  is  a  greater  source  of  obligation  than  creation  or  preser- 
vation. Hence  it  is  a  well-spring  of  holiness.  2.  "  With  a  price."  This  indicates 
the  greatness  of  the  cost.  The  Father  gave  the  Son.  The  Son  gave  Hims  If ;  His 
happiness,  glory,  body,  soul.  Measure  the  price  by  the  bloody  sweat,  the  Cross,  the 
heart-break.     3.  Our  body  and  spirit  are  both  bought  with  the  body  and  spirit  of 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


Jesus.  (1)  This  is  either  a  fact  or  not.  "  Ye  are  bought,"  or  ye  are  unredeemed. 
Terrible  alternative.  (2)  If  a  fact,  it  is  the  fact  of  your  life.  A  wonder  of  wonders. 
(3)  It  will  remain  to  you  eternally  the  grandest  of  all  facts.  (4)  It  should  therefore 
operate  powerfully  upou  iis  both  now  and  ever.  II.  A  plain  consequence.  "Ye 
ar.'  not  your  own."  1.  Negative.  It  is  clear  that  if  bought,  ye  are  not  your  own. 
'J  his  involves — (1)  Privilege.  You  are  not  your  own — {</)  Provider  :  sheep  are  fed 
by  tlieir  shepherd,  {h)  Guide  :  ships  are  steered  by  their  pilot,  (c)  Father : 
children  loved  by  parents.  (2)  Responsibility.  We  are  notour  own — (a)  To  injure. 
(h)  To  waste,  in  iiileness,  auiusenitnt,  or  speculation,  (r)  To  exercise  caprice,  and 
lollo^v  our  own  prejudices,  depraved  aiJections,  wayward  wills,  or  iriegular  appe- 
tites. (2)  To  lend  our  service  to  another  master,  (e)  To  serve  self.  Self  is  a 
dethroned  tyrant.  Jesus  is  a  blessed  husband,  and  we  are  His.  2.  Positive.  Y'our 
bodv  and  your  spirit  .  ,  .  are  God's.  (1)  We  are  altogether  God's.  Body  and 
spirit  include  the  whole  man.  (2)  We  are  always  God's.  The  price  once  paid,  we 
are  for  ever  His.  (3)  We  rejoice  that  we  know  we  are  God's,  for  thus— (a)  We  have 
a  belovi  d  owner  {h)  We  pursue  an  honoured  service,  (c)  We  fill  a  blessed  posi- 
tion. We  are  in  Christ's  keeping.  III.  A  pkactical  conclusion.  Glorify  God.  1.  In 
your  body.  (1)  By  cleanliness,  chastity,  temperance,  industry,  cheerfulness,  self- 
denial,  patience,  &c.  (2)  In  a  suffering  body  by  patience  unto  death.  (3)  In  a  working 
bodv  by  holy  diligence.  (4)  In  a  worshipping  body  by  bowing  in  prayer.  (.5)  In  a  well- 
governed  body  by  self-denial.  (0)  In  an  obedient  body  by  doing  the  Lord's  will  with 
delight.  2.  In  your  spirit.  By  holiness,  faith,  zeal,  love,  heavenliness,  cheerfulness, 
fervour,  humility, expectancy,  etc.  Conclusion  :  1.  Remember,  0  redeemed  one,  that — 
(1)  You  will  te  closely  watched  by  Christ's  enemies.  (2)  Y'ou  will  be  expected  to  be 
more  gracious  than  others  ;  and  rig'itly  so,  since  you  claim  to  be  Christ's  own.  (3) 
If  you  are  not  boly,  the  sacred  name  of  your  Redeemer,  your  Proprietor,  and  your 
Indweller  will  be  compromised.  (4)  But  if  you  lead  a  rciet-med  life,  your  God  will 
be  honoured.  2.  Let  the  world  see  what  redemption  can  do.  3.  Let  the  world  see 
what  sort  of  men  "  God's  own  "  are.      (C.  H.  Spiirrjeon.)  God  to  be  (jJorified  by 

'tho'i"  bought  with  a  price: — The  religion  of  the  Bible  relates  to  the  twogreat  branches 
of  human  duty,  the  things  to  be  believed,  and  the  things  to  be  done.  The  doctrines 
and  precepts  of  the  gospel,  though  they  niay  be  distinguished,  must  not  be  separated. 
The  objects  of  our  faith  furnish  motives  for  duty ;  and  duty  cannot  be  rightly  per- 
formed unless  under  the  influence  of  the  belief  of  thnse  doctrines.  Consider  here — 
I.  The  duty  stated.  To  glorify  God.  1.  The  duty  is  "  to  glorify  God  with  our 
bodies  and  spirits."  Lft  lis  begin  with  tbe  latter.  How  may  we  glorify  God  with 
our  spirits,  that  is,  with  our  rational  souls  ?  This  we  do — (1)  By  using  our  reason 
in  contemplating  tbe  ct  aracter  of  God  as  made  known  in  His  works  and  Word.  (2) 
By  believing  au'i  relying  on  all  He  has  said.  (3)  By  the  constant  and  lively  exer- 
cise of  pure  love.  (4)  By  forming  such  purposes  as  are  in  accordance  with  the 
Divine  will.  (.5)  By  patient  submission  to  atHictive  providences.  (6)  By  constantly 
and  deliberately  promoting  His  glory.  2.  Our  bodies — (1)  When  we  preserve  them 
from  impurity  and  intemperance.  'J'his  was  the  very  idea  which  the  apostle  had  in 
his  mind  (ver.  I'J).  (2)  When  we  employ  them  in  His  service.  («)  All  the  institu- 
tions  demand  the  employment  of  our  bodies.  We  must  bow  down  before  Him,  and 
by  external  actions  manifest  our  reverence,  and  praise  Him  with  our  lips,  [b)  God 
is  gloiilied  by  every  species  of  g  )od  works  which  require  the  instrumentality  of  the 
body.  Our  hands  may  be  made  to  glorify  God  when  they  are  opened  in  acts  of 
libemlity  and  beneficence.  II.  The  motive  offeked.  1.  The  redemption  of  cap- 
tives was  an  idea  very  familiar  to  the  Greeks.  As  by  the  customs  of  war  every 
prisoner  was  made  a  slave,  it  often  happened  that  persons  of  wealthy  families  would 
be  thus  separat^■d  from  their  relatives  ;  and  it  frequently  happened  that  tliese  rela- 
tives would  send  the  ransom  of  their  friend  by  a  suitable  person,  who  would  redeem 
hnn  and  bring  him  home.  What  would  be  the  feelings  of  a  number  of  captives 
when  it  shoukl  be  anuounf  ed  that  a  Redeemer  had  arrived  ?  But  when  the  fortunate 
captive  heard  his  own  name  called,  who  can  describe  his  exultation?  2.  The 
deliverance  of  sinners  by  Christ  bears  a  striking  analogy  to  this.  iMen  are  taken 
captive  by  the  devil.  They  cannot  liberate  themselves,  nor  can  this  redemption  be 
effected  by  any  one  but  the  Son  of  God.  But,  though  the  analogy  is  striking,  yet 
there  are  circumstances  whicli  distinguish  it  from  that  which  obtains  among  men. 
(1)  When  one  went  to  redeem  his  friend,  though  he  might  have  far  to  go,  still  he 
had  not  to  go  out  of  the  world  ;  it  was  nece-saiy  for  Christ  to  descend  from  heaven 
to  earth— from  the  throne  to  a  manger.  (2)  When  an  earthly  redeemer  set  off  in 
search  of  an  enslaved  sou,  or  brother,  he  had  to  take  with  him  a  ransom  of  silver 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.  COniyTIIIANS.  443 


j,nd  gold.  But  when  the  Son  of  God  came  into  the  world  to  red^em  lost  sinners 
He  must  lay  down  a  ransom  of  blood,  (o)  By  the  nature  of  the  sinner's  bondage. 
He  was  first  nnder  a  sentence  of  condemnation.  Next,  he  was  held  in  cords  of 
iniquity,  which  no  created  arm  could  loose.  And  lastly,  he  was  lying  under  the 
cruel  tyranny  of  Satan,  tlie  w-orst  of  masters.  l"'rom  all  these  our  iiedeenier  came 
"  to  save  His  people."  He  removed  the  curse  of  the  law  by  bearing  it  in  His  own 
body  o.'i  the  tree.  He  saves  His  people  also  from  their  sins  by  the  washing  of 
regeneration  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  He  dispossesses  Satan  by  His 
^■uperior  power.  3.  Now  tho^e  who  have  been  thus  redeemed  owe  a  dt  bt  of  giati- 
tude  which,  without  exaggeration,  may  be  said  to  be  infinite.  No  wonder  Paul 
judged  it  unnecessary  to  urge  other  motives.  Conclusion:  1.  Let  us  retle.t  peni- 
tently on  our  culpable  neglect  of  this  great  duty  of  glorifying  God.  2.  Let  us 
endeavour  to  obtain  a  lively  feeling  of  our  obligations  to  the  Bedeemer.  3.  Let  us 
esteem  it  a  great  privilege  to  be  the  redeemed  servants  of  the  Lord.  4.  Let  us 
remember  that  the  time  which  remains  to  us  is  short.  (A.  Alextnuler,  D.D.) 
Our  ditti/  to  God  uigcd  from  His  rifilit  in  us : — I.  An  important  mattek  of  fact  to 
BE  BELIEVED  AND  LAID  TO  HEAKT.  1.  "  Ye  are  not  your  owu,"  ttc.  As  to  the  reason 
of  this,  we  may  observe — (1)  We  did  not  create  ours^elves.  ('2)  We  do  not  preserve 
or  uphold  ourselves  in  life  or  being  (Acts  xvii.  28  ;  James  i.  17).  On  these  accounts, 
then,  we  are  not  our  own,  but  the  property  of  God.  2.  "Ye  are  bought  with  a 
price."  But  if  we  were  originally  God's  property,  what  need  was  tbere  to  buy  us? 
(1)  We  ha  1  become  ruined  debtois,  enslaved  captives,  and  guilty  criminals.  We 
had  sold  ourselves  into  slavery;  we  had  committed  sins,  and  thereby  exposed  our- 
selves to  condemnation  and  wrath.  (2)  The  pnrchasers  were,  Ihe  Father,  who  gave 
His  Sou  (.John  iii.  l(i ;  Bom.  viii.  32),  the  Son,  who  gave  Himself.  (2)  In  reference 
to  tlie  price  piid,  we  may  observe.  He  gave  His  riches  (1  Cor.  viii.  9),  His  honour, 
His  liberty,  His  life  (Phil.  ii.  6-8).  In  a  word.  He  "  purchased  the  Church  with  His 
own  blood"  (Acts  xx.  28).  All  mankind  are  here  concerned,  all  being  redeemed 
(1  Tiin.  ii.  6;  2  Cor.  v.  14,  1.5;  Heb.  ii.  9),  and  hence  are  not  their  own,  much 
less  the  world's ;  least  of  all,  the  devil's.  The  people  of  God  are  li.  re  e^pecially 
meant,  who,  in  a  peculiar  sense,  are  not  their  own,  but  the  temjjles  of  God  (vers. 
13-20;  chap.  iii.  17-23).  II.  Ax  exhortation  to  duty  groundkd  thereon.  The 
end  God  had  in  view  in  purchasing  us  was  that  we  might  glorify  Him  (1  Pet.  ii.  9). 
We  must  glorify  God — 1.  "In  our  body,"  by  temperance,  purity,  S'  If-denial  (ver.  13), 
and  bringing  it  into  His  house,  and  consecrating  it  to  Him  as  ills  temple  to  be  kept 
holy.  2.  "In  our  spirit."  (1)  By  humility:  consideiing  that  we  have  nothing 
which  we  have  not  received,  and  which  has  not  been  forfeited  by  sin.  (2)  By  grati- 
tude ;  He  hNS  given  us  all  back  asaiu  with  great  advantage.  (3)  By  love.  (4)  By 
resiMuation ;  if  we  be  His,  may  He  not  do  what  He  will  with  His  own?  (5)  By 
obedience  ;  implying  subjection  to  His  will,  and  devotedness  to  His  glory.  Conclu- 
sion :  Note — 1.  The  real  nature  and  great  evil  of  sin.  It  is  not  only  disobedience 
and  ingratitude,  but  robbery  of  the  worst  kind.  2.  The  ama/.ing  worth  of  the  soul 
of  man,  which,  after  it  was  enslaved,  was  ransomed  at  so  gr^  at  a  price.  3.  Tbe  great 
and  inexcusable  guilt  of  those  who,  after  all  this,  still  will  perish.  4.  The  great 
encouragement  we  have  to  give  ourselves  to  God,  and  employ  ourselves  for  Him. 
If  He  bought  us,  He  must  be  willing  to  accept,  preserve,  and  bhss  us.  {J.  Benson.) 
Full  surrender  to  God  : — A  friend  of  mine  was  having  an  earnest  conversation  upon 
the  necessity  of  full  consecration  with  a  lady  who  professe  1  to  know  Christ  as  her 
Saviour,  but  shrunk  from  yielding  herself  fully  to  Him.  At  last  she  said,  with  more 
outspoken  honesty  I  am  afraid  than  many  who  mean  exactly  the  same  thing  display, 
"  I  don't  want  to  give  myself  right  over  to  Christ ;  for  if  1  were  to  do  so,  who  knows 
what  He  might  do  with  me;  for  aught  I  know.  He  might  send  me  out  to  China." 
Y'ears  had  passed  away  when  my  friend  received  a  most  deeply  interesting  l^-tter  from 
this  very  lady,  telling  of  how  her  long  conflict  with  God  had  come  to  an  end,  and  what 
happiness  and  peace  she  now  felt  in  the  complete  surrender  of  herself  to  her  Lord  ; 
and  referring  to  hfV  former  conversation  she  said,  "  And  now  I  am  my  own  no 
longer.  I  have  made  myself  over  to  G^id  without  reserve,  and  He  is  sending  me  to 
China."  Do  you  think  that  this  lady  is  Itss  happy  obe>ing  the  Divine  call,  and 
working  the  Divine  will  out  yonder  in  China,  than  she  was  when  she  shrunk  from 
that  will,  and  preferred  to  live  a  life  of  worldlj*  ease  and  self-indulgence  at  home  ? 
(ir.  Hay  Aitlen.)  All  onr  faculties  should  (ilorify  God: — Christians  are  like  fire- 
engines  at  night.  They  carry  a  powerful  lamp  in  front,  which  casts  a  light  far 
ahead,  but  in  no  other  direction,  leaving  the  everlasting  snake-train  which  they 
drag  behind  them  euvelojied  in  darkness.     This  light  corresponds  to  the  Christian's 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


hope,  which  casts  its  rays  hpavenward,  but  leaves  the  long  train  of  bodily  appetites 
and  necessities  which  go  with  him  through  life  unilluminated.  Men  regard  their 
worldly  business  and  their  family  duties  as  distinct  from  their  religion.  They  carry 
the  light  of  hope  on  their  brow,  and  that  is  what  they  call  their  religion  ;  whereas, 
I  understand  religion  to  be  this  :  the  right  carriage  of  body  and  soul,  all  together. 
I  understand  that  no  man  is  living  a  Christian  life  who  is  not  a  Christian  in  the 
world,  in  the  family,  in  the  Church,  in  his  mind,  in  his  soul,  in  the  emotions  and 
appetites  of  his  nature,  in  his  hand,  in  his  foot,  in  his  head — who  is  not  a  Christian 
everywhere,  and  in  everything  in  him.  To  take  every  faculty  or  power  God  has 
given  you,  and  bring  it  under  Divine  influences,  and  make  it  act  right — that  is 
being  a  Christian  ;  and  all  partialisms,  by  just  so  much  as  th3y  are  partialisms,  are, 
therefore,  misunderstandings  or  misappropriations  of  Christian  truth.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Therefore  gloriiy  God  in  your  Too&y.—  Gloriftj  God  : — The  phrase  does 
not  mean  merely  not  to  dishonour  Hun  :  it  means  to  disjDlay  positively  in  the 
use  of  our  body  the  glory  and  especially  the  holiness  of  the  heavenly  Master 
who  has  taken  possession  of  our  person.  Man  has  lost,  in  whole  or  in  part, 
since  his  fall,  the  feeling  which  was,  so  to  speak,  the  guardian  of  his  body, 
tliat  of  natural  modesty.  Faith  restores  to  it  a  more  elevated  guardian — 
self-respect  as  being  brought  by  Christ  the  organ  of  the  Spirit  and  temple  of 
God.  This  is  modesty  henceforth  raised  to  the  height  of  holiness.  {Prof.  Godet.) 
How  God  is  (jlorified  in  the  body  : — Real  Christians  are  prepared  to  glorify  God,  for 
they  are  new  creatures  and  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  it  is  under  the 
inrtuence  of  that  Holy  Spirit  working  in  them  both  to  will  and  to  do  that  they  are 
to  glorify  God  their  Saviour.  I.  By  subjecting  the  body  to  His  law.  It  is 
essential  both  to  genuine  piety  and  the  Divine  glory,  that  what  we  do  should  be  not 
only  what  is  required  by  the  commandments  of  God,  but  also  that  it  be  done  from 
a  regard  to  His  authority.  A  consideration  which  robs  thousands  of  all  their  pre- 
tensions to  excellence !  Men  are  easily  sntisfied  with  themselves.  They  look  no 
further  than  their  conduct.  If  that  is  good,  they  concern  not  themselves  about  the 
Divine  will  and  glory.  And  as  the  design  of  glorifying  God,  and  a  regard  to  His 
will  and  authority  in  prosecuting  or  fulfilling  that  design,  are  necessary  if  we  would 
glorify  Him  indeed,  so  further  in  our  regard  to  His  will  we  must  beware  lest  we 
mistake  that  will.  The  things  by  which  God  is  glorified  a,re  the  things  which  He 
requires.  When,  however,  we  combine  the  thinys  which  have  been  mentioned, 
when  we  aim  at  His  glory,  when  we  regard  His  will,  and  when  we  indeed  do  it,  and 
all  this  from  the  conviction  that  we  are  not  our  own  but  His,  then,  in  the  most 
ordinary  acts,  we  glorify  Him  indeed,  we  do  that  by  which  He  esteems  Himself 
glorified,  we  please  Him.  Let  these  things  be  combined  then,  and  under  their 
joint  influence  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  to  God,  and  this  will  be  a  holy, 
acceptable,  and  reasonable  service.  And  remember  that  the  more  promptitude 
and  jjleasure  and  zeal  you  show  in  yielding  your  bodies  unto  God  the  more  you 
shall  honour  Him.  Let  not  your  backwardness  in  presenting  your  bodies  unto 
God  betray  any  want  of  love  and  gratitude  and  honour.  The  more  abundantly 
these  bodies  labour  the  greater  readiness  you  manifest  to  spend  and  be  spent,  to 
magnify  Christ  in  your  bodies,  whether  by  life  or  by  death,  the  greater  pleasure 
you  take  in  your  infirmities  for  Christ's  sake,  the  more  do  you  show  your  love  to 
the  Redeemer,  and  the  more  do  you  glorify  Him  in  your  bodies.  II.  By  yielding 
IT  TO  His  correction.  Christians  should  endeavour  to  glorify  God  as  well  by 
suffering  affliction  as  by  obedience.  And  they  should  aim  at  glorifying  Him,  not 
only  by  patience,  by  fortitude,  by  resignation,  by  acquiescence,  and  by  thankful- 
ness ;  but  as  all  affliction  is  sent  for  the  purposes  of  improvement,  by  humbling 
themselves  before  Him,  by  inquiring  wherefore  the  Lord  contendeth  with  them, 
by  putting  away  their  iniquities,  and  by  giving  their  hearts  and  devoting  their  lives 
unreservedly  to  His  will.  But  the  sufferings  by  which  Christ  is  most  glorified  in 
the  body  are  those  which  we  have  to  endure  for  His  name's  sake.  When  we  are 
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake,  and  glory  in  tribulation,  and  esteem  the 
reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  the  world,  when  all  afflic- 
tions, and  persecutions  for  Christ's  sake,  instead  of  depressing  our  spirits  give 
winss  to  our  souls  by  which  we  mount  up  higher  and  higher  in  heaven- 
liness  of  mind  and  of  character,  then,  truly,  we  glorify  God  in  our  bodies, 
and  may  adopt  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  As  unknown  and  yet  well 
known,  as  dyinp,  and  behold  we  live,"  &c.  The  last  act  by  which  Christ  is 
glorified  in  the  body  is  the  act  of  dying.  And  oh  !  who  can  behold  a  believer 
walking  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  without  seeing  that  God  is 


CHAP,  VI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  445 


glorified  ?     (il/.    Jackson.)  Glurifij    God    in   ynur   hodij  /—Easter   is    a    season 

which  emphatically  belongs  to  the  body.  I.  We  do  wkll,  therkforr,  to  give 
SOJIE  THOUUHTS  TO  THE  BODY — for,  do  we  not  treat  religion  as  consisting  almost 
entirely  of  thoughts  and  feelings?  and  so  we  exalt  the  soul  to  the  disparagement  of 
the  body.  And  yet  I  know  nothing  which  you  can  say  of  the  soul  which  you  cannot 
also  predicate  of  the  body.  Was  the  soul  formed  in  the  image  of  God?  So  was  the 
body.  No  distinction  is  made  in  the  narrative.  Is  the  soul  redeemed?  So  is  tlie 
body.  Did  Jesus  address  Himself  to  the  soul?  ]'id  He  not  equally  to  the  body? 
How  careful  He  was  after  His  resurrection  to  identify  Plis  body.  He  ascended  and 
will  come  again  in  His  body.  And  at  the  last  day  ihe  body  is  the  leading  feature 
of  Paul's  picture.  Such  honour  does  God  give  everywhere  to  the  body.  H.  How 
CAN  WE  "  GLORIFY  GoD  IN  OUR  BODIES  "  ?  1.  Generally.  We  should  treat  our  body  as 
something  given  us  to  enjoy  and  use  for  God.  A  part  of  our  likeness  to  Christ;  a 
part  of  our  present  being  given  us  here  to  train  for  tiie  services  which  it  is  to  render 
in  heaven.  Such  being,  then,  the  body,  we  should  pray  about  our  bodies  as  much 
as  about  our  souls.  We  should  consecrate  it  in  the  morning  to  (iod,  and  deal  with  it 
all  day  long  as  a  very  sacred  thing.  You  remember  what  St.  Paul  said  about  his  body 
— "  1  keep  under  my  body,"  &c.  2.  In  detail.  (1)  In  the  Old  Testament  very  great 
stress  indeed  was  laid  on  the  keeping  of  tlie  body  very  clean  ;  and  even  in  the  New 
Testament  we  have  it  united  almost  as  one  with  faitli  and  conscience  and  truth 
(Heb.  X.  22).  And  more  than  many  people  think  a  clean  body  is  a  help  to  purity  of 
heart.  We  are  bound  to  take  care  of  the  health  of  the  body,  for  it  is  God's  body  ; 
and  we  all  know  how  greatly  even  a  little  disease  of  the  body  can  disturb  even  our 
peace  and  joy,  and  faith,  as  illness  stops  work,  and  gives  sorrow  H)id  expense  to 
others.  Therefore  we  should  try  to  "  glorify  God  "  by  the  health  of  our  body.  (2) 
There  is  not  a  part  of  our  frame  which  may  not  be  the  embodiment  of  spiritual 
things  or  tlie  means  for  religious  service.  When  I  comb  my  hair  the  very  hairs 
remind  me  that  they  are  all  numbered.  And  the  eyes,  are  they  not  inlets  where- 
with I  may  first  take  into  my  very  heart  all  the  beautiful  works  of  God  in  nature, 
and  providence,  and  grace?  And  then  by  bright  and  loving  looks  spread  peace  and 
happiness.  How  much  of  Satan,  liow  much  of  Christ  tliere  mav  be  in  the  look  of 
the  eye.  And  the  mouth  !  What  action  the  mouth  has  for  sin  and  self-indulgence, 
or  self-denial  and  careful  moderation  for  Christ's  sake.  And  more  than  you  are 
aware  the  mouth  is  tire  index  of  t(  mper  or  of  sweetness.  Take  care  of  your  mouth. 
"  Glorify  God  "  with  it.  And  the  tongue  !  What  a  curse  or  a  blessing  it  may  be ! 
And  your  ear !  Learn  wlien  to  shut  it  and  when  to  open  it.  And  your  nerves. 
They  are  very  good  servants,  but  very  bad  masters.  Take  caie  of  them.  Pray 
constantly  for  more  calmness.  And  all  the  senses — consecrate  them.  They  are 
the  Lord's.  And  all  your  members !  Those  hands,  let  them  be  busy,  useful 
hands.  And  those  knees.  Let  them  fulfil  the  great  design  for  which  God  gave 
you  knees.  And  "  the  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace." 
And  your  whole  body!  Keep  every  part  of  it  for  God.  [J.  Vaughcui,  M.A.) 
Glorifyinp  God: — The  motive  to  the  duty  set  before  us  in  this  passage  is  the  most 
solemn  in  the  whole  sum  of  human  thought.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  says 
the  apostle;  "therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are 
God's."  But  how  are  we  to  fulfil  this  duty  ?  1.  To  glorify  God  is  to  think  of  God. 
It  is  evident  that  all  human  actions  commence  in  the  mind  of  men.  The  mind, 
under  some  impulse  or  motive,  moves  and  then  the  man  moves.  For  every  act  is, 
at  first,  a  thought.  From  thence  come  the  various  actions  of  men  pertaining  to 
their  fello«s,  and  the  other  actions  also  which  refer  to  God.  AVe  often  say  that 
some  men  do  not  think,  but  it  is  evident  that  if  they  did  not  think  they  would  not 
act.  But  everybody  does  think.  Men  think  about  life  and  society,  about  dress  and 
manners,  about  liti-rature  and  science,  about  history  and  politics.  But  the  great 
fault  of  man  is  that  the  range  of  his  thought  is  temporal  and  carnal.  He  has  but 
the  fewest  flights  toward  the  heavens.  And  this  is  a  great  sin.  Nothing  can  be 
more  evident  than  the  guilt  of  shuttinc;  out  from  the  mind  the  grandest  Being  and 
the  noblest  idea  which  can  reach  the  intellect — thought  of  the  Infinite  and  Eternal 
One.  Its  sinfulness  shows  itself  by  a  lower  but  similar  transgression.  What  Vi'ould 
you  think  of  a  child  who  lived  day  by  day  under  the  blessedness  and  the  loving 
care  of  a  devoted  parent,  and  yet  from  design  and  purpose  passed  by  that  parent, 
day  by  day,  year  by  year,  and  determinedly  shut  him  out  from  all  thought  and 
consideration  ?  First  observe  that  a  l^irge  portion  of  our  fellow-creatures  drop  God 
from  their  thought,  passively,  through  neglect,  without  intention,  with  no  set  and 
formal  purpose  to  dishonour  Him,  but  carelessly  and  indifferently.     But  another 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

class  of  men  set  God  aside  purposely  and  deliberat  ly.  They  will  not  have  the  idea 
of  God  present  in  their  minds.  They  will  not  let  the  things  of  God  circle  their 
brains,  stimulate  their  lives,  or  influence  their  conduct.  Eut  to  think  carelessly  of 
God  is  neglect;  to  think  reluctantly  of  Him  is  vicious;  to  think  angrily  nnd  repul- 
sively of  Him  is  monstrous,  and  amounts  to  abomination  and  ruin.  To  glorify  God, 
then,  implies  as  the  very  first  tiling  that  we  tliink  of  Him.  We  are  to  begin  by 
opening  the  mind,  and  craving  the  entrance  therein  of  the  thoufjlits  of  the  Eternal. 
To  think  uf  God  aright  is  to  take  Him,  fi.rmally  and  solemnly,  and  put  Him  before 
the  mind,  and  tlieu  to  contemplate  Him  before  and  behind,  in  tiie  depths  and  in 
the  heigiits,  in  His  attributes,  in  His  decrees,  in  His  covenants,  in  the  great  salva- 
tion of  His  Son,  with  reverence,  with  awe,  with  humility.  This  it  is  to  think  of 
Go  1.  This  is  the  root  idea  of  glorifying  God.  But  this  is  not  enough — it  is  only 
the  beginning.  2.  To  glorify  God  i-i  to  take  the  convictions  which  come  from  right 
thinking  and  to  turn  them  into  aspirations.  This  is  the  next  step  toward  honour- 
ing the  Maker.  We  must  not  sutler  thon^'ht  to  become  beilridden  in  the  soul.  Few 
things  aie  more  injurious  to  the  mind  than  that  passive  contemplation  which  fails 
to  run  out  into  active  desires  or  stimulated  hope.  It  will  do  no  goo<l  for  us  to  think 
about  God  if  such  thought  is  not  used  as  a  means  to  an  end,  but  it  will  do  us  harm. 
It  will  make  us  insensible.  It  will  make  us  irreverent.  The  insensibility  will 
be  the  direct  result  of  liandling  an  awful  and  majestic  idea  without  a  spiritual 
purposH.  The  irieverence  will  come  from  taking  libeities  with  the  Divine  name, 
perchance,  for  mere  speculation.  Thought  concerning  God,  then,  is  legitimate  when 
it  tends  to  the  elevation  of  the  soul  to  a  higher  plane  of  being.  To  think,  merely 
to  think,  would  be  somewhat  as  for  a  river  to  flow  from  its  source,  and  then  to  flow 
b:ick  again  to  its  original  sprin^r.  It  may  be  assumed  as  a  principle  of  our  being 
that  nil  our  acts,  internal  or  external,  are  only  then  healthy  and  genuine  when  they 
reach  forward  to  something  beyond  and  nobler  than  themselves.  We  see  this  in 
natuie.  The  illumination  of  the  sun  is  not  self-exliausted.  It  comes  down  to 
earth  with  vivifying  fructification,  diffusing  life,  and  health,  and  joyous  animation 
in  all  things  and  in  all  creatures.  And  that  is  its  beneficence  and  its  glory.  The 
analo'jy  is  m<ist  exact  with  regard  to  the  soul.  Thinkinjr  about  God  is  not  the  end 
of  G(  dthinUing.  Thinl<ing  of  God  is  the  most  glorious  of  all  means  to  h  nobler  end, 
that  i^,  the  glory  of  God.  When  it  is  mere  ihmking — albeit  God  is  the  object  of 
thought — it  is,  nevertheless,  mere  speculation  on  God.  And  mere  spt-culation,  as 
such,  concerning  God  has  no  more  value  thati  speculation  concerning  a  tnouutain 
or  a  mine.  Never,  peihaps,  in  the  history  of  God's  Church  was  thnre  a  man  who 
thought  so  much,  so  d  eply,  so  continuHlly  of  God  as  David  did.  It  was  the  occu- 
pation of  his  life.  What  was  the  result  of  this  habit?  What  fruit  sprun.' from 
this  constant  meditation  concerning  God?  One  siunle  paragraph  from  the  writings 
of  David  «ill  show  yon.  ''  Like  as  the  hart  desireth  the  water  brooks,  so  lon^eth 
my  soul  after  Thee,  0  God.  Mv  soul  is  athirst  for  Go  I,  yea,  even  for  the  living 
God."  And  here  I  return  directly  to  the  i)oint  from  which  I  have  slightly  departed. 
Take  the  convictions  which  come  from  ri^-hc  thinking,  and  turn  them,  as  David  did, 
into  heavenls  aspirations.  Meilitate  constantly  on  the  character  of  God.  Bring 
His  loving  and  majestic  attr.butes  vividly  before  you.  You  see,  for  instam-e,  that 
God  is  good.  Take,  then,  the  fact,  that  is  the  goodness  of  God,  out  of  the  domain 
of  thought,  and  make  it  an  aspiration  of  your  soul.  Strive  after  goodness — God's 
goodness,  as  a  personal  pos  ession,  and  run  along  the  lines  of  excellence  and  moral 
beauty  for  the  fashioning  of  your  inner  and  your  outer  life.  Take  the  purit  of  God 
as  an  object  of  admiration.  Bring  it  down  from  the  sphere  of  speculation,  and 
then  send  it  up  to  the  throne  of  God — a  living  fiame  of  desire  for  your  own  p-^rsonal 
puiity  in  body,  mind,  and  spirit.  Think  of  the  righteousness  of  G'd  !  Hear  it  in 
the  stern  accents  of  Mount  Sinai,  in  the  thun  ^ers  of  the  Law  !  Hear  it  in  the  expi- 
atory plaints  of  sacrificed  animals  ;  see  it  in  their  tlowinj?  blood  !  Take  the  love  of 
God.  You  can  if  you  choose  look  at  it  as  a  distant  object  of  thought  and  contem- 
plation. But  I  exhort  you  to  cov'  t  the  spirit  of  love  as  your  own  personal  posses- 
sion. Indeed  there  is  not  a  phase  of  the  Divine  existence,  not  an  attribute  of  God, 
not  a  decree,  not  a  commandment,  however  abstract  it  may  be,  but  that,  with  the 
aid  of  the  Spirit,  may  be  fused  with  heat  and  tire  from  above,  and  become  changed 
in  our  pure  souls  into  burning  desires  and  heavenly  aspirMtions.  3.  To  g  orily  (iod 
is  to  realise  the  asi)irations  of  the  soul  into  the  activities  of  life.  This  is  practical 
religion  ;  it  answers  the  requirements  of  our  blessed  Lord  that  we  do  His  command- 
ments. And  there  can  be  no  true  religion  without  this  habit  of  outward  obedience. 
Mere  conviction  of  the  brain,  or  mere  spiritual  aspiration,  separate  from  conduct, 


CHAP.  VI.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  447 


are  each,  or  both  together,  insufficient.  We  must  do  God's  holy  will.  Just  this 
test  is  laid  down  bj  our  blessed  Saviour — "  If  ye  love  Me  keep  My  commandments." 
To  talk  of  how  we  feel,  or  what  we  think  concerning  Christ,  is  an  idle  tale.  No, 
what  our  Lord  desires  is  something  which  has  passed  out  and  beyond  mere  human 
conceit  into  actual  living  reality.  Did  you  ever  think  of  that  word  reality?  of  its 
full  meaning,  of  its  mi^'hty  import,  of  its  wide  scope  and  bearing?  Eeality  !  that 
is  religion  made  personal  in  the  Christian  life,  act,  word,  conduct,  and  bearing  of 
living  disciples.  I  beg  to  commend  the  apostle's  injunction  to  your  earnest 
consideration.  The  master  end  of  existence,  whether  in  angel  or  in  man, 
is  the  glory  of  God.  Anything  below  this  end  is  a  ruinous  and  insulting 
prostitution    of    powers.       (A.    CntmiiwII.)  Glurifijiiiri    God    ivith    the    body 

(children's  sermon) : — "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God  and  to  enjoy  Him 
for  ever."  Look  at  my  watch.  It  may  be  used  for  many  ends — as  a  mere 
ornament,  &c. ;  but  its  "  chief  end  "  is  to  tell  what  o'clock  it  is.  What  have  you 
got  your  body  for?  God  says,  "  Use  it  for  Me."  If  you  were  to  get  a  pound  from 
your  father  or  master,  you  would  nat'irally  ask,  "  What  am  I  to  do  with  it  ?  "  and 
you  would  know  what  was  meant  if  he  said,  "  Use  it  for  me  in  such  a  way  as  to 
please  me."  I.  Why  am  I  to  glouiky  G..d  in  my  body?  1.  Because  He  made  it, 
and  made  it  for  Himself.  When  you  have  made  a  ttiing  for  yourself,  you  feel  that 
you  have  the  best  right  to  it.  If  it  viere  taken  away  from  you,  or  turned  against 
you,  would  you  not  think  it  very  hard  ?  During  tlie  French  Itevolution  the  guillo-\ 
tine  was  invented,  and  the  first  man  who  suffered  by  it  was  tbe  man  who  invented  j 
it.  Perhaps  some  one  will  say,  "It  was  just  what  he  deserved."  But  suppose  it/ 
had  been  some  contrivance  for  saving  life.  If  that  were  turned  agaiust  the  man 
who  designed  it,  or  ili-eovered  it,  would  not  every  right-minded  person  cry  "  shame  "? 
And  who  made  that  body  of  yours?  The  cleverest  man  in  the  world  could  not  make 
it.  None  could  make  it  but  God.  God  made  that  hand  of  yours  for  His  own  use. 
Is  it  not  a  sin  and  a  shame  to  turn  it  against  Hiru  ?  Take  any  book  you  are  reading, 
and  you  will  se*-  on  it  the  names  of  five  people  who  were  concerned  in  the  making 
of  it.  On  the  title-page  is  the  name  of  the  man  who  wrote  it ;  at  the  foot  of  the 
page,  the  name  of  the  ujan  who  published  it ;  on  the  other  side  of  the  page,  or  at 
the  end  of  the  book,  the  name  of  tiie  man  who  printed  it ;  on  a  little  label  inside 
the  board  at  the  end,  the  name  of  the  man  who  bound  it  ;  and  on  another,  inside 
the  board  at  the  beghining,  the  man  of  the  man  vOio  sold  it.  All  these  get  credit 
for  what  they  have  done.  Every  sheet  of  paper  I  write  on  has  the  "  water-mark," 
as  it  is  called,  with  the  name  of  the  man  who  made  it.  The  very  but'ons  on  my 
clothes  bear  tiie  name  of  their  maker.  And  we  all  feel  it  quite  right  that  it  should 
be  so.  But  it  does  not  always  need  the  name.  Some  people  can  take  up  a  piece  of 
clotb,  and  say,  "  this  is  so  and  so's  make,"  or  a  picture,  and  say,  "  that  is  such  and 
such  a  painter's  jjiece,"  or  a  l)ook,  and  say,  "  this  is  written  by  .-uch  a  man,  I  know 
by  its  style."  And  do  we  need  any  kind  of  mark  or  stamp  on  our  body  to  tell  us  who 
made  it?  No.  See  that  wonderful  tubular  bridge  which  stretches  from  Wales  to 
Anglesea,  and  you  will  hear  of  its  nuiker — Stephenson,  the  great  engineer:  it 
glorifies  him.  See  St  Paul's  Cathedral,  and  people  will  tell  you  of  its  great  archi- 
tect. Sir  Christopher  Wren  :  it  glorifies  him.  Go  to  the  National  Gallery,  and  the 
artist's  work,  in  each  case,  may  be  said  to  "  glorify  "  him.  And  shall  I  not  seek 
to  glorify  God  with  my  body?  (Exod.  iv.  11  ;  Psa.  xciv.  9  ;  Prov.  xx.  12).  2.  Be- 
cause He  sustains  it.  Sujipose  your  father  were  to  take  some  poor  sick  beggar-boy 
off  the  street  into  his  hovise — to  nurse  him,  and  to  feed  him,  and  to  do  everything 
to  make  him  well  and  strong.  What  would  you  think  if  that  boy  were  t  >  forget 
your  father  ?  Take  a  stranger  dog  into  your  house,  and  feed  it,  an  i  be  kind  to  it, 
and  before  a  fortnight  is  over,  it  will  follow  you  everywhere.  What  would  you 
think  if  your  dog  left  you  every  morning  whenever  he  got  his  breakfast,  and  ran 
after  every  strange  boy  on  the  street,  and  would  not  follow  you,  and  only  come  in 
to  his  meals  ?  Now  God  does  all  for  your  body  that  you  do  for  your  dog.  And 
again  I  ask,  may  it  not  well  be  used  for  Him  in  such  a  way  as  He  wi-hes?  3. 
Because  He  has  redeemed  it.  Our  body,  like  everything  else  about  us,  was 
forfeited;  just  like  a  thing  that  has  been  put  in  pawn.  Is  is  no  longer  ours. 
It  has  meanwhile  become  the  property  of  another.  And  it  must  be  redeemed. 
And  Jesus  bought  back  our  boi*y,  paid  the  price  of  His  own  blood  for  it,  and 
so  made  it  His  own.  Let  me  again  ask  how  you  judge  of  things  that  you  have 
bought,  your  knife,  &c.,  which  you  have  saved  your  pocket-money  to  buy.  You  say 
of  any  of  these,  as  you  said  of  the  money  that  bought  it,  "  it  is  my  very  own.  I 
may  lend  these  things  or  give  the  use  of  them  to  others,  but  none  has  a  right  to 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


/them  like  me."  In  the  days  of  slavery,  when  one  had  bought  a  slave,  he  regarded 
that  man's  body,  and  all  that  the  body  could  do,  as  his.  You  remember  the  story 
of  the  ransomed  s'ave  whom  a  British  merchant  purchased  at  a  great  prion  and  then 
set  fr^-e — how  the  liberated  slave  clung  to  his  purchaser,  and  followed  liim  wherever 
he  went,  and  served  him  as  no  other  did  or  could,  telling,  wht^never  lie  was  asked 
the  reason,  "  He  redeemed  me  !  He  redeemed  me  !  "  Gratitude  and  love  bound 
him,  and  made  him,  what  I  might  call,  in  opposition  to  a  bondman — a  fiee  slave. 
Now  that  is  what  Jesus  has  done;  He  has  bought  us,  not  with  His  money,  but  with 
His  life.  He  has  bought  us  and  set  us  free.  And  we  are  His  free  slaves.  11.  How 
AM  I  TO  GLORIFY  GoD  IN  MY  BODY  ?  I  claim — 1.  Your  hands  for  God.  Y'ou  have 
no  right  to  use  them  in  the  service  of  Satan,  the  world,  or  sin.  Idle  hands  do  not 
glorify  God,  nor  mischievous  hands,  nor  dirty  hands,  nor  dishonest  hands,  nor 
unkind  hands,  nor  careless  hands.  2.  lour  feet.  They  should  go  only  on  His 
errands.  When  I  see  tlie  little  feet  kicking  or  stamping  in  passion,  or  venturing 
into  forbidden  and  dangerous  paths,  or  loitering  when  they  should  make  haste,  I 
cannot  help  thinking :  "  These  feet  are  not  for  God."  "  How  beautiful  are  the  feet, 
when  they  are  for  God!"  3.  Y'our  lips.  What  shall  I  say  of  profane  words, 
untruthful  words,  coarse  and  vulgar  words,  angry  and  irritating  words,  unholy  and 
impure  words,  light  and  jesting  words,  slandering  and  gossiping  words?  When  we 
are  going  to  speak  of  any  one,  it  has  been  said  there  are  three  questions  which  it  is 
well  to  ask — "  Is  it  true  ?  Is  it  useful  ?  Is  it  kind?  "  4.  And  so  with  the  whole 
body.  The  ears  should  be  for  God,  listening  to  nothing  of  which  He  would  dis- 
approve ;  and  the  eyes,  turning  away  from  all  that  He  would  not  look  upon.  All 
should  be  for  God.  "Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,"  &q.  And  how  is  all  this  to  be? 
The  root  of  all  lies  in  having  the  heart  for  God.  (J.  H.  Jl'dson.)  Our  bodies 
should  glorifii  God  : — The  employment  of  the  parable  may  be  traced,  says  Dr. 
Wright,  to  Hillel,  the  great  rabbi,  who  died  a  few  years  before  the  Christian  era. 
In  the  jNIidrash  on  Lev.  xxv.  99,  it  is  related  that  his  scholars  asked  Hillel  one  day 
where  he  was  going.  "To  perform  a  commandment,"  answered  the  rabbi.  "  What 
special  commandment  ?  "  asked  the  disciples.  "  To  bathe  myself  in  the  bath- 
house," said  Hillel.  "  Is  that  one  of  the  commandments  ?  "  imjuired  thej'. 
"  Certainly,"  rejoined  Hillel ;  "  if  the  statues  of  kings  placed  in  the  theatres 
and  circuses  have  to  be  kept  clean  and  washed,  how  much  more  ought  I  not 
to  keep  my  body  clean,  since  I  have  been  created  in  the  image  of  God?  "  And 
in  your  spirit. — How  God  is  glorified  in  the  spirit: — I.  When  jhe  undekstand- 
ING  COMPREHENDS  His  CHARACTER.  Total  ignorance  of  His  character,  by  implying 
contempt ;  partial  ignorance  of  it,  by  implying  neglect ;  and  correct,  but  unoperative 
views  of  it,  by  imj)lying  enmity  ;  all  dishonour  God.  It  is  only  when  the  views  are 
both  sound  and  practical,  when  the  understanding  is  enlightened  by  the  eternal  Spirit, 
that  we  are  able  so  to  comprehend  the  things  that  belong  to  our  peace,  as  to  glorify 
God  in  our  spirits.  IL  When  the  conscience  acknowledges  His  authority.  What- 
ever we  may  know  of  God,  we  dishonour  Him,  unless  conscience  V)e  influenced  by 
what  we  know ;  for  all  knowledge  which  God  imparts  has  a  direct  reference  to  con- 
science, and  addresses  it  in  the  most  energetic  terms.  But  when  conscience  moves 
and  actuates  you  in  all  things,  and  is  itself  moved  and  actuated  by  God ;  re-echoes 
the  voice  of  God  addressing  the  soul  on  all  that  is  great  and  tender,  interesting  and 
alarming,  abasing  and  exalting,  and  hears  and  feels  every  word  as  the  word  of 
supreme  authority,  with  reverence  and  submission — then  the  spirit  glorifies  God  ! 
III.  When  the  affections  embrace  His  Word.  What  spiritual  eye  can  see  men 
poor  in  spirit,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdoiH,  meek  and  inheriting  the  earth,  hungering 
and  thirsting  after  righteousness,  and  filled  with  the  Spirit ;  merciful,  and  monu- 
ments of  mercy  ;  pure  in  heart,  and  hoping  to  see  God  ;  persecuted  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,  and  anticipating  glory  and  honour;  reviled  and  persecuted,  and  all 
manner  of  evil  spoken  against  them  falsely  for  Christ's  sake ;  and  exceeding  glad  of 
this — who  can  behold  them  as  the  salt  of  the  earth,  as  the  li^ht  of  the  world,  and 
remember  it  is  the  Word  of  God  which  is  the  instrument  of  all  this  excellence, 
without  knowing  and  feeling  that  the  giver  of  every  good  and  of  every  perfect  gift 
is  glorified  in  their  spirits  ?  IV.  When  the  will  submits  to  His  law.  This  is 
the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  His  commandments.  Who  can  imagine  that  God  is 
to  be  glorified  in  the  spirit  while  the  will  opposes  Him  ?  But  let  us  not  forget  that 
every  human  will  is  opposed  to  God  till  renewed  by  grace,  and  that  after  it  has  been 
renewed  it  is  still  rebellious.  The  most  advanced  Christian  has  to  complain,  "  When 
I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me."  God  only  can  hold  us  up.  And  when 
He  is  pleased  in  tender  mercy  to  work  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  ;  to  enable  us  to 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  449 


choose  His  comraandmeuts  as  the  rule  of  our  hfe,  and  to  give  us  grace  to  obey 
them  ;  we  are  then  the  workmanship  of  God,  created  in  Clirist  Jesus  unto  good 
■worlis  :  and  all  the  honouring  of  God,  which  is  implied  in  the  relintiuishment  of  our 
own  will,  and  in  the  adoption  of  His,  we  cordially  offer  to  Him  ;  and  others,  seeing 
our  good  works,  glorify  our  Father  wlio  is  in  iieaven.     {M.  Juck^un.) 


CHAPTEE  VII. 

Vers.  1-17.  Now  concerning  tlie  things  wbereof  ye  wrote  to  me  :  It  is  good  for 
a  man  not  to  toucli  a  woman. — Murriafje — I.  Is  not  necessaey  roit  Ahh  (vev.  1). 
1.  Instituted  by  God,  sanctitied  by  Christ,  it  is  pure  and  holy.  2.  Yet  circumstances, 
such  as  times  of  calamity,  personal  duty,  etc.,  may  render  it  undesirable  II.  Is 
ADVISABLE  FOK  jiAXY  (vers.  2-5).  Jiecause — 1.  Of  the  force  of  natural  ]iassion.  2. 
It  is  a  shelter  fiom  temptation.  III.  It  is  nevektheless  a  matteh  of  choice  (vers. 
(j-9).  1.  Paul  only  counsels,  does  not  command.  2.  The  choice  must  be  determined 
by  the  f-ift  of  God,  which  may  render  celibacy  preferable,  but  every  one  must  care- 
fully estimate  liis  case.  (J.  Lyth,  ]>.!).)  Marrio'ie  : — There  are  two  preliminary 
consideiations  which  ilirow  some  light  on  this  passage.  1.  Paul  had  to  speak  about 
marriage  as  he  found  it.  Hence  he  makes  no  allusion  to  thiit  which  with  us  is  the 
main  argument  and  nn'ti-e,  viz.,  love.  In  the  marriages  of  Jews  and  Greeks,  love 
had,  as  a  rule,  little  to  do.  The  mariiage  was  arranged  by  the  parents.  2.  He  was 
here  only  j-'iving  answers  to  some  special  questions,  and  not  discussing  the  whole 
•suliject  (ver.  1).  Certain  scruples  about  marriage  had  arisen.  Among  the  Jews 
juarriage  was  a  duty,  "  so  much  so  that  he  who  at  the  age  of  twenty  had  not 
married  was  considered  to  have  sinned."  Among  the  Gentiles  the  tendency  to 
celibacy  was  so  strong  that  it  was  considered  necessary  to  counteract  it  by  legal 
enactment.  The  questions  referred  to  Paul  resolve  themselves  into  two.  So  we 
have — I.  Paul's  counsel  to  the  unjiakhied.  This  is  summed  up  in  vcr.  8,  "  It  is 
good  f(U-  them  if  tliev  abide  even  as  I  "  ;  i.e.,  unmarried.  But  if  any  man's  tempera- 
ment be  such  that  he  cannot  settle  to  his  work  without  marrying  ;  and  if  he  is  so 
full  of  natural  cravings  whicli  make  him  feel  sure  he  would  be  less  distracted  in 
married  life — then,  says  Paul,  let  such  an  one  by  all  means  marry.  But  he  adds, 
I  do  not  say  you  ought  to  marry  ;  I  say  you  maij,  and  in  certain  circumstances 
oH'ihr.  Those  amonj,'  you  who  say  a  man  sins  if  he  do  not  marry,  talk  nonsense. 
Those  among  \ou  who  feel  a  quiet  snpeiiority  because  you  are  married  are  much 
mistaken.  I'ersonally,  I  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  myself,  only  I  know 
that  to  many  men  it  is  not  so  easy  as  it  is  to  me  to  live  unmarried  ;  and  therefore 
I  do  not  advise  them  to  a  single  life.  1.  This  proceeds,  not  from  any  ascetic 
tendency,  but  from  the  practical  bias  of  Paul's  mind.  He  merely  thought  that 
unmarried  men  were  likely  to  be  most  available  for  the  work  of  Ciirist  (vers.  32,33). 
No  doubt  a  good  wife  may  stimulate  a  man  to  liberality,  and  may  greatly  increase 
his  tenderness  towards  deserving  objects  ;  but  he  who  has  seven  mouths  to  till 
cannot  have  so  much  to  give  away  as  if  he  had  but  one.  With  the  unmarried  man 
tliere  need  be  no  other  considerati^m  than  this:  How  can  I  beit  serve  Clirist  ? 
With  the  married  man  there  must  always  be  other  considerations.  It  is  therefore 
to  the  unmarried  that  the  State  looks  for  the  manning  of  the  army  and  navy,  that 
society  looks  for  tlie  nursing  of  the  sick  and  for  the  filling  of  posts  of  danger,  that 
tlie  Church  depends  for  a  large  part  of  her  wdk,  from  teaching;  in  Sunday  schools 
to  occupying  precarious  outposts  in  the  mission  field.  2.  But  Paul  says  also, 
Beware  how  you  individually  think  yourself  a  hero,  and  able  to  foie<;o  marriage. 
Beware  lest,  by  choosing  a  part  which  you  aie  not  tit  for,  you  give  Satan  an  advan- 
tage over  you  (ver.  35,  cf.  ver.  7).  ^^'hatis  good  for  one  man  is  not  good  for  anotlier  ; 
every  man  mu<t  ascertain  for  himself  what  is  best  for  liim.  And  this  is  precisely 
what  is  lacking  in  popular  feeling  about  marriage.  Peo^jle  start,  and  are  encour- 
aged to  start  in  life,  on  the  understanding  that  their  happiness  cannot  be  complete 
till  they  are  married.  Now,  on  the  contrary,  they  should  be  taught  to  consider 
their  own  mnke  and  bent,  and  not  to  tike  this  for  granted.  Marriafje  is  but  one 
path  to  happiness,  and  it  is  possible  celibacy  may  be  the  straightest  path  for  some. 
Above  all  life  is  very  wide  and  multifarious,  and  to  effect  His  emls  God  needs  per- 
sons of  all  kinds  and  conditions.  3.  This  not  only  illustrates  the  judicial  balance 
VOL.    I.  29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

of  tbe  apostle's  mind,  but  gives  us  the  key  to  the  whole  chapter.  The  capaoity  for 
celibacy  is  a  gift  of  God  which  may  be  of  eminent  service,  but  no  moral  value  can 
be  attached  to  it.  There  are  many  gifis  of  immense  value  which  may  belong  to 
bad  as  well  as  to  good  men.  In  the  Eomau  Chinch  celibacy  is  regarded  as  a  virtue 
in  itself,  so  that  men  with  no  natui'al  gift  for  it  have  been  encouraged  to  aim  at  it, 
with  what  results  we  need  not  saj'.  But  while  there  is  no  virtue  in  remaining 
unmarried,  there  is  virtue  in  remaining  unmarried  for  the  sake  of  serving  Christ 
better.  Some  persons  are  kept  single  by  mere  selfishness  ;  but  all  honour  to  that 
eldest  son  of  an  orphaned  family  who  sees  tbat  it  is  not  for  him  to  please  himself, 
but  to  work  for  those  who  have  none  to  look  to  but  bim  !  There  are  here  and 
there  persons  who  from  the  highest  motives  decline  marriage  :  persons  conscious  of 
some  hereditaiy  weakness,  &c.  We  may  be  thankful  that  there  are  men  and  women 
of  sufficiently  beroic  mould  to  exemplify  the  wisdom  of  the  apostle's  counsel.  Such 
devotion  is  not  for  every  one.  Tliere  ai'e  persons  of  a  domestic  temperament  who 
need  the  comforts  of  home-life,  and  nothing  can  be  more  ill-advised  than  to 
encourage  such  persons  to  turn  their  life  into  a  channel  in  which  it  was  never 
intended  to  run.  But  it  is  equally  to  be  lamented  that,  where  there  aie  women 
quite  capable  of  a  life  of  self-devotion  to  some  noble  work,  they  should  be  dis- 
couraged from  such  a  life  bj'  the  false,  foolish,  and  petty  notions  of  society.  No 
calling  is  nobler  than  marriage  ;  but  it  is  not  the  only  calling.  II.  St.  Paul's 
COUNSEL  TO  THE  M.\KKiED.  1.  Some  of  the  Corintliians  seem  to  have  thought  thut, 
because  they  were  new  creatures  in  Christ,  their  old  relations  should  be  abandoned- 
Paul  had  shi'ewdness  enough  to  see  tbat  if  a  Christian  might  separate  from  an 
unbelieving  wife  on  the  sole  grnuud  that  he  was  a  Christian,  this  easy  mode  of 
divorce  might  lead  to  a  large  influx  of  pretendf-d  Christi.ms  into  the  Church.  He 
therefore  la.\  s  down  the  law  that  the  power  of  separation  is  to  rest  with  the  unbe- 
lieving, and  not  with  the  believing,  partner  (vers.  12-15).  It  frequently  happened 
in  the  early  ages  that  when  a  man  was  converted  iu  middle  life,  and  judged  he 
could  serve  God  better  without  the  encumbrance  of  a  family,  he  forsook  his  wife 
and  children  and  betouk  himself  to  a  monastery.  This  directly  contravened  the 
law  here  laid  down  (ver.  20),  which  is  of  wide  apjilic  ition  (vers.  21,  &c.).  2.  But 
the  principle  to  which  Paul  chiedy  trusts  he  enounces  in  vers.  29-31.  Whatever 
is  temporary  in  our  relation  to  the  present  world  it  is  foolish  so  to  set  our  heart  on, 
for  death  may  end  all  our  joy  and  usefulness.  The  man  who  is  sent  abroad  for 
five  years  would  consider  it  folly  to  accumulate  a  large  collection  of  the  luxuries 
of  life  ;  how  many  times  five  years  do  we  expect  to  live,  that  we  should  be  much 
concerned  to  amass  goods  which  we  cannot  remove  to  another  world  ?  This  world 
is  a  means,  and  not  an  end  ;  and  those  use  it  best  who  use  it  in  relation  to  what  is 
to  be.  It  is  the  thought  of  our  great  future  which  alone  gives  us  sullicient  courage 
and  wisdom  to  deal  with  present  things  in  earnest.  The  very  intensity  of  our 
interests  and  affections  reminds  us  that  we  cannot  root  ourselves  iu  this  present 
life,  but  need  a  larger  room.  (M.  Dods,  D.D.)  PauVs  conception  of  marriaqe  : — 
That  it — I.  Is  NOT  a  duty  binding  upon  mankind — not  a  moral  obligation  like 
"  Thou  shalt  love  tbe  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  (vers.  1,  7,  8,  40).  Some  may  feel  that 
celibacy  is  best  for  them,  then  let  them  remain  single  ;  others  that  marriage  is  most 
desirable,  then  let  them  marry.  Now  does  it  seem  strange  that  a  condition  upon 
which  the  continuation  of  tbe  race  depends  should  be  thus  left  open  ?  For  were 
celibacy  to  rule,  in  about  sixty  years  mankind  Mould  be  extinct.  But  it  may  be 
replied  that  marriage  is  a  law  of  natuie  and  does  not  require  a  command  any  more 
than  eating  or  drinking.  II.  Is  primarily  for  spii!itual  ends  (ver.  14).  Those 
who  enter  on  this  relation  from  fleshly  impulses  and  with  fleshly  ends  misunder- 
stand the  ordinance.  True  marriage  means  such  a  mutual  spiritual  affection  as 
welds  two  souls  into  one  moral  j)ersonality.  III.  Involves  mutual  obligations  the 
MOST  SACRED.  Mutual — 1.  Benevolence  (ver.  3),  each  wishing  the  woU-being  of  the 
other.  2.  Identification  (ver.  4).  The  two  are  one.  The  equal  rights  of  husband 
and  wife  are  everywhere  recognised  iu  the  Bible.  3.  Honesty  (ver.  5).  Deception 
is  inimical  to  the  true  union  of  souls.  Nothing  cuts  united  hearts  asunder  so  easily 
and  effectually  as  artfulness.  4.  Forbearance  (vers.  12,  14).  Should  diiference  of 
religious  opinion  crop  up,  do  not  separate ;  for  the  believing  may  correct  the 
unbelieving.  5.  Concession  of  personal  freedom  (ver.  15).  Conclusion  :  Paul's  con- 
ception is  wise  and  just.  We  have  made  marriage  simply  a  civil  contract ;  but  its 
essence  is  the  strongest  sympathies  and  aims  that  one  can  have  for  another  ;  the 
bond  of  mari'iage  is  the  solemn  mutual  pledge.  Those  who  are  thus  married  are 
united  by  a  cord  finer  than  the  finest  web ;  too  weak  to  fetter,  yet  too  strong  to 


CHAP,  vii.j  I.   CORINTHIANS.  451 


break.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  PauVs  view  of  celihacij  : — It  is  neccssaiy  to  reniem- 
ber — I.  That  we  uave  heke  only  half  of  the  apostolic  mind.  Had  this  passage 
stood  alone,  we  might  then  liave  been  justified  in  taking  it  as  an  ab.^oIiite  piefeienee 
of  the  sini;le  state.  But  inasmuch  as  Cal.  iii.  18,  1!) ;  Eph.  v.  22-33 ;  Heb.  xiii.  4  ; 
1  Tet.  1-7  ;  1  Tliess.  iv.  4  sp  ak  of  uiarriuge  with  high  commendation,  it  is  obvious 
that  this  passage  expresses  only  one  side  of  the  truth.  And  it  is  also  clear  that  it 
is  this  passage  which  must  be  iiualified  by  the  others  and  rice  vi-rsa,  inasmuch  as 
he  is  here  adctres-sing  himself  to  the  answer  of  a  particular  question  put  uipder  par- 
ticular circums-tauces  ;  in  the  others  he  is  speaking  witirout  reserve  on  tlie  general 
duties  of  a  Christian  life.  This  conclusion  is  coulirmed  by  a  consideration  of  this 
passage  in  detaiL  The  preference  for  celibacy,  although  stat^d  absolutely  at  first 
(vers.  1,  7,  8),  i>  afterwa  ds  expressly  founded  on  the  impendmg  calamities  (vers. 
26-31),  and,  apparently  in  connec'ion  with  this,  on  tlie  greater  freedom  thereby 
afforded  from  worldly  cares  (vers.  32-3.5).  In  one  instance,  tuat  of  recommending 
widows  not  to  niau-y  (vers.  H,  40).  We  have  a  precept  (1  Tim.  iv.  14)  reversing 
this  ;  and  whilst  there  is  no  trace  here  of  the  superior  sanctity  of  celibacy,  tlie  pro- 
hibition of  marridge  on  that  ground  is  in  1  Tim.  iv.  1-3  classed  among  tire  signs  of 
a  false  and  dangerous  system.  II.  That  the  apostle's  prefeuence  jiust  be  taken 
WITH  thhee  stkong  q^  alificatioxs.  1.  As  being  the  expression  of  his  natural 
temperament  (ver.  7).  But  he  never  confounds  his  individual  peculiarity  with 
Cliristianily  itself.  He  warns  us  that  it  is  he  who  speaks  and  not  Christ,  and  claims 
for  his  recommendation  no  higher  authority  than  the  requirements  of  the  time.  2. 
As  given  in  expe -tation  of  calamities.  3.  As  given  without  reg  ird  to  the  moral 
purposes  of  marria^'e.  To  a  certain  extent  the  highe.-<t  form  of  Human  marriage 
was  a  union  for  high  moral  purposes ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  Jewish 
marriages  in  tlie  Old  Testament  and  Apocrypha.  But  even  in  these  the 
sterner  rather  than  the  gentler  alTections  were  called  forth  ;  and  in  the 
Greek  and  Eastern  provinces  generally  marriage  was  little  more  than  what 
the  apostle  describes  it,  gnod  only  as  preveniing  great  evils.  And  just  us 
Lis  denunciations  of  Gicek  wisdom  must  not  be  extended  without  quMlification 
to  that  liigher  philosophy  of  So'-rates  and  Plaio  ;  so  his  dennnci-itions  of  marriage 
must  not  be  extended  withnut  (jual  iication  to  that  intimate  union  of  pure  domestic 
affections  which  rose  out  of  tlie  combination  of  the  Teutonic  and  Christian  elements. 
III.  That  taking  this  phefehence  as  it  stands  two  practical  inferences  may 
BE  deduced.  1.  That  there  are  ordinal y  circumstances  in  Christian  as  well  as  in 
political  life,  under  which  the  ordinary  rules  of  right  and  expediency  may  be 
suspended  or  sup.  rseded  by  a  higher  claim.  Philosophical  histori ms  have  truly 
felt  tint  the  monastic  system  was  to  a  great  extent  excused,  if  not  justified,  by  the 
fact  that  it  originated  in  an  age  when  it  seemed  the  only  refuge  from  the  dissolution 
of  the  existing  fabric  of  society.  An  absolute  dictatorship,  whether  of  pope  or 
emperor,  has  often  leen  defended  on  the  ground  that  it  met  the  emergencie-i  of  a 
crisis  of  damier  and  transition.  The  enforcement  of  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy  in 
the  Middle  Ages  dcubtless  in  part  arose  fr.im  the  just  instinct  that  they  would  else 
have  sunk  into  an  heredilar*  feudal  caste.  No  one  can  deny  th^it  domestic  ties 
must  occasionally  be  severed  by  extraordinary  calls,  political,  military,  or  religious. 
All  tliese  are  instances  of  the  adoption  of  a  rule  in  peculiar  circumstances  which 
St.  Paxil's  advice  tenches  us  not  tu  condemn  at  once,  even  though  it  may  seem  at 
variance  with  the  broader  principles  of  Christian  life  laid  down  elsewhere  in  the 
New  Testament.  Note  in  exact  cor  espond' nee  with  this  passage  the  declaration 
of  Queen  Elizabeth  that  "  England  was  her  husband  and  all  Endishmen  her 
children,"  and  that  .-he  "  desired  no  higher  character  or  fairer  remembiance  of  her 
than  this  inscr  ption  on  her  tombstone,  '  Hi-re  lies  Elizabeth,  who  lived  and  died  a 
maiden  queen.' "  2.  That  ilie  highest  duties  of  Christianity  are  compatible  with 
every  lawful  condition  of  life.  If  the  state  of  f^lavery  be  consistent  with  the 
cultivation  of  the  true  spirit  of  Christian  liberty,  if  the  great  religious  divisions  of 
Jew  and  Gentile  be  alike  compatible  with  the  true  service  of  God,  then  in  all  other 
states  of  life  the  spirit  of  the  apostolic  injunctions  may  be  observed  where,  in  the 
letter,  they  seem  disiegarded.  Freedom  from  earthly  cares  may  be  maintained  in 
the  married  as  well  as  in  the  single  state  ;  indifference  to  worldly  gain  may  exist 
in  riches,  no  less  than  in  povertv ;  our  nearness  to  God  depends  not  on  our 
desertion  of  one  religious  community  for  another,  but  on  our  keepmg  His  com- 
mandments. (Bean  Stanley.)  Celibacy  and  marriafje: — I.  Celibacy.  1.  la 
what  sense  is  it  called  uoo'i  ?  Not  in  the  sense  of  being  in  itself  and  always 
superior  to  maniage  which  is  the  image  of  the  union  between   Christ  and   His 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


Church  (Ei")h.  v.  23-25).  "  Foi-bidding  to  marry"  (1  Tim.  iv.  3)  is  a  mark  of  false 
teaching.  The  law  of  consistency,  then,  bids  us  interpret  Paul's  statements  here 
as  in  no  sense  depreciatory  of  the  Divine  ordinance  of  marriage.  A  single  life  is 
good  in  tlie  sense  of  being  in  itself  honourable,  and  in  ceitain  circumstances 
expedient.  The  apostle's  "good"  must  alwHys  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  "not 
good  "  of  Gen.  ii.  18.  2.  Wlien  is  it  to  be  preferred  to  marriage  ?  Leaving  out  of 
view  considerations  of  physical  health,  which  may  in  certain  cases  render  marriage 
imprudent  or  culpable,  tbree  answers  are  given  in  this  chapter.  (1)  Tn  circum- 
stances of  peculiar  distress  (ver.  26).  In  times  of  persecution  or  dearth  it  may 
be  wise  not  to  marry.  (2)  When  called  to  some  peculiar  service  for  the  Lord 
(vers.  32,  33  ;  cf.  Matt.  six.  12).  (3)  Both  these  considerations  must  be  taken  with 
that  in  ver.  7.  If  a  man  has  not  the  gift  of  continency,  then  his  duty  to  marry  is 
clear  (ver.  9)  ;  if  he  has  the  gift,  then  he  is  free  to  give  weight  to  reasons  which 
may  turn  the  balance  in  favour  of  celibacy.  Even  then,  however,  the  higher  ends 
of  wedlock  tire  not  to  be  overlooked.  3.  It  is  not  to  be  made  obligatory.  The 
Church  of  Eome  ascribes  a  peculiar  excellence  to  the  celibate  state,  as  fitted  to 
promote  greater  sanctity.  There  is  no  warrant  for  this  here ;  while  experience 
testifies  to  the  dreadful  evils  to  which  it  leads.  II.  Makmage.  1.  Is  a  safegitard. 
against  incontinence.  Q'he  apostle  is  not  treating  of  it  in  general,  or  in  its  higher 
aspects.  Still  the  use  here  referred  to  is  not  to  be  overlooked  in  view  of  such 
licentiousness  as  prevailed  at  Corinth.  2.  Implies  the  rendering  of  conjugal  duty 
(vers.  3,  4).  The  one  party  exists  for  the  other,  and  the  other  alone — the  twain 
having  become  one  llesh  (Gen.  ii.  24).  3.  It  is  a  union  between  one  man  and  one 
woman.  In  polygamy  the  true  idea  of  marriage  is  lost.  The  testimony  of  Scripture 
is  all  in  favour  of  monogamy  (Gen.  ii.  24 ;  JMatt.  xix.  4,  5  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  2) ;  and  the 
staterueuts  of  the  apostle  here  take  this  for  granted.  Domestic  bliss  is  not  to  be 
found  in  ttie  haunts  of  polygamy.     {H.  Brehiner,  B.D.) 

Vers.  6-9.  I  speak  this  by  pe'^mission,  and  not  of  commandment. — Revelation  : — 
1.  By  permission.  1.  Is  still  l)ivine  and  therelore  authoritative.  2.  Respects 
matters  of  expedieuey  and  pnvate  applic  ition.  II.  By  commandment.  1.  Is 
absolute.  2.  Ut  iinmeasuralile  importance.  3.  Universally  binding.  {J.  Lijth,  D.D.) 
For  I  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  mysalf. — The  happiness  of  single  life  : — I. 
Exemplified  by  Paul.  1.  Freedom  from  earthly  care.  2.  Entire  devotedness  to 
the  service  of  God.  II.  Depends  on  s-p  ;cial  gift.  1.  Thegift  of  continence.  2. 
Not  conferred  upon  all.  3.  Associated  generally  with  special  grace.  III.  Must 
NOT  BE  inculcated  UPON  ALL.  1.  Would  violate  the  ordination  of  Providence.  2. 
Breed  mischief  and  immorality.  (Ibid.)  But  every  man  hath  his  proper  gift 
from  God,  one  after  this  manner,  and  another  after  that. — Instinct  gifts  : — Paul 
had  peculiar  natural  powers,  adapting  hun  for  a  hfe  of  consecration  and  service. 
But  it  was  a  beautiful  feature  in  his  character  that  he  did  not  expect  or  wish  ail 
Christians  to  resemble  himself  in  all  things.  In  fellow-labourers  he  recognised 
adaptation  for  usefulness.  1.  Human  exdowmf.nts  are  Divine  gifts.  The  devout 
mind  naturally  looks  up  to  the  source  of  all.  If  to  God  we  are  to  attribute 
providential  favours,  shall  we  attribute  h  gher  gifts  to  an  inferior  souice  ?  II. 
Divine  gifts  are  bestowkd  upon  men  in  gi;kat  variety.  1.  It  is  so  in  bodily 
constitution.  One  has  muscular  strength,  another  manual  dexterity,  &c.  2.  It  is 
so  in  temperament.  One  is  calm  and  wise,  another  tender  and  sympathetic,  a 
third  impulsive  and  commanding.  3.  It  is  so  in  intellectual  charHcter.  One 
reasons  with  force,  another  persuades  with  fervour,  a  tliird  speaks  with  eloquence. 
Where  are  two  leaves,  two  faces  ahke  ?  So  in  the  Church — one  has  the  gift  to 
rule,  another  to  teach,  or  to  console,  &c.  One  is  fitted  for  a  pastor,  another  for 
an  evangelist.     One  is  called  to  a  public,  another  to  a  private  position.    III.  Tuese 

GIFTS    are    complementary    AND    CO-OPERATE    TO    THE     GENERAL    GOOD.       Noiie     Cail     be 

spared.  There  is  generosity,  but  not  waste  in  the  Divine  benefactions.  Pray  for 
the  qualified  workman,  and  the  work  shall  not  be  uncione  for  the  want  of  him. 
Because  all  things  are  Christ's,  all  things  are  ours.  One  supplies  another's  lack, 
and  mutual  sympathy  and  ministrations  stibset  ve  the  general  good.  Conclusion  : 
1.  Gratitude  should  be  cultivated  as  due  to  Him  who  is  the  Giver  of  all.  2.  Pride 
should  be  repressed ;  for  if  one  has  his  gift  he  has  to  remember  that  it  is  a  gift 
bestowed  in  grace.  3.  Forbearance  and  toleration  are  lequisite.  It  is  vain  to 
expect  all  gifts  to  centre  in  the  same  person,  to  look  for  what  God  has  not  bestowed, 
to  complain  because  a  man  has  his  proper  gift  and  that  only.  (Fn>f.  J.  E. 
Thomson.) 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTIIUNS.  453 


Vers.  10-17.  And  unto  the  married  I  command,  yet  not  I,  but  the  Lord,  Let 
not  the  wife  depart  from  her  husband — The  iiuirridii'-  uuiun  :  lioir  dititurbaiices 
of  it  are  to  be  alleviated  : — I.  Iv  both  PArrriHS  ahe  bjlLucvkiis — according  to  our 
Lord's  command.  1.  Not  by  divorce.  2.  But  by  mutual  couciliation.  II.  If  one 
PARTY  IS  AN  UNBELIEVER — according  to  apostolic  piescription.  1.  Not  by  divorce. 
2.  But  by  patience  in  the  believing  pariy,  that  by  exaiii])le,  &c.,  the  uubelievirg 
party  and  the  cbildien  may  be  saved.  III.  If  the  unbelievino  party  brings 
ABOUT  A  sf.paration.  1.  By  submission,  love  to  God  must  predominate.  2.  God 
can  overrule  it  for  good.  3.  Everyone  must  content  himself  with  the  appointments 
of  Providence.  (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Uiiitii  in  marria<:e  : — The  Cherokee  marriage 
ceremony  is  very  expressive.  The  man  and  woman  join  hands  over  running  water, 
to  indicate  that  their  lives  are  thenceforth  to  tiow  in  one  stream.  Divorce 
is — I.  A  SAD  evidence  of  human  PEPRAvirY.  Except  in  the  case  of  confirmed 
lunacy — 1.  It  originates — (1)  In  marrying  out  of  impure  motives.  (2)  In  the 
loss  of  atfection.    (3)  In  the  unfaithfulness  of  one  or  both  parties.    2.  Is  opposed — 

(1)  To  the  express  command  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  v.  31,  xix.  1-12),  wiiich  is  tounded 
on  the  deep  significance  of  the  marriage  bond  (Matt.  xix.  6;  Eph.  v.  32).  (2)  To 
the  dilfusion  of  the  king'lom  of  God,  as  exerting  a  deleterious  influence  on  the 
general  welfare  of  mankind.  II.  Cannot  be  entirely  disallowed.  1.  The  Lord 
permits  it  in  certain  instances  (Matt.  v.  32),  and  the  apostle  extends  the  permission 
in  an  exceptional  case  (ver.  15).  2.  Yet  so  long  as  there  is  hope  of  reconciliation, 
every  means  must  be  used  to  maintain  an  unbroken  union.  3.  Separation  is  there- 
fore allowable  when  it  is  evident  that  a  perpetuated  union  will  only  be  a  souice  of  sin, 
or  that  it  will  prove  perilous  to  the  salvation  of  the  innocent  party.  (J.  Liith,D.D.) 
Divorce:  vii.rctl  marria;]es : — Having  spoken  of  celibacy  and  marriage,  the  apostle 
now  deals  with  the  case  of  those  already  married.  I.  Where  both  parties  are 
Christian.  In  this  case  Christ  has  decided,  and  Paul  refers  them  to  His  words 
(Matt.  V.  32,  xix.  9).  1.  The  marriage  bond  is  indissoluble.  This  arises  from  the 
relationship  itself,  as  well  as  from  the  Divine  appointment.  Husband  and  wife 
are  ideally  one  ;  the  bond  has  no  parallel  in  the  world  ;  Go  i  has  made  t!ie  union 
sacred  by  blessing  it.  2.  Separation  is  not  to  be  final.  The  cause  of  separation 
(ill-treatment,  &c.)  may  or  may  nut  be  siilHcient  to  justify  it,  but  it  must  not  be 
regarded  as  severing  the  tie.  The  wife  must  remain  unmarried,  or  she  must  be 
reconciled  to  her  husband.  The  latter  is  the  desirable  course,  inasmuch  as  husband 
and  wife  cannot  go  apart  without  scandal  to  the  Christian  name.  Let  them 
reconsider  their  position,  and  remove  every  barrier  to  union.  II.  Where  one 
party  is  Cmristian  and  the  other  heathen.  Christ  had  given  no  utterance  on 
mixed  marriages,  and  therefore  Paul  gives  his  inspired  judgment  regardii  g  them. 
Consider  the  case  where — 1.  The  unbelieving  partner  is  content  to  remain.  The 
Christian  spouse  is  not  to  seek  a  separation  as  if  the  marriage  were  unholy  (ver.  14). 
The  apostle  does  not  mean  that  an  unbeliever  by  conjugal  union  with  a  believer 
becomes  personally  holy ;  but  that  he  or  she  is  consecrated.  As  the  altar  sanctifies 
the  gift  (Matt,  xxiii.  19),  so  the  Christian  reflects  somethincr  of  his  character  on 
everything  connected  with  him.  His  property,  business,  family,  are  all  in  a  sense 
holy  as  belonging  to  one  who  is  in  covenant  with  God,  and  are  umler  His  special 
protection.  Hence  the  pagan  partner  is  a  privileged  person  on  the  ground  of  union 
with  a  Christian.  The  reason  is  significant  (ver.  14).  It  was  an  accepted  maxim 
that  the  children  of  such  marriages  were  born  within  the  Church.  This  principle 
was  recognised  among  the  Jews,  as  the  case  of  Timothy  shows  (Acts  xvi.  1-3). 
If,  then,  the  children  of  such  marriage  are  reckoned  holy,  the  marriage  from  which 
they  spring  cannot  be  inconsistent  with  the  law  of  God  (Eom.  xi.  6  and  conversely). 
The  children  take  their  standing  from  the  Christian  parent,  who  is  regarded  as  the 
nobler  of  the  two.  2.  The  unbelieving  partner  refuses  to  remain.  In  this  case  the 
Christian  is  to  acquiesce.  For — (1)  He  or  she  "  is  not  under  bondage  "  (ver.  15). 
The  marriaKe  is  not  to  be  dissolved  at  the  instance  of  the  behevin^^  partner;  but  if 
the  other  refuses  to  remain,  the  contract  is  no  longer  binding.  It  would  be  a  case 
of  bondrtge  if  the  one  were  held  to  a  union  which  the  other  has  wilfully  broken  up. 

(2)  "  God  hath  called  us  in  peace."  The  gospel  is  not  intended  to  produce  strife  ; 
but  if  this  be  the  result  of  the  heathen  partner  continuing  to  dwell  with  the 
Christian,  it  were  better  to  let  him  have  his  wish.  (3)  The  Chiistian  partner  is 
not  to  prevent  the  departure  of  the  other  in  the  hope  of  being  instrumental  to 
conversion.  This  is  at  best  uncertain,  and  peace  is  not  to  be  haza'ded  therefore. 
And  if  such  a  union  is  not  to  be  maintained  for  the  sake  of  a  possible  conversion, 
much  less  is  it  to  be  contracted  with  that  view.     Conclusion  :  1.  This  passage  is 


451  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


generally  adiluced  as  the  Bible  warrant  for  the  view  that  wilful  desertion  is  a 
sufficient  reason  for  divorce.  Such  desertion  is  a  de  facto  rupture  of  the  marriage 
bond,  and  stands  on  the  same  footing  as  adultery.  2.  The  evil  of  mixed  marriages. 
They -(1)  Render  the  complete  fellowship  of  husband  and  wife  impossible.  (2) 
Break  up  domestic  peace.  (3)  Prevent  family  religion,  (4)  Interfere  with  the 
rehgious  training  of    children.       {H.   Bremner,   B.D.)  Christian  casuistry: — 

1.  St.  Paul  makes  a  distinction  between  those  things  which  he  speaks  by  com- 
mandment and  by  permission  ;  between  what  he  says  as  being  taught  of  God,  and 
that  which  he  speaks  only  as  a  servant,  "  called  of  the  Lord  and  faithful."  2.  It 
is  plain  that  there  are  many  questions  in  which  right  and  wrong  are  fixed ;  while 
there  are  others  where  tliese  terms  depend  on  circumstances,  e.r/.,  there  may  be 
circumstances  in  which  it  is  the  duty  of  a  Christian  to  be  married,  and  others 
remain  unmarried.  In  the  case  of  a  missionai-y  it  may  be  right  to  be  married  ;  in 
the  case  of  a  pauper,  unable  to  maintain  a  family,  it  may  be  proper  to  remain 
unmarried.  No  fixed  law  can  be  laid  down  upon  this  subject.  3.  These,  therefore, 
are  questions  of  casuistry,  which  depend  upon  the  particular  case:  fiom  which 
"casuistry"  is  derived.  On  these  points  the  apostle  speaks  not  by  commandment, 
but  by  permission.  This  distinction  is  not  between  inspired  and  uninspired, 
but  between  a  decision  in  matters  of  Christian  duty,  and  advice  in  matters  of 
Christian  prudence.  God  cannot  give  advice  ;  He  can  only  issue  a  command. 
When  we  come  to  advice  the  human  element  is  introduced.  4.  There  are  three 
main  questions  on  wliich  the  apostle  here  gives  his  inspired  decision.  I.  Con- 
cerning   THE    SANCTITY   OF   THE    MARRIAGE    BOND   BETWEEN   TWO    CHRISTIANS  (vcr.  10). 

1.  Of  all  earthly  unions  almost  this  is  the  only  one  permitting  of  no  change  but 
that  of  death.  It  is  that  engagement  in  which  man  exerts  his  most  awful  and 
solemn  power — that  of  parting  with  his  freedom.  And  yet  it  is  perhaps  that 
relationship  which  is  spoken  of  and  entered  into  most  carelessly.  It  is  not  an 
union  merely  between  two  creature-^,  but  between  two  spirits  ;  and  the  intention  of 
that  bond  is  to  perfect  the  nature  of  both,  by  giving  to  each  sex  those  excellences 
in  which  it  is  naturally  deficient.  2.  There  is  no  earthly  relationship  wbich  has 
so  much  power  to  ennoble  (ver.  16).  The  very  power  of  saving  belongs  to  it,  and 
that  of  ruin  too.  For  there  are  two  rocks  on  which  the  soul  must  either  anchor  or 
be  wrecked.  The  one  is  the  "  Rock  of  Ages,"  on  which  if  the  human  soul  anchors, 
it  lives  the  blessed  life  of  faith  ;  against  which  if  the  soul  be  dashed,  there  ensues 
atheism— the  worst  ruin  of  the  soul.  The  other  rock  is  of  another  character. 
Blessed  is  the  man  or  woman  whose  life-experience  has  taught  a  confiding  belief  in 
the  excellences  of  the  sex  opposite  to  their  own.  And  the  ruin  is  second  only  to 
perdition.  And  it  is  the  worst  of  these  alternatives  which  the  young  risk  when 
thev  form  an  inconsiderate  union,  and  which  parents  risk  when  they  bring  up  their 
children  with  no  hij.'her  view  than  that  of  a  lich  and  honourable  marriage.    II.  The 

SANCTITY   OF    THE    MARRIAGE    BOND    BETWEEN   A    CHRISTIAN    AND    A    HE.ATHEN.         1.    The 

question  arose.  Is  not  the  marriage  null  and  void  ?  As  if  it  were  an  union  between 
one  dead  and  one  living.  And  that  perpetual  contact  with  a  heathen,  and  therefore 
an  enemy  of  God,  is  not  that  defilement?  The  apostle  decides  this  with  his  usual 
inspired  wisdom — the  marriage  bond  is  sacred  still  (vers.  12,  13).  2.  Now  for  us 
the  decision  is  not  of  so  much  importance  as  the  reason  in  support  of  it,  which 
amounts  to  this:  If  this  were  no  marriage,  but  an  unhallowed  alliance,  it  would 
follow  that  the  offspring  could  not  be  the  children  of  God  ;  but  it  is  the  instinctive 
conviction  of  every  Christian  parent,  "  My  child  is  a  child  of  God,"  or,  in  the 
Jewish  form  of  expression,  "My  child  is  clean  "  (ver.  14).  It  follows  if  the  children 
are  holy  in  this  sense  of  dedicated  to  God,  then  the  marriage  relation  was  not 
unhallowed,  but  .sacred  and  indissoluble.  The  value  of  this  argument  in  the 
present  day  depends  on  its  relation  to  baptism.  This  question  is  whether  we  are 
baptized  because  we  are  the  children  of  God,  or,  whether  we  are  the  children  of 
God  because  we  are  baptized.  Here  the  apostle's  argument  is  unansweiable.  He 
does  not  say  that  these  children  were  Christian,  or  clean,  because  they  were 
baptized,  but  because  they  were  the  children  of  one  Christian  parent.  3.  Observe 
also  the  important  truth  which  comes  out  collaterally  from  this  argument— namely, 
the  sacreiness  of  impression,  which  arises  from  the  close  connection  between 
parent  and  child.  Possibly  from  the  very  first  moments  of  consciousness  we  begin 
to  impress  ourselves  on  our  children.  There  is  scarcely  one  here  who  cannot  trace 
back  his  religious  chtiracter  to  some  impression  from  one  or  other  of  his  parents— 
a  tone,  a  look,  a  word,  a  habit,  or  even,  it  may  be,  a  bitter  exclamation  of  remorse. 
III.  Existing  relations  (vers.  17,  20,  24).     Christian  men  were  to  remain  in  them, 


CHAP,  vii.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  455 

and  in  them  to  develop  the  Christian  life.  Paul  applies  this  principle  in  two  ways. 
1.  Ecclesiastically  (ver.  18).  The  Jews,  after  their  conversion,  were  to  continue 
Jews,  if  they  would.  Christianity  required  no  change  in  these  outward  things. 
Paul  circumcised  Timothy,  and  u.-ed  Jewish  customs.  It  was  not  the  duty  oi  a 
Christian  to  overthrow  the  Jewish  system,  but  to  throw  into  it  a  Christian  feeling. 
Let  us  apply  this  to  modern  duties.  The  gieat  desire  among  men  now  appears  to 
be  to  altei',  and  so  have  perfect  institutions,  as  if  they  would  make  perfect  men. 
Mark  the  difference  between  this  feeling  and  that  of  the  apostle  (ver.  20).  No  man 
will  get  true  rest  for  his  soul  in  these  days  of  controversy,  until  he  has  learned  the 
significance  of  these  wise  words.  2.  Civilly — to  that  relationship  which,  of  all 
others,  was  the  most  dithcult  to  hnrmouise  with  Cnristianity — slavery  (ver.  21). 
Eecollect — (1)  That  Cliristianity  had  made  much  way  among  slaves.  No  wonder 
that  they  embraced  with  joy  a  religion  which  taught  the  dignity  of  the  human 
soul,  and  declared  that  rich  and  poor,  master  and  slave,  were  equal  in  the  sight  of 
God.  And  yet  it  was  to  be  feared  lest  men  should  be  tempted  to  compel  their 
masters  and  oppressors  to  do  them  right.  (2)  That  all  this  occurred  in  an  age 
in  which  slavery  had  reached  its  worst  and  njost  fearful  form.  And  yet  fearful  as 
it  was,  the  apostle  says,  '•  Care  not  for  it."  And  hence  we  understand  tiie  way  in 
which  Christianity  was  to  work.  No  doubt  it  will  at  length  abolish  slavery,  war, 
&c.,  but  there  is  not  one  case  where  we  find  Christianity  interfering  with  iustitu- 
tions,  as  such :  Onesimus  I'aul  sent  back  to  his  master,  but  he  told  him  of  a 
higher  feeling  that  would  make  him  free  with  the  shackle  upon  his  arm.  And  so 
it  was  possible  for  the  Christian  then,  as  it  is  now,  to  be  possessed  of  the  highest 
liberty  even  under  tyranny.  It  many  times  occurred  that  Christian  men  found 
themselves  placed  under  an  unjust  governmetit,  and  compelled  to  pay  unjust  taxes. 
The  Son  of  Man  showed  His  freedom  not  by  refusing,  but  by  paying  them.  His 
glorious  liberty  could  do  so  without  any  feeling  of  degradation.  Conclusion  :  It  is 
possible  from  all  this  to  di'aw  a  most  inaccurate  conclusion.  Some  men  have 
spoken  of  Christianity  as  if  it  was  entirely  indifferent  about  public  questions. 
This  indifference  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  Apostle  Paul.  V/hile  he  asserts  that 
inward  liberty  is  the  only  true  liberty,  he  still  goes  on  to  say,  "  If  thou  mayest  be 
free  use  it  rather."  Christianity  gave  to  the  slave  the  feeling  of  his  dignity  as  a  man, 
at  the  same  time  it  gave  to  the  Christian  master  a  new  view  of  his  relation  to  his 
slave,  and  taught  him  to  regard  him  "not  now  as  a  servant,  but  a  brother  beloved." 
And  so  by  degrees  slavery  passed  into  freed  servitude,  and  freed  servitude,  under 
God's  bles-ing.  may  jiass  into  something  else.  (F.  W.  Bobertaon,  M.A.)  But  to 
the  rest  speak  I,  not  the  Lord. — PauVs  inxpiration : — The  distinction  here  is  not 
between  his  uninspired  and  inspired  commands.  If  we  say  tliat  he  usually  writes 
under  Divine  inspiration,  but  that  when  he  speaks  about  celibacy  it  fails  him,  to 
return  suddenly  when  he  enters  on  the  question  of  divorce,  again  to  desert  him 
when  he  writes  on  the  case  of  mixed  marriages,  inspiration  becomes  at  once  (1) 
arbitrary,  because  there  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  subjects  to  account  for  the 
difference  ;  and  (2)  mechanical,  because  it  comes  and  goes  independently  of  the 
writer's  mental  activity.  The  explanation  is  that  on  the  question  of  divorce  Christ 
had  legislated  (Matt.  v.  32,  xix.  9)  ;  but  on  the  other  questions  gave  no  direct 
decision.  The  question  of  divorce  touches  the  inmost  nature  of  marriage,  as  it 
was  instituted  by  God  at  the  beginning,  and  afterwards  connected  by  Christianity 
with  the  union  between  Christ  and  the  Church.  For  this  reason  Christ,  as  the  Divine 
lawgiver,  rescinded  the  Mosaic  permission  to  divorce  for  other  causes  than  adultery, 
and  resti  'red  the  original  idea  of  marriage.  Paul  never  dai'ed  to  rescind  a  law  of  iMoses. 
Yet  the  apostle  draws  various  inferences  from  the  words  of  Christ.  One  distinction 
between  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  of  His  apostles  must  necessarily  be  that  Christ 
always  commands.  He  never  arrived  at  a  conclusion  through  a  process  of  reasoning, 
much  less  discussed  a  question  and  left  it  unanswered.  This  absolute  certitude  is 
essential  in  the  revelation  of  ct'iitral  principles.  But  it  would  be  destructive  of 
all  that  is  valuable  in  human  effort  if  it  extended  to  the  minute  details  of  life ;  if 
it  decided  beforehand  every  p  issible  case  of  conscience,  and  reduced  our  rtjoral 
activity  to  a  mechanical  conformity  with  unswerving  and  merely  authoritative 
regulations.  The  danger  attaches  to  all  books  of  casuistry ;  but  in  a  book  accej)ted 
by  the  doubting  conscience  as  containing  Divinely-inspired  casuistry,  the  etfect  is 
fatal.  The  writings  of  the  apostles  abound,  on  the  other  hand,  in  argument  and 
inference,  which  sometimes  end  in  practical  decisions,  sometimes  only  in  the  expres- 
sion of  an  opinion.  The  decision  is  often  left  to  the  enlightened  conscience  of  the 
spiritual  man  (cf.  ver.  25).    But  apart  from  the  teaching  of  Christ,  the  foiis  et  origo 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


of  revelation,  the  inspiration  of  the  apostles  would  have  been  an  altogether  different 
thing  from  what  it  is.  We  need  not  suppose  that  Christ  gave  the  apostle  au 
immediate  revelation  on  tlie  question  of  divorce.  The  general  tradition  of  the 
Early  Church  and  tlie  narrative  in  the  Acts  p  dnts  to  an  intimate  connection 
between  Paul  and  Luke.  Indeed,  our  Lord's  doctrine  on  that  subject  was  in  that 
a"e  singular  and  cannot  full  to  have  been  known  among  Christians  throughout 
the  world.     [I'lincipal  Edwards.) 

Yers.    14-lG.    For  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by  the  wife. — The 

sanctification  of  an  unbelieving  j'aitucr  : — The  Christian  wife  la\s  her  heathen 
husband  upon  the  altar  of  God  ;  and  in  all  her  intercourse  with  him  acts  as  Crod's 
servant,  striving  ever  to  accomplisii  His  jjurposes.  Therefore,  whatever  the 
husband  may  be  in  himself,  he,  in  the  subjective  world  of  her  thought  and  life,  is 
a  holy  object  ;  and  her  treatment  of  him  is  a  sacrifice  to  God.  Such  intercourse 
cannot  defile.  Therefore  his  heathenism  is  not  in  itself  a  reason  for  separation. 
(Prof.  B-et.)  Tlie  saitctifiration  of  mixed  marriage  relations: — The  unbelieving 

hnsband  (or  wife)  is  externally  sanctified.  His  status  is  a  hallowed  one.  For  he 
dwe  Is  no  longer  in  the  profane  and  godless  world,  but  stai  ds  upon  the  sacred 
threshold  of  the  Church.  Both  he  and  his  wife  are  in  God's  commonwealth : 
she  incorporated,  he  merely  atl  ached  ;  hers  is  a  dedication  of  self,  his  a  consecra- 
tion of  pos  tion  ;  his  surroundings  only  are  hallowed;  brougiit  out  of  darkness  he 
is  in  the  light,  but  the  light  is  not  in  him.  United  to  a  sanitly  consort  he  is  in 
daily  contact  with  saintly  conduct ;  holy  associatiuu  may  become  holy  assimilation, 
and  the  sanctity  which  ever  environs  may  at  last  penetrate  ;  for  it  is  drop  upon 
drop  that  hollows  the  rock  and  makes  it  a  cistern ;  the  circumstances  are  such 
that  the  man's  will  may  be  reached  by  God's  grace,  which  by  a  Divine  law  moves  in 
the  sphere  of  theocratic  consecration.  But  the  man's  conversion  is  not  a  condition 
necessary  to  the  sanctity  of  the  subsisting  conjugal  union.  This  being  so,  the 
childrrii  being  the  offspring  of  a  hallowed  union  are  themselves  hallowed,  i.e.,  in 
a  position  meet  for  dedication  to  Grid's  service  in  Holy  Baptism.  It  is  not  easy  to 
sound  the  deeper  sense  of  tliis.  We  may  imagine  three  concentric  circles  :  the 
innermost  circle  of  spiritual  light,  environed  by  a  margin  of  theocratic  twilight, 
the  suburbs  of  the  city  of  God;  embracing  this  twofold  sphere  is  the  immense 
margin  of  outer  cosmic  darkness.  Better  the  twilight  tban  the  outer  darkness,  for 
it  is  a  state  of  hope  and  transition  from  the  bad  to  the  good,  and  one  that  furnishes 
opportunities  of  grace,  and  makes  salvation  accessible.  The  deeper  causes  of 
these  I'oundary  lines  lie  in  the  secret  laws  of  the  Divine  government  of  the 
universe,  and  in  the  unknown  iiartition  of  mundane  realms  among  angels  and 
spirits,    good    and   evil.      (Canon   £rrt«.s\)  For  what  knowest  thou,   0  wife, 

whether  thou  shalt  save  thy  husband? — The  conversion  of  an  vnbelievinu  Itushand 
or  wife  ; — 1.  Especially  concerns  those  to  whom  they  are  united  by  marriage  ties. 
2.  Sbould  be  intensely  desired,  3.  Should  be  enruestly  attemiated.  4.  Confidently 
hoped  for.  5.  Thankfully  acknowledged.  (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Adiire  to  a  pious  wife  :  — 
A  lady  in  Germany,  who  was  a  sincere  follower  of  Christ,  but  whose  husband 
was  still  unrenewed,  was  very  much  afflicted  on  his  account,  and  told  a  clergyman 
that  she  had  done  all  in  her  power  in  persuading  and  beseeching  him  to  I  urn  from 
his  evil  practices,  to  no  effect.  "  Madam."  said  he,  "  talk  more  to  God  about  your 
husband,  and  less  to  your  husband  about  God."  A  few  weeks  after,  the  lady  called 
upon  him,  full  of  joy  that  her  prayers  to  God  had  been  heard,  and  that  a  change 
was  wrought  upon  her  husband.  Earthlij  relationships  sanctified  to  heavenly 
usfs  : — There  were  several  weighty  reasons  why  a  Christian  husband  or  wife  should 
not  leave  an  unbeliever  partner  ;  and  the  same  hold  good  to-dav.  1.  An  obligation 
has  been  undertaken  from  which  only  flagrant  immorality  can  liberate  either  party. 
2.  Ciiildren  may  have  been  born  during  the  union  whose  welfiire  depends  upon  its 
continuance.  3.  Affection  may  have  sprung  up  which  it  would  be  an  outrage  to 
check.  4.  The  continuance  of  the  union  may  make  the  Christian  the  minister  of 
spiritual  blessing  to  the  unconverted  consort.  I.  An  attractive  eepeeshntation 
MAY  BE  FUKxisHKD  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER.  Moral  excellence,  as  presented  in 
the  Bible  or  any  other  book,  or  from  the  pulpit,  is  far  less  impressive  than  when, 
embodied  in  a  life,  it  speaks  from  the  domestic  hearth.  Some  virtues  are 
peculiarly  Christian,  and  their  evhibition  is  likely  to  give  rise  to  the  inquiry,  What 
is  the  secret  of  such  a  life?  How  many  a  husband  has  been  won  to  Christ  by  his 
wifel  II.  An  dnconsoious  influence  may  be  exercised.  Who  can  know,  un- 
moved, that  a  dear  consort  is   seeking  his  spiritual  welfare?     There   is  a   tone 


CHAP,  vii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  457 

imparted  to  the  intercourse  of  daily  life  by  the  habit  of  prayer.  And  there  is  a 
di{,'nity,  gentleness,  and  spirituality  of  manner  and  language  which  cannot  fail  to 
be  observed  and  to  have  due  effect.  III.  An  opportunity  is  given  fou  express 
PERSUASION  WHICH  MAY  ISSUE  IN  SPIRITUAL  GOOD.  In  many  iustHnces  it  is  unwise  to 
make  formal  eliort ;  it  may  be  better  to  leave  religion  to  tell  its  own  tale  and  do 
its  own  work.  But  Providence  not  uufrequently  will  open  the  way  for  effort. 
There  are  few  ministers  who  could  not  tell  of  instances  in  which  God  has  blessed 
the  effort  of  husband  or  wife  so  that  both  have  become  heirs  together  of  the  grace 
of  life.  Yet  all  this  being  said,  the  mere  hops  of  exerting  such  influence  should 
never  lead  to  an  unequal  union.     {I'l'of.  J.  li.  'Thomno)!.) 

Vers.  17-24.  But  as  God  hath  distributed  to  every  man,  as  the  Lord  hath 
called  every  one,  so  let  him  walk. — Krcii/  Cluistiun  at  Ids  jMst. : — 1.  God  appoints 
every  man  liis  station  and  condition  in  life.  2.  Has  called  him  in  it.  3.  Ivequires 
liim  faithfully  to  fulfil  its  duties.  4.  Allows  of  no  exception  unless  when  compli- 
ance is  sinful.  (J.  Ijijtii,  D.D.)  The  (ticinity  of  tlie  true  Cliristtan  : — He  rises 
above  the  circumstances — I.  Of  caste.  1.  Externals  are  nothing.  2.  Only  con- 
formity to  the  will  of  God  gives  true  dignity.  II.  Of  station.  1.  As  a  servant  he 
is  free;  serving  God  in  his  calling,  contented  to  leave  the  improvement  of  his 
position  to  Divine  Providence,  rejoicing  in  the  liberty  of  Christ.  2.  As  free  he  is 
imaifected  by  external  advantage,  and  glories  in  being  a  servant  of  Christ.  III.  Of 
uuJiAN  servility.  1.  He  is  redeemed  by  Christ.  2.  Therefore  not  the  servant  of 
man.  3.  Can  in  every  condition  abifle  with  God.  (IbuL)  'True  conteiit)uent  : — 
I.  Respects — 1.  Our  religious  privileges.  2.  Our  earthly  condition.  II.  Arises 
out  of  the  conviction — 1.  That  we  are  redeemed.  2.  Can  serve  Chri.■^t.  3.  Enjoy 
fellowship  with  God.  (Ibid.)  The  true  fn  edom  and  dependence  of  every  Chris- 
tian:— I.  His  TRUE  FREKDo.-M.  1.  From  an  over-estimate  of  externals.  2.  From 
pride  of  condition  ai.d  false  shame.  3.  From  servility.  4.  In  the  service  of 
Christ.  II.  His  true  dependence.  1.  He  knows  that  self-dependence  is  im- 
possible. 2.  Piegards  himself  as  Christ's  property.  3.  Accounts  it  his  higiiest 
honour  to  abide  in  God.  (Ibid.)  Is  any  man  called  being  circumcised?  let 
him  not  become  uncircumcised. — The  external  and  the  real  in  reliijion: — 1.  God 
calls  us  without  any  reference  to  our  former  condition.  2.  Puts  no  value  upon 
religious  externals.  3.  Ilequires  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  4.  Hence  anxiety 
about  mere  forms  is  reprehensible.  (Ibid.)  Why  Cliristians  sJiould  be  contented 
with  their  circumstances : — 1.  External  circumstances  are  of  no  importance  in  the 
sight  of  God  (vers.  18,  19).  2.  God  overrules  them  fur  our  advantage  (vers.  20-22). 
3.  By  seeking  to  change  them  we  may  e  isily  forget  Clirist  and  become  the  servants 
of  men  (vers.  23,  24).  (Ibid.)  Circumcision  is  nothing  .  .  .  but  keeping  the 
commandments  of  God. — Forms  versus  character  (text.  Gal.  v.  0,  vi.  15) : — The 
great  controversy  which  embittered  Pauls  life  turned  upon  the  question  whether 
a  heathen  could  come  into  the  Church  by  the  door  of  faith,  or  of  circumcision. 
Time,  which  settles  all  controversies,  has  settled  that.  But  the  principles  are 
eternal,  tliough  the  forms  vary  with  every  varying  age.  The  Ritualist  and  the 
Puritan  rt^present  permanent  tendencies  of  human  nature.  These  three  passages 
are  Paul's  deliverance  on  the  question  of  the  comparative  value  of  external  rites 
and  spiritual  character.  Note — 1.  Tue  emphatic  proclamation  oe  the  nullity  of 
OUTWARD  RITES.  1.  Circuujcision  neither  is  anyihing  nor  does  anything.  Paul 
spenks  about  baptism,  in  chap,  i.,  in  a  precisely  similar  tone  and  for  precisely  the 
same  reason.  (1)  Forms  have  their  value.  A  man  prays  all  the  betitr  if  he  bow 
his  head,  Ac.  Forms  help  us  to  the  realisation  of  the  truths  tthich  they  express. 
Music  may  waft  our  souls  to  the  heavens,  and  pictures  may  stir  deep  thoughts. 
(2)  But  then  external  rights  tend  to  usurp  more  tliHii  belongs  to  them,  and  in  oar 
weakness  we  are  apt,  instead  of  using  them  as  means  to  lift  us  higher,  to  stay  in 
them,  and  to  mistake  the  mere  gratification  of  taste  and  the  excitement  of  the 
sensibilities  for  worship.  If  tliere  be  as  much  form  as  will  embody  the  spirit,  that 
is  all  that  we  want.  What  is  more  is  dangerous.  All  form  in  worship  is  like  tire, 
it  is  a  good  servant  but  it  is  a  bad  niMster.  Now,  wlien  men  say  about  Chiisiian 
rites  that  they  are  necessary,  then  it  is  needful  to  take  up  Pauis  ground  and  to 
say,  "No!  they  are  nothing!"  If  you  say  that  grace  is  miraculously  conveyed 
through  them,  then  it  is  needful  to  declare  their  nullity  for  the  higiiest  piajiose, 
that  of  making  that  spiritual  character  which  alone  is  essential.  2.  Uncircum- 
cision  is  nothing.  It  is  very  hard  for  a  man  who  has  been  deliveivd  from  tlie 
dependence  upon  forms  not  to  fancy  that  his  formlessness  is  what  the  other  people 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


think  that  their  forms  are.  The  Puritan  who  does  not  believe  that  a  man  can  be 
a  good  man  hecau-e  he  is  a  Rituahst  or  a  Roman  Catholic,  is  committing  the  very 
same  error  as  the  Ritualist  or  the  Roman  Catholic.  Theie  may  be  as  much 
idolatry  in  reliance  upon  the  bare  worship  as  the  ornate ;  and  many  a  Nonconfor- 
mist vilio  fancies  that  he  has  "never  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal"  is  as  true  an  idol- 
worshipper  as  the  men  who  trust  in  Ritualism.  II.  The  THREEFOLn  variety  of  the 
DESIGNATION  OF  ESSENTIALS.  1.  By  "keeping  the  commandments"  the  apostle 
does  not  mean  merely  external  obedience,  but  conformity  to  the  will  of  God. 
That  is  the  petfection  of  a  man's  nature,  when  his  will  tits  on  to  God's  like  one  of 
Euclid's  triangles  superimposed  upon  another,  and  line  for  line  coincides.  When 
his  will  allows  a  free  passage  to  the  will  of  God,  without  resistance  or  deflection,  as 
light  tra^els  through  transparent  glass;  when  his  will  responds  to  the  touch  of 
God's  fingeis  upon  the  kevs,  like  the  telegraphic  needle  to  the  operator's  hand,  then 
man  has  attained  all  that  God  and  religion  can  do  fm-  him,  all  that  his  nature  is 
capable  of ;  and  far  beneath  his  feet  may  be  the  ladders  of  ceremonies  and  forms 
aud  outward  acts  by  which  he  climbed  to  that  serene  and  blessed  he'ght.  2.  But 
I  can  fancy  a  man  saying,  "  That  is  all  very  well,  but  how  can  I  attain  to  that?  " 
Well,  take'  Gal.  vi.  15.  If  we  are  ever  to  keep  the  will  of  God  we  must  be  made 
over  again.  Our  own  consciences  and  the  history  of  all  the  efforts  that  ever  we 
have  made,  tell  us  that  there  needs  to  be  a  stronger  hand  than  ours  to  come  into  the 
fight  if  it  is  ever  to  be  won  by  us.  But  in  that  word,  "a  new  creature,"  lies_  a 
promise  from  God  ;  for  a  creature  implies  a  Creator.  We  may  have  our  spirits 
moulded  into  His  likeness,  and  new  taste^,  desires,  and  capacities  infused  into  us, 
so  as  that  we  shall  not  be  I  ft  with  our  own  poor  powers  to  try  aud  force  ourselves 
into  obedience  to  God's  will,  but  that  submission  and  holiness,  and  love  that  keeps 
the  commandments  of  God,  will  spring  up  in  our  renewed  spirits  as  their  natural 
product  and  growth.  3.  And  so  we  come  to  Gal.  v.  6.  If  we  a-e  to  be  made  over 
again,  we  must  have  faith  in  Christ.  We  have  got  to  the  root  now.  External  rites 
cannot  make  men  partakers  of  a  new  nature.  He  tint  trusts  Christ  opens  his 
heart  to  Christ,  who  comes  with  His  new-creating  Spirit,  and  makes  us 
wilhng  in  the  day  of  His  power  to  keep  His  commandments;  and  faitlr 
shows  itself  living,  because  it  hails  us  to  love,  and  through  love  it_  pro- 
duces its  effects  upon  conduct.  The  keeping  of  the  commandments  will  be 
easy  where  there  is  love  in  the  heart.  The  will  will  bow  where  there  is 
love  in  the  heart.  PhuI  and  James  shake  bands  here.  (A.  Maclareu,  D.D.) 
The  one  tlireefohl  es^oitinl : — As  with  all  de.' ply  earnest  men,  the  teaching  of  St. 
Paul  grew  out  of  the  special  events  of  his  life.  The  crisis  called  out  the  struggle, 
and  the  struggle  called  out  the  word  of  command.  For  some  years  of  his  life 
St.  Paul  passed  through  a  strange  experience.  The  man  who  to  us  is  a  saint,  the 
very  type  of  all  that  is  most  exalted,  the  very  man  who  now  keeps  the  conscience 
of  Christendom,  and  of  whom  it  is  a  commonplace  to  say,  "Follow  him,  as  he 
followed  Chiis^t,''  this  man,  while  he  lived,  was  for  many  years  regarded  by  religious 
men,  and  doubtless  by  devout  women  also,  as  a  dangerous  man,  as  lacking  true 
reverence  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  as  what  we  might  call  in  these  days  aa 
innovator  and  latitudinarian.  "  Circumcision,"  in  the  eyes  of  St.  Paul's  opponents, 
was  the  s.vmbol  of  what  they  rceienced  and  what  they  accused  him,  rightly  or 
wrongly,  of  disp;iraging.  He  called  himself  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  He  turned 
his  back  on  his  own  race  and  training.  Pie  seemed  eager  not  to  bridge  over  the 
chasm  which  separated  the  new  from  the  old,  but  to  glory  in  the  conviction,  which, 
indeed,  in  one  of  these  four  Epistles  he  expressly  enunciated,  that  "  in  Christ  old 
things  had  passed  away;  behold,  all  things  had  become  new."  Now,  how  did 
St.  Paul  bear  such  comments,  and  the  consciousness  that  they  came  not  only  from 
unscrupulous  partisans,  but  also  doubtless  from  devout  and  aggrieved  souls?  I 
think  we  may  say  that  among  all  his  manifold  troubles  he  had  no  heavier  cross 
to  bear  than  this.  It  led  him  not  only  to  justify  himself — not  only  in  various 
ways  and  at  various  times  to  make  an  Apoloiiia  pro  vita  sua — but  to  dwell 
earnestly,  solemnly,  may  we  not  also  say  wistfully,  and  with  something  of  a  holy 
impatience,  on  the  real  stake  at  issue.  Why  all  this  battling  about  symbols,  about 
outward  things,  about  the  things  below,  instead  of  the  things  above  ?  Circum- 
cision and  uncircumcision,  sjmbol  and  no  symbol,  conformity  with  the  past,  or 
no  conformity,  what  were  they  in  the  sight  of  Him  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  knows 
no  difference  between  Gerizim  and  Jerusalem  ?  The  essential  thing  is  this — the 
keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God ;  faith  which  worketh  by  love  ;  a  new 
creature.     We   may  regard    these    as   three   essentials,  or  as  one  essential;    but 


VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  459 


here  we  have  from  a  master  of  the  spiritual  life,  at  a  time  when  he  was  attacked 
on  every  side  by  misrepresentation,  besides  that  which  came  upon  him  daily, 
"  the  care  of  all  the  churches,"  an  emphatic  declaration  of  the  essence  of  true 
Christianity;  obedience  to  God's  commands,  faith  working  by  love,  a  new  creature. 
I.  Whatever  else  may  be  important  or  unimpoitaut  in  Christian  teaching  or 
discipline,  this  at  least  is  essential,  thk  keeping  of  the  co\ntANi)5iENTs  of  God. 
The  expression  may  mean  almost  anything,  or  almost  nothing,  according  to  our 
rank  in  the  school  of  Christ.  To  the  ripe  scholar  it  means  almost  ever.\  thing.  "  The 
keeping  of  tlie  commandments  of  God."  "  Which  be  they?  "  "  The  same  which 
God  !-piike  in  the  20tli  chapter  of  Exodus?"  Yes,  of  course,  and  much  more. 
The  same  which  the  life  and  death  of  Christ  have  written,  not  on  tables  of  stone, 
but  on  tables  of  the  heart  and  conscience.  The  commHndments  which  every 
development  of  thought,  every  discovery  or  half-disjovery  as  to  tlie  origin  or  the 
mysterious  interdependence  of  mind  and  body,  nay,  every  acceptance,  general  or 
partial,  of  some  moral  half-truth  or  even  honest  heresy,  have  c  mcurred  in  stamp- 
ing upon  an  enlightened  conscience.  Wherever  the  spirit  of  the  age  is  in  harmony 
with  tlie  Spirit  of  God,  wherever  the  increase  of  thought  and  knowh  dge  points  to 
wider  sympathies  and  enlarged  fields  of  human  service,  there  are  fresh  provinces 
marked  o.t  for  the  empire  of  "  the  comm>tndments  of  God."  To  learn  these  com- 
mamiments,  to  accept  them  with  ardour  and  intelligence,  with  the  mind  as  well  as 
with  the  heart — to  "  do  them  "  ourselves  and  to  "  teach  men  so  " — this  is  one  of  the 
essentials  of  a  true  Christian  faith.  II.  "  In  Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth 
anything,  nor  uncircimcision,  but  faith  which  woeketh  by  love."  We  are  not 
content,,  surely,  that  these  should  remain  merely  technical  words;  we  wo  Jd  have 
them  living  forces.  To  St.  Paul  faith  is  that  outgoing  of  the  whole  being — mind, 
heart,  spirit — which  attaches  itself  to  a  Person  ;  believes  in  Him,  clings  to  Him, 
trusts  Him,  worships  Him  ;  finds  in  His  will,  and  even  more  iu  His  assured 
sympathy,  the  plainest  guarantee  of  duty,  and  cannot,  even  in  imagination, 
separate  itself  from  His  presence  and  His  indwelling.  By  this  test  may  we  know 
whether  we  are  Christ's  disciples.  In  Christ  Jesus  faith  working  throu^ih  love  is 
an  essential.  We  cannot  live  without  regardto  Him,  as  thouj^h  He  were  nothing 
now  to  us  beyond  nn  illustrious  Example.  We  cannot  look  at  Him,  speak  of  Him, 
criticise  Him  as  from  outside.  We  cannot  think  of  Him  as  the  citizens  of  a 
neutral  power  migiit  think  of  the  ruler  or  the  general  of  some  belligerent  nation, 
sympathising  pernaps  in  part  with  his  policy,  but  still  rsgaiding  it  as  outside 
their  own.  No!  we  are  not  outsiders.  We  are  servants  of  One  who  has  used  the 
strongest  language  as  to  His  claims  upon  His  servants  ;  One  who  has  SHid,  "  He 
that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me";  and  again,  '*  Abide  in  Me,  and  I  iu  you; 
as  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself  exc-pt  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more  can 
ye  except  }e  abide  in  Me";  and  again,  "Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of 
Man  and  drink  His  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."  "  Faith  which  works  by  love," 
perfect  trust  in  .Jesus  Christ  showing  forth  its  devotion  by  sympathy  with  those 
whom  He  calls  His  brethren — this  is  life  eternal ;  this  can  never  disappoint,  never 
betra^'  the  soul  that  trusts  it.  III.  "Neither  is  circumcision  anything,  nor 
uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creatuke."  It  is  not  easy,  nay,  it  is  morally 
perilous,  to  try  to  analyse,  as  in  a  laboratory,  the  essence  of  an  expression  wrung, 
one  might  dare  to  say,  from  the  very  heart,  and  steeped  in  the  very  life-blood  of 
this  great  soldier  of  Christ,  a  "new  creature,"  a  "  new  creation."  One  thing  is 
clear — we  may  interpret  at  least,  if  we  hesitate  to  apply — that  St.  Paul  must  have 
meant  to  express  by  this  phr  ise  the  greatest  of  all  changes,  not  a  mere  improve- 
ment, the  lopping  off  of  a  vice  here,  and  an  ambition  there  ;  not  a  taming  down  of 
the  old  wild  nature  under  the  yoke  of  some  humanising  and  civilising  charm  ; 
nothing  so  sm-ill  as  this,  but  a  change  comparable  to  a  new  birth,  a  new  order  of 
being,  a  new  manifestation  of  life,  with  new  aims,  new  conceptions,  new  ideals, 
new  organ,  new  powers.  To  become  a  Christian,  then,  wheth-r  the  cliinge  were 
from  heathendom  or  Judaism,  must,  of  course,  have  been  something  different  from 
what  it  can  be  to  the  sons  of  Christian  parents  in  the  nineteenth  cenlui-y  of  the 
Christian  Church,  and  at  a  place  like  this  where  the  very  stones  are  witnesses  to 
the  reforming  and  re-creating  power  of  the  name  of  Christ.  But  even  now  I 
venture  to  say  that  we  do  not  know  what  true  Curistianity  is  unless  we  are  able  to 
recognise  it  as  "  a  new  creature."  It  is  the  "  new  creature  "  which  "  tin  ough  peril, 
toil  and  pain,"  was  to  "  overcome  the  world."  It  was  the  "  new  creature  "  which 
was  to  root  out  gradually  all  that  was  vile  and  refuse  in  humanity,  and  to  present 
to  Christ  a  changed  society,  worthy  to  be  called  His  own   bride,  "  a  glorious 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  va. 


Church,   not    having    si^ot   or   wrinl<le,   or   any   snch    thing."      (H.    M.   Butler, 
D.D.)         Let  every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein   he  was  called. — 

On  the  choke  of  a  ■profession  : — la  seasons  of  unusual  religious  excitement  and 
earnestness  men  are  tempted  to  regard  all  political  and  social  distinctions,  and  all 
ordinary  secular  employments,  as  abolished  or  suspended.  This  apostolic  injunc- 
tion may  be  considered  as  directed  in  piinciijle  against  a  twofold  form  of  error 
prevalent  at  such  times.  1.  In  the  first  place  it  is  directed  against  the  error  of 
making  religion  a  business  or  profession  by  itself,  leaving  us  no  time  or  thought 
for  anything  else.  Who  is  the  best  Christian  ?  Not  he  who  makes  the  loudest 
professions  of  Christianity,  nor  he  who  gives  the  most  time  to  thinking  about  it, 
nor  yet  he  who  best  understands  its  principles ;  but  he  who  best  succeeds  in 
applying  these  principles  to  his  daily  cares  and  duties,  and  in  filling  his  place  in 
society,  whatever  it  may  be,  in  a  Christ-like  spirit.  2.  Again,  the  injimction  in  the 
text  is  directed  generally,  and  in  principle,  against  the  kindred  error  of  supposing 
that  there  are  many  lawful  callings  or  professions  in  which  it  is  impossible  to  lead 
a  Christian  life.  More  difficult  it  may  be,  but  not  impossible,  the  difficulty  only 
eniiancing  the  virtue  which  has  strength  and  resolution  enough  to  overcome  it. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  clerical  profession,  to  those  who  are  fit  for  it,  is  generally 
thought,  in  a  moial  and  religious  point  of  view,  to  promise  best  of  all;  because 
the  special  business  and  object  of  the  calling  coincide  so  entirely  with  what  ought 
to  be  the  highest  business  and  object  of  us  all.  But  here  also  there  is  difficulty 
and  drawback,  showing  that  the  difference  in  the  eligibility  of  the  various  profes- 
sions on  moral  grounds  is  not  so  great  as  is  often  supposed.  Where  the  profession 
is  religious,  the  danger  is  that  the  religion  will  become  professional.  Then,  too, 
looking  merely  at  the  effect  of  his  labours,  I  believe  it  is  often  possible  for  a  layman 
to  do  more  for  religion  than  a  clergyman,  from  the  very  fact  that  he  cannot  be 
suspected  of  a  professional  bias  or  bribe.  We  arrive,  then,  at  the  conclusion  that 
all  the  great  professions  are  open  to  choice,  and  that  there  is  nothing  in  any  one 
of  them,  in  itself  considered,  to  hinder  a  good  man  in  certain  cases  from  choosing 
it.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  all  profi^ssions  are  equally  eligible  in  them- 
selves ;  much  less,  that  all  are  equally  eliL'ible  to  every  person  and  under  all 
circumstances.  A'l  are  open  to  choice  ;  but  this  does  not  exclude  tbe  duty  of 
making  a  wise  choice,  as  being  that  on  which,  more  perhaps  than  on  any 
other  one  thing,  a  man's  usefulness  and  happiness  will  depend.  Let  me  begin 
by  observing,  that  if  the  time  for  choosing  a  profession  has  come,  it  is  not  well,  as 
a  general  rule,  to  postpone  it  by  unnecessary  delays.  If  you  say,  your  mind  is 
unsettled  ;  I  reply,  in  the  first  place,  that  in  practical  matters  the  will  has  more  to 
do  in  settling  the  mind  than  art,'uments  ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  probable  effect  of 
another  year  spent  wiihout  an  object  will  only  be  to  unsettle  j'our  minds  still  more. 
To  enter  on  the  practice  of  any  profession  without  being  duly  prepared  for  it  is,  I 
admit,  a  great  error  ;  but  this  is  a  reason  for  beginning  the  preparation  as  soon  as 
may  be ;  certainly  it  is  no  reason  for  unne'essaiy  delnys.  So  much  impressed  was 
Dr.  Johnson  with  the  mischief  of  fickleness  on  this  subject,  that  he  is  half 
inclined  to  recommend  that  every  one's  calling  should  be  determined  by  his 
parents  or  guardian  ;  at  any  rate,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  conclude,  "  that  of  two 
states  of  life  equally  consistent  with  religion  and  virtue,  he  who  chooses  earliest 
chooses  best."  Annther  preliminary  suggestion  is,  that  in  choosing  a  profession 
we  should  take  care  not  to  allow  too  much  weight  to  local  and  temporary  con- 
sidera'ions; — considei'ations  which  will  have  no  bearing  on  our  future  progress, 
except  perhaps  to  narrow  and  limit  it.  I  suppose  there  are  those  who  can  give  no 
better  reason  for  being  in  one  profession  rather  than  another  than  this,  that  they 
found  it  easier  to  get  into  it.  But  certainly  our  success  and  happiness  are  to 
depend,  not  on  our  getting  into  a  profession,  but  on  our  getting  on  in  it ;  that  is  to 
say,  on  our  being  abie  to  fill  it  honourably  and  well.  I  know  the  common  excuse. 
It  will  be  said,  that  we  are  often  placed  in  circumstances  where  we  must  do,  not  as 
v,-e  would,  but  as  we  can.  We  talk  about  what  we  can  do,  and  what  we  cannot; 
but,  after  all,  this  is,  for  the  most  part,  an  arhitraty  distinction.  What  one  man 
calls  impossible,  another  man  calls  merely  difficult ;  and,  with  minds  which  are 
made  of  the  right  sort  of  stuff,  difficulties  do  not  repel  or  dishearten  ;  they  only 
stimulate  to  new  and  greater  efforts.  Hence  we  conclude,  that  every  yonng  man 
owes  It  to  himself,  at  any  sacrifice  consistent  \\ith  virtue  and  religion,  to  find,  as 
soon  as  mav  b-,  his  proj^er  place  and  calling,  meaning  thereby  the  place  and  calling 
in  which,  with  his  educat'on  wnd  abilities,  he  is  most  likely  to  become  useful  and 
happy.     Bat  how  is  lie  to  find  it  ?  that  is  the  great  question.     I  answer  generally, 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  461 


By  consideriuf;  what  he  was  made  for,  taking  into  view,  at  the  same  time,  his 
intellectual  aptitudes,  and  his  monil  needs  and  dangers.  As  I'egards  iiiteliectual 
or  mental  aptitudes,  or  what  is  sometimes  callt-d  the  natural  bent  of  one's  genius, 
two  extreme  opinions  have  found  supporters,  which  seem  to  me  to  be  almost  equally 
removed  from  practical  wisdom.  The  first  is  that  of  those  who  contend  that  a 
strong  tendency  to  one  profession  rather  than  to  another  is  to  be  considered  ;  but 
only,  that  it  may  be  crossed  and  overruled.  Thus,  if  a  person  early  manifests 
extraordinary  talents  for  business  and  affairs,  this  is  a  reason  why  he  should  not 
be,  by  profession,  a  man  of  business  and  affairs,  for  he  is  enough  of  that  already  : 
he  ought  rather  to  go  into  the  army  or  the  Church,  which  will  have  the  effect  to 
call  forth  his  latent  qualities.  I  hardly  need  say  that  this  doctrine,  plausible  as  it 
may  seem  to  some  minds,  is  thtoretically  false,  and  practically  absurd.  It  is 
theoretically  false  ;  for,  though  balance  and  harmony  of  character  enter  into  the 
theory  of  what  a  man  ought  to  be,  these  have  nothing  to  do  with  an  equal,  or  even 
with  a  proportionate  development  of  his  faculties.  Moreover,  to  pursue  this  course 
would  be  practically  absurd.  Every  man  would  do  what  he  is  least  fitted  to  do  ; 
and  the  consequence  would  be,  that  the  whole  work  of  life  would  be  done  in  the 
worst  possible  manner  and  under  the  greatest  possible  disadvnntages.  Nor  is  this 
all ;  for  the  subject  has  its  religious  aspects.  Wnen  we  refer  to  a  man's  profession 
as  being  liis  vocation,  or  calling,  we  suppose  him  to  be  called.  Every  man  is 
cahuly  and  impartially  to  consider  what  he  was  made  for,  wh  tt  by  the  constitution 
of  his  mind  and  character  he  is  best  fitted  to  become,  and  to  look  upon  this  as 
a  call  from  God — the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  his  own  nature,  which,  when 
distinct  and  emphatic,  he  has  no  riglit  to  disregard.  Often,  however,  and  I 
supijose  I  may  say  generally,  the  call  is  not  distinct  and  emphatic,  at  least  as 
regards  most  professions  ;  and  this  leads  me  to  notice  the  other  of  the  two  extreme 
opinions  referred  to  above.  It  consists  in  supposing  that  every  man  has  his  jjlace, 
and  that  everything  depends  on  his  finding  that  particular  jilace,  a  mistake  here 
being  final  and  fatal.  No  such  thing-  We  are  not  born  with  adajitations,  but 
with  adaptaS)ilities  ;  and  these  are  such  in  most  men  that  they  can  fit  themselves 
as  well,  or  nearly  as  well,  for  one  as  another  of  several  professions.  Leaving  out 
of  view  eminence  in  the  line  arts,  which  seems  to  require  at  the  start  a  peculiar 
nervous  organisation,  I  do  not  believe  there  is  one  man  in  ten  whom  nature  has 
endowed  with  aptitudes  and  predispositions  so  special  and  marked  that  he  might 
not  succeed  perfectly  well  in  any  one  out  of  several  pursuits.  In  a  large  majority 
of  cas^s  the  battle  of  life  is  won,  not  by  natural,  but  by  personal  qualities  ;  by 
those  personal  qualities  which  invite  favour  and  inspire  confidence  and  insure 
courage  and  persistency  in  whate\'er  is  undertaken.  Neither  your  profession  nor 
your  circumstances,  but  the  qi;ick  eye,  and  the  strong  arm,  and  the  iron  will  must 
work  out  for  you  the  great  problem  of  life.  These  qualities,  however,  are  little 
better  than  brute  force,  unless  inspired  and  directed  by  a  high  moral  purpose ; 
and  this  high  moral  jjurpose  little  better  than  a  breath  of  air,  unless  it  rests 
on  religious  faith  ;  and  this  religious  faith  "  unstable  as  water,"  unless  accepted 
as  the  revealed  will  of  God.  "  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 
that   is   laid,    which   is   Jesus   Christ."      (J.    Walker,   D.D.)  Abide   in  your 

caUiitfi,  if  it  is  an  honest  one.  1.  It  is  God's  own  appointment.  2.  God  has 
blessed  you  in  it.  3.  It  can  be  no  impediment  to  a  holy  life.  4.  Affords  ample 
scope  for  the  development  of  Christian  character.  5.  May  be  dignified  by  fidelity. 
(J.  Lyth,  D.D.)     Christianity  universally  applicable  : — It  is— I.  Adapted  to  evert 

BANK  AND  CONDITION.  II.  INTERFERES  WITH  NO  HONEST  CALLING,  but  rather  alle- 
viates, dignifies,  and  makes  it  subservient  to  the  noblest  ends.  III.  Teaches 
UNIVERSAL  coNTENTiiENT.  1.  In  the  recognition  of  the  Divme  will.  2.  By  the 
enjoyment  of  the  Divine  blessing.  (Ibid.)  Art  tliou  callecl,  being  a  servant  ? — ■ 
The  Cliristian  slave: — I.  His  privilege— called.  II.  His  duty — contentment. 
III.  His  EMANCIPATION — a  lawful  object  of  ambition.  (Ibid.)  True  liberty  : — I. 
Does  not  consist  in  independence,  1.  A  slave  may  be  free.  2.  The  freeman  a 
slave.  If.  It  consists  in  the  subjection  of  the  heart  to  Christ  who — 1. 
Makes  the  hardest  service  freedom.  2.  Subjects  the  freest  will  by  the  force  of  love. 
(ibid.)  The  yospel : — 1.  Emancipates  the  slave.  2.  Captivates  the  free.  (Ibid.) 
The  common  lot  tlie  best  spliere  : — In  the  "  Eecords  "  of  Dr.  Ealeigh's  Life  we  meet 
with  some  striking  thoughts  suggested  while  he  journeyed  in  Palestine.  The 
following  remarks  are  interesting  and  instructive :  "  It  seems  strange  that  events 
so  great  should  transpire  in  a  geographical  area  so  small.  Palestine  is  not  much 
larger  than  Wales,  to  which,  in  some  parts,  it  is  not  unlike,  and  not  only  is  it  small, 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  vii. 


but  rug'jerl,  even  what  men  call  'common.'  Some  travellers  come  back  almost 
oppressed  with  the  '  commonness '  of  what  they  have  seen.  God  does  not  need 
niucli  earthly  space,  nor  tliatthe  little  should  be  of  what  men  esteem  the  best,  on 
whicli  to  prepare  tlie  scenes  of  the  great  drama,  histoiical  and  celestial,  which  has 
b  en  tliere  unfolded.  He  does  not  want  a  continent  with  fur-stretching  plains  and 
ship-liearing  rivers.  He  wants  only  a  strip  of  land  lunning  along  the  sea  shore  ;  a 
confused  mass  of  mountain  and  high  laud  and  plain  ;  a  single  river  of  moderate 
size,  a  lake,  and  a  Dead  Sea.  Only  so  much — and  the  great  drama  may  go  on 
w^hich  has  already  culminated  in  a  tragedy,  and  which  is  destined,  on  some  future 
day,  to  end  in  a  world-wide  triumph.  God  has  repeated  that  type  and  method 
of  action  often.  Egypt  is  a  river-bed.  Greece  is  little  else  than  rock  and 
sea.  Monteuf-gro  is  an  eagle's  nest.  Grau'Hy  the  Divine  action  show^  against  a 
background  of  plainness!  Beautifully  the  Divine  idea  is  worked  out  in  scenes  of 
common  life !  The  fisherman  in  his  I'oat  on  the  sea  ;  the  shepherd  leading  his  flock 
along  the  hillside ;  sisters  dwelling  in  a  brother's  house  in  a  village — these,  and 
such  as  the-^e,  Hre  the  characters  illuminated  for  ever  for  the  instruction  of  all  the 
W'orld.  ^Vhat  can  we  do  better  than  construct  our  life,  and  seek  to  have  it  inspired 
after  the  model  of  God's  own  action  ?  Do  our  souls  Legin  to  hanker  after  the  fat 
pastures,  the  Iroad  acres,  the  rich  estate,  the  ample,  well-furnished  house?  And 
do  we  dislike  the  commonness,  the  ruggednes-s  thiough  which  we  must  work  our 
way?  We  are  wrong,  we  need  much  less  than  we  are  apt  to  imagine,  we  must 
correct  our  ideal.  We  need  only  foothold — room  to  begin.  We  d"  not  need 
selected  and  auspicious  circumstances — we  need  just  such  as  come.  We  may  take 
the  commonness  and  gloiify  it  by  our  temper  and  f^pirit.  We  may  vanquish  the 
hardsliips  of  life  by  courage  and  industry,  and  fill  all  its  scenes  with  a  gentle  and 
nolile  simplici'y.  We  may  put  righteousness  into  it,  strong  as  the  bars  of  the 
mountains  round  about  Jerusalem,  and  love  in  the  h^^art  of  it,  rising  ever  more  like 
the  waters  of  iShiloah,  and  so  all  our  life  will  be  a  Holy  Land."  For  he  that  is 
called  in  tiie  Lord,  being  a  servant,  is  the  Lord's  freeman. — Deliverance  from 
alavery : — I.  The  bondage  sdpposed  by  the  gospel,  and  which  calls  fob  its 
iNTEEFERENCE.  It  is  a  boudage — 1.  In  which  all  are  born.  2.  Proilaced  and 
perpetuated  by  an  awfully  evil  agency  from  without.  Satan  exercises  his  dominion 
in  a  secret  way,  by  adap;ing  it  to  our  own  pei  verted  inclinations.  He  moves  us, 
not  violently,  but  by  means  of  exciting  in  a  natuial  way,  our  depraved  powers  and 
propensities.     3.  Toilsome  and  piinful,  protitless  and  punishable.     II.  The  naiure 

OF    THAT    FREEDOM    FROM    IT,    WHICH    THf5     GOSPEL    EFFECTS     IN     THK     CASE     OF    ALL    ITS 

CONVERTS.  Every  such  one  is  "  the  Lord's  freeman  "  Of  this  freedom  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  author.  He  is  the  meritorious  cause  of  its  being  bestowed  ;  the 
agent  of  effecting  it  by  His  Spirit,  and  the  leader  of  all  who  partake  of  it.  It  is  a 
freedom  of  three  steps  and  di  grees.  1.  It  is  a  deliverance  from  the  rightful  powder 
and  custody  of  Satan.  (1)  Our  bondage,  because  voluntary,  is  our  crime.  Satan 
dot  s  not  force,  but  only  draws,  and  we  obey.  Hence  guilt  is  contracted,  and  guilt 
renders  us  amenahle  to  the  Divine  justice.  Thus  guilt  brings  us  under  condemna- 
tion, and  gives  Satan  a  rightful  power  and  custody  over  us,  as  the  permitted 
executioner  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  Such  a  ))Ower  the  law  gives  a  jailer  over 
the  prisoner  under  sentence.  (2)  Tois  is  the  state  of  which  we  are  made  aware 
when  convinced  of  sin.  Nor  can  we  think  of  any  plea  for  mitig  iting  or  removing 
the  sentence  of  Divine  justice.  Finding  ourselves  in  this  dilemma,  we  are  prepared 
for  the  revelation  of  Divine  mercy.  Je^us  steps  forth  as  an  Almighty  Deliverer. 
We  see  Him  in  the  gospel  offering  His  life,  paying  it  into  the  hands  of  justice  as  a 
ransom  for  the  deliveiance  of  sinners.  But  this  deliverance  must  be  sued  by  us, 
accompanied  \\ith  a  reference  by  faith  to  the  great  ransom  presented.  Then  it 
becomes  app'ied,  and  we  are  set  free.  (3)  Our  sentence  being  cancelled,  Satan 
loses  bis  rightful  power  over  us.  He  retains  his  vexing,  tempting,  accusing  power, 
but  his  light  is  g.  ne.  By  the  removal  of  condemnation  we  are  taken  out  of  his 
custody  for  ever  (R  m.  viii.  1).  2.  It  is  a  deliverance  from  inbred  sin,  hy  means 
of  new  and  holy  tastes,  incl  nations,  and  princip^s.  The  faith  by  which  we  obtain 
deliverance  from  guilt  and  the  power  of  Satan  is  a  holy  principle.  There  is  a  law 
in  the  mard  now,  stronger  than  the  law  of  sin  in  the  members,  and  overcoming  its 
dictates  (Rom  viii.  2).  3.  It  is  a  freedom  of  acting  and  moving  in  a  nohle  and 
elevated  condition.  The  converted  per-on  is  the  Lord's  freeman.  He  serves  Him 
in  ob'^ying  His  laws,  reverencing  His  institutions,  cherishing  His  image,  cultivating 
His  worship,  and  promoting  His  glory.  Tnis  service  is  perfect  freedom.  It  is  the 
BOul  moving  in  its  proper  element,  and  feeling  the  pleasure  which  every  creature 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  463 

enjo.ys  so  moving.  Conclusion :  1.  Observe  the  noble  character  of  Christianity. 
2.  Those  who  are  partakers  of  the  spiritual  freedom  of  the  gospel  have  three 
appropriate  exercises  allotted  to  them.  (1)  They  should  promote  the  natural  and 
civil  freedom  of  men,  according  to  the  dictates  of  the  gospel,  and  in  its  spirit. 
The  genius  of  the  gospel  is  opposed  to  bondage  and  vassah^ge  of  every  kind.  (2) 
By  teaching  men  in  the  highest  ranks  to  be  just,  they  can  hold  none  of  their 
fellow-creatures  in  slavish  and  ignominiou-i  subjection.  The  reign  of  Christianity, 
therefore,  must  be  productive  of  liberty.  (3)  Anticipate  for  yourselves  the  liberty 
of  heaven,  and  exult  in  the  jjrospect.  Your  freedom  is  here  only  begun.  You 
shall  enter  into  fud  redemption.  [J.  LeifcliiUl,  D.D.)  Liberty  and  slavery:  — 
The  ideas  are  antithetical  ;  they  therefore  explain  each  other.  We  cannot  under- 
stand the  liberty  spoken  of  until  we  understand  the  bondage,  and  vice  versa. 
Liberty  is  not  freedom  from  restraint  or  authority.  No  creature  is  thus  free.  All 
rational  beings  are  under  the  authority  of  reason  and  right.  And  as  these  are  in 
infinite  subjection  to  God,  all  creatures  are  under  absolute  subjection  to  Him.  And 
this  is  the  highest  liberty.  Consider — I.  Man's  sekvile  state,  1.  In  renouncing 
subjection  to  God  man  lost  his  liberty  and  became — (1)  The  slave  of  sin.  Tiiis 
subjection  is  bondage  because — (</)  It  has  no  right  to  rule.  It  does  not  belong  to 
our  normal  state,  and  is  inconsistent  with  the  end  of  being,  {h)  It  is  independent 
of  the  will.  We  cannot  throw  it  off.  (2)  The  slave  of  the  law.  He  is  under  the 
obligation  of  satisfying  its  denrands  or  of  bearing  its  penalty.  This — (a)  Is 
inexorable.  (/;)  Reveals  itself  in  the  conscience,  (t-)  Produces  the  slavish  spirit — 
fear  and  anxious  looking  for  of  judgment.  (3)  The  slave  of  Satan.  We  are  in  his 
power,  subject  to  his  control.  2.  Tnis  subjection  manifests  itself  in  various  ways. 
(1)  It  destroys  the  balance  and  jiower  of  the  soul.  (2)  Not  being  subject  to  God, 
and  being  unable  to  guide  itself,  it  submits  to  tlie  world  and  public  opinion,  and  to 
the  priesthood  and  the  Church.  II.  Man's  free  state.  Cnrist  is  our  Redeemer, 
and  the  author  of  our  liberty.  They  only  are  truly  free  whom  He  makes  free.  He 
frees  us — 1.  From  condemnation.  Until  th^s  is  done  nothing  is  done.  A  man  in 
prison  under  sentence  of  death  must  be  freed  or  he  cannot  be  delivered  from  other 
evils.  2.  From  the  law  or  the  obligation  of  fulfilling  its  dtmands.  3.  From 
the  authority  and  power  of  Satan  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15).  4.  From  the  reigning  power  of 
sin.  5.  From  a  slavish  spirit.  6.  From  all  undue  subjection  to  men.  (1)  By 
bringi>'g  the  reason  under  subjection  to  His  truth  we  are  freed  from  their  authority 
as  to  doctrine.  (2)  As  we  are  subject  to  Him  alone,  as  to  the  conscience,  we  cannot 
be  subject  to  any  other  authority  in  deciding  wlmt  is  morally  right  or  wrong.  (3) 
As  we  have  through  Him  deliverance  from  condemnation  and  acceptance  with  God, 
we  are  free  from  the  priesthood.  (4)  As  all  we  do  is  done  in  obedi^nce  to  Him, 
lawful  subjection   to  men  is  part   of  our  liberty.       (C.   Hodiic,  D.D.)  Slares 

and  free: — This  remarkable  saying  occurs  in  a  remarkable  connection,  and  is 
used  for  a  remarkable  purpose.  The  apostle  has  been  laying  down  the  principle 
that  the  effect  of  true  Christianity  is  greatly  to  diminish  the  importance  of  outward 
circumstance.  Paul  says,  "  Ynu  will  better  yourself  by  getting  nearer  God,  and  if 
you  secure  that — art  thou  a  slave?  care  not  for  it:  if  thou  mayest  be  free,  use  it 
rather.  Art  thou  bound  to  a  wife  ?  seek  not  to  be  loosed.  Art  thou  loosed  ?  seek 
not  to  be  bound.  Art  thou  circumcised  ?  seek  not  to  be  uncircumcised.  Never 
mind  about  externals:  the  main  thing  is  our  relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  because  in 
that  there  is  what  will  be  compensation  for  all  the  disadvantages  of  circumstances. " 
I.  First,  then,  note  how,  according  to  the  one-half  of  the  antithesis,  Christ's  freed 
MEN  ARE  SLAVES.  Now  the  way  in  which  the  New  Testament  deals  with  that  awful 
wickedness  of  a  man  held  in  bondage  by  a  man  is  extrem-ly  remarkable.  It  might 
seem  as  if  sueh  a  hideous  piece  of  immorality  were  altogether  incapable  of  yielding 
any  lessons  of  good.  But  the  apostles  liave  no  hesitation  whatever  in  taking 
slavery  as  a  clear  picture  of  the  relation  in  which  all  Ciiristian  people  stand  to 
Jesus  Christ  their  Lord.  He  is  the  owner  and  we  are  the  slaves.  And  all  the 
ugly  associations  which  gather  round  the  word  are  transported  bodily  into  the 
Christian  region,  and  there,  instead  of  being  hideous,  take  on  a  shape  of  beauty, 
and  become  expressions  of  the  most  blessed  truths.  And  what  is  the  centre  idea 
that  lies  in  this  metaphor,  if  you  like  to  call  it  so?  It  is  this  :  absolute  authority, 
which  has  for  its  correlative— for  the  thing  in  us  that  answers  to  it — uncon- 
ditional submission.  Jesus  Christ  has  the  perfect  right  to  command  each  nf 
us,  and  we  are  bound  to  bow  ourselves,  unreluctant,  unmurmuring,  unhesi- 
tating, with  complete  submission  at  His  feet.  And  His  authority,  and  our 
submission,   go   far,   far    deeper    than    the    most    despotic    sway    of    the    most 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


tyrannous  mastpr,  or  than  the  most  abject  submission  of  the  most  down- 
trodden slave.  For  no  man  can  coerce  another  man's  will,  and  no  man  can  require 
more,  or  can  ever  get  more,  tlian  the  outward  obedience,  which  may  be  rendered 
with  the  most  sullen  and  fixed  rebellion  of  a  hating  heait  and  obstinate  will. 
Absolute  submission  is  not  all  that  makes  a  disciple,  but  depend  upon  it  there 
is  no  disciplesbip  worth  calling  by  the  name  without  it.  Bc'W  yi'ur  obstinate  wdls, 
surrender  yourselves  and  accept  Him  as  absolute,  dominant  Lord  over  jour  whole 
being!  Are  you  Christians  after  that  patt>  rn  ?  Being  freemen,  are  you  Christ's 
slaves?  What  does  it  matter  what  you  and  I  are  set  to  do  ?  Nothing!  And  so 
why  n^ed  we  struggle  and  wear  our  hearts  out  to  get  into  conspicuous  places,  or  to 
do  work  that  shall  bring  some  revenue  of  pi aise  and  glory  to  ourselves?  "Play 
well  thy  part ;  there  all  the  honour  lies,"  the  world  can  say.  Serve  Christ  in  any- 
thing, and  it  is  all  alike  in  His  sight.  The  slave-owner  had  absolute  power  of  life 
and  death  over  his  dependents.  He  could  split  up  families;  he  could  sell  a«ay 
dear  ones  ;  he  could  part  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  cliild.  And  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Lord  of  the  household,  the  Lord  of  providence,  can  say  to  this  one,  "  Go  !  "  and 
Le  goes  into  the  mists  and  shadows  of  death.  And  He  could  say  to  those  that  are 
most  closely  united,  "Loose  your  hands!  I  have  need  of  one  of  you  yonder.  I 
have  need  of  the  other  one  here."  And  if  we  are  wise,  if  we  are  His  servants  in 
any  real  deep  sense,  we  shall  not  kick  against  the  appointments  of  His  supreme  and 
yet  most  loving  providence.  The  slave-owner  owned  all  that  tlie  slave  owned.  He 
gave  h'm  a  little  cottHge,  with  seme  humble  sticks  of  furniture  in  it,  and  a  bit  of 
ground  on  which  to  grow  his  vegetables  for  his  family.  But  he  to  whom  the  owner 
of  the  vegetables  and  the  stools  belonged  owned  them  too.  And  if  we  are  Christ's 
servants,  our  banker's  book  is  Cbrist's,  and  our  purse  is  Clirist's,  and  our  invest- 
ments are  Christ's ;  and  our  mills,  and  our  warehouses,  and  our  shops,  and  our 
businesses  are  His.  We  are  not  His  slaves  if  we  arrogate  to  ourselves  the  riglit  of 
doing  what  we  like  with  His  iDossessions.  And  then,  still  further,  there  comes 
into  our  apostle's  picture  here  yet  another  point  of  resemblance  between  slaves 
and  the  disciples  of  Jesus.  For  wbat  follows  my  text  iramediattlv  is,  "Ye  are 
bought  with  a  price."  Jesns  Christ  has  won  us  for  Himself.  Tht^re  is  only 
one  ijrice  that  can  buy  a  heart,  and  that  is  a  heart.  There  is  only  one  way 
of  getting  a  man  to  be  mine,  and  that  is  by  giving  myself  to  be  his.  And  so  we 
come  to  the  very  vital,  palpitating  centre  of  all  Christianity  when  we  say,  "  He 
gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  acquire  to  Himself  a  people  for  His  possession." 
The  one  bright  point  in  the  hideous  institution  of  slavery  was  that  it  bound  the 
master  to  provide  for  the  slave,  and  though  that  was  degrading  to  the  inferior,  it 
made  his  life  a  csireless,  cbildlike,  merry  life,  even  amidst  the  many  cruelties  and 
abominations  of  the  system.  If  I  am  Christ's  slave  it  is  His  business  to  take  care 
of  His  own  property,  and  I  do  not  need  to  trouble  myself  much  about  it  IL  Then 
there  is  the  other  side,  about  which  I  must  say,  secondly,  a  word  or  two ;  and  that 
is,  THE  i-EEEDOM  OF  Christ's  SLAVES.  As  the  text  puts  it,  he  that  is  culled,  being 
a  servant,  is  the  Lord's  freedman.  A  freeman  was  one  who  was  emancipated,  and 
who  therefore  stood  in  a  relation  of  gratitude  to  his  emancipator  and  pation.  So 
in  the  very  word  "freedman"  there  is  contained  the  idea  of  submission  to  Him 
who  has  struck  off  the  fetters.  I  do  not  forget  how  wisdom  and  truth,  and  noble 
aims,  and  high  purposes,  and  cultuie  of  various  kinds  have,  in  lower  degrees  and 
partially,  emancipated  men  from  self  and  flesh  and  sin  and  the  world  and  all  the 
other  fetters  that  bind  us.  But  sure  I  am  that  the  process  is  never  so  completely 
and  so  assuredly  effected  as  by  the  simple  way  of  absolute  submission  to  Jesus 
Christ,  taking  Him  for  the  supreme  and  unconditional  Arbiter  and  Sovereign  of  a 
life.  If  we  do  that,  if  we  really  yield  ourselves  to  Him,  in  heart  and  will,  in  life 
and  conduct,  submitting  our  understanding  to  His  infallible  Word,  and  our  wills  to 
His  authority,  regulating  our  conduct  by  His  perfect  pattern,  and  in  all  things 
seeking  to  serve  Him,  and  to  realise  His  presence,  then  be  sure  of  this,  we  shall  be 
set  free  from  the  one  real  bondage,  and  that  is  the  bondage  of  our  own  wicked 
selves.  There  is  no  such  tyranny  as  mob  tvranny ;  and  there  is  no  such  slavery 
as  to  be  ruled  by  the  mob  of  our  own  passions  and  lusts.  And  that  is  the  only  way 
by  which  a  man  can  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  dependence  upon  outward 
things.  Christian  faith  does  so,  because  it  brings  into  a  life  a  sutticient  com- 
pensation for  all  losses,  limitations,  and  sorrows,  and  a  good  which  is  the  reality 
of  -which  all  earthly  goods  are  but  shadows.  So  the  slave  may  be  free  in 
Christ,  and  the  poor  man  may  be  rich  in  Him,  and  the  sad  man  may  be  joyful,  and 
the  joyful  man  may  be  delivered  from  excess  of  gladness,  and  the  rich  man  kept 


CHAP.  VII.]  7.  CORINTHIANS.  4G5 


from  the  temptations  and  sins  of  wealth,  and  the  freeman  tanght  to  surrender  his 
liberty  to  the  Lord  who  makes  him  free.  A'ld  if  we  are  the  servants  of  Christ  we 
shall  be  set  free,  in  Ihe  measure  in  which  we  aie  His,  from  tlie  slavery  which  daily 
becomes  more  oppressive  as  the  means  of  communication  become  more  complete, 
the  slaveiy  to  popular  opinion,  and  to  men  round  about  us.  {A.  Macliin')i,  h.D.) 
Freedom  throuiih  Clirint : — Freedom  !  What  a  word  !  It  has  in  it  the  music  of 
the  trumpet  and  psaltery,  the  harp,  the  loud  cymbals  and  the  high  sounding 
cymbals  of  heaven  and  earth  !  I.  Ambition  speaks  out  boldly.  Feeling  fettered 
by  our  present  lot,  our  poverty,  hard  toil,  obscure  position  and  such  like,  we 
indulge  the  animus  of  discontent,  pine  to  rise  above  penury,  grinding  toil  and 
isolaiion.  Ind^penden''e  affirms  that  freedom  is  her  legitin)ate  offspring.  The 
boy  at  home,  curbed  in  many  ways,  feels  under  restraint  and  dicams  of  liberty. 
And  tliis  spirit  of  reckless  independence  belongs  to  us  all.  One  of  our  luling 
passions  is  a  desire  to  be  our  own  master — to  do  as  we  like— set  uj:)  on  our  own 
account — throw  off  all  Divine  control.  II.  But  some  will  say,  to  be  free  is  to  be 
EDUCATED.  There  is  but  one  thing  needed,  we  are  told,  to  roll  b.ick  the  dark  clmid 
of  bondage  from  t'.ie  race  and  cause  the  stais  of  liberty  to  stud  every  man's  blue 
vault,  viz.,  inti  lligence.  Give  the  people  a  profound  learning,  a  broaJ  culture,  and 
you  give  tlit  m  freedc^m.  All  will  concede  the  great  blessing  of  education  and  the 
utter  impos'-ibility  of  lifting  men  up  without  it.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  never  yet  have  a  people  been  made  free,  in  any  true  sense,  by  mere  intellectual 
culture,  however  profound.  I  appeal  to  Greece  of  old,  with  her  high  scholarship 
represented  by  Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  and  to  France  in  modern  history  with 
her  Voltaire,  Diderot,  Eeaumarchais,  and  llousseau.  After  all  their  learning, 
Greece  ended  in  corruption,  and  France  in  the  horrors  of  revolution.  Examples 
we  have  of  men,  bound  in  hand  and  foot  and  heart  by  chains  of  vice  and  ill-formed 
habits,  bearing  the  most  crushing  yoke  of  bondage,  yet  highly  educated  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  term  is  here  used.  Julius  Csesar  was  a  great  scholar,  but  he 
borrowed  money,  which  he  never  paid  back,  to  bribe  the  people  in  election  times, 
and  he  made  common  traffic  of  female  virtues.  Aristotle  was  profoundly  educated, 
but  he  classed  woiking  men  with  brutes,  and  made  lewdness  in  woman  excusable 
so  long  as  she  theveliy  accumulated  wealth.  Cardinal  de  Kichelieu  was  one  of 
the  brightest  intellectual  stars  of  his  age,  yet  he  lived  an  immoral  life,  being 
a  helpless  slave  to  intemperance  and  uncl<-anness.  And  what  are  we  to  say  of  the 
defiiulteis,  rogues,  impostors,  and  backsliders  from  integrity  so  nuinerous  in  our 
nii'st  and  all  over  the  country?  Looking  at  the  facts  of  the  case,  is  it  not  the 
wildest.  a»  surdity  to  speak  of  education  as  the  ultiujate  source  of  freedom?  III. 
Once  more,  govebxment  asi'Tres  to  be  the  true  liberator  of  the  race.  Now 
it  is  an  ab.-^olute  uicnarchy  for  which  the  high  claim  is  made,  now  limited  monarchy, 
now  an  oligardiy,  now  a  republic.  In  the  name  of  freedom  has  every  government 
of  earth  been  set  up.  From  the  capita's  of  all  the  States  and  the  seats  of  power 
of  all  nji'ions  has  floated  the  silken  binner  of  freedom.  But  oh,  how  often  the 
breezes  that  have  carried  out  these  folds  from  the  flag-staff  Lave  brought  to  the 
people  themselves  a  pestilence  of  corruption,  self-seeking,  intrigue,  and  imperialism 
— bondnge  in  its  worst  forms  !  IV.  Over  against  government,  education,  ambition, 
vaunting  independence,  and  every  other  such  thing,  I  place  the  declaration  of 

THE    OLD    SAGE    OF    TaUSUS    AS   THE    ONLY   REAL    SOURCE     OF    TRUE    FREEDOM:    "For    he 

that  is  called  of  the  Loi  d,  being  a  servant,  is  the  Lord's  freeman."  When  a  man  is 
called  of  Jesus  Christ  into  His  kingdom  as  a  regenerated  soul  through  the  power  of 
the  Holy  S{)iiit,  such  an  one  is  free,  has  come  into  possession  of  that  liberty  which 
knows  no  trammels  save  what  his  duty  to  God  and  to  man  puts  upon  him.  "Ye 
shall  know  the  truth  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  "  Where  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty."  But  what  is  the  freedom  here  taught?  First  of  all, 
it  is  from  sin.  The  essential  element  of  all  seivitude  and  degradation  and  bone 
and  heart  crushing  forces  is  sin.  Here,  then,  is  the  first  thing  from  which  Jesus 
Christ  gives  freedom.  But  Christ  in  the  soul  not  only  emancipates  from  the 
pollutiig  and  condemning  power  of  sin,  but  secures  for  us  the  joy  and  exercise  of 
the  highest  freedom,  notwithstanding  the  most  hami^eriiig  earthly  circumstances. 
Paul  had  in  mind  this  thought.  He  was  thinking  about  what  the  gospel  did  even 
for  slaves.  In  short,  Paul  says :  "  It  makes  no  difference  what  your  calling  is  or 
what  your  circumstances  are;  if  Chrit  is  in  you,  you  are  a  free  man,  and  your 
duty  is  to  serve  Him."'  How  this  argument  rebuts  what  many  affirm,  that  they 
cannot  be  Christians  because  of  their  peculiar  lot  in  life ;  or  they  cannot  serve  the 
Lord  because  the  state  of  their  affairs  will  not  permit  them.  Some  plead  poverty 
VOL.  I.  30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


as  an  excuse  for  not  being  Christians,  or  for  taking  no  part  in  the  service  of  Christ 
and  the  work  of  the  Church.  Not  a  few  say  they  have  no  time  for  these  things. 
Others  again  joarade  the  wrong-doing  of  others,  tlie  hindrances  placed  in  their  way, 
it  may  be,  by  domestic  infelicities.  Over  against  this,  the  Scriptures  declare  that 
the  grace  of  God  is  suliicient  to  save  us,  no  matter  what  our  lot  or  fortune  may  be, 
and  being  saved,  we  are,  therefore,  free  men  in  (Uiiist,  and  hence  His  servants. 
Art  thou  called  being  a  slave — a  poor  person,  a  man  crushed  with  cares  and  toil,  a 
heart-broken  husband  or  wife,  mother  or  father—  care  nothing  for  it.  Remember 
that  God  is  greater  than  adverse  circumstances,  and  He  can  stiiiigljten  every  one  of 
tliem  and  make  you  free  to  enjoy  and  serve  Him.  Nothing  is  any  more  a  thraldom 
when  the  soul  has  been  born  into  the  light  and  liberty  of  the  gospel.  With  this 
liberty  comes  the  duty  of  serving  tlie  Lord— a  duty  which  is  never  irksome,  but 
always  a  glorious  delight,  as  all  obligations  springing  out  of  a  sense  of  true  freedom 
ever  are.  "  H>^  that  is  ciUed,  being  free,  is  Ciirisfs  servant."  My  text  also 
involves  freedom  from  all  ecclesiastical  trammels  and  sectarian  and  denominational 
rigidities.  Not  that  we  are  to  condemn  Church  forms  and  laws  and  observances, 
but  these  are  not  to  hamper  us  in  our  service  of  Christ  or,  in  any  way,  keep  us 
from  the  largest  possible  usefulness.  Then,  too,  political  freedom  is  found  in 
Christ.  "  Of  one  thing  I  am  convinced,"  remarked  a  Brahmin,  "  do  what  we  will, 
oppose  it  as  we  may,  it  is  the  Christian's  Bible  that  will  work  the  regeneration  of 
India.  Wise  indeed  is  this  confession  of  the  learned  Oriental.  Applicable  to 
every  nation  is  the  thing  he  says.  The  Bible  is  the  world's  emancipator.  {A.  H. 
Mtiiiwnt.)  In  Chritit,  the  servant  tlie  Lord's  freeman:  the  tree  vinn  Christ's 
servant: — lu  Christ  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free.  It  is  not  what  they  are  with 
respect  to  man  that  is  thought  of,  but  what  they  are  with  respect  to  Christ.  Thus 
considered,  the  servant  is  the  Lord's  free  man,  the  free  man  is  Christ's  servant. 
The  apostle  speaks  to  the  bond  as  free.  The  man  who  is  called  being  a  servant, 
may  remain  so.  And  then  in  some  sense  he  is  still  the  servant  of  his  earthly 
master,  and  in  some  sense  he  is  not  so.  His  freedom  consists  in  his  being  Christ's. 
That  one  thing,  while  it  sets  bim  fre»  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  thus  brings 
him  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God,  changes  the  nature  of  tliat 
service  ^Yhich  he  pays  to  his  earthly  master,  and  gives  the  character  of  liberty  to 
that  also.  For  in  reality  he  has  but  one  master,  i.e.,  the  Lord ;  and  the  s'-rvice 
which  he  now  most  dutifully  renders  to  his  master  on  earth,  is  but  a  part  of  the 
service  which  he  pays  to  his  Master  in  heaven.  It  may  be  still  called  service 
from  the  nature  of  the  work,  but  it  is  freedom  from  the  spirit  in  which  it  is 
done.  As  the  servant  of  man,  he  once  found  his  work  drudgery,  and  did  it 
unwillingly.  But  as  the  Lord's  freeman,  he  finds  it  liberty,  and  does  it  with 
delight.  He  then  served  through  fear.  He  now  serves  through  love,  and  there- 
fore performs  every  part  of  his  duty  better  than  ever  he  did.  His  joy  is  to 
approve  himself  to  the  Master  wh^se  he  is,  and  whom  he  loves,  as  well  as  serves. 
His  service  is  uniform,  because  Jesus  is  always  the  same,  whatever  be  the  changing 
humour  of  an  earthly  master.  But  now  let  us  pass  to  him  who  has  been  called, 
being  free.  Of  him  it  is  said,  that  he  is  Ch  ist's  servant.  He  also  is  reminded 
that  he  has  a  master.  In  fact,  he  that  is  called  being  a  servant,  and  he  that 
is  called  being  free,  are  both,  after  their  calling,  exactly  in  the  sanae  circum- 
stances. Both  are  under  the  law  to  Christ,  and  neither  of  them  under  the  law 
to  man  any  further  than  the  law  of  Chr.st  permits.  The  servant,  therefore, 
is  bound  no  further  than  the  superior  will  of  Christ  requires ;  and  so  far  the 
free  man,  when  he  becomes  the  servant  of  Christ,  is  bound  also.  He  is  no  longer 
his  own.  He  has  not  himself  only  to  please.  He  has  talents  committed  to  him, 
and  he  must  employ  them  according  to  the  will  of  Him  who  committed  them. 
His  time  is  not  to  be  idled  away,  nor  his  health  and  strength  wasted  in  frivolous 
employments,  nor  his  substance  squandered  in  selfish  gratifications.  And  these, 
whether  they  he  professional,  or  mercantile,  or  agricultural,  are  all  appointed  of 
God;  and  by  them  the  servants  of  Christ,  though  they  serve  no  one  earthly 
master,  serve  the  public  at  the  command  of  their  Master.  Thus  those  who  are 
not  servants  to  men,  are  servants  to  Christ.  Tbey  have  to  serve  their  generation 
by  His  will ;  and  they  have  to  receive  the  law  from  Him.  And  now  let  us 
endeavour  to  review  the  subject  in  as  practical  a  manner  as  we  may  be  enabled 
to  do.  We  have  already  observed,  that  to  be  the  servant  of  Christ,  and  to  be  the 
Lord's  free  man,  are  one  and  tlie  same  thing.  Thus  both  were  the  servants  of 
Christ,  and  both  were  free,  because  the  service  of  both  was  a  service  of  love.  A 
service  of   love   must  be    a   free   service,    because   it   is   childlike   and  willing, 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  467 

delighting  to  do  what  pleases  him  whose  person  is  loved,  as  well  as  his  authority 
owned.  But  whence  arises  this  love  which  makes  the  servant  of  Christ  thus 
affectionately  dutiful,  the  free  man  of  the  Lord  thus  willingly  laborious?  It  is 
faith.  The  servant  of  Christ  can  then  only  be  satisfied  when  lie  is  conscious  of 
being  where  he  is,  and  doing  what  he  d"cs,  according  to  the  will  of  Christ. 
Hence  will  arise  two  benefits.  1.  It  is  obvious  that  this  habitual  reference  to 
the  will  of  his  Lord  will  very  much  tend  to  give  him  assurance,  and  to  prevent 
doubts  concerning  his  state.  And  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  this  end.  It  is 
impossible  for  a  man  to  ho]ie  assuredly  who  lives  negligently.  They  who  habitually 
acknowledge  Christ  as  a  Master  will  also  steadily  hope  in  Him  as  a  Saviour.  2. 
And  as  this  spirit  of  obedience,  which  leads  a  man  ha'  itually  to  consider  h  m-elf  as 
Christ's  servant,  is  tlie  best,  evidence  of  that  faith  and  interest  in  Christ  with  which 
salvation  is  connected,  so  it  gives  a  nobleness  to  every  station  of  life,  and  every 
work  of  man,  which  is  thus  conducted.  The  magistrate  on  his  bench,  or  even 
the  monarch  on  his  throne,  has  the  most  exalted,  as  well  as  the  most  just  views 
of  his  offii-e,  when  he  considers  himself  as  the  minister  of  God,  as  the  servant  of 
Jesus  Christ.  3.  Lastly,  I  may  observe,  that  Christ  is  too  good  a  Master  to  let 
His    servants    obey    Him    for   nothing.       {J.    Fawrett.)  Fersomtl    ChriKtiamty 

for  the  hand  (ind  the  free:  —  Pergonal  Christianity  —  I.  May  be  possesskd 
HY  BOTH  BOND  AND  FHKE  (ver.  22).  Many  slaves  were  in  connection  with  the 
Corinthian  Church.  Naturally  enough  some  would  desire  their  emancipation,  and 
the  more  so  as  Christianity  gave  them  a  sublime  sense  of  their  manhoi  d.  Paul's 
advice  is  not  to  be  too  anxious  about  their  enfranchisement,  but  rather  to  be 
anxious  to  "  abide"  in  their  "  calliug,"  their  religion.  Chrisiianity  is  fur  man  as 
man,  not  for  him  as  bond  or  free;  it  comi-s  to  him  as  outward  nature  comes  to 
him,  with  equal  freeness  and  fitness  for  all.  The  physical,  civil,  or  ec  lesiastical 
condition  of  a  man,  therefore,  in  this  life  is  no  excuse  for  his  not  becom  ng  a 
Christian  ;  thou^ih  bound  in  chains,  his  soul  is  free,  and  it  is  with  the  soul  that 
Christianity  has  to  do.  Slaves  were  members  of  many  of  the  first  Church'  s,  and 
religion  reign«  d  amongst  a  large  number  of  American  slaves.     II.  Its  possi-ssion, 

WHETHEK   BY    THE    BOND    OR     THE     FREE,    INVESTS     MAN     WITH     THE    HIGHEST    LIBERTY. 

He  is  the  "Lord's  freeman,"  however  manacled  his  bodily  limbs.  There  is  no 
freedom  like  this  from  the  dominion  and  consequences  of  in'>ral  wrong — the 
"  glorious  Uberty  of  the  children  of  God."  III.  Tins  highest  liberty  augments 
man's  obligation  to  SERVE  Christ  (ver.  23).  No  creature  owns  itself.  The 
highest  angel  has  nothing'  in  him  that  he  c^n  call  his  own.  Man  is  not.  merely  the 
property  of  God  on  the  ground  of  crea'ureship,  but  on  the  ground  of  Chiist's  inter- 
position (ch^p.  vi.  19).  This  being  the  case,  however  free  and  independent  of  men, 
you  must  ever  serve  Christ  heartily,  faithfully,  loyally,  and  for  ever.  His  service  is 
perfect  freedom,  it  is  heaven.     {D.  Thnmas,  D.D.)  The  siihordm  'tioii  of  love  :  — 

Slavery  is  the  subordination  of  one  wdl  to  another  will  under  the  inflnence  of  fear  ; 
loyalty  is  the  subordination  of  one  will  to  another  will  under  the  inspiration  of  love. 
Here  are  two  soldiers  :  one  has  been  drigged  by  conscription  and  put  in  the  Mrmy, 
and  fights  for  fear,  because  there  is  a  bayonet  behind  him  ;  and  beside  hi  n  wnother 
man  who  loves  his  country,  his  flag,  and  he  conrts  danger  and  death  for  love's 
sake — fear  there,  loyalty  here.  Here  are  two  pupils  sitting  .side  by  side  in  school: 
one  afraid  of  his  teacher,  with  his  mind  half  on  h  s  book  and  half  on  his  sports, 
eyeing  his  teacher  and  dreadnig  the  rod  — slave,  he  !  at  his  side  Hnother  p'  pil  who 
reveres  the  teacher,  whose  ambition  it  is  to  be  such  a  scholar  as  this  teacher  and 
such  a  man  as  this  man  is — loyal  pupil,  he!  Suboidinati^n  to  a  larger,  nobler, 
diviner  will  for  reverence'  sake  and  for  love's  sake  is  not  slavery;  it  is  the  great 
emancipator  of  the  world.  The  men  who  have  believed  in  Divine  sovereignty  have 
not  been  tlie  world's  slaves,  they  have  been  the  world's  freeni'  n.  ^Yhen  a  man  has 
a  conscience  behind  his  will,  and  God  belnnd  his  conscience,  no  man  can  put 
mana;les  upon  his  wrists.  Submission  is  not  the  weak,  invertebrate,  jellyfish 
quality  that  men  nnagine  it  to  be.  Submission  to  fear  is.  But  submission  to  love 
and  loyalty  is  not.  Men  tell  us  that  if  a  man  yields  his  will  to  the  sovereign  and 
supreme  will  of  Christ,  he  will  be  made  gentle,  amiable,  peaceful,  kindlv,  meek,  imt 
the  heroic  will  be  taken  out  of  him.  Ask  history  to  answer  the  question.  What 
sort  of  men  were  the  Scotch  Presbyterians  ?  Not  famous  for  meekne.-s  and  gentle- 
ness and  invertebrate  qualities.  What  sort  of  men  were  the  Swiss  Calvinists? 
Not  men  famous  for  truckling  and  le  ting  other  people  walk  over  them.  What  sort 
of  people  wnre  the  New  England  Puritans?  Men  who  were  strng  because  their 
will  had  behind  it  the  Divine  will,  and  they  willed  to  do  the  will  of  Another.     A 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


weak  will  is  o^e  thing,  and  an  obedient  will  is  another  and  a  very  dift'ereut  thing. 
To  be  a  Christian  is  to  take  the  Divine  will  as  your  will.  [Liiinan  Abbott.) 
Christ's  freemen  : — If  you  are  His  servants  you  are  free  from  all  be  ides ;  if  you 
give  yoarselves  up  to  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  me  i sure  in  which  you  give  youi  selves  up 
to  Him,  you  will  be  set  at  liberty  from  the  worst  of  all  slaveries,  that  is  the  slavery 
of  your  own  will  and  your  own  weakness,  and  your  own  tastes  and  fancies.  You  will 
be  set  at  liberty  from  the  dependence  up  m  men,  from  thinking  about  their  opinion. 
You  will  be  set  at  liberty  from  your  dependence  upon  externals,  fiom  feeling  as  if 
you  could  not  live  unless  you  had  this,  that,  or  the  other  person  or  thing.  You 
will  be  emancipated  from  fears  and  hopes  which  torture  the  men  who  strike  their 
roots  no  deeper  than  this  visible  film  of  time  which  tioats  upon  tlie  surface  of  the 
great  invisible  ahyss  of  Eternity.  If  you  have  Christ  for  your  Master  you  will  be 
the  masters  of  the  world,  and  of  time  and  sense  and  men  and  all  besides  ;  and  so, 
being  triunrphed  over  by  Him,  you  will  share  in  His  triumph.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Ye  are  bought  with  a  price  ;  be  not  ye  the  servants  of  men  (see  on  chap.  vi.  20). — 
True  freedom: — Observe — I.  The  import  of  the  apostle's  counsel.  "  Be  not  under 
bondage  to  men."  1.  This  exckides — (1)  Shivish  fear.  (2)  Servility.  (3)  Unlaw- 
ful submission.  2.  A.  servant  must  maintain  his  Christian  dignity  as  serving  the 
Lord  Christ.  II.  The  moiive  by  wrich  he  enforces  it.  Christ's  claim  upon  us 
secured  by  redeeming  grace — by  the  price  of  blood.     {J.  Lytli,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  Brethren,  let  every  man  wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide  with  God. — 

The  Cliristiaii  calling  : — 1.  Tiie  word  "calling"  in  a  Christian  sense  is  a  condensed 
confession  of  faith.     It  means  thit  our  life  is  governed  by  a  will  above  it,  and  is 
capable  of  receiving  influences  of  attraction  fr^m  the  Spirit  of  God.     2.  In  its 
secular  use,  as  a  man's  common  employment,  it  discovers  the  same  origin.     It 
must  have  sprung  up  in  days  when  it  was  believed  that  each  man's  business  was 
sacred,  and  that  he  himself  was  on  a  Divine  errand.     3.  The  expression  stirs  some 
feeling  of  mystery  ;  yet  a  life  without  the  sense  of  God  calling  it  is  far  more  perplex- 
ing than  with  that  key  to  its  changes.     For  severed  from  a  Father  it  is  not  only  a 
mystery  but  a  contradictiun,  an  engma  which  neither  genius  nor  sensuality  nor 
stoicism,  nor  suicide  can  solve.     Earnest  minds,  however,  find  rational  comfort  in 
it,  and  only  triliers  will  ignoie  it  alt^get'-er.     So  true  is  this  that  the  world's  great 
men  have  represented  themselves  as  led    on   by  a  power  beyond  themselves— a 
genius,  a  destiny,  or  a  deity.    But  the  apostle  refers  to  something  higher  and  holier 
than  this  dreamy  sentiment.     It  is  God  who  calls.      Chiist  has  lived,  and  He  asks 
living  followers.     He  has  died,  and  asks  the  spirit  of  sacrifice.     4.  It  is  remarkable 
how  perseveringly  the  New  Testament  clings  to  tnis  conception  (see  Concordance  on 
"called"  and  "calling").     Note  its  prominent  teachings.     I.  The  business  of  a 
Christian  life  is  something  special  and  distinctive.     1.  It  is  a  "calling"  by 
itself.     It  is   to   be    dis  inguished   from    all  other  occupations,  systems,  &c.     It 
springs  from  its  own  root,  giows  by  its  own  laws,  bears  its  own  peculiar  fruit.     2. 
It  is   a  Divine  calling.      Paul  speaks  as  if  no  pursuit  were  to  be  thought  of  in 
comparison   with   it.     II.    This  idea  of  a  calling  individualises  the  Christlvn 
PERSON.     Paul  had  no  conception  of  a  social  Christianity  apart  from  the  ijersonal 
righteousness  of  the  men  who  make  up  society,  and  therefore  he  uses  personal 
language.     It  is  quite  vain  for  us  to  congratulate  ourselves  on  a  state  of  general 
integrity  and   order,  if  we   tolerate   depravity  in  ourselves,  or  excuse  it  in  the 
usages  of  the  class  to  whi'h  we  belong.     If  we  have  a  community  of  a  thousand 
people,  in  which  we  want  to  see  the  Christian  graces  flourishing,  our  only  way  is 
to  go  to  work  and  turn  one  and  another  into  a  Christian  person,  each  beginning 
with  himself.     How  weary  God  must  be  at  hearing  these  Pharisaic  praises  of  a 
Christian  country,  legislation,  &c.,  from  those  who  allow  Christianity  to  conquer 
no  one  of  their  propensities.     III.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  the  calling  is  op 
UNIVERSAL  application.     It  is  not  meant  for  a  class  here  and  there.     "  Wliosoever 
will  "  ;  and  its  speciality  is  the  veiy  ground  of  its  universality.     For  it  addresses 
men — 1.  Of  all  kinds  of  mental  equipment.     2.  Of  all  varieties  of  outward  fortune. 
3.  In    every  time.      Conclusion  :  The  text  appeals  to — 1.  Families.      2.  Parents. 
3.  Men  of  action.     (Bp.  Hniitiufiton.)         Abiding  in  our  calling  :— The  Christian 
must   appear   in   the   man  of   business.     He  is  to  abide  with  God.     I.  By  the 
MODERATION  OF  HIS  DESIRES  AND  EXERTIONS ;  Dot  entangling  himself  in  the  affairs 
of    this   life ;    diligent  in    business,   but  not,    by  multiplication    and   complexity, 
injuring  the  health  of  his  body  and  the  peace  of  his  mind,  and  compelling  himself, 


CHAP.  VII  ]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  409 


if  not  to  omit,  to  curtail  his  relif^ious  duties.  II.  By  itnvariable  conscientious- 
ness ;  not  content  to  keep  him-elf  witliin  the  precincts  of  le^-al  obUgation,  but 
shunning  everything  that  is  me  in  and  over-reachnig  ;  and  exemplifj'ing  everything 
that  is  fair  and  honourable.  III.  By  a  dkvodt  tejipku  and  habit  that  will  leniind 
him  of  the  presence  of  God  ;  tliat  will  keep  him  from  planning  any  enteri^rise 
without  dependence  upon  Heaven  ;  practically  owning  the  agency  of  Providence  in 
all  the  contingencies  of  h's  aifairs ;  ascribing  all  to  the  blessing  of  the  Lord. 
Conclusion:  This  secular  life  is  Christianised,  and  the  bounds  of  religion  enlarged 
far  be>ond  the  district  of  what  we  commonly  mean  by  devotion.  In  all  situations, 
the  cares  of  life  demand  the  vaster  jiart  of  his  time  and  atti'ntion  ;  but  he  must 
always  walk  before  the  Lord  in  the  latid  of  the  living  ;  and  whether  he  eats  or 
drinks,  or  whatever  he  does,  he  may  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  spirit  of 
devotion  actuates  him  in  the  absence  of  its  forms;  and  this  principle,  as  is  reported 
of  the  philosopher's  stone,  turns  all  it  touches  into  gold.  Tlius  his  natural  actions 
become  moral ;  his  civil  duties  become  religious  ;  the  field  or  the  warehouse  is  holy 
ground  ;  and  the  man  of  business  is  the  "  man  of  God."  (Weckh/  Pulpit.)  How 
to  walk  icith  God  in  our  catlinfi : — I.  A  good  calling  is  a  great  meucy,  whether 
you  take  the  word  "calling"  for  the  calling  of  condition,  or  for  the  calling  of 
employment.  For — 1.  A  man  is  thereby  kept — (1)  From  idleness,  which  is  the 
nurse  of  all  wickedness.  (2)  From  busy-bodiedness.  The  more  idle  a  man  is 
the  more  apt  he  is  to  be  meddling  with  others'  matters  (2  Thess.  iii.  11).  2.  A 
lawful  calling  is  God's  ground,  inasmuch  as  no  calling  or  an  unlawful  one  is  the 
devil's  ground.  II.  A  man  having  a  good  calling  is  to  abide  therein.  1. 
Therefore  there  is  an  aptness  in  us  to  change  or  lay  down  our  callings,  or  why 
should  the  apostle  three  times  call  upon  us  to  abide  in  them?  2.  But  it  is  not 
absolutely  unlawful  for  a  man  to  leave  or  to  change  his  calling.  For  possibly  a 
man — (1)  Mny  be  qualitif^d  for  higher  emplo\meuts.  In  this  case,  David  left  his 
calling  of  a  shepherd  and  became  a  king ;  the  apostles  left  the  calling  of  their  fish- 
ing and  became  apostles.  (2)  May  see  the  same  hand  of  (iod  leading  him  out  of 
his  calling  which  did  bring  him  inio  it.  So  when  Noah  had  the  same  command  to 
go  out  of  the  ark  that  h«  had  to  go  in,  then  he  went  out.  (3)  May  be  forced 
through  want  to  change  his  calling.  Paul,  though  a  preacher  and  apostle,  was 
sometnnes  forced  to  work  with  his  hands.  3.  Thou^ih  it  be  lawful  in  snme  cases  to 
do  so,  yet  ordinarily  a  man  is  to  abide  in  his  calling,  for  a  good  calling  is  the 
Lord's  gift.  (1)  It  is  God  that  calls  a  man  to  it,  and  is  it  likely  that  God  will  bless 
him  who  deserts  it?  (2)  Ihere  is  no  calling  but  God  may  be  served  and  enjoyed 
therein  (ver.  22).  4.  But,  says  one,  that  is  the  reason  why  I  would  lay  down  my 
calling,  because  I  cannot  serve  God  so  well  theiem.  Are  you  sure  of  that? 
Luther  tells  us  of  a  certain  mau  that  was  given  to  anger,  and  who  to  avoid 
provocation  would  go  live  alone  as  an  hermit ;  and  going  to  the  well  with  his 
pitcher  something  displeased  him,  and  he  threw  down  his  pitcher,  and  he  broke  it 
in  anger  ;  which  when  he  had  done,  he  said.  Well,  now  I  see  it  is  not  in  my 
condition,  but  in  my  heart,  that  doth  cause  provocation  ;  therefore  I  will  return  to 
my  calling  again.  III.  It  is  the  dvty  of  every  man  to  walk  with  God  in  his 
calling,  and  not  barely  to  abide  therein.  1.  It  was  so  from  the  beginning.  Adam 
had  a  calling  in  the  state  of  innoceucy,  and  therein  he  was  to  walk  with  God.  2. 
And  if  a  man  do  not  walk  with  God  in  his  calling,  how  can  he  walk  with  God  at  all  ? 
A  man  is  not  said  to  walk  with  God  because  he  prays  in  the  morning  or  evening; 
walking  is  a  constant  thing.  3.  Thereby  a  man  is  distinguished  from  men  of  the 
world.  A  m)in  is  not  of  another  world  because  he  deserts  his  calling  that  he  may 
give  himself  unto  his  devotions.  Christ  Himself  was  in  the  world,  "  but  not  of  the 
world."  4.  This  is  that  which  will  sweeten  and  elevate  your  callings  :  everything 
is  raised  or  depressed  as  God  is  present  with  it  or  absent  tiom  it.  5.  Every  man  is 
as  he  is  in  his  callii'g;  a  man  hath  no  more  grace  than  he  ma}'  or  can  use  in  his 
calling;  and  though  I  have  all  parts  and  gifts,  yet  if  I  be  not  gracious  in  my 
calling,  they  ate  but  sounding  brass  and  as  tinkling  cymbal.     IV.  What  should  a 

MAN    DO    THAT   HE    MAY    WALK    WITH    GoD    IN    HIS    CALLING?         1.    Negatively.       (1)    YoU 

must  not  be  ignorant  of  the  way  of  your  calling;  for  if  you  take  i  p  a  calling,  and 
are  ignorant  of  it,  you  may  tempt  God  therein.  Every  man  should  be  the  master 
of  his  art.  (2)  You  must  not  be  negligent.  Diligence  in  our  callings  is  commanded, 
commended,  and  rewarded  in  Scripture.  (3)  You  must  not  deal  unjustly  with 
men  (Micah  vi.  8).  (4)  You  must  not  be  too  fond  of  your  calling,  or  you  will  forget 
the  God  of  your  calling.  You  will  go  with  an  apron  into  your  shop  that  you  may 
keep  your  clothes  clean,  and  hath  not  your  soul  as  much  need  of  an  apron  in  your 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


calling  ?  If  the  ivy  clings  too  close  unto  the  oak  it  hinderethits  growth  ;  so  if  your 
callings  cling  too  close  to  you,  and  you  to  your  callings,  it  will  hinder  your  spiritual 
growth.  2.  Aliirmatively.  (1)  You  must  observe  v^hat  those  temptations  are  that 
are  incid'-nt  to  your  calling,  and  take  heed  thereof  (vers.  2.3,  35).  (2)  You  must 
live  by  faith  in  your  callings.  Thereby  you  shall  be  kept  from  covetousness  and 
love  of  the  world"  "  This  is  our  victory,"  &c.  (3)  Whatever  you  do  therein,  do 
all  to  the  g'ory  of  God.  (4)  Be  sure  that  you  so  manage  your  calling  that  your 
general  calling  may  not  be  a  hindrance,  but  a  help  to  your  particular  ;  and  thus 
your  particular  calling  may  be  no  hindranie,  but  a  help  to  your  general  calling. 
(5)  Be  t-ure  that  you  turn  as  God  turns,  sweetly  complying  with  His  dispensations 
in  the  way  of  your  calling.  (G)  You  must  judge  of  things  in  your  calling  as  God 
judges.  (7)  You  must  spiritualise  your  particular  calling  with  heavenly  things; 
not  put  all  upon  a  morning  and  an  evening  prayer.  Conclusion  :  If  you  walk  with 
God  in  your  paiticular  calling,  God  will  walk  with  you  in  your  general  calling.  1. 
Then  shall  your  calling  be  a  blessing  to  you  indeed,  and  you  shall  have  a  greater 
reward  than  the  wealth  of  your  calling.  2.  Thereby  the  knots  and  difficulties 
of  your  callings  shall  be  taken  off,  and  your  way  made  easy.  3.  Thereby 
you  sliall  be  kept  from  the  sins  and  temptations  of  your  calling.  4.  Thereby  shall 
your  way  of  godliness  be  convincing  and  winning.  [W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  The 
difjwti/  of  the  secular  calling  :—l.  It  is  unfortunate  that  this  chapter  is  mainly 
occupied  with  subjects  the  public  discussion  of  which  is  in  these  days  hardly  pos- 
sible. Few  portions  of  his  Epistles  more  largely  reveal  the  far-sighted  wisdom  of 
St.  Paul.  He  was  the  foremf>st  statesman  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  golden 
mean  between  extreme  opinions  to  him  was  clear.  How  firmly  he  held  the  balance 
between  asceticism  and  license  1  2.  The  subject  here  is  most  difiicult  and  delicate. 
Fanatics  on  either  side  were  watching  eagerly  for  a  word  which  might  support  their 
views.  A  less  able,  wise,  and  self-controlled  man  might  easily,  with  such  a  force 
as  the  gospel,  have  shattered  the  whole  framework  of  civilisation.  Well  was  it  for 
the  world  that  this  tremendous  power  of  revolution  was  in  hands  so  wise,  so  calm, 
so  firm.      Note — I.  The  eaenest  desike  of  St.  Paul  that  there  should  be  no 

VIOLENT,    VISIBLE    CHANGE     IN     THE     RELATIONS     OF     CLASSES     AND     THE     ORGANISATION 

OF  SOCIETY.  "These  men,  that  have  turned  the  world  upside-down,  are  come 
hither  also."  But  the  marvel  is  that  practically  they  overturned  so  little,  and  left 
so  much  peacefuhy  and  patiently  to  grow.  Whatever  has  come  forth  from 
Christianity  for  human  welfare  and  progress  has  come,  not  from  without,  by  any 
rearrangeruent  of  classes  or  orders,  but  from  withiu,  by  the  renewing  and  reorder- 
ing of  individual  arts.  Christianity  introduced  an  idea  absolutely  new  into  the 
world  :  "  There  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew  .  .  .  for  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus." 
Here  was  explosive  matter  enough  to  shatter  society.  This  issue  Paul's  wisdom 
and  firmness  averted.  Read  the  Epistle  to  Philemon.  What  a  world  of  practical 
wisdom  is  there.  Take  this  great  question  of  slavery.  The  slaves  bi>re  the  yoke 
uneasily,  and  in  fact  slavery  in  those  days  was  eating  out  the  very  heart  of  the 
empire.  Throw  this  new  thought  into  their  minds.  It  is  hateful  to  God  and  wrong; 
all  are  equal  before  Him,  and  have  the  right  from  Him  to  contend  for  equality.  It 
might  have  originattd  a  new  and  more  awful  servile  war,  which  would  have  reduced 
to  ruin  the  whole  structure  of  Roman  society,  ages  before  the  German  races  were 
tramed  to  occupy  its  room.  But  the  gospel  announced  the  principle,  and  yet 
maintained  the  order.     II.  Paul's  deep  conviction  that  no  external  change  in 

THE    CONDITION   AND   RELATIONS    OF   MEN   IS    WORTH  ANYTHING  UNLESS   IT    GROW    OUT    OF 

AND  CLOTHE  A  CHANGE  DEEP  DOWN  IN  INDIVIDUAL  SOULS.  Nothing  Can  be  more 
fallacious  than  the  notion  that  in  different  circumstances  you  would  be  a  different 
man.  A  bad  slave  would  be  a  bad  master  ;  a  bad  child  a  bad  parent ;  a  bad  man 
would  be  bad  everywhere.  Man  cannot  be  content  with  the  world  as  it  is.  But 
he  dreams  that  the  mi- chief  is  in  things.  God  says  it  is  in  souls.  And  God  sets 
up  His  kingdom  in  souls — in  the  heart  of  the  mischief.  The  Jews  thought  the  evil 
was  in  their  condition,  so  they  dreamed  of  a  splendid  Messiah's  kingdom.  God 
saw  that  it  was  in  their  spirits,  and  said,  "  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you." 
Paul  wouLI  have  had  little  hope  of  any  gieat  ultimate  good  if  he  could  simply  have 
struck  the  sctptre  out  ot  the  hand  of  the  brutal  Nero,  emancipated  every  slave  in 
the  broad  Roman  dominion  ;  while  no  new  life-blood  was  poured  into  the  exhausted 
veins  of  society.  No  1  it  must  go  on  struggling,  suffering,  while  the  inward  renew- 
ing was  working ;  then  it  might  be  lifted  bodily  into  a  clearer  and  brighter  heaven. 
III.  That  the  condition  of  a  man  in  his  particular  calling  is  just  the  instru- 
ment WHICH  God  has  furnished,  by  the  use  of  which    he    may  train   himself 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  471 


FOR  YET  HIGHER  THINGS.  Do  not  be  Content  to  aspire,  but  grow.  Do  not  demand 
things  as  abstract  rights,  win  them  by  manifest  power.  Do  not  talk  of  being,  or 
boast  of  calling,  but  be,  an^l  thus  make  your  calling  and  election  sure.  And  this 
runs  throLigh  the  whole  scale  of  life.  Have  you  capacity  for  higher  things?  Prove 
it  by  doing  the  lower  more  perfectly.  Throw  all  your  soul  into  your  work  ;  you 
are  surely  training  yourself  for  the  highest  work  of  heaven  (Luke  xix.  10,  17). 
Despising  the  one  talent  it  the  most  fatal  folly.  All  faculty  is  like  seed.  Planted 
in  work,  it  grows,  and  fills  wide  neighbourhoods  with  shade  and  fruit.  The  con- 
dition wherein  a  man  is  called  is  God's  best  school  for  him.  Not  by  wriggling 
hastily  out  of  it,  but  by  working  bravely  and  patiently  in  it,  he  is  helping  the  pro- 
gress of  his  own  being  and  of  mankind.  IV.  But  a  man  may  say.  It  is  poor 
WORK  AFTER  ALL.  Is  IT?  "  TiiEiiKiN  ABIDE  WITH  GoD."  Let  the  poorest  remember 
that  God  abode  with  it;  and  th.it  all  that  is  most  blessed  for  the  universe  came  to 
it  out  of  a  poor  workman's  home.  But  the  lot  is  a  very  humble  one!  Be  it  so. 
It  is  humble  with  Him.  What  is  it  to  abide  in  our  lot  with  God  ?  Surely  it  means, 
Let  a  man  abide  in  it  with  the  full  consciousness  of  all  that  he  is,  all  that  he  has, 
all  that  he  shall  have,  in  Christ  Jesus.  1.  Let  him  dismiss  all  fretful  impatience 
at  the  meanness  of  his  figure  aud  the  poorness  of  his  pay.  Sui-h  matti-rs  are  not, 
cannot  be,  vital  to  a  man  who  is  so  rich  in  hope.  He  must  calmly  wait  God's  time. 
2.  Let  him  know  that  the  Lord  abides  with  him  in  his  lot,  and  has  a  deeper 
interest  and  joy  in  his  daily  labour  than  in  the  debates  of  the  world's  most  famous 
congresses,  and  the  acts  of  its  most  splendid  kings.  3.  The  man  who  abides  with 
God  in  the  lowliest  condition  makes  that  condition  illustrious  by  the  patient, 
strenuous  discharge  of  its  duties,  and  manly  resistance  to  the  temptations  which 
beset  it,  and  which  drag  many  a  helpless  worldling  down.  4.  Such  a  man  will 
wait  for  God's  word,  and  ni>t  man's,  to  "go  up  higher."  5.  Wherever  he  is,  he 
will  abide  with  dignity  and  patience,  because  assured  of  the  supreme  promotion  at 
last.     {J.  Baldwin  Bnnrn,  11. A.)  Godliness  in  all  conditions  of  life  : — The  text 

teaches — I.  That  men  are  found  in  various  conditions  of  life.  Some  are  free 
men,  some  are  slaves,  &e.  This  varietj' — 1.  Affords  scope  for  benevolent  activity. 
If  all  men  were  in  precisely  identical  worldly  conditions,  there  would  be  manifestly 
no  sphere  for  it.  2.  Creates  a  bond  of  socinl  unity.  Gratitude  is  one  of  the 
strongest  social  ties,  and  hence  the  relation  between  the  giver  and  the  receiver,  the 
helper  and  the  helped,  is  generally  close,  tender,  and  strong.  Were  all  men  in 
exactly  the  same  condition,  there  would  be  a  spirit  of  reckless  independency,  and  a 
state  of  social  disorder.  3.  Invests  society  with  FOL-ial  charms.  "Variety  is  one  of 
the  charms  of  existence.  II.  That  some  of  the  conditions  of  life  are  of  Divine 
appointment.  Of  some  this  cannot  be  said.  People  are  found  in — 1.  Matrimonial 
relations  which  God  has  not  appointed.  Two  people  are  brought  together  for  life 
whose  instincts,  temperaments,  habits,  are  antagonistic.  2.  Ecclesiastical  positions 
which  God  has  not  appointed.  3.  Commercial  engagements  which  God  has  not 
appointeil.  Those  who  turn  the  ores  of  the  earth  into  implements  of  destruction, 
and  distil  the  fruits  of  the  earth  into  liquids  that  drown  the  reason,  ruin  the  health, 
and  destroy  the  morals  of  a  community,  are  not  "  called  "  to  their  sphere.  III. 
That  in  every  condition  of  life  jif.n  should  practise  godliness.  What  is  it  to 
"abide  with  God"?  It  means  constancy  of  supreme  love  and  obedience  to 
Him,  and  of  devotion  to  His  cause.  Godliness  is — 1.  Binding  in  all  conditions  of 
life.  As  much  so  in  the  market  as  in  the  chamber  or  the  temple.  God  is  every- 
where, and  your  relation  to  Him  remains  intact  in  all  circumstances.  2.  Possible. 
Let  no  man  say  his  conditions  are  such  that  he  cannot  be  religious.  If  they  really 
are,  he  must  come  out  of  them.  If  lawful,  God  knows  them,  and  will  help  you  in 
them.     (£).  ThoDins,  D.D.)  The  Christian  life  : — Three  times  within  the  com- 

pass of  a  very  few  verses  this  injunction  is  repeated  (vers.  17,  20,  24).  1.  The 
reason  for  this  emphatic  reiteration  is  that  there  were  strong  temptations  to  rest- 
lessness besetting  the  early  Christians.  The  great  change  from  heathenism  to 
Christianity  would  seem  to  loosen  the  joints  of  all  life.  Hence  would  tend  to  come 
the  rupture  of  family  ties,  the  Jewish  convert  seeking  to  become  like  a  Gentile,  and 
vice  versa,  and  the  slave  trying  to  be  free.  To  all  three  the  apostle  says.  Stop 
where  you  are.  For  if  Christianity  had  become  the  mere  instrument  of  sncial 
revolution,  its  development  would  have  been  thrown  back  for  centuries,  aud  the 
whole  worth  and  power  of  it,  for  those  who  first  apprehended  it,  would  have  been 
lost.  Paul  believed  in  the  diffusion  of  the  principles  which  he  ijroclaimed,  and  the 
mighty  name  which  he  served,  as  able  to  girdle  the  poison-tree,  and  to  take  the 
bark  off  it,  aud  the  rest — the  slow  dying — might  be  left  to  time.     2.  But,  besides 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 


this  more  especial  application  of  the  text,  it  carries  with  it  a  large  general  principle 
that  applies  to  all.  t'ur  maxim  is,  "  Get  on  !  "  Paul's  is,  "  ^'ever  mind  about 
getting  on,  gft  up  !  "  Our  notion  is,  "  Tiy  to  make  the  circumst;inces  what  I  would 
like  to  have  tlie-rj."  Paul's  is,  "  Leave  circumstances  to  take  care  of  themselves — 
or  rather  leave  God  to  take  care  of  the  circumstftnces — and  ever\thiig  else  will 
right  itself."  I.  Our  chief  effort  in  life  ought  to  be  union  with  God. 
"  Abide  with  God  "  means — 1.  Constant  communion,  the  occupation  of  all  our 
nature  with  Him.  As  we  go  to  our  work  to-morrow,  what  difference  would 
obedience  to  this  precept  make  upon  our  lives?  Before  all  else,  we  should  think 
of  that  Divine  Mind  that  is  waitmg  to  illumine  our  darkness;  we  should  feel  the 
glow  of  that  perfect  Love  which,  in  the  midst  of  change,  treachery,  is  ready  to  fill 
our  hearts  with  tenderness  and  trfliT'oillity ;  we  should  bow  befote  that  Will  which 
is  "  the  good  pleasure  of  His  goodne-s  and  the  counsel  of  His  grace."  And  w/th 
such  a  God  ever  in  our  thou>.hts,  love,  and  obedience,  what  room  would  there  be 
for  agitations  and  distractions  ?  They  die  in  the  fruition  of  a  present  God  all- 
suffic  ent,  even  as  the  sun  when  it  is  risen  may  wither  the  weeds  ihat  grow  about 
the  fruitful  tree  whose  deeper  roots  are  but  warmed  by  the  rays  that  ripen  the  rich 
clusters  v.'hich  it  bears.  2.  And  then  there  will  follow  the  recognition  of  God's 
will  as  opeiating  in  and  di^termining  all  circumstances.  When  our  whole  soul  is 
occupi^d  with  Him,  we  shall  see  Him  everywhere,  and  connect  everything  which 
befalls  ours^lves  and  the  world  with  Him.  H.  Se'CH  union  with  God  will  lead 
TO  contented  continuance  in  our  place,  whatever  it  be.  You  have  been 
"  called  "  in  such  and  such  worldly  circumstances,  which  proves  that  these  circum- 
stances do  not  obstruct  the  highest  and  richest  blessings.  And  that  is  the  one 
point  of  view  from  which  we  can  bear  to  look  upon  the  world  and  not  be  bewildered 
and  overmastered  by  it.  Peace,  a  true  appreciation  of  all  outward  g  lod  and  a 
charm  against  the  bitterest  sting  of  outward  evils,  a  patient  continu;mce  in  the 
place  where  He  has  set  us,  are  all  ours — when  by  fellowship  with  Him  we  look 
upon  our  work  as  doing  His  will,  and  upon  all  our  possessions  and  conditions  as 
means  for  makin':^  us  like  Himself.  The  only  question  worth  asking  in  regard  to 
the  externals  of  our  life  is,  How  far  does  each  thing  help  me  to  be  a  good  man,  and 
open  my  understanding  to  apprehend  God,  and  pieiiare  me  for  the  world  beyond? 
Is  there  any  other  more  satisfying,  more  maje-tic  thought  of  life  than  this— the 
scaffolding  by  which  souls  are  built  up  into  the  temple  of  God !  And  to  care 
whether  a  tbing  is  painful  or  pleasant  is  as  absurd  as  to' care  whether  the  brick- 
layer's trowel  is  knt'cking  the  sharp  corner  off  a  brick,  or  plastering  mortar  on  the 
one  below  it  before  he  lays  it  carefully  on  its  course.  Is  the  building  getting  on? 
That  is  the  one  question  that  is  worth  thinking  about.  If,  then,  we  have  once  got 
hold  of  that  pii.iciple  that  all  the  antitheses  of  life  are  the  product  of  His  will,  the 
manifestation  of  His  mind.  His  means  for  our  discipline,  then  we  have  the  talis- 
man which  will  preserve  us  from  the  fever  of  desire  and  the  shivering  fits  of 
anxiety  as  to  things  wliich  perish.  III.  Such  contented  continuance  in  our  place 
is  the  dictate  of  the  truest  wisdom.  1.  Though  you  may  change  about  as 
much  as  you  like,  there  is  a  pretty  substantial  equipoise  and  identity  in  the 
amount  of  pain  and  pleasure  in  all  external  conditions.  The  total  length  of  day 
and  night  all  the  year  round  is  the  same  at  the  North  Pole  and  at  the  E(iuator.  It 
does  not  matter  much  at  what  degrees  between  the  two  we  live,  when  the  thing 
comes  to  be  made  up  we  shall  be  all  pretty  much  upon  an  equality.  Wliat  is  the 
use  of  such  eager  desires  to  change  our  condition,  when  every  condition  has  dis- 
advantages attending  its  advantages,  as  certainly  as  a  shadow  ;  and  when  all  have 
pretty  neaily  the  same  quantity  of  the  raw  material  of  pain  and  pleasure,  and 
when  the  amount  of  either  actually  experienced  by  us  depends  not  on  where  we 
are,  but  on  what  we  are?  2.  Whilst  the  portion  of  external  pain  and  pleasure 
summed  up  comes  pretty  mucn  to  the  Sime  in  everybody's  life,  any  condition  may 
yield  the  fruit  of  devout  fellowshii)  w  ith  God.  3.  What  is  the  need  for  my  troubling 
myself  about  outward  changes,  when  in  Christ  I  can  get  all  the  iieculiaiities  which 
make  any  given  position  dtsirable  to  me?  Hear  bow  Paul  talks  to  slaves  wanting 
to  be  set  free  (vers.  21,  22).  If  a  man  is  a  slave  he  may  be  free  in  Christ.  If  free, 
he  may  have  the  joy  of  utter  submission  to  an  absolute  master  in  Christ.  If  you 
and  I  are  lonely  we  may  feel  all  the  delights  of  society  by  union  with  Him.  If 
distracted  by  companionship,  and  seeking  for  seclusion,  we  may  get  all  the 
peace  of  perfect  privacy  in  fellowship  with  Him.  If  we  are  rich  and  think 
that  if  we  were  poorer  we  should  be  le-s  tempted,  we  may  find  all  for  which 
we   covet   poverty   in   coinmuiiion   with  Him.     If    we   are   poor  and  fancy  that 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  473 

if  we  had  a  little  more  we  should  be  happier,  we   may  find   all  tranquillity  in 
Him.     4.  Think  seriously  of  the  antagonism  bet^^een  these  principles  and  the 
maxims  current  in  the  world.     Our  text  is  a  revolutionary  one.     It  is  dead  against 
the  watchwords  that  you  fathers  give  your  children — "  push,"  "  energy,''  "  advance- 
ment," "  get  on  whatever  you  do."     If  you,  by  God's  grace,  lay  hold  of  these  prin- 
ciples, in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  you  will  have  to  make  up  your  minds 
to  let  the  big  prizes  of  your  trade  go  into  other  people's  hands,  and  be  contented  to 
say,  "I  live  by  peaceful,  high,  pure,  Christ-like  thoughts."     {A.  Muclareri,  D.D.) 
Vocation: — I  want  to  take  the  general  piinciple  Paul  lays  down  here  and  draw 
from  it  some  lessons  which  I  think  it  plainly  teaches.     1.    In  the  first  place,  then, 
we  learn  that  our  daily  work  may  be  work  to  which  we  are  divinely  called.     Now 
that  is  not  how  many  men  think  of  their  work.     We  may  admit  that  the  prophet, 
the  reformer,  or  the  patriot  receive  their  calling  from  above — that  a  John  Knox,  a 
Joan  of  Arc,  were  called  to  then-  vocations  in  life  ;  but  to  most  people  it  seems 
a  little  ridiculous  to  say  that  a  painter,  a  sailor,  a  manufacturer,  or  nrerchant  has 
been  called  by  God  to  do  the  work  he  is  doing.     The  reason  we  think  this  is,  I 
suppose,  because  of  the   hard  delinition  we  make  between  the   sai'red   and  the 
secular.     That  distinction  should  not  by  any  means  be  an  absolute  distinction. 
In  the  tabernacle,  in  the  Jewish  temple,  there  was  a  "  holy  "  and  a  "  holy  of 
holies,"  and  yet  they  were  both  under  the  same  roof,  and  formed  part  of  the  great 
Temple  of  God  ;  and  so  it  is  with  the  things  we  call  sacred  and  the  things  we  call 
secular.     "We  must  admit  that  much  of  God's  work  is  what  we  would  call  secular. 
He  makes  the  sun  to  shine,  the  rivers  to  flow,  the  grass  to  spnng :  and  if  God  is 
interested  in  work  like  that,  the  man  ought  not  to  feel  he  is  bemeaning  himself  if 
God  calls  upon  him  to  be  a  fellow-labourer  in  the  same  vineyard.     For  mstance, 
we  talk  of  God  supplying  us  with  food.     But  when  we  come  to  ask  how  it  is  that 
the  w. add  is  provided  with  its  meat,  we  find  that  God  calls  in  human  agencies. 
The  farmer  who  grows  the  grain,  the  miller  who  grinds  it,  and  the   haker  who 
makes  the  breid,  have  all  been  called  by  God.     2.  There  is  another  great  lesson  to 
be  drawn  from  this  principle,  and  it  is— if  this  be  true  we  ought  to  have  a  plain 
call  to  the  occupation  we  follow,  because  it  must  be  admitted  that  every  occupation 
is  not  a  Divine  occupation.     Sometimes  a  man  is  engaged  in  a  particular  form  of 
business  which  his  conscience  tells  him  is  wrong;  such  a  man  cannot  think  he  is 
Divinely  called.     Again,  a  young  m>in  may  be  employed  in  a  business  that  is 
worked  on  wrong  principles.     Another  man  may  be  emplo\ed  in  quite  an  honest 
calling,  yet  for  which  he  is  nnsuited — sometimes  a  square  mnn  gets  into  a  round 
hole— and  if  be  gets  a  change  to  a  vocation  he  likes,  he  should  take  the  opportunity 
and  enter  into  the  calling  he  really  cares  for.     How  does  God  call  upon  us  ?     "Well, 
sometimes  He  gives  us  a  bias  for  a  special  business.     Another  way  in  which  God's 
guiding  handcoines  in  is  in  our  outward  circumstances,  because  we  must  renumber 
these  circumstances  are  shaped  by  God's  own  hand,  and  sometimes  our  way  is  made 
pretty  clear  by  circumstances  alone.     Another  way  in  which  God's  voice  can  be 
heard  is  in  the  advice  of  our  friends,  and  we  ought  to  take  the  advice  of  those  who 
can  look  at  our  character  and  work  from  a  different  standpoint  than  that  we  our- 
selves occupy.     And  now  let  me  say  this — that  we  should  all  choose  our  calling 
in  the  full  light  of  the  "^^ord  of  God,  "  Thy  Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and 
a  light  unto  my  path."     Then  we  must  remember  prayer.     Remember  that  more 
things  are  done  by  prayer  than  people  think  of  ;  that  if  we  lift  up   our  voices  in 
prayer  for  guidance,  that  guidance  will  come.     Again,  I  would  remark  thatwhen 
we  have  received  our  calling  we  should  abide  in  it.     "Let  every  m;m  abide  in  the 
calling  wherewith  he  is  called."     No  doubt,  the  statement  might  be  twisted  into 
a  wrong  meaning.     It  might  be  said  that  this  was  an  advocacy  of  the  great  fallacy 
that  whatever  is,  is  right,  teaching  that   man  should  have  no   aspirations  after 
better  things.     Christianity  is  something  that  has  the  principle  of  revolution  in  it ; 
and  yet  though  Christianity  hns  tue  revolutionary  principle  inside  of  it,  it  does  not 
make  its  followers  revolutionists.     And  now  in  the  last  place  we  are  taught  that, 
abiding  in  our  callings,  we  sh  )uld  therein  abide  with  God.     It  matters  not  what 
your  duties  are,  however  common,  however  meiely  secular,  do  them  as  under  your 
great  Master's  eyes.     (•/.  C  Lambert.)         Ot(r  caUinri: — We  are  the  subjects  of  two 
callings.     There  is  our  "high  calling  of  God  in  Chiist  Jesus,"  that  is  the  culing 
of  grace ;  and  there  is  our  outward  situation  in  life,  that  is  the  calling  of  Provi- 
dence.     In  the  text   both  these    callings   are   mentioned,  oar  temporal  and  our 
spiritual   calling ;  and  we   are   directed  to  abide   in   the  same  tenjporal   calling, 
wherein  we  may  be,  when  we  are  spiritually  called.      A  Christian  man  is  not 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


to  murmur  or  be  fretful  and  restless  in  that  situation  which  the  providence  of  God 
has  assigned  to  him,  but  to  be  patient,  quiet,  submissive,  and  cheerful  in  it.   Grace, 
when  it  takes  possession  of  a  man,  does  nut  alter  his  place  in  society,  nor  annul 
the   obligations    that  pertain   to  it,   unless   it  be   intrinsically   wron^    and  sinful, 
requiring   of   bim  a  course  of   aotion  which   is  immoral  and  injurious.      If  that 
be  its  character,  it  is  the  devil's  calling  and  not  God's,  and  we  caunot  too  promptly 
abandon  it  at  whatever  sacrifice.     Now  what  I  wish  to  impress  upon  you  is  that 
our  temporal  condition,  with  that  peculiar  form  of  life  which   it   imposes,  is  a 
caili'  g.  and  is  such  because  God  has  called  us  into  it.     I  would  remind  you  that 
the  fashion  of  our  existence  in  this  world  is  not  an  accident,  not  the  fruit  of 
chance,  nor  of  our  own  will,  nor  of  th^  will  of  other  men.     God  has  assigned  us 
our  place.     Whether  we  sha'l  work  with  our  brains  or  our  hands,  and  in  which  of 
the  various  departments  of  human   activity  that  belong  to  either.  He  has  deter- 
mined.    How  important,  in'^eed,  is  the  truth  which  we  express  in  the  naming  our 
work   in   this  world   our    vocation,   or  which    is    the    same,   finding  utterance  in 
homelier  Anglo-Saxon,  our  c  tiling.     What  a  calming,  elerating,  solemnising  vievr 
of  the  tasks  which  we  find  ourselves  set  in  this  world  to  do,  this  word  would  give 
us  if  we  did  but  realise  it  to  the  full.     What  a  help  is  this  thought  to  enable  us  to 
appreciate  justly  the  dignity  of  our  work,  though  it  were  far  humbler  work  even  in 
the  eyes  of  men,  than  that  of  any  one  of  us  present !     What  an  assistance  in 
calming  unsettled  thoughts  and  desires,  such  as  would  make  us  wish  to  be  some- 
thing else  than  that  which  we  ate!     What  a  source  of  confidence  when  we  are 
tempted   to  lose  heart,  and   to   doubt  whether  we  shall  be  able   to  carry  through 
our  work  with  any  blessing  or  profit  to  ourselves  or  others  !     It  is  our  vocation, 
our  calling ;  and  He  who  called  us  to  it  will  fit  us  for  it  and  strengthen  us  in  it. 
That  the  circumstances  which  frame  our  outward  condition  into  its  actual  fashion 
are  of  God's  ordering,  none  will  doubt,  who  believe  in  the  presence  and  agency  of 
God  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.    Our  parentage,  the  period  of  our  birth,  the  associa- 
tioi  s  of  our  childhood,  the  events  that  betide  us  in  our  early  days,  the  influences 
that  act  upon  us  as  we  advame  to  manhood,  all  the  causes  that  co-operate  to  fasten 
upon  our  life  the  form  it  finally  and  permanently  assumes,  are  of  God's  ordering 
and  fixing.     And  thus  the  whole  sum  of  society,  in  all  its  complicated  framework, 
its  mutual  relations  and  dependences,  it«  necessary  gradations  and  shares  of  honour 
and  advantage,  will  nppear  to  be  a  visible  outgoing  of  the  Divine  will,  instinct 
throughout  with  a  Divine  presence,  a  Divine  authority,  and  a  Divine  blessing;  and 
every  member  of  the  same,  in  his  own  proper  station  and  work,  his  special  "  voca- 
tion and  ministry,"  believmg  God  made  his  place  for  him  and  him  for  his  place, 
will  be  enabled  to  walk  in  it  with  (iod,  without  pride  in  elevation,  with  self-respect 
in  inferiority,  in  a  spiiit  of  cheerful  submission,  conscientious  fidelity,  and  lowly 
hojie.     What  we  contend  for  is  that  every  Christian  should  believe  himself  called 
to  every  work  in  which  he  finds  his  occupation  and  his  livelihood  ;  and  that,  except 
he  believes  this,  the  work  of  life,  wbatever  it  may  be  outwardly,  will  be  unholy  and 
cheerless,  lack  its  best  stimulus  and  its  purest  support  and  comfort,  and  be  pursued 
without  confidence  in  God,  or  any  expei-tation  of  hif^h  and  worthy  fruit.     The  rich 
man  who  is  exenpt  from  the  necessity  of  relying  on  some  trade  or  profession  for 
a  living,  is  not  so  exempt  in  order  that  he  may  be  an  idler.     He  also  has  a  calling, 
and  a  calling  has  always  a  work,  and  tbe  work  of  his  calling  is  by  no  means  the 
least  arduous  and  difficult ;  and  if,  because  he  is  not  driven  to  it  by  the  stern 
pre-sure  of  necessity,  he  leaves  it  undone,  and  dies  a  mere  loiterer,  his  will  be  the 
fearful  reckoning  of  one  who  wrapped  not  one  but  many  talents  in  a  napkin  and 
liid  them  in  the  earth.     This  view  of  our  work  as  a  ca.ling  communicates  dignity 
and  comfort  to  life,  and  this  not  in  sou:e  of  its  range-^,  but  in  all  of  them.     The 
prejioiis  ointment  on  the  head  goes  down  to  the  ski  ts  of  the  garments.     There  is 
no  valley  in  life  so  low  that  the  dew  of  Divine  service  does  not  visit  and  refresh  it. 
The  honour  of  the  noble  he«d  pervades  the  family,  stops  not  at  the  favourite  of  the 
lord,  or  chief  officer  of  the  household,  but  goes  on  till  it  reaches  the  bottom  of  the 
social  fabric  ;  and  the  lowest  menial  shines  in  the  reflected  lustre  of  his  Master. 
And  surely  there   can  be  no   debasement  in  filling  any  station  which  God  has 
created  and  assigned  to  us.     It  is  an  honour  to  serve  Him  in  any  place.     It  is 
looking  upon   our  lot  in  life  apart  from   God,  viewing  ourselves  as  the  sport  of 
a  blind  chance,  or  the  victim  of  human  tyranny,  caprice,  or  injustice,  that  makes 
us  despise  and  scorn  it,  view  it  with  a  bitter  contempt  and  an  indignant  hatred. 
Only  let  ns  look  at  it  as  our  calling,  the  utterance  of  God's  will,  and  the  appoint- 
ment of  God's  wisdom,  and  we  shail  respect  it  and  ourselves  in  it ;  for  we  shall  see 


I.  CORINTHIANS.  475 


that  we  are  paits  of  a  system,  in  winch  it  is  an  honour  to  hold  any  position,  of  a 
mechanism  so  glorious,  that  the  cog  of  the  smallest  wheel,  or  the  eoid  of  the 
obscurest  pulley  that  is  needful  t"  its  well-being  and  well-woiking,  is  honoured 
by  its  function.  Nothing  has  so  elevating  an  intluence  on  men  as  to  feel  that  tliey 
are  members  of  a  Divine  economy  in  wbich  honour  depends  not  upon  place,  but 
upon  faithfulness ;  so  that  some  who  are  far  down  in  it,  may  be  higher  in  the 
estimation  of  Him  whose  judgment  is  its  only  rule  of  eminence,  than  many  that 
are  outwardly  above  them,  as  sweet  violi-ts  lie  low  and  i  \stle  in  the  sod,  overhung 
and  hidden  by  tall,  tlirifty,  but  idle  weeds,  and  gaudy  but  scentless  blossoms. 
But  if  this  view  of  the  work  of  life  as  a  calling  confers  on  li\^  a  dignity  that  relieves 
and  gladdens  it,  so  does  it  also  load  it  with  a  wt  ight  of  resNuisibility  which  com- 
municates to  it  a  tincture  of  seriousness  an<l  solemnity.  Seeing  that  all  stations 
are  of  God,  it  is  indeed  a  grave  and  awful  thing  to  live  in  any  station.  God  does 
not  ask  at  our  hands  volunteer  services,  but  prescribed  and  ordered  services ;  and 
if  in  the  tinnl  reckoning  we  undertake  to  recite  our  performances  of  the  former 
kind,  we  shall  be  cut  short  with  the  inquiry,  Who  hath  required  this  at  your  hand  ? 
how  did  you  till  your  station?  A  soldier  who  is  appointed  to  stand  sentry  will  not 
escape  censure  if  he  has  left  his  post  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy's  camp,  or  capture 
a  solitary  s'raggler.  Nor  will  a  farmer  be  satisfied  with  his  servant  who  leaves 
his  field  unplou-hed  to  instruct  his  neighbour  in  agricultural  sci'  nee.  When  every 
man  does  his  own  w^ork,  the  specific  service  of  his  place,  then  is  the  welfare  of 
society  most  advanced,  God's  will  best  done,  the  gospel  best  recommended,  and 
the    souls    of    men    best    fitted    for   eternnl    life.      (R.   A.   Hallam.)  Kvery- 

day  rAiii'ion: — Learn — I.  What  the  eeiioiox  of  Jesds  Christ  really  is.  The 
godly  man  is  the  man  who  "abides  with  God."  We  use  the  term  "religious" 
very  loosely,  meaning  by  it  the  observance  of  certain  ceremonies  or  the  reception 
of  certain  opinions,  but  religion  in  deed  and  in  truth  consists  in  a  right  state  and 
action  of  the  soul  towards  God.  It  is  our  knowledge  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  lead- 
ing us  to  aim  at  a  Christ-like  life.  II.  Eeligion  so  understood  is  a  right  and  a 
REASONABLE  THING.  It  is  the  exercise  of  our  powers  ujion  Him  who  is  infinitelj' 
worthy  of  them  all.  It  is  the  rendering  to  God  His  own  what  He  is  pleased  to  ask 
and  reijuire.  The  eye  is  no  more  fitted  to  see  or  the  ear  to  hear  than  is  the  con- 
stitution of  your  nature  fitted  for  religion ;  and  just  as  the  formation  of  the  eye 
tells  us  that  though  there  may  be  blindness,  nevertheless,  we  were  made  to  see, 
and  just  as  the  formation  of  the  ear  tells  us  that  though  there  may  be  deafness  the 
ear  was  constructed  that  men  should  hear,  just  so  the  very  structure  of  our  moral 
nature  teaches  us  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  wanderings  of  the  intellect  and  the  worse 
wanderings  of  the  heart,  we  are  made,  it  is  the  very  end  of  our  being,  to  love  and 
honour  God.  Eegarded  as  a  life,  religion  is  the  life  a  man  is  fitted  to  live.  Eegarded 
as  a  work,  religion  is  the  work  a  man  is  adapted  and  intended  to  perform.  A  man 
is  not  a  uian  in  the  full  sense  of  the  teim  unless  he  is  religious;  he  is  other  than 
he  ought  to  be,  be  is  less  than  he  ought  to  be  if  he  is  not  religious.  He  is  a  ground 
not  tilled,  a  seed  not  sown,  a  perversion  of  power.  III.  This  religion  may  be  a 
matter  of  every-day  life  with  trs  IN  every  condition  of  life  a  man  mat  be 
called  to  occupy.  If  it  consisted  in  the  observance  of  certnin  rites,  then  it  would 
be  a  ihing  of  times  and  places ;  but  since  it  is  a  life,  it  cannot  be  restricted  to  times 
and  plac-  s  and  conditions.  Even  slaves  are  told  that  whatsoever  they  do  they 
do  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord.  Well,  now,  if  the  bard  service  of  slaves  may  be  a 
servicH  of  God,  is  it  not  perfectly  clear  that  every-day  religion  must  be  possible  to 
each  one  of  us?     (J.  Vauglian  Pryce,  M.A.)  Home  life  and  duties  (Mark  v.  19, 

and  text) : — 1.  The  first  text  is  the  reply  of  .Jesus  to  the  maniac  out  of  whom  He  had 
cast  a  legion  of  devils.  This  man  certainly  had  passed  through  a  very  remarkable 
experience ;  and  we  might  reasonably  expect  that  so  remarkable  a  case  wouLl  be 
made  much  of  by  Jesus.  This  man  will  at  once  be  sent  out  into  the  world  as  a 
witness  to  the  power  of  his  Saviour.  The  man  seems  to  have  thought  that  some- 
thing of  this  sort  was  called  for  in  his  case.  He  prays  to  be  always  with  Jesus. 
But  instead  be  is  met  by  the  quiet,  tame  words,  "  Go  home  to  thy  friends.  They 
saw  you  go  wrong,  and  are  the  ones,  above  all  others,  to  be  moved  by  the  sight  of 
your  restoration.  Go  back  to  your  former  life,  and  from  tiiat  centre  work  outward." 
2.  The  same  thought  lies  in  the  second  text.  The  e.irly  Christians  thought  that  in 
their  conversion  something  unearthly,  prodigious,  had  happened,  and  expected  a 
complete  translation  from  their  past  life.  They  had  caught  the  signiKcauce  of 
Jesus'  words,  "  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil."  No  disruption  of  your  life 
in  the  world  is  proposed,  but  simply  to  conduct  that  life  to  nobler  issues  by  a 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vit. 

purified  and  sanctified  spirit.  So  the  apostle  says  to  these  restless  Corinthians, 
"  Go  home  to  your  friends  a^d  to  your  occupation."  Your  relations  to  your  fellow- 
beings  in  the  household,  in  the  state,  in  the  market  and  shop,  are  the  very  points 
of  contact  at  which  your  new  spiritual  life  is  to  get  access  to  the  gross  life  of  the 
woi'ld.  Let  every  man,  therefore,  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called. 
3.  There  is  something  perennial  in  the  mistake  of  this  maniac  and  the  early  Church, 
and  it  arises  from  a  total  misconcepti'ii  of  our  life.  We  have  not  two  lives,  but 
life.  We  have  not  two  sides  to  our  life  any  more  than  a  ray  of  light  or  a  cuirent 
of  electricity  has  sides.  We  live  ;  that  is  all.  If  you  would  see  the  absurdity  of 
this  division  of  our  life,  carry  it  up  to  God,  our  Father.  He  is  a  Spirit,  yet  He  is 
constantly  carrying  on  the  affairs  of  a  material  universe.  Kow  has  God  two  lives — 
one  spiritual,  when  He  is  lost  in  self-contemplation,  or  when  receiving  the  adora- 
tions of  the  heavenly  hosts  ?  The  other  life  material,  when  He  is  conducting  the 
minute  affairs  of  a  world  or  a  constellation,  temj^ering  its  climates,  mixing  its  soils, 
.  ordering  wars  and  overturnings  here,  prosperity  and  abundance  theie  ?  All  actions 
of  a  spiritual  being  are  spiiitual.  We  are  the  children  of  God,  and  to  divide  our 
life  and  call  one  part  earthly,  the  other  heavenly,  is  just  as  absurd  as  to  attempt  to 
draw  such  a  line  through  the  life  of  God  our  Fatljer.  4.  Now,  this  being  so,  it 
follows  that  the  practical  life  is  the  only  point  of  vital,  spiritual  contact  with  the 
world,  and  if  you  are  to  make  yourself  felt  as  a  spiritual  power,  it  must  be  in  the 
practical  life.  What  is  the  world  to  you  and  to  me?  It  is  just  our  own  small 
circle  of  the  daily  life.  Now  just  that  is  our  point  of  contact  with  the  great  round 
world.  A  tree  is  a  mighty  growth,  with  thousands  of  leaves,  presenting  to  the  sun 
and  atmosphere  a  vast  area  of  surface.  Now  suppose  a  single  leaf  should  busy 
itself  with  thinking  of  that  vast  surface  of  absorption  and  ratliation,  and  forget  that 
its  own  daily  life  was  its  world  of  absorption  and  radiation.  And  having  made  this 
mistake,  it  hastens  to  make  finother.  It  forgets  that  its  own  stem  is  the  nexus, 
the  point  of  vital  contuct  with  the  great  life  of  the  tree,  and  whatever  transactions 
it  may  have  with  light  and  air,  the  results  must  be  communicated  to  the  great  life 
of  the  tree  through  its  own  sti'm.  Our  point  of  living  union  with  the  great  life  of 
the  world  is  our  daily  practical  life  ;  that  is  the  stem  which  joins  us  to  the  mighty 
ti'ee.  Whatever  dealings  we  may  have  with  ti;ie  heavens,  the  result  must  be  com- 
municated to  the  woild  through  that  one  puint  of  union,  that  leaf-stalk,  the  practical 
life.  E.g.,  here  is  an  humble,  honourable  craft — shoemaking.  Now  the  average 
Christian  shoemaker  says  to  himself,  ]\Iy  secular  life  lies  in  my  craft.  But  my 
spiritual  life  lies  in  another  realm.  I  must  go  apart  there  to  do  my  praying  and 
meditating,  and  get  my  spiritual  nourishment.  Now  Christ  meets  that  man  in  his 
so-called  spiritual  realm,  and  orders  him  off  at  once.  "  Go  home  to  thy  friends." 
And  the  apostle  re-echoes  the  words  of  his  Lord.  You  are  joined  to  the  great  world 
at  the  point  of  your  daily  life.  The  need  of  the  world  for  shoes  is  just  as  impera- 
tive, therefore  as  sacred,  as  its  need  for  praying,  and  singing,  and  Bible-reading. 
If  it  imperatively  needs  shoes,  it  just  as  imperatively  needs  good  shoes.  You  are 
called  of  God  to  minister  to  that  honourable  need.  The  principal  part  of  your 
time,  your  thought,  your  labour,  is  held  to  that  one  point.  If  you  are  not  spiritual 
there,  then  the  principal  part  of  your  life  is  un;-piritual.  If  you  fail  of  a  spiritual 
impression  there,  you  have  failed  altogether,  and  any  fine  talk  or  earthly  expe- 
riences wh'ch  you  may  bring  to  your  fellow-men  from  some  other  dreamy  spiritual 
realm  will  be  to  them  as  chaff'  and  dust.  They  tarn  upon  you  in  just  wrath,  say- 
ing, Away  with  your  religion.  I  needed  you.  I  had  a  right  to  demand  of  you,  and 
all  that  I  asked  of  you  was  good  work.  You  have  lost  your  chance  on  me.  And  so 
the  man  loses  his  chance  of  spiritual  influence  upon  the  world.  See  to  it  that 
spiritual  power  goes  into  your  work,  throngh  it  and  with  it  as  it  pnsses  from  your 
hands  into  the  world.  Genuine  material,  honest  work  ;  clean  and  sound  thought 
and  speech  ;  these  are  the  vehicles  for  transmitting  spiritual  power  to  the  world. 
St.  Paul  was  a  tent  m-iker.  I  pled^'e  you  he  made  the  best  tents  to  be  had  in  the 
country.  (./.  H.  Ecoh,D.D.)  ChiiDtian  contoitmeiit : — Observe — I.  The  danger. 
— 1.  Of  becoming  discontented  with  our  calling.  2.  This  is  common.  3.  It  may 
be  excited  by  the  more  enlightened  views  produced  by  conversion.  II.  The  duty. 
"To  abi<le,"  &c.  1.  This  does  not  mean — (1)  That  a  slave  may  not  seek  his 
liberty.  (2)  That  a  man  must  not  relinquish  a  nefarious  occupation.  (3)  That  a 
Christian  msiy  not  de-<ire  a  position  of  greater  advantage  and  usefulness.  2.  It — 
(1)  Inculcates  contentment.  (2)  Teaches  that  every  honest  calling  affords  scope 
for  Christian  development,  and  that  we  should  serve  God  in  our  calling.  III.  The 
MoiiVE.     (Jod — 1.  Has  appointed  your  cobdition.     2.  Blesses  you  in  it.     3.  Can 


cnAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  477 

easily   improve    it    if    desirable.      (J.   Lj/th,    D.D.)  The  need,  choice,    and 

use  of  a  calling  : — Tlie  Christian  calling  doih  not  at  all  prejudice,  much 
less  overthrow,  it  raiher  strengthenetli  those  iutei'ests  that  arise  from  natural 
relations,  or  fr^m  voluntary  contracts  Ijetwixt  man  atid  man.  I  desired  to 
spealv,  and  ju'lged  expedient  for  you  to  hear,  concerning — 1.  The  necessity.  2. 
The  choice.  3.  The  use  of  particular  callings.  Points,  if  ever  need  to  be  taught, 
certainly  in  these  days  most.  Wherein  some  habituated  in  idleness  will  not  betake 
themselves  to  any  calling  :  liiie  a  heavy  jade  that  is  good  at  bit  and  nought  else. 
These  wouhl  be  soundly  spurred  up  and  whi|>ped  on  end.  Other  some,  through 
weakness,  do  not  make  good  choice  of  a  fit  calling:  like  a  young  unbroken  thing 
that  hrtth  mettle  and  is  free,  but  is  ever  wrying  the  wrong  way.  These  would  be 
fairly  checked,  turned  into  the  right  way,  and  guided  with  a  steady  and  skilful 
hand.  A  third  sort,  through  unsettb'dness,  or  discoutenteduess.  or  other  untoward 
humour,  walk  not  soberly  and  uprightly  and  order  y  in  the'r  calling  :  like  an 
unruly  colt  that  will  over  hedge  and  ditch,  no  ground  will  hold  him,  no  fence  turn 
him.  The  tirst  sort  are  to  be  taught  the  necessity  of  a  calling  ;  the  second,  to  be 
directed  for  the  choice  of  their  calling;  the  third,  to  be  limited  in  the  exercise  of 
their  calling.  Of  which  three,  in  their  order;  and  of  the  fi.st — I.  The  necessity 
OF  A  rvLLiNG.  The  necessity  whereof  you  are  to  imagine  not  an  absolute  and 
positive,  but  a  conditional  and  supposiiive  necesity.  Not  as  if  no  man  could 
be  without  one,  de  facto,  but  because,  de  jure,  no  man  should  be  without  one. 
And  this  necessity  we  aie  now  to  prove.  And  that — First,  from  the  obedience  we 
owe  to  Ciod's  ordinances,  and  the  account  we  must  render  for  every  one  of  God's  gifts. 
Amongst  those  ordinances  this  is  one,  and  one  of  the  first,  that  in  ihe  sweat  of  our 
faces  every  man  of  us  should  eat  our  bread  (Gen  iii.  19;  Eph.  iv.  28),  and  woe  to 
us  if  we  neglect  it.  But  say  there  were  no  such  express  command  for  it;  the  very 
distribution  of  God's  gifts  were  enoui;h  to  lay  upon  us  this  necessity.  Where  God 
bestoweth  He  bindeth  ;  and  to  whom  anything  is  given,  of  him  something  shall  be 
required.  We  may  not  tijink  the  Gud  of  nature  doth  bestow  abilities  whereof  He 
intendeth  no  use,  for  that  were  to  bestow  them  in  vain.  Secondly,  the  necessity  of 
a  calling  is  great  in  regard  of  a  man's  self,  and  that  more  wa.\s  than  one.  For  man 
being  by  nature  active,  so  he  must  be  doing.  There  is  no  Cross,  no  holy  water,  no 
exorcism  so  powerful  to  drive  away  and  to  conjure  down  the  fiend,  as  faithful  labour 
in  some  honest  calling.  Thirdly,  life  must  be  preserved,  families  maintained,  the 
pofir  relieved;  this  cannot  be  done  without  bread,  and  bread  cannot  be  gotten  honestly 
but  in  a  lawful  vocation  or  calling.  Fourthly  and  lastly,  a  calling  is  necessary  in 
regard  of  the  public.  God  hath  made  us  sociable  creatures ;  contrived  us  into 
commonwealtlis  ;  made  us  fellow-members  of  one  body.  Every  man  should  put 
to  his  helping  hand  to  advance  the  common  good.  For  whioh  reason  the  ancient 
renowned  commonwealths  were  so  careful  to  ordain  that  no  man  should  live  but 
in  some  profession.  It  is  the  sin  of  many  of  the  gentry  whom  God  hath  furnished 
with  means  and  abilities  to  do  much  good,  to  spend  their  whole  days  and  lives  in 
an  unprofitable  course  of  doing  either  nothing,  or  as  good  as  nothing,  or  worse 
than  nothing.  Manual,  and  servile,  and  mechanic  trades  and  arts  are  for  men  of 
a  lower  condition;  but  yet  no  man  is  born,  no  man  should  be  bred  unto  idleness. 
There  are  generous,  and  ingenuous,  and  liberal  employments  soitable  to  the 
greatest  births  and  educations.  But  for  our  gallants  who  live  in  no  settled  course 
of  life,  but  spend  half  the  day  in  sleeping,  half  the  night  in  gaming,  and  the  rest 
of  their  time  in  other  pleasures  and  vanities  to  as  little  purpose  as  they  can  devise, 
as  if  thfy  were  born  for  nothing  else  but  to  eat  and  drink  and  sport.  The  third 
sort  of  those  that  live  unprofitably  and  without  a  calling,  are  our  sturdy  rogues  and 
vagi-ant  towns-end  beggars  ;  the  very  filth  and  vermin  of  the  commonwealth.  I 
mean  such  as  have  health  and  strength  and  limbs,  and  are  in  some  measure  able 
to  work  and  take  pains  for  their  living.  God  is  just,  and  will  not  call  any  man 
to  that  which  is  not  honest  and  good.  God  is  all-sufficient,  and  will  not  call  any 
man  to  that  which  is  above  the  proportion  of  his  strength.  God  is  wonderful  in 
His  providence,  and  will  not  call  any  man  to  that  whereto  He  will  not  open  him 
a  fair  and  orderly  passage.  Somewhat  by  your  patience  of  each  of  these.  And 
first,  of  the  course  we  intend.  Wherein  let  these  be  our  inquiries — First,  whether 
the  thing  be  simply  and  in  itself  lawful  or  no.  Secondly,  whether  it  be  lawful  so 
as  to  be  made  a  calling  or  no.  Thirdly,  whether  it  will  be  profitable  or  rather 
hurtful  to  the  comm"nwi-altli.  Now  observe  the  rules.  II.  Our  first  care  past, 
which  concerneth  the  calling  itself,  oar  next  care  in  our  choice  jiost  bk  to  inquire 
into  ourselves,  what  calling  is  most  fit  for  us  and  we  for  it.     Wiierein  our  inquiry 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 


must  rest  especially  upon  three  things  ;  our  inclination,  our  gifts,  and  our  educa- 
tion. III.  Kemameth  now  the  third  and  last  point  j)roposed,  the  use  of  a  man's 
CALLING.  Let  him  walk  in  it  (ver.  17).  Let  him  abide  in  it  (ver.  20).  Let  him 
abide  ttierein  with  God.  It  may  seem  he  would  have  us  stick  to  a  course;  and 
when  we  are  in  a  cullins?,  not  to  for>ake  it,  nor  change  it,  no,  not  for  a  betti-r,  no, 
not  upon  any  terms.  Perhaps  some  have  taken  it  so,  but  certainly  the  apostle 
nev>r  meant  it  so.  It  is  lawful  to  change  it,  so  it  be  done  with  due  caution.  It  is 
lawful,  first,  in  subordinate  callings.  How  should  we  do  for  generals  f^r  the  wars 
if  colonels,  and  lieutenants,  and  captains,  and  common  soldiers  might  not  relinquish 
their  chaiyes?  It  is  lawful,  secondly,  yea,  necessary,  when  the  very  calling  itself, 
though  in  itself  good  and  u-eful,  doth  yet  by  accident  become  unlawful  or  unuscful. 
As  when  some  manufacture  is  j)rohibited  liy  the  State.  It  is  lawful,  thirdly,  when 
a  man  by  some  accident  becometh  unable  for  the  duties  of  his  calling,  as  by  age, 
blindness,  niaim,  decay  of  estate,  and  sundry  other  impediments  which  daily 
occur.  It  is  lawful,  fourt'ily,  where  there  is  a  want  of  suffiident  men,  or  not 
a  sufScient  number  of  them  in  some  callings,  for  the  necessities  of  the  State  and 
country  ;  in  such  cases  authoriiy  may  interpose.  But  then  it  must  be  done  with 
due  i-autions.  As  first,  not  out  of  a  desultory  lightness.  Nor,  secondly,  out  of  the 
greediness  of  a  covetous  or  am>itiius  lust.  Thirdly,  nor  out  of  suUenness,  or 
a  discontentedness  at  thy  present  condition.  Much  less,  fourthly,  out  of  an  evil 
eye  against  thy  neighbour  that  liveth  by  thee.  But,  fifthly,  be  sure  thou  change 
not,  if  thy  calling  be  of  that  iiature  that  it  may  not  be  changed.  Wheresoever  thy 
calling  is,  tlierein  abide  ;  be  c<  ntent  with  it.  The  second  is  faithfulness  and 
industry  and  diligence.  What  is  here  called  abiding  in  it,  is  at  ver.  17  called 
walking  in  it,  and  in  Rom.  xii.  17,  waiting  on  it.  The  third  is  sobriety,  that  we 
keep  ouiselve>;  within  the  proper  bounds  and  limits  of  ouv  callings.  For  how  doth 
he  abide  in  his  calling  that  is  ever  and  anon  flving  out  of  it,  and  starting  beyond 
it  ?  like  an  extravagant  sold  er  that  is  always  breaking  rank.  But  yet  abiie  with 
God.  The  clause  was  not  added  tor  nothing;  it  teacheth  thee  also  some  duties. 
First,  so  to  den  ean  thyself  in  thy  particular  calling  as  that  thou  do  nothing  but 
what  may  -tand  with  thy  general  calling.  ]Magistrate,  or  minister,  or  lawyer,  or 
merchant,  or  artificer,  or  whatsoever  otner  thou  art.  remember  thou  art  withal 
a  Christian.  God  is  tlie  author  of  both  callings.  Do  not  think  He  hath  called 
thee  to  service  in  the  one,  and  to  liberty  in  the  other  ;  to  justice  in  the  one,  and 
to  cosenage  in  the  other;  to  simplicity  in  the  one,  and  to  dissimulation  in  the 
o'her  to  holiness  in  the  one,  ano  to  profaneness  in  the  other.  It  teachtth  thee, 
secondly,  not  to  ingulf  thvself  so  whiJly  into  the  business  of  thy  particular  calling 
as  to  abridge  thyself  of  convenient  op|  ovlunities  to  the  exerci^e  of  those  religious 
duties  which  thou  art  bound  to  perform  by  virtue  of  thy  general  calling,  as  prayer, 
confession,  thanksgiving,  meditation,  etc.  God  alloweth  thee  to  serve  thyself,  but  He 
commandeih  thee  to  serve  Him  too.  It  teacheth  thee,  thirdly,  to  watch  over  the 
special  sins  of  thy  particular  calhng.  Sins,  I  niean  not  that  cleave  necessarily  to 
the  calling,  for  then  the  very  calling  i'self  should  be  unlawful;  but  sins  unto  the 
temptation-*  whereof  the  condition  of  thy  calling  layeth  thee  open  more  than  it  doth 
unto  other  sins,  or  more  than  some  o^her  callings  would  do  unto  the  same  sins. 
{Bishop  S'lvdersnn.)  Cln-intidnity  diffusive,  iiot  ieioJvtio)iary  : — Paul    reminds 

us  of  the  m<iral  act  which  has  the  power  of  sanctifying  and  ennobling 
every  external  position:  the  eye  tixfd  on  God,  walking  in  His  presence.  This 
is  what  preserves  the  believer  from  the  temp'ations  arising  from  his  situation, 
and  wtat  raises  his  hun. blest  duties  to  the  supreme  dignity  of  acts  of  worship. 
This  principle  has  been  of  inialeulahle  impoitance  in  the  develo)  merit  of  the 
Churcli.  It  is  by  means  of  it  that  Christianity  has  been  able  to  become  a  moral 
power,  at  once  stilf  ciently  firm  and  snffi  iently  elastic  to  adapt  itself  to  all  human 
situations,  p  rsonal,  domestic,  nation  1,  and  social.  Thereby  it  is  that  without 
revidution  it  has  worked  the  greatest  revolutions,  accepting  everything  to  transform 
everything,  submitung  to  ever^tl  ing  to  rise  above  everything,  renewing  the  world 
from  top  to  bottom,  while  condemning  all  violent  subversion.  Wlience  has  the 
apostle  derived  this  principle  in  \\hich  there  meet  the  most  unconquerable  faith 
and  the  most  oonsumma'e  ability  (see  Hem.  xii.  3)  ?  Wisdom  from  on  hiyh  did 
not  le-s  direct  Paul  the  pastor  than  Paul  the  teacher;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that 
he  was  acquainted  with  the  parable  of  the  lta\en.     {Prof.  Godet.) 

Vers.  25-40.  Now  concerning  virgins  I  have  no  commandment  of  the  Lord. — 
Concerning  virgins  and  icidows  : — The  apostle  advises — I.  The  unmarried  or  both 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  479 


SEXES.  As  he  has  argued  against  the  disruption  of  the  ties  between  slave  and 
master,  Christian  and  heathen,  so  Paul  now  advises  the  unmarried  to  remain  as 
they  arp.  Not  that  he  disparages  maniage,  but  special  circumstances  make  it 
inadvisable.  1.  The  present  distress  (ver.  2G).  This  m  ly  refer  to  the  Neroniau 
persecution  already  commenced  (a.d.  64),  or  to  the  troubles  which  were  to  usher  in 
the  second  advent  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.).  The  injunction  will  hold  in  all  similar  cases  ; 
as  when  the  soldier  is  called  to  dangerous  duty,  or  when  a  man  is  approaching 
death,  or  during  the  prevalence  of  famine  or  pestilence.  2.  Tribulation  in  the 
flesh  (ver.  28),  i.e.,  distress  wliich  bears  more  hardly  on  the  married  than  on  the 
single.  3.  The  shortness  of  time  (ver.  29).  4.  The  cares  incident  to  the  married 
state  (ver.  32).  II.  Fathers  kegardixg  unjiarkied  daughters.  In  the  East 
marriages  are  arranged  by  parents  much  more  than  Nvith  us  :  but  how  much  ev»n 
with  u.s  depends  on  the  Christian  wisdom  of  parents,  who  may  sacrifice  the  highest 
interests  for  the  sake  of  a  union  that  offers  worldly  attractions.  Faithful  parental 
guidance  may  prevent  an  unholy  alliance  and  lead  to  a  happy  union  "  in  the  Lord." 
The  point  before  the  apostle  is — 1.  When  permission  to  marry  may  be  granted 
(ver.  Si')).  (1)  Generally,  when  the  refusal  would  lead  to  anything  unseemly.  (2) 
In  particular,  if  the  girl  is  of  marriageable  age,  and  if  she  and  her  lover  are  bent 
on  union,  to  enforce  celibacy  would  be  to  put  temptation  in  her  way.  The  general 
advice  not  to  marry  because  of  present  distress  is  overborne  by  stronger  considera- 
tions (ver.  2)  ;  and  in  view  of  these  the  father  will  do  well  to  put  no  barriers  in  the 
way.  2.  When  pernussion  may  be  withheld.  The  elements  determining  judgment 
will  be — (1)  The  presence  or  absen-'e  of  the  considerations  mentioned  in  the  previous 
case.  (2)  The  temperament  or  inclination  of  the  daughter  in  reference  to  marriage. 
(3)  Her  fitness  for  Christ's  service  in  the  single  state.  (4)  Her  general  well-being 
temporal  and  spiritual.  If  in  view  of  these  he  judges  it  best  for  his  daughter  not 
to  marry  he  may  resist  the  solicitations  of  her  suitors.  III.  W'idows.  This  pro- 
ceeds on  the  same  lines  as  the  advice  to  the  unmarried.  She  is  free,  b  it  she  must 
only  marry  "  in  the  Lord."  Yet  the  apostle  advises  against  a  second  marriage",  on 
grounds  already  adduced  in  the  case  of  virgins.  A  widow  will  be  more  free  from 
care  if  she  remain  as  she  i-<.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  application  of  abiding  principles 
is  modified  by  changing  ciicumstauces.  What  is  prudent  in  a  Christian  country 
may  be  imprudent  elsewhere.  2.  Christians  should  only  marry  "in  the  Lord." 
(H.    Bremner,   B.D.)  H'orks  of  supererogation  and  counsels   of  perfection  : — 

Theologians  have  inferred  that  Christians  have  power  not  only  to  give  adequate 
obedience  to  the  moral  law,  but  also  to  do  works  of  supererogation.  This  doctrine 
rests  upon  two  assumptions — 1.  That  God  requires  in  His  creatures,  not  perfect 
conformity  with  moral  law,  but  only  sincerity  of  endeavour.  2.  That  the  actions 
supposed  to  be  counselled  but  not  commanded  are  moral,  and  not  n.erely  indifferent. 
But  both  assumptions  destroy  the  essential  nature  of  moral  law,  which  must,  in  its 
very  idea,  be  obligatory  ;  and  whatever  is  not  obligatory  is  no  part  of  morality,  but 
belongs  to  the  class  of  indifferent  things.  It  follows  that  if  the  apostle  imposes  no 
command  but  simply  gives  advice  in  reference  to  abstention  from  marriage  sucli 
abstention  is  not  to  be  reckoned  a  work  of  supererogation.  This  distinction, 
however,  between  obligatory  and  supererogatory  moral  obedience  must  not  be 
confounded  with  the  distinction  between  precepts  and  counsels  of  perfection — the 
latter  so  called  from  the  vulgate  rendering  of  yi'io/Ji]  in  this  verse.  Counsels  of 
perfection  differ  from  works  of  supererogation  in  two  points — 1.  They  have  always 
reference,  not  to  actions  in  themselves  moral,  but  to  actions  in  themselves  indifferent. 
2.  They  are  to  be  sought  not  in  the  words  of  Christ,  but  in  the  words  of  His 
apostles.  Whatever  Christ  says  in  reference  to  practice  is  a  command  which  men 
disobey  at  their  peril.  But  the  apostles,  though  they  may  often  have  authority  to 
command,  may  be  unable  on  occasion  to  arrive  at  a  decision  and,  therefore  rest 
content  with  the  expression  of  an  opinion,  which  Christians  may,  if  they  so  judge, 
lay  aside.  The  present  passage  is  an  instance  of  this.  We  need  not  discard  the 
name  "  counsels  of  perfection."  There  are  undoubted  cases  in  which  celibacy  is 
helpful  to  spiritual  progress,  and  other  cases  in  which  marriage  is  essential  to  it. 
The  apostle  says,  "  I  give  my  advice,  not  frivolously  nor  as  a  wise  man  of  this 
■world,  but  with  all  the  faithfulness  and  sincerity  of  one  that  has  had  the  grace  of 
salvation  and  apostleship."  The  advice  is  given  with  manifest  reluctance.  He  is 
careful  to  prep  ire  their  minds  for  it  by  telling  them  that  it  is  simply  his  own 
opinion,  not  the  Lord's  command,  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  formed  his 
judgment  under  a  sense  of  responsibility  attaching  to  his  office.  (Priitcijial  Edwards.) 
How  to  judge  in  difficult  matters  : — I.  Modestly  (ver.  25).     1.  Not  dogmatically  as 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 


if  we  had  a  right  to  command.  2.  Yet  faithfully.  3.  In  dependence  upon  the 
mercy  of  God.  II.  Wisely.  1.  With  deUcacy  and  discrimination  (vers.  26-28). 
2.  With  a  due  knowledge  of  times,  circumstances,  &(?.  III.  In  toe  feak  and  love 
OF  God  (vers.  32-34).  1.  Even  in  ordinary  life  earthly  ends  are  not  to  be  ihe  rule 
of  action.  2.  The  glory  of  God  must  be  the  supreme  aim.  IV.  Kindly  (vers. 
35-40).  I.  Not  assuming  anything  to  ourselves.  2.  But  respecting  the  liberty  of  onr 
neighbour.     (J.  Lijth,  D.D.)  Hmo  to  [live  advice: — I.  Modestly — not  with  an 

assumption  of  authority.  II.  Homely — as  a  matti^r  of  jud^^ment,  which  must  be 
tested  by  the  Word  of  God.  III.  In  a  Chris  ii\n  spiuit — as  those  who  have  been 
forgiven.     IV.  Faithfully — as  the  servants  of  God.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  29-31.  But  this  I  say,  brethren,  the  tirne  is  short :  it  remaineth  that  both 
they  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none. — Tlif  tinw  is  short : — I.  For  the 
DOJiKSTic  CONNECTIONS  OF  THE  WORLD  (ver.  29).  1.  Man  is  the  creature  of  the  family. 
He  is  nurseil  and  trained  under  its  intiuence.  When  called  to  leave  his  first  home 
the  domestic  instinct  impels  him  to  become  the  head  of  a  family  himself.  And 
then  amidst  the  infirmities  of  old  age  he  becomes  again  the  subject  of  dora^stic 
solicitude  and  sway.  A  well-organised  family  is  earth's  chief  nursery  and  highest 
type  of  heaven.  2.  But  this  relationship  "is  short."  Few  husbands  and  wives 
are  allowed  to  climb  the  hill  together,  and  fewer  still  hand-iu-hand  "  to  totter 
down."  3.  If  family  connections  are  thus  fo  ttansient,  how  ought  the  members 
to  live  in  vital  conneL-tion  with  that  gospel  which  immortalises  all  human  friend- 
ships. II.  FoK  THE  soiiKows  AND  JOYS  OF  THE  WOULD  (ver.  30).  1.  TlicTc  are  a 
wee  I  ling  and  rejoicing  that  will  never  end.  The  lost  sinner  will  weep  for  ever; 
and  the  joy  of  a  commending  conscit^nce  will  never  end.  2.  But  there  is  a  sorrow 
and  a  rejoicing  that  will  end  with  life — the  tear  of  worldly  anxiety,  and  the  joy  of 
worldly  success.  This  transitoriness  is — (1)  A  consolatory  thought  to  the  gnod 
man;  for  all  his  sorrows  end  here,  and  all  unsatisfactory  joys.  (2)  A  terrible 
thought  to  the  wicked.  Mnny  of  the  sorrows  he  Las  now  will  make  way  for 
greater  ones,  and  all  the  pleasures  he  has  now  will  end  for  ever.  III.  F.'H  the 
MERCANTILE  TKANSACTioNS  OF  THE  WORLD.  "  They  that  buv,"  d'c.  1.  The  principle 
of  commerce  is  adapted  to  unite  men  together  ;  and  by  the  exchange  of  the  material 
commodities,  to  exchange  kind  and  improving  thoughts.  Were  London  tradesmen 
all  religious,  they  could  exp  irt  religion  with  their  goods — the  market  would  be  the 
best  Missionary  Society  for  converting  the  world.  2.  This  material  commerce  will 
soon  be  over,  but  mental  and  spiritual  commerce  may  go  on  for  ever.  Make,  then, 
this  tempoiary  business  subservient  to  your  spiritual  welfare  ;  make  the  market  a 
means  of  grace.  In  all  your  getting  get  that  "  wisdom  which  is  the  principal 
thing."  IV.  For  the  eight  using  of  the  world  (ver.  31).  1.  The  world  is  abused 
when  it  is  used  chiefly — (1)  With  a  sensuous  end.  To  the  brute,  indeed,  the  world 
has  no  relation  but  to  the  senses.  (2)  With  a  secular  end.  When  men  value  it 
on  account  of  its  fruit  and  minerals,  i.e.,  so  far  as  it  can  be  turned  into  money, 
then  they  abuse  it.  (3)  With  an  intellectual  end.  The  world  ttems  with  Divine 
thoughts,  which  it  is  our  duty  and  interest  to  study.  But  to  make  this  the  end  is 
to  abuse  it.  2.  To  "use"  it  rightly  is  to  use  it  chiefly  with  a  relgious  end. 
Eeligion  warrants  us  to  use  it  sensuously,  for  we  have  senses ;  secularly,  for  we 
need  worldly  good  ;  intellectually,  for  we  require  truth  ;  but  it  demands  that  we 
should  suboidinate  it  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul — make  it  the  means  of  grace — the 
temple  of  worship.  3.  This  religious  use  of  the  world  makes  it  ours.  The  differ- 
ence between  the  world  to  the  worldly  and  to  the  Christian  is,  that  the  former  is 
po-sessed  by  it,  the  other  possesses  it.  V.  For  the  fashion  of  the  world.  1. 
The  world  literally  has  a  "  fashion  "  that  is  passing  away.  The  phenou'cna  and 
forms  of  the  world  are  ever  shifting.  2.  The  fashion  of  the  human  world  passeth 
away.  (1)  The  political  world  has  its  fashions  which  get  out  of  fashion,  and  others 
appear  on  the  stage  to  meet  the  times.  (2)  The  social  world  has  its  fashions,  &c., 
they  become  obsolete,  and  others  take  their  place.  (3)  The  religious  world  has  its 
fashions.  Now  one  ism  is  in  vogue,  and  now  another.  Now  one  popular  preacher, 
and  then  another.  Thus,  there  is  nothing  fixed.  Conclusion  :  Let  us  not,  then, 
put  our  confidence  in  forms,  but  in  substances.  You  know  that  though  the  world 
changes,  there  are  certain  principles  that  remain  for  ever.  It  is  for  ever  true,  that 
without  virtue  there  is  no  happiness,  and  that  without  Jesus  there  is  no  virtue; 
that  "A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  he  possesses." 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  time  is  short : — I.  "  The  time  is  short."  All  things  tell 
us  so.    1.  The  year  tells  it  in  its  rapid  flight.     The  seasons,  how  they  come  and  go  I 


OOA '.  VII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  48!1 

2.  Life  tells  it.  Look  back,  you  who  can  ramember  many  years !  What  seem 
they  now  ?  As  a  dream  when  one  awaketh.  3.  The  grave  tells  it,  opening  for  one 
afier  another  of  our  friends.  4.  Sickness  and  weakness,  the  body's  gradual  decay, 
tell  it.  5.  Every  day,  stealing  by  us  so  quickly  and  impercei)tibly,  giving  us 
warning.  We  go  forth  in  the  mornin.'  ;  and  in  a  few  brief  hours  our  work  is  done, 
and  we  lie  down  again  to  rest.  IL  What  gives  to  this  troth  its  vast  impor- 
tance ?  1.  Because  time  is  the  entrant-e  to  eternity.  If  we  were  formed  for  this 
world  only,  we  might  as  well  join  with  those  who  say,  Let  us  h  ive  a  short  time  and 
merry  one.  But  tliis  life  has  dread  responsibilities,  when  viewed  in  relation  to  a 
life  which  is  to  come.  To  every  one  of  us  is  committed  the  solemn  trust,  to  have 
this  immortal  being  prepared  for  its  appearance  before  God.  2.  And  how  may  this 
be  done  ?  The  way  is  revealed  to  us  in  tlie  gospel.  IIL  What  practical  lkssons 
DOES  it  enforce?  1.  Use  this  wjrld  as  not  abusing  it.  (1)  To  live  in  sin  is  au 
abuse  of  this  hfe.  Sin  is  a  hor.ible  disorder,  brought  into  the  world  which  God 
made  good.  (2)  All  who  care  only  for  the  body,  are  abusing  this  life  ;  who  work,  i 
and  eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep,  and  do  no  more.  Wliy  !  the  horse  and  the  ass  are- 
as good  as  they — nay,  better  ;  for  the  brutes  fulfil  the  pinp  )se  of  God.  (3)  If  we 
set  our  affections  on  the  things  of  this  world,  we  are  abusing  them.  2.  Be  not 
weary  in  well  doing:  for  in  due  season  ye  shall  reap,  if  ye  faint  not.  3.  What- 
ever good  "thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  tby  might."  (/<>'.  Blencotve,  M.A.) 
The  time  is  xhort  : — I.  The  time  of  the  world.  Christ  is  at  hand  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead.  II.  The  time  of  our  little  world  ;  our  particular  judgment 
is  near  at  hand.  It  shall  be  with  us  at  the  latter  day  as  it  is  when  we  die.  III. 
The  season  of  the  time.  The  opportunity  of  time  is  shorter  than  the  time  of 
life;  for  we  have  not  opportunity  of  time  all  our  life.  1.  The  time  is  short  for 
doing  and  taking  good.  2.  It  is  uncertain  ;  we  cannot  tell  how  short.  If  it  were 
told  any  that  within  two  days  he  shall  die,  it  would  make  us  look  about 
us :  but  who  of  us  all  knows  certainly  that  he  shall  live  two  hours  ?  3.  It  is 
irrecoverable  when  it  is  gone.  It  is  a  precious  thing,  given  for  great  purposes  ;  let 
us  take  heed  what  we  do  in  it.  We  may  do  that  in  a  little  time  tbat  we  may  rue 
for  eternity.  We  may  do  and  get  that  good  in  a  little  time  that  may  stand  by  us 
world  without  end.  Conclusion  :  There  are  three  main  parts  of  this  little  tmie.  1, 
The  time  that  is  gone;  let  us  repent  of  it,  if  it  have  not  been  spent  well.  2.  The 
time  present  is  to  do  good  in.  3.  For  the  time  to  come,  it  is  out  of  our  power. 
(R.  S.hhes,  D.D.)  Time:  ^iJi(jht  of: — Wht^n  young,  our  years  are  ages;  in 
mature  life,  they  are  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days  ;  in  old  age,  they  have 
dwindled  to  a  few  weeks.  Time  is,  indeed,  the  messenger  with  wings  at  his  feet. 
Yesteiday,  he  took  my  wife;  to-day,  vay  son;  to-morrow,  he  will  take  me. 
{Madame  de  Gaspariu.)  Time:  how  to  use  it: — I.  Know  the  use  of  time  ;  that 
it  is  a  seed-time,  wherein  thou  must  go  forth  and  sow,  though  in  tears  and 
showers.  An  husbandman  will  not  lose  his  seed-time  whatever  weather  it  prove. 
True,  our  life  is  a  moment,  but  on  which  eternity  depeudeth.  And  it  is  a  time  of 
trartic  till  the  Master  come  :  and  is  the  Master's  absence  for  eating,  drinking,  or 
Bmiting  the  fellow-servants?  II.  Know  the  worth  of  time,  before  the  want  of 
time.  It  is  a  very  folly  to  be  niggards  of  wealth  and  prodigal  of  time.  It  is  the 
great  sin  of  some  that  they  cast  away  their  short  time  in  doing  evil,  or  doing 
nought  to  the  purpose  :  as  little  children  who  spend  their  candle  in  play,  and  are 
glad  to  go  to  bed  by  dark,  and  never  perceive  their  childish  folly  till  it  be  too  late. 
But  Christian  wisdom  is  to  set  such  a  price  on  time  as  not  to  let  it  slip  without 
making  ourselves  gainers  of  S' mething  better  than  itself.  (J.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Time:  its  rapid  fliijltt : — A  Chinese  preacher,  wishing  to  impress  upon  his  hearers 
the  idea  that  time  seems  to  pass  more  swiftly  as  we  get  older,  used  a  telling  illus- 
tration drawn  from  the  incense-pan.  The  incense-pan  is  an  article  of  furniture 
familiar  to  every  Chinaman,  young  and  old.  It  is  a  stand  made  to  hold  a  great 
length  of  incense,  coiled  np  like  a  clock-spring.  The  outer  coils  are  by  far  the 
largest,  the  outermost  being  fifteen  or  eighteen  inches  in  circumference  ;  while  the 
inner  coils  get  gradually  shorter,  the  innermost  of  all  not  being  more  than,  perhaps, 
three  inches  in  circumference.  This  spiral  incense  being  fixed  on  the  frame  and 
lighted,  the  first  ronjid  takes  a  long  time  to  burn;  the  second  round,  being  shorter, 
is  completed  quicker  ;  the  third  lound  is  completed  more  quickly  still ;  and  so, 
with  accelerated  pace,  the  smoking  point  courses  round  the  shortening  coils  till 
the  last  is  reached,  which,  being  the  shortest  of  all,  is  travelled  round  in  a  fraction 
of  the  time  that  was  taken  to  consume  the  first.  In  the  same  way,  said  the 
Chinaman,  our  \  ears  seem  to  go,  tiyiug  more  swiltly  the  nearer  we  get  to  the  end 
VOL.   I.  31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cdap.  vii. 


of  our  life.  The  xlinrtness  of  life  :— 1.   The  tone  in   which  a  man   speaks   often 

helps  us  to  understand  his  meaning.  "Brethren,  the  time  is  short,"  wiites  St. 
Paul,  and  there  is  no  tremor  of  dismay  or  sadness  in  his  voice.  He  was  in  the 
midst  of  work,  full  of  the  joy  of  living,  and  he  quietly  said,  "  This  is  not  going  to 
last  long."  It  is  what  men  often  say  to  themselves  with  terror,  clutching  the 
things  they  hold  all  the  more  closely,  as  if  they  would  hold  them  for  ever.  Thei\. 
is  nothing  of  that  about  St.  Paul.  And  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  hatred  u 
life  which  makes  him  want  to  be  away.  Tiiere  is  no  mad  impatience  for  the 
things  which  lie  bi-yond.  2.  It  does  not  matter  what  St.  Paul  was  thinking  of. 
He  may  have  had  IjIs  mind  upon  death  or  the  coming  of  CLrist.  And  perhaps  the 
very  vagueness  helps  us  to  his  meaning.  For  he  is  not,  evidently,  dwelling  upon 
the  nature  of  the  event  which  is  to  limit  the  "  time,"  only  upon  the  simple  fact 
that  there  is  a  limit.  I.  What  is  the  shortxess  of  life?  To  the  ephemera  it 
looks  like  an  eternity  ;  to  God  it  looks  like  an  instant.  How  shall  human  life 
seem,  then,  to  man?  It  depends  upon  where  he  stands  to  look  at  it.  If  he  stands 
vith  the  ephemera,  his  life  looks  long  ;  if  with  God,  his  life  looks  short.  If  a  man 
is  able,  that  is,  to  conceive  of  immortality,  he  thinks  his  life  on  earth  is  sliort — 
and  that  we  can  do  so  is  the  pledge  and  witness  of  our  nobility.  II.  The  short- 
ness or  LIFE  IS  BOUND  UP  WITH  ITS  FULNESS.  The  day  crawls  to  the  idler,  and 
flies  to  the  busy  worker.  The  shortness  of  life  is  closely  associated,  not  merely  with 
the  greatest  hopes  of  the  future,  but  with  the  real  vitality  of  the  present.  What 
then?  If  you  and  I  complain  how  short  life  is,  how  quick  it  ilies,  we  are  com- 
l^laining  of  that  wliich  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  our  vitality.  And  does  not 
then  the  shortness  of  life  cease  tj  be  our  lamentation  and  become  our  privilege 
and  glory?  III.  Suppose  a  man  has  accepted  the  shortness  of  life  as  a  con- 
viction,  WHAT   EFFECT   WILL   THAT     CONVICTION    HAVE     UPON     HIS     LIFE  ?        1.    Must   it 

not  make  a  luan  try  to  sift  the  things  thit  offer  themselves  to  him,  and  try  to  find 
out  what  his  things  are  ?     Epictetus  paid  that  for  each  of  men  there  is  one  great 
classification  of  the  universe,  into  the  things  which  concern  him  and  the  things 
which  do  not  concern  him.     To  how  many  men   that   classification   is   all  vague. 
Many  men's  souls  are  like  omnibuses,  stopping  to  take   up   every  interest   or  task 
that  holds  up  its  finger  and  beckons  them  from  the  side  walk.     Such  indiscrimi- 
nateness  is  almost  legitimate  and  necessary  in  childhood.     Then  life  seems  endless. 
Then  the  quick  experimenting  senses  are  ready  for  vdiatever  strikes  them._    But  as 
the  course  goes  on,  as  its  limit  comes  in  sight  and  we-  see  how  short  it  is,  the 
elective  system  must  come  in.     Out  of  the  mass  of  things  which  we  have  touched, 
we  must  choose  these  which  are  ours — books,  fi  lends,  pleasures,  usefulness,  &c., 
before  we  go.     We  come  to  be  like  a  party  of  travellers  left  at  a  great  city  railway 
station  for  a  couple  of  hours.     All  cannot  see  everything  in  town.     Each  has  to 
choose  according  to  his  tastes  what  he  will  see.     2.  It  brings  a  power  of  freedom  in 
deahng  with  the  things  which  we  do  take  to  be  our  own  (vers.  29-31).     Not  that 
they  should  not  marry,  &c.     The  shortness  of  life  was  not  to  paralyse  life  like 
that.     But  they  were  to  do  these  things  with  a  soul  above  their  details,  and  in  the 
principles  and  motives  which  lay  be\ond  them.     He  who  has  only  an  hour  to  stay 
in  some  great  foreign  city  will  not  puzzle  himself  with  the  intricacies  of  it-^  streets 
or  the  small  particulars  of  its  life.     He  will  try  simply  to  catch  its  general  spirit,  to 
see  what  sort  of  town  it  is,  and  learn  its  lessons.     He  must  tread  its  pavements, 
talk  with  its  people,  <l'c.  ;  but  he  will  not  do  these  things  as  the  citizens  do  them. 
He  will  do  them  as  if  he  did  them  not.     Just  so  he  who  knows  he  is  in  the  world 
for  a  very  little  while,  is  not  like  a  man  who  is  to  live  here  for  ever.     3.  In  the 
shortness  of  life  the  great  emotions  and  experiences  assume  their  largest  power  and 
act  with  their  most  ennobling  influence.     Think,  e.f;.,  of  a  great  bereavement  com- 
ing to  a  man.     It  comes  in  two  forms.     One  is  in  the  change  of  circumstances; 
the  other  is  in  the  mystery  of  death  and  the  distress  of  love.     Now  if  the  man  who 
is  bereaved  sees  nothing  in  the  distance,  but  one  stretch  of  living,  it  is  the  first 
of  these  aspects  that  is  the  most  real.     He  multiplies  the  circumstances  of  his 
bereavement  into   all  these  coming  years.     But  if,  when   we  stand  to  watch  the 
spirit  which  has  gone  away  to  heaven  it  seems  but  a  very  little  time  before  we  shall 
go  too,  then  our  gi-ief  is  exalted  to  its  largest  form.     Men's  griefs  are  as  <lifferent  as 
men's  lives.     To  the  man  who  is  all  wrapt  up  in  this  world,  grief  comes  as  the 
ghosts  come  to  the  poor  narrow-minded  churl — to  plague  and  tease  him.     To  him 
to  whom  life  is  but  an  episode,  grief  comes  as  angels  came  to  the  tent  of  Abraham. 
The  soul  takes  the  grief  in  as  a  guest,  and  listens  reverently  for  what  it  has  to  say 
about  the  God  from  whom  it  came.     4.  The  criticalness  of  life  is  bound  up  with  its 


CHAP,  vii.]  I.   COniNTHrANS.  483 

shortness.  That  thought  belongs  to  every  limited  period  of  being  which  opens  into 
something  greater.  A  boy  feels  the  probation  character  of  his  youth  just  in  pro- 
portion as  he  vividly  realises  the  approach  of  his  majority.  And  man  is  made  so 
that  some  sense  of  criticalness  is  necessary  to  the  best  life  always.  Let  me  feel 
that  nothing  but  this  moment  depends  upon  this  moment's  action,  and  I  am  very 
apt  to  let  this  moment  act  pretty  much  as  it  will.  Lt-t  me  see  the  spirits  of  the 
moments  >et  unboin  watching  it  anxiously,  and  I  must  watch  it  also  for  their  sakes. 
And  it  is  in  ihis  that  the  strongest  moral  power  of  life  is  found.  Now  ask  yourself. 
Could  this  have  b^-en  if  life  had  seemed  so  long  to  men  as  never  to  suggest  its 
limits  ?  It  is  when  the  br>.ok  begins  to  hear  the  great  nver  CMlling  it,  and  knows 
that  its  time  is  shoit,  that  it  begins  to  hurry  over  the  rocks  and  tuss  its  foam  into 
the  air  and  make  striiight  for  the  valle_y.  Life  that  never  tliinks  of  its  end  lives  in 
a  present,  and  1  'ses  the  How  and  movement  of  responsibility.  5.  When  we  know 
that  our  time  of  intercourse  is  short  ^'ith  any  man,  our  rel-ttions  with  that  man 
grow  true  and  deep.  Two  men  who  have  lived  side  by  side  for  years,  with  business 
and  social  life  between  them,  with  a  nmltitude  of  suspicions  and  conceahiients, 
let  them  know  that  they  have  only  an  hour  more  to  live  together,  and,  as  they  look 
into  each  other's  eyes,  do  not  the  suspicions  and  concealments  clear  away?  Oh, 
you  who  are  letting  miserable  misunderstandings  run  on  from  ye.ir  to  \ear,  mean- 
ing to  clear  them  up  some  day  ;  or  letting  your  friend's  heart  ache  for  a  word  of 
appreciation  or  syiupathy,  which  you  mean  to  give  him  some  day — if  you  could 
only  know,  all  of  a  sudden,  that  "  the  time  is  short,"  how  it  would  break  the  sjjell! 
How  you  would  go  inst  intly  and  do  the  thing  which  you  might  never  have  another 
chance  to  do.  (/.';).  I'liilli/jt!  Lliooks.)  Life^g  hreiutij  : — No  Christian  will  receive 
this  as  a  sad  announcement,  or  who  has  lost  those  whom  he  loves,  and  has  a  good 
hope  beyond  the  grave.  His  only  ground  of  regret  is  that  the  work  he  has  to  do  is 
too  great  for  the  space  in  which  he  has  to  do  it.  And  this  is  the  thought  which 
the  word  "  short "  most  literally  conveys.  It  means  "shut  in,"  "straitened  for 
room. ■'  And  this  thought  was  natural  to  a  mind  like  Paul's — so  full,  so  busy,  with 
large  undertakings.  I.  Thicke  are  three  reasons  why  time  is  shout.  1.  To  the 
eye  that  has  been  dwelling  on  eternity,  all  time,  everything  sve-  can  measure,  must 
be  short.  2.  Good  occupations  make  shortness.  There  is  a  great  deal  to  do.  Alas ! 
for  the  man  who  finds  any  day  of  his  life  too  long.  3.  No  happy  man  complains 
that  the  hours  run  sluggishly;  and  happiness  is  every  man's  dn  j.  To  those  who 
are  infinitely  ha^'py  there  is  no  time  at  all.  II.  I  speak  to  'jhose  who  wis  i  it  to 
BE  short.  1.  "This  I  say,  hrctliren,  the  time  is  short,"  bef -re  the  Elder  Br. .ther 
comes.  The  time  is  short  for  all  your  earthly  brotheniood ;  and  s  on  will  be  the 
heavenly  biotherhood,  when  the  whole  family  will  meet  m  their  Father's  house. 
Already  Jesus  is  on  His  way.  and  He  travels  quickly.  2.  What  makes  time  longer 
than  it  is,  is  to  clog  it  with  the  past  or  encumber  it  with  the  future.  If  you  desire 
that  time  should  feel  short,  live  straight  to  the  present;  tlie  present  duties,  joys, 
trials.  You  have  nothing  to  do  bat  with  the  passing  moment.  Don't  be  long  about 
an\  thing.  What  is  to  be  said,  say  it ;  what  is  to  be  done,  do  it;  what  is  to  be 
thought,  think  it;  what  is  to  be  prayed,  pray  it ;  what  is  to  be  sulfered,  suffer  it. 
Concentrate.  Many  persons  are  too  lotig  in  their  religious  duties  ;  they  may  do 
better  by  more  condensation.  8.  The  time  is  too  sh(prt — (1)  To  trifle  with.  (2)  To 
be  speculative  ;  what  we  want  is  to  be  exceedingly  practical.  (3)  For  fretting  about 
lit'le  things.  The  future  we  care  about  may  never  come  ;  and  if  it  comes  will  be 
only  for  a  little  while.  (4)  To  hoard  up,  when  "this  nig>t  thv  soul  may  be 
required  of  thee."'  (5)  To  quarrel,  when  we  are  all  about  to  go  in  together  to  stand 
before  His  judgment  seat,  (ij)  To  mourn  for  those  who  are  none  wli.  nthey  will  so 
soon  come  back  again.  (7)  To  weep — when  God  is  so  soon  to  "wipe  away  all 
tears  from  our  eyes."  4.  But  it  is  not  too  short — (1)  To  pause  and  feel  its  shortness. 
(2)  To  do  something  for  God  before  we  "  finish  the  work  which  He  has  given  us  to 
do."  (J.  Vaitgh  m,  M.A.)  I^rief  life  is  here  our  portion  .-  —  The  text  does  not  say 
that  time  is  short.  That  were  very  true.  Compared  with  eternity,  time  at  the  very 
longest  is  but  as  a  point.  But  the  text  says  "  Tlie  time  is  short,"  i.e.,  the  time  of 
our  life  and  opportunity.  This  is  a  truth  which  everybody  believes  ;  yet  how  few 
of  us  act  as  if  we  believed  it!  "All  men  think  all  men  mortal  but  themselves." 
Ask  the  angel  what  he  thinks  of  the  life  of  a  mortal,  and  he  will  tell  you  "  Like  the 
grass,  scarcely  have  I  gazed  upon  them  ere  thi^y  are  cut  down,  withered,  "nd  gone." 
Or  if  you  interrogate  the  oak  or  the  elm  they  will  tell  you  that  man  is  but  an 
infant  of  to-diy.  Or  take  coimsel  of  the  old  man  and  he  will  tell  you  that  when 
he  was  a  boy  he  thought  he  had  a  wealth  of  time  before  him.     Yet  now  he  re- 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

members  -when,  as  it  were  but  yesterday,  he  was  liimself  a  little  child,  and  his 
grandsire  clasped  him  to  his  bosom.  And  yet,  perhaps,  some  of  you  hoary  veterans 
need  to  be  reminded  that  the  time  is  short.  Should  five,  or  even  ten  years  more  be 
granted  you,  how  quickly  they  must  pass  when  seventy  so  rapidly  have  fled  !  Be 
parsimonious  of  minutes  now,  though  you  may  have  been  once  prodigal  of  years. 
But  to  estimate  this  oracle  truly  we  must  turn  to  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the 
Most  High.  "  A  thousand  years  in  His  sight  are  but  as  yesterday,"  cfec.  "The 
time  is  short."  I.  It  warns.  If  ye  knew  the  sterling  worth  of  time  ye  would 
shrink  from  the  smallest  waste  of  so  precious  an  article.  It  is  too  short — 1.  To 
squander  upon  unprofitable  amusements.  While  recreation  is  needful  to  keep  the 
mental  and  physical  powers  in  working  order,  we  can  give  no  countenance  to  such 
gambols  and  gamblings  as  rather  tend  to  enervate  than  to  invigorate.  2.  To  lose 
it  in  t-enseless  talk,  idle  g'  ssip,  or  domestic  scandals.  3.  'Jo  plan  a  round  of 
empty  frivolities  to  while  away  an  afternoon  or  an  evening,  as  the  manner  of  some 
is.  It  is  said  of  Henry  Martin  that  he  never  wasted  an  hour.  I  wish  it  could  be 
said  of  us,  that  we  wasted  neither  an  hour  of  our  own  time,  nor  of  other  peoi^le's.  4. 
For  indecision  and  vacillation.  Your  resolving  and  retracting,  your  planning  and 
scheming,  your  sleeping  and  dreaming,  are  a  mockery  of  lif<^,  and  a  wilful  murder 
of  time.  If  God  be  God,  seive  Him.  Decide  quick,  speak  sharp.  If  not,  take  the 
alternative — serve  Baal.  5.  For  speculating  upon  nice  points  of  controversial 
theology.  You  know  how  the  school-m^n  used  to  debate  how  many  angels  could 
stand  on  the  point  of  a  needle.  There  is  a  little  of  the  spirit  abroad  now. 
Ministers  will  devote  whole  sermons  to  the  discussion  of  some  crotchet.  I  have 
generally  noticed  that  the  less  imp  atant  the  point  is,  the  more  savagely  will  some 
persons  defend  it.  I  would  sooner  be  able  t  >  i^roclaim  the  Cross  and  explain  the 
Gospels  than  decipher  the  imagery  of  Ezekiel,  or  the  symbols  of  the  Apocalypse. 
II.  It  suggests.  Surely,  then,  I  have  some  opportunity  to  follow  out  the  work  of 
faith,  the  patience  of  hope  and  th-  labour  of  love,  though  not  the  opportunity  I 
once  had.  Some  of  you  can  never  hope  to  receive  the  greeting  that  awaits  such  a 
faithful  servant.  You  have  lost  the  golden  opportunity.  But  are  there  not  children 
here  to  whom  this  is  possible?  I  solemnly  charge  each  young  man  to  foster  this 
aspiration.  Prepare  for  the  gooil  fight  of  faith.  Live  to  the  utmost  possible  con- 
secration of  your  entire  manhood.  "  Wha  soever  tby  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with 
thy  might."  III.  It  inspires.  Now  is  the  accepted  time.  The  time  to  do  the 
deeds  that  thou  must  do,  or  leave  them  undone,  flies  s-vviftly  past.  1.  Are  your 
children  converted  ?  Pray  with  them  to-night.  "  The  time  is  short  "  for  others  as 
well  as  yourself.  Do  not  wnit,  young  man,  to  preach  Jesus  till  you  have  had  more 
instruction.  You  that  mean  to  do  something  for  the  poor  when  you  have  hoarded 
up  some  more  money,  spend  your  money  now.  Be  y>iur  own  executors.  "  The 
time  is  short."  Let  it  inspire  you  to  pray  for  immediate  conversions.  2.  Seeing 
the  time  is  short,  let  us  bear  with  p  itience  the  ills  that  vex  us.  Are  we  very  poor  ? 
Is  consumption  beginning  to  prey  on  our  trembling  frame?  Have  we  to  bear  evil 
treatment  from  an  ungenerous  world  ?  Why  trouble  yourselves  about  what  you 
will  do  a  month  or  two  hence?  You  will  probably  not  be  here;  you  will  be  in 
heaven.  Worldly-mindedness  ill  becomes  us  who  have  confessed  that  we  are 
strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.  IV.  It  alarms.  And  well  indeed  it  may.  It 
is  a  dismal  knell  I  have  to  toll  for  the  unconveited  man,  to  whom  life  has  been  a 
joy,  for  he  has  prospered  in  the  world.  But  what  have  you  not  done  ?  You  have 
not  found  salvation.  How  few  the  opportunities  that  remain  !  (C.  H.  Spiirgeon.) 
Leiuith  of  life: — Ten  thousand  human  beings  set  forth  together  on  their  journey. 
After  ten  vears,  one-third,  at  least,  have  disappeared.  At  the  middle  point  of  the 
common  measures  of  life  but  half  »re  s^till  upon  the  road.  Faster  and  faster,  as 
the  ranks  grow  thinner,  they  that  remain  till  now  become  weary,  and  lie  down,  and 
rise  no  more.  At  three-score  and  ten,  a  band  of  some  four  hundred  yet  struggle  on. 
At  ninety,  these  have  been  reduced  to  a  handful  of  thirty  tremt.ling  patriarchs. 
Year  after  year,  they  fall  in  diminishing  numbers.  One  lingers,  perhaps,  a  lonely 
marvel,  till  the  century  is  over.  We  lo^k  again,  and  the  work  of  death  is  finished. 
{Bp.  hiiraesfi.)  Oiili/  a  little  wlnle  : — The  attitude  of  people  towards  a  temporary 
state  of  affairs  is  very  dilTerent  from  their  attitude  towards  something  permanent. 
No  man  fits  up  his  room  at  an  hotel  as  he  does  his  home.  Wh^n  one  is  waiting  in 
the  vestib'ile  of  a  public  hall  he  does  nut  give  much  thou^dit  to  the  inconveniences 
of  his  situation.  The  thing  for  which  lie  lias  come  is  behind  those  doors.  When  a 
man  rtdes  in  a  street-car  he  would  r.ither  have  a  seat  and  less  crowding;  but  he 
never   thinks  of  inakii.g  a  serious  matter  of  that.     His  object  is  to  get  down  to 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.   CORINTHIASS.  485 

business.     Now  do  we  recognise  the  larger  applications  of  the  same  principle  ? 
Suppose  we  set  this  life  of  sixty  or  seventy  years  over  a.uainst  the  eternal  life  of  the 
future.     T.'ie  two  spaces  are  related  to  eacli  other  as  the  vestibule  to  the  hall,  the 
transit  on  the  car  to  the  day's  business.     But  remember  that  Paul  does  not  use  the 
fact  of  the  shortness  of  life  to  encourage  a  sense  of  indifference  to  life's  duties. 
There  may  be  in  the   ante-cliamber  some   beautiful   pictures  and  sculptures,  etc. 
These   things  are  for  us :   we  may  and  ought  to  enjoy  them.     We  are  not  excused 
from  the  courtesies  of  life,  even  on  a  street -car.     The  other  world  may  be,  and  is, 
the  prime  fact ;  but  tliis  world  is  a  fact,  too,  though  a  secondary  one.     If  Paul 
says,  "  It  remaineth  that  those  who  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none,"  we 
are  not  to  conclude  that  because  a  man  expects  to  depart  for  heaven  in  a  short 
time,  he  is  therefore  to  treat  his  wife  as  though  she  were  not.     This  beiug  premised, 
note  the  bearing  of  this  fact  on — I.  Our  ik):\ikstic  wKr.ATioxs  (ver.  29).     These  are 
tlie  nearest  and  dearest  of  all  enrthly  tit-s  ;  they  call  out  our  deepest  affections,  oar 
best  energies.     And  God  Himself  institute'l    tht-m,  and   Christ  sanctified   them  at 
Cana  ;  and  Paul  chooses  them  to  illustrate  the  love  of  Christ  for  the  Church.     Yet 
it  remaineth,  that  they  that  have  wives  be  as  though  tney  had  none.     1.  If  our 
earthly  homes   crowd  out   the   attractions  of  tlie  heavenly  home,  we  are  misusing 
them.     "When  home  c^'a-es  to  be  the  nursery  of  consecrated  power,  a  scene  of  pre- 
paration for  heaven,  and  become^*,  instead,  a  base  foi'  fashion  and  shallow  plensure, 
then  it  is  time  to  face  tire  hour  when  a  voice  shall  call  us  forth  from  these  beloved 
doors,  to  return  no  more.     2.  And  then,  too,  we  know  that  often  the  family  relation 
is  not  the  type  of  heaven.     We  know  how  men  make  it  the  instrument  of  fostering 
their  pride  of  birth,  and  how,  for  the  sake  of  jireserving  a  family  name,  loveliness 
and  innocence  are  allied  with  senility  and  debauchery.     3.  On  the  contrary,  in  the 
New  Testament  domestic  life  is  always  treated  with  special  reference  to  the  life  to 
come.     The  institution  of  the  family,  beyond  any  human  institution,  points  up  to 
God.     God  Himself  takes  tlie  name  of  the  family  head  ;  marriage  is  to  be  in  the 
Lord  ;  cliildren  are  to  be  trained  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.     11. 
The  sorkow  of  this  would  (ver.  30).     1.  Let  us  confine  ourselves  to  one  element — 
injustice.    The  innocent  suffer ;  the  bad  prosper.    Away  back  in  the  far  past  we  find 
Job  wrestling  with  the  question.     On  the  one  hand,  the  reasoner  asks,  "How  did  it 
come  to  pass  ?     Why  is  it  allowed  ?  "     On  the  other  hand,  the  man  who  is  trying 
to  live  riglitly  asks,  "  What  shall  I  do  with  it  ?     How  shall  I  adjust  myself  to  it  ?  " 
2.   Note  the  answers  which  are  given  to  the  latter  rjuestion.     (1)  Kousseau  tells  us 
it  is  all  the  result  of  false  training.     Human  nature  is  good;  and,  if  you  only 
educate  it  properly,  its  evil  will  be  checked,  and  we  shall  have  a  re'gn  of  liberty, 
equality,  and  fraternity.     Tlie  value  of  Eousseau"s  answer  may  be  estimated  in  the 
lurid  liglit  of  the  French  Pievolution.     (2)  The  communist  says,  "  Onlv  do  away 
witii  all  private  interest,  and  merge  all  in  the  public,  and  all  will  be  well."     But, 
unfortunately,  the  history  of  Nihilism  has  some  significant  stories  to  tell  of  that 
experiment.     (3)  There  was  the  Stoic,  who  steeled  himself  against  injustice,  and 
cultivated  insensibility  to  pain,  anger,  and  XDity  alike.     (4)  Thf^re  was  the  Epicurean, 
saying,  "  I  will  keep  out  of  all  such  relations  with  men  as  will  eiigrnder  injustice  or 
cruelty."     3.  All  these  views  are  strictly  bouniled  by  this  life,  and  are  opjiosed  by 
that  which  is  represented  in  our  text.      For  tlie  New  Testament — (1)  Shows  no 
sympathy  with  Ilousseau's  view.     It  treats  injustice  as  an  evil  that  will  exist  so 
long  as  human  society  is  not  under  the  power  of  Divine  love.     (2)  Does  not  give 
us  a  xjicture  of  any  favoured  man  who  escapes  the  world's  injustice.     On  the  con- 
trary, the  better  its  men  the  more  they  suffer  at  the  world's  hands.     (3)  Gives  us 
no  men  of  iron,  insensible  to  suffering.      The  victims  of  tlie  world's  cruelty  are  real 
sufferers.     (4)  Puts  every  Christian  in  a  positive  attitude  towards  this  fact.     He 
cannot  evade  it ;  he  must  feel  towards  it  in  the  ri^ht  wny.     And  if,  as  the  gospel 
everywhere  assumes,  this  state  of  things  is  passing  away  to  give  place  to  a  better 
and  more  permanent  one,  then  let  the  injustice  and  cruelty  and  sorro.v  be  measured 
by  the  proportions  of  tliat  larger  life  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).     We  can  be  as  though  we  wept 
not ;  i.e.,  we  can  be  as  useful  and  as  kindly  as  if  we  had  no  cause  to  weep.     We 
may  have  lost  what  is  ours  ;  but  the  time  is  short,  and  heaven  will  give  it  back  with 
intere-t.     III.  Odr  joys  (ver.  30).     Not  that  we  are  to  pass  this  life  in  gloom  and 
sullenuess  because  it  is  short.     When  the  train  goes  through  the  tunnel  let  us  be 
all  the  more  cheerful  liecause  the  sunlight  will  pour  in  by  and  by.     But  if  there  is 
grander  joy  in  the  life  beyond  this,  it  is  not  the  part  of  wisdom  to  be  too  much 
absorbed  in  earthly  joy.     IV.  The  buyixg  and  selling,  the  possessing  and  use  of 
THE  WORLD  IN   GENERAL  (ver.  31).     All  these  things,  in  New  Testament  thought. 


48G  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

have  their  value  determined  bj  two  facts — the  shortness  of  this  hfe,  and  the  over- 
shadowing, transcendent  grandeur  of  the  hfe  to  come.  Does  it  not  become  us  to 
hold  this  world  lightly  in  view  of  these  two  truths — so  little  time  left,  and  eternity 
approaching?  An  old  woman  sat  one  day  beside  her  apple-stand  in  a  great 
thoroughfiire.  A  well-known  judge^  walked  up  and  stopped  for  an  apple.  "  Well, 
Molly,"  said  he,  "  don't  you  get  tired  of  sitting  here  these  ddd,  dismal  days?" 
"It's  only  a  little  while,  sir,"  was  the  answer.  "And  the  hot,  dusty  days?" 
*'  Only  a  little  while,  sir."  "  And  the  rainy,  drizzly  days,  and  your  sick,  rheumatic 
days  ?  "  "  It's  only  a  little  while,  sir."  "  And  what  then,  Molly  ?  "  "  Then,  sir, 
I  shall  enter  into  that  rest  which  i-emains  for  the  people  of  God  ;  and  the  trouble- 
someness  of  the  way  there  don't  pester  nor  fret  me.  It's  only  a  little  while."  "  But," 
said  the  judge,  "  what  makes  you  so  sure,  Molly?  "  "  How  can  I  help  being  sure, 
since  Christ  is  tlie  way,  aud  I  am  His  ?  Now  I  only  feel  Him  along  the  way  ;  I 
shall  see  Him  as  He  is  in  a  little  while,  sir."  "  Ah  !  "  said  the  judge,  "  you've  got 
more  than  the  law  ever  taught  me."  "Yes,  sir,  because  I  went  to  the  gospel." 
"  Well,"  said  he,  as  he  took  up  his  apple,  and  began  to  walk  off,  "  I  must  look  into 
these  things."  "  There's  only  a  little  while,  sir."  {M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  L{fe,its 
shadows  and  its  svh-'tance : — Is  it,  then,  the  aim  of  Christianity  to  turn  this  world 
into  a  dream-land  ?  Are  we  to  undervalue  life's  sweetest  affections  and  def^pest 
sentiments  as  if  they  were  but  appearances?  Surely  no  !  Such  an  interpretntion 
misconceives  this  passage  alone  and  the  whole  Bible  teaching ;  for  no  other  book  is 
more  intensely  realistic  than  the  Word  of  God,  and  nothing  places  more  value  on 
common  life.     I.  Let  us  look  around  and  recall  some  of  our  experiences  to  see 

WHETHER  WE    MAT    NOT    FIND    A    CLUE    TO    THIS    REMARKABLE    PASSAGE.       1.    When,    On 

some  summer  afternoon,  parents  watch  the  sports  of  their  children  and  perceive 
their  realisation  of  the  game,  do  they  not  feel  that  to  the  child  t'lere  is  value  in 
these  things?  And  yet,  when  they  consider  the  after-life  of  the  child,  do  they  not 
smile  at  his  dream-land?  It  is  to  the  parents  as  if  it  wei'e  not.  And  when 
the  childien  grow  up  they  feel  that,  when  compared  with  the  larger  experience 
into  which  they  have  entered,  that  early  joy  was  unsubstantial.  In  like  manner,  it 
is  in  the  power  of  the  ripened  mind  to  look  f(jrward  toward  a  coming  state  whose 
glory  and  perfectuess  shrill  cast  all  present  realisations  into  such  relative  inferiority 
that  they  shall  seem  to  be  but  shadows.  2.  There  are  two  states  of  mind  in  which 
men  hive  an  experience  in  business.  The  reality  and  importance  of  business 
is  solemnly  to  he  affirmed.  Aud  yet  there  are  times  when  men  feel  disgust  at 
wealth,  and  at  all  the  means  by  which  it  is  sought.  But  there  are  hours  in  which 
men  feel,  not  that  earthly  treasure  is  despicable,  but  that  theie  is  a  kind  of  treasure 
with  which  that  which  the  earth  affords  bears  no  comparison.  3.  He  who  has 
built  a  palace  for  his  affections  knows  two  exi^eriences  of  the  like  kind.  The 
earnest  reHlity  of  heart-life — nothing  can  take  from  its  importance.  But  there  are 
times  when  there  is  a  vision  of  the  coming  love  in  comparison  with  which  all  that 
we  here  knew  in  res)iect  to  heart-love  is  but  a  germ,  or  a  plant  in  its  curly  years. 
4.  Some  there  are  who  will  tell  you  that  in  sorrow  there  is  a  like  experience.  The 
realitv,  the  power,  and  the  dominion  of  sorrow  no  man  disputes.  Yet,  as  in  storms, 
sometimes  there  are  moments  when  the  clouds  part  and  let  through  the  whole  gush 
of  the  sun  ;  so,  out  of  anguish,  often,  the  soul  rises  to  a  vision  of  the  work  which 
sorrow  does  for  men.  "  No  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,"  &c. 
And  in  these  higher  moods  we  look  back  upon  sorrows  as  if  they  had  been  no 
sorrows.  Who  remembers,  when  once  his  feet  are  upon  land  ayain,  those  weary 
stoims  that  well-nigh  rocked  the  life  out  of  him  but  yesterday  ?  5.  Thus  in  jfiy  too 
we  learn  to  rejoice  as  though  we  rejoiced  not.  We  learn,  blessed  and  beautiful  as 
is  the  present,  to  wait  for  the  more  glorious  disclosure  that  is  just  beyond.  Have 
we  not,  then,  in  these  and  like  experiences,  the  interpretation  of  this  sublime  truth 
of  the  sacred  Scriptures  ?  In  another  way  John  comes  at  the  same  truth,  where  he 
says,  "  Be'oved,  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 
shall  be.''  You  are  to  live  as  if  all  things  here  below  were  transient.  You  are  not 
to  rest  in  thtm  as  though  you  were  satisfied  with  them.  Let  us  live  as  though  all 
these  symbols  of  the  life  to  come  wei'e  but  shadows  and  dreams.     11.  In  view  of 

THESE  ILLUSTRATIONS  CONSIDER  HOW  THE  DEEPENING  AND  ENNOBLING  OF  HUMAN  LIFE 
DEPENDS,  NOT  ON  THE  IDOLATRY  OF  ITS  PRESENT  LOW  ESTATE,  BUT  ON  SO  EMPLOYING  ITS 
EARTHLY    LETTER    AS    '10    DESCRY  WHAT    IT    IS    GOING    TO    BE.       1.    Take   love,  the    finest 

feeling.  We  are  to  lift  uj)  our  conceptions  to  a  state  in  which  our  character  will 
ti*rn  on  this  feeling,  not  occasionally,  but  as  an  ordinaiy  experience.  And  when 
we  have  thus  raised  the  ideal  that  ideal  comes  back  to  teach  us  how  pure  and  noble 


CHAP.  VII.]  7.   CORINTHIANS.  487 

it  ought  to  be.  2.  Nothing  else  is  a  better  guard  against  immorleration  and  the 
vuh-'arising  tendencies  of  business  than  that  habit  of  mind  whicli  the  apostle  here 
indicates.  We  take  business  too  often  as  an  ultimate  end.  We  do  not  let  it  pro- 
phesy  anything  to  us.  The  wickedness  of  this  world  is  not  that  men  are  addicted 
to  business,  but  that  they  look  at  it  only  on  the  earth  side;  that  they  fail  to  hear 
its  testimony  of  higher  things.  So  soon  as  a  man  is  satisfied  that  there  is  higher 
wealth  than  this  world  affords;  that  his  life  consists  n<it  of  the  abundance  of  the 
things  which  he  possesses,  he  is  fitted  to  acquire  wealth  and  administer  it.  3.  All 
the  experiences  which  we  have  in  our  varied  life  of  this  habit  of  mind  which  the 
apostle  enjoins,  will  tend,  not  to  destroy  our  conscious  enjoyment  in  the  present 
sources  of  innocent  good,  but  to  give  us  a  finer  joy.  j\len,  for  the  most  part,  do  not 
know  how  to  find  the  honey  in  the  things  of  this  world.  You  will  never  suspect 
where  the  honey  of  a  flower  is  ;  or,  if  you  did,  too  large  is  your  hand  to  be  thrust 
in  to  get  it.  But  the  bee  draws  out  the  hidden  stores.  Its  very  fineness  gives  to  it 
what  your  coarseness  withholds  from  you.  We  are  not  fine  enough  to  discover  the 
joy  that  is  hidden  in  many  of  the  relations  of  this  life.  4.  So,  too,  cares  and 
disappointments,  such  as  waste  life,  are  forc'^talled  and  resisted  by  this  habit  of 
mind.  "  For  I  would  have  you  without  carefulness."  Not  without  occupation, 
but  without  corrosive  anxieties.  He  that  feels  that  his  life  here  is  but  transient, 
aud  that  his  true  life  is  coming  to  him,  lives  above  tliose  annoyances.  The  higher 
our  conception  of  life  the  easier  will  life  become.  5.  This  view  lifts  us  above  tliose 
fluxes  and  refluxes  of  pain  and  suffering  that  come  from  death.  What  is  death  ? 
When  the  apple-tree  blossoms  you  laugh,  and  you  do  not  cry  when  you  pick  the 
apple  ;  but  when  man  blossoms  man  laughs,  and  then,  when  God  picks  the  fruit, 
he  cries.  In  winter  I  planted  under  glass,  and  depended  upon  artificial  heat,  and 
waited  for  the  time  when  I  might  remove  my  early  plants.  But  now,  in  these 
Juue  days,  I  have  taken  them  into  the  broad,  exposed  garden,  and  put  them  where 
they  are  to  blossom,  and  they  did  not  weep  when  I  put  them  there.  Now  God  has 
raised  us  under  glass,  and  nurtured  us  there,  that  we  might  bear  transplanting  into 
another  and  better  sphere,  and  when  He  comes,  and  takes  us,  and  plants  us  out  m  His 
open  garden,  is  that  the  time  for  us  to  cry  ?  Now  let  us  thank  God,  not  that  men  die, 
but  that  they  live.  Let  us  mourn  as  though  we  mourned  not.  (//.  W.  Bcecliei:) 
The  shortness  of  time: — "  The  time  is  short."  To  the  serious  Christian  there  is 
much  of  consolatory  as  well  as  exhortatory  nature  in  this  solemn  declaration. 
There  is  much  that  meets  the  anxious  sorrows  of  the  weary  and  heavy  laden  ;  and 
much  that  meets  the  circum-tances  of  a  sleeping,  loitering  pilgrim  fin  the  road  to 
Zion.  I.  It  iskmaixeth  that  they  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had 
NONE.  The  apostle  would  here  caution  Christians  against  the  undue  encroachment 
of  domestic  cares.  We  must  take  care  that  our  affection  does  not  degenerate  into 
idolatry;  that  we  love  our  jjartners  and  our  children  with  a  subordinate  regard; 
fearing  lest  our  hearts  should  be  overcharged  with  the  cares  of  this  life,  aud  so  the 
day  of  our  departure  come  upon  us  unawares.  We  must  only  sip  at  the  stream  as 
we  hasten  through  the  valley,  and  beware  how  we  linger  on  its  banks.     II.  The 

8H0ETNESS    OF    TIME    SHOULD    LEAD    THOSE    THAT    WEEP    TO    BE    AS     THOUGH    THEY    WEPT 

NOT.  There  must  be  weeping  of  one  kind  or  other  in  such  a  world  as  this.  We  must 
weep  over  the  death  of  relatives  :  we  must  mnuru  the  failu'e  of  our  favourite  pro- 
jects, the  treachery  of  professed  friends,  the  pains  and  diseases  of  a  corruptible 
body,  the  weariness  aud  helplessness  of  old  age.  And  however  free  we  may  be  from 
immediate  causes  of  distress,  we  must  often  mourn  from  sympathy,  "  weep  with 
those  that  weep."  But  the  most  fruitful  source  of  a  Christian's  tears  is  his  sin. 
But  the  time  is  .short ;  and  it  remameth  that  those  that  weep  be  as  though  they 
wept  not.  I  might  well  weep  rivers  of  tenrs  on  the  very  possibility  of  losing  my 
immortal  soul  and  an  eternity  of  bliss  ;  but  for  the  loss  of  everything  in  this  world, 
surely  there  should  be  a  sorrow  commensurate  with  the  narrow  limits  of  its  dura- 
tion. What  though  we  witness  the  departure  of  friends  ?  They  are  only  Cfilled 
home  a  little  before  ourselves,  and  soon  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  each  other  and 
the  Lord.  What  though  we  feel  the  adversities  of  life?  Who  can  fret  over  a 
momentary  privation,  who  has  a  good  hope  through  grace  of  an  inheritance  in 
heaven  ?  What  though  we  feel  the  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  dissolving  ? 
We  have  a  bmlding  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens, 
where   the  inhabitants  no  more  say,  I  am   sick.      III.  The  shortness  of  time 

SHOULD    LEAD    THOSE    THAT    REJOICE     TO    BE    AS     THOUGH    THEY     REJOICED    NOT.       To     a 

certain  extent  many  have  a  real  enjoyment  of  human  life.  There  is  a  temporary 
absence  of  disturbance,  and  a  considerable  competence  of  what  nature  relishes. 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vii. 


Things  wear  a  prosperous  and  a  pleasurable  aspect ;  and  for  a  season  at  least  men 
seem  at  liberty  to  r-  joice,  and  to  let  their  hearts  cheer  iheni.  But  let  us  pause  and 
be  sober-minded.  What  is  it  that  we  are  so  fondly  handling  ?  Perhaps  tlie  cocka- 
trice's egg.  The  object  of  our  endearment  is  filled  with  the  seeds  of  mi^-ery,  and 
vanity,  and  corruption.  We  are  leaning  on  a  feelde  reed.  The  longest  sejison 
of  earthly  pleasure  is,  after  all,  but  a  fleeting  summer's  day.  Let  us  rejoice 
with  trembling,  and  only  suffer  our  unrestrained  elevation  of  spirit  to  be  given 
to  these  objects,  which  will  never  fail  us.  Rejoicing  in  Christ  Jesus — rejoicing  in 
hope — rejoicing  in  tlie  testimony  of  our  conscience — here  is  a  wide  and  satisfying 
field — here  we  may  fearlessly  rejoice,  even  with  a  joy  unspeakalde  and  lull  of  glory. 
IV.  The  shortness  of  time  should  lead  those  that  boy  to  be  as  those  who 
POSSESSED  NOT.  Suspect  something  seriously  wrong  if  you  bpgin  to  think  yourselves 
at  home  in  this  world.  After  all,  you  are  but  tenants  of  a  day,  and  here  have  no 
continuing  city.  Let  your  loins  then  be  girded  about,  and  your  liglits  burning,  and 
ye  yourselves  like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord.  V.  The  shortness  of  time 
should  lead  us  to  use  this  world  as  not  abusing  it.  Such  is  the  depraved 
propensity  of  human  nature,  that  it  turns  into  a  curse  what  was  intended  for  a 
blessing.  Riches  are  abused  to  the  purposes  of  covetousness  or  extravagance.  The 
advantages  of  talents  and  education  are  abused  to  the  furtherance  of  infidelity  and 
error  on  the  one  hand,  or  pride  and  self-conceit  on  the  otlier.  Time,  health,  and 
every  other  possession  are  liable  to  the  same  ahenation  from  its  proper  service.  It 
is  the  fault  and  the  misery  of  our  nature  thnt  it  is  always  making  the  creature  the 
object  of  idolatrous  regard.  But  we  must  watch  against  this  propensity.  We  must 
reflect  upon  our  situation.  The  time  is  shoit.  We  are  hastening  on  our  journey. 
We  are  travelling  to  our  home.  And  shall  we  be  unduly  pleasing  ourselves  with  the 
comforts  of  the  inn  of  this  world?  or  wantonly  and  excessively  partaking  of  its 
provision,  or  longing  to  abide  in  it.  [W.  C.  JVilaon,  B.A.)  The  narrow  d  Offor- 
tuiiity  : — If  a  woman  take  leaven  and  hide  it  in  me  il,  the  meal  will  he  changed  into 
bread  ;  but  the  meal  must  work  before  the  bread  can  be  made.  The  end  is  a  good 
end,  but  the  process  by  which  it  is  reached  is  not  pleasant  and  seemly.  The  meal 
will  heave  and  labour,  and  must.  In  like  manner,  when  a  new  principle  of  life  is 
infused  into  human  society,  when,  for  example,  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  brought  into 
vital  contact  with  a  society  like  that  of  ancient  Corinth,  the  new  quickening  prin- 
ciple must  work  in  and  upon  it  before  it  can  be  changed,  and  in  order  that  it  may 
be  changed,  into  more  wholesome  and  hajiijier  forms.  To  hasten  the  process,  and 
to  make  the  bread  all  the  sweeter  when  it  came,  St.  Paul  threw  in  tlie  salt  of  his 
good  counsel.  He  answers  the  questions  by  which  the  Coiintljians  were  troubled, 
and  which  they  were  not  able  to  answer  for  themselves.  A  grown  man,  who  is 
governed  solely  by  maxims  ai  d  rules,  not  by  reasons  and  principles,  is  a  j)ei:ant  or 
a  slave  rather  than  a  man.  I.  Use  the  world,  but  don't  abusk  it.  This  is  the 
broad  general  principle  which  covers,  modifies,  sanctifies  all  the  details  of  practical 
life.  Christ  had  said,  "Be  not  of  this  world";  He  had  revealed  a  larger,  fairer, 
more  enduring  world  than  the  outward  set  of  phenomena  and  conditions  by  which 
we  are  surrounded.  And  when  the  gospel  came  to  the  Corinthians,  that  spiritual 
world,  which  in  its  perfection  is  also  a  future  world,  seetued  so  attractive  to  some 
of  them,  so  near,  so  mumentous,  that  they  heartily  despised  this  present  world  and 
all  that  had  once  endeared  it  to  them.  This  was  one  view  of  the  case.  And  the 
other  was  :  "  If  time  be  so  short,  and  the  woild  so  near  its  end,  let  us  make  the 
most  of  them  while  they  last,  and  take  our  fill  of  pleasure  as  long  as  we  can.  Let 
us  eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die."  Both  these  conclusions,  opposite  as  they 
are,  were  drawn  from  the  same  premises ;  and  each  of  them  is  equally  remote 
;'  from  the  true  conclusion.  St.  Paul  rebukes  them  both.  To  the  Stoic  conclusion, 
"Renounce  the  world,"  he  re)ilies,  "Nay,  but  use  the  world  "  ;  to  the  Epicurean 
conclusion,  "Live  only  to  enjoy  this  world,"  he  replies,  "Nay,  do  not  abuse  the 
world."  To  all  who  held  thun  he  says,  "  All  things  are  yours.  You  may  use  and 
enjoy  them  all.  But  eive  the  best  things  the  best  place  in  your  thoughts.  Let 
that  which  is  largest,  fairest,  most  enduring,  take  the  deepest,  strongest  hold  upon 
your  hearts."  II.  The  apostle  assigns  two  reasons  for  thus  using  the  world 
AS  not  abusing  it.  1.  The  brevity  of  time.  "  This  I  say,  brethren,  the  time  is 
short  in  order  that  henceforth  ...  we  may  use  the  world  as  not  abusing  it." 
Time  is  a  word  whose  value  wholly  depends  on  o;ir  construction  of  it.  It  is  variable 
as  a  chameleon,  and  takes  its  hue  from  the  moods  in  which  we  regard  it.  An  hour 
is  mucli  to  a  child,  little  to  a  man.  To  the  same  man  an  hour  at  a  merry  Christ- 
mas feast  is  one  thing,  and  an  hour  on  the  rack  of  pain  or  expectation  is  a  very 


CHAP,  vii.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  489 

(lilTeient  thing.  Nay,  so  purely  relative  is  time,  that  its  length  contracts  or  expands 
aci'ording  as  we  look  before  or  after.  It  is  of  little  use  talking  to  you  of  the  brevity 
of  the  time  to  be  ;  but  look  back  on  the  years  that  have  gone,  and  confess  that 
"  the  time  is  short,"  that  now,  if  ever,  you  must  bring  your  life  under  law  to  God. 

"  The  Bird  of  Time  has  but  a  little  way 
To  flutter — and  the  bird  is  on  the  wing." 

But  the  words  rendered  "the  time  is  short  "mean  literally  "the  season  is  con- 
tracted, the  opportunity  lessened."  Every  year,  every  season  of  life,  brings  its  own 
opportunities  with  it,  and  these,  once  neL'lected,  never  return.  Every  day,  more- 
over, carries  off  with  it  an  indelible  record  of  how  you  have  either  used  or  abused 
it — a  record  which  can  never  be  obliterated,  or  even  modified.  As  an  old  Persian 
poet  finely  says — - 

"  Tlie  moving  finger  writes  ;  and  having  writ, 
Moves  on  :  nor  all  your  piety  and  wit 
Shall  lure  it  back  to  cancel  half  a  line. 
Nor  all  your  tears  wash  out  a  word  of  it." 

2.  The  second  reason  which  the  apostle  assigns  for  a  wise  use  of  life  is  the  transi- 
toriness  of  the  world.  In  the  Pauline  vocabulary  the  word  "  world  "  includes 
nature,  human  society,  and  ecclesiastical  f^rms,  or,  rather,  it  denotes  iill  the  visible 
and  perishable  elements  of  them.  And  all  these  change,  and  live  by  chan^'e.  The 
more  delicate  and  sensitive  phenomena  of  nature  vary  even  as  we  look  upon  them. 
The  bare  bouglis  put  forth  leaves  of  a  tender  green  ;  the  green  shifts  into  yellows, 
browns,  and  crimsons  ;  then  the  leaves  fall,  and  the  boughs  are  bare  again.  The 
birds  come  and  go.  The  clouds  shift  and  fly.  The  wind  vpers  from  point  to  point. 
The  very  rocks  crumble.  The  sea  eats  away  the  hind.  The  ice  splits  the  moun- 
tains. And  men  change.  The  boy  grows  up  into  the  man,  the  man  marries  and 
has  children,  sickens,  dies.  One  generation  goeth  and  another  cometh.  Modes  of 
thought  and  government  and  the  customs  of  society  are  for  ever  on  the  flux  ;  "  the 
old  order  changeth,  giving  place  to  the  new."  And  we  ourselves  change.  Our 
deepest  impressions  are  fleeting  unless  they  are  continually  recalled  and  ret  aiched. 
Our  most  intense  deligtit,  wliether  drawn  from  some  beautiful  scene  in  nature,  or 
from  sacred  human  affections,  or  from  fellowship  with  God,  loses  its  edge  and 
keenness  as  the  months  go  by.  Thete  is  no  affection  so  sharp,  there  is  no  joy  so 
pure,  but  that  time  dulls  it.  Let  us,  tlierefore,  use  the  world  as  not  abusing  i'. 
To-morrow  becomes  to-day  so  fast,  and  to-day  yesterday,  that  we  dare  not  attach 
ourselves  to  the  present  moment,  and  should  not  fail  to  avail  ourselves  of  whatever 
grace  or  opportunity  it  mny  bring.  We,  chang>-ful  as  we  are,  have  an  abiding  life 
beneath  all  our  changes,  and  though  the  world  be  changeful  too,  yet  its  various 
phenomena  are  the  passing  forms  of  an  external  substance.  And  the  question  for 
us  is — Which  shall  we  care  most  tor,  for  which  shall  we  must  habitually  and 
earnestly  provide,  that  which  is  changeful  and  perishable  in  us  and  in  the  world 
around  us,  or  that  which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever?      (.S'.  Cox,  D.D.)  The 

message  of  tlie  closing  year  : — Like  the  traveller  who  goes  to  sleep  in  the  course  of  a 
long  journey,  and  awakes  astonished  to  find  that  he  lias  traversed  such  a  distance, 
so  have  we  felt,  when  the  approach  of  the  year's  end  roused  us  to  give  attention  to 
the  matter.  Hce  are  two  statements,  and  a  series  of  practical  inferences  drawn 
from  them.  I.  The  first  statement  is  pre-eminent  for  its  brief  point  and  solemn 
suggestiveness  :  "  The  time  is  shout."  Time,  as  every  one  knows,  Is  simply  dura- 
tion ;  but  it  may  be  either  the  duration  of  the  world  itself,  or  the  brief  space  of  an 
individual's  life  on  earth  ;  or  it  may  be  employed  to  specify  the  precise  date  of  some 
important  occurrence.  1.  It  is  short,  in  itself  considered  ;  for,  as  the  Psalmi-t 
sings,  "  The  days  of  our  years  are  threescore  years  and  ten  "  ;  and  this  is  lathnr  the 
outmost  limit  than  the  general  average  of  life.  2.  It  is  short  in  comparison  with 
the  duration  of  the  material  universe.  3.  The  time  of  our  life,  again,  is  short  us 
compared  with  the  years  of  those  who  lived  in  the  days  befote  the  flood,  or  even 
with  those  of  the  patriarchs  immediately  theieafter.  They  reckoned  by  hun^hcds  ; 
■we  do  now,  at  most,  by  scores.  4.  Again,  the  time  of  our  lile  is  short  in  conijiarisdn 
with  the  work  we  have  to  do  in  it.  The  old  jjainters  had  an  adage,  which  they 
derived  from  Hippocrates,  the  father  of  medicine.  "  Art  is  long,  and  life  is  brief." 
'oScey  felt  in  their  pursuits  what  our  great  lexicographer  has  expressed,  when  he 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

declares,  in  reference  to  some  matters  about  his  dictionary,  "  that  a  whole  lifetime 
might  be  devoted  to  them,  and  even  a  whole  lifetime  would  not  be  sufficient."  And 
so  every  true  Christian  feels  regarding  the  woik  that  is  set  before  him.  5.  But  once 
more  here,  the  time  of  our  life  is  brief  in  comparison  with  eternity.  II.  The  second 
statement  here  made  is,  that  "the  fashio.v  of  this  world  passeth  away."  The 
figure  has  been  taken,  as  is  commonly  supposed,  from  theatrical  exhibitions.  How 
lapidly,  in  a  drama,  does  scene  follow  scene,  and  act  succeed  to  act!  Battles  are 
fought  and  won,  empires  lost  and  gained,  sudden  elevation  followed  by  swift  mis- 
fortune, and  the  events  of  many  years  compressed  into  a  few  short  hours  ;  and  then, 
after  the  foot-lights  are  extinguished,  the  place  where,  shortly  before,  there  have 
been  pomp  and  pageantry,  is  hushed  in  the  silence  of  complete  desertion  ;  while,  if 
you  follow  the  actors  to  their  homes,  you  may  discover  that  he  who  stalked  across 
the  stage  with  the  port  of  an  emperor,  lies  down  to  sleep  in  an  empty  attic,  or  on 
the  cold  damp  floor  of  a  cheerless  cellar.  And  such,  indeed,  is  life  :  its  changes  as 
rapid,  its  possessions  as  fleeting,  its  joys  as  trunsieut,  and  after  it  is  over,  there 
may  be  seen  many  contrasts  far  more  striking  than  that  between  the  actor  in  his 
sparkling  finery  on  the  stage,  and  the  SHme  man  shivering  in  the  cold  nakedness  of 
his  home.  In  the  estimation  of  other.-;,  however,  the  figure  here  is  taken,  not  from 
the  theatre,  but  from  a  public  profession.  But  such  a  procession  the  whole  race  of 
mankind  wgon  the  earth  has  been.  On  the  page  of  history  men  pass  on  and  on  in 
ceaseless  motion  ;  the  costumes  vary  as  the  times  do  change ;  yet  still  we  gaze,  and 
still  they  pass  :  and  then,  when  we  come  down  to  the  day  in  which  we  live,  we  too 
fall  in  and  follow  th^m,  joining  thus  "  the  innumerable  caravan  that  moves  "  to  the 
l^ale  realms  of  shade.  Thus  it  has  ever  been,  thus  it  shall  ever  be.  In  solemn 
procession  the  race  is  moving  on  to  death.  "Passing  away" — let  us  alKx  these 
words  to  the  ornaments  we  delight  to  look  upon,  and  the  works  of  art  we  love  to  see. 
Briefly  Jet  us  pa-s  on  now  to  the  considerdtiou  of  the  practical  inferences  which  are 
here  di  awn  from  these  two  solemn  truths.  1.  The  first  has  reppeet  to  the  relation- 
ships of  life — "  It  remaineih  that  they  who  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none." 
But  let  us  not  misunderstand  our  apostle.  He  does  not  mean  that  a  man  should 
desert  his  wife  and  children,  and  le^ve  them  to  the  cold  cheer  of  the  workhouse, 
or  to  the  still  more  uncertain  mercv  of  precarious  charily.  That  is  one  way  in 
which  a  man — naj',  let  me  rather  call  him  a  human  brute — having  a  wife,  may  be 
as  though  he  had  none  ;  but  that  is  not  obeying  the  apostle's  precept.  Neither  does 
he  mean  that  a  man  should  spend  nil  his  time  out  of  his  own  house — whether  in 
the  fashionable  club-room,  or  the  genteel  hotel,  or  the  low  public-house.  That  is 
another  way  in  which  he  who  has  a  wife  may  be  as  though  he  had  none  ;  but  that 
is  not  obedience  to  the  aj)ostle's  precept.  Neither  does  he  mean  that  a  man  should 
come  to  his  home  after  business  cross,  testy,  and  cantankerous,  so  that  he  cannot 
be  spoken  to  ;  and  should  sit  down  to  his  newspaper  or  book,  with  a  foot  on  either 
side  the  fire,  utterly  oblivious  that  there  is  one  by  his  side  whom  he  has  solemnly 
Bworn  to  love.  Tiie  meaning  is  that  wife,  and  children,  and  earthly  relationships 
in  general,  must  all  be  subordinated  to  God.  We  must  not  build  ourstlves  upon 
them,  as  if  they  were  to  be  always  with  us,  or  we  alv\ay&  with  them.  We  must  build 
thus  on  God  alone.  2.  The  next  inferences  have  respect  to  the  sorrows  and  the  joys 
of  earth — "  They  that  weep,  as  though  they  wept  not ;  and  they  that  rejoice  as 
though  they  rejoiced  not."  Here,  again,  we  must  beware  of  supposing  that  Paul 
means  to  inculcate  that  .stoical  indifference  to  which  all  things  come  alike,  and 
which  can  neither  be  melted  to  tears  nor  won  into  a  smile.  This  was  not  the  example 
which  the  Saviour  set ;  for  He  joined  in  the  mirth  of  a  marriage  feast,  dropped  a 
tear  over  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  and  wept  over  the  lost  Jerusalem.  He  means  that  we 
must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  swallowed  up  of  sorrow,  we  must  not  nurse  our  grief 
until  it  become  too  strong  for  us  to  rise  above  it,  nor  brood  over  our  sadness  until  it 
become  murmuring.  3.  The  next  inference  has  respect  to  the  business  of  life — 
"They  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed  not."  This,  of  course,  does  not  mean 
that  possessions  impose  no  obligation,  or  involve  no  responsibility.  The  vastness 
of  their  possessions  is  to  cause  no  pride ;  for  what  is  it,  after  all,  to  the  infinitude 
of  God?  The  smallness  of  their  eartiily  portion  is  to  cause  no  envy  ;  for,  having 
God,  what  cause  have  they  to  complain  ?  4.  Finally,  these  truths  have  an  influ- 
ence on  the  enjoyment  of  this  world's  goods — "  They  that  use  this  world,  as  not 
abusing  it."  There  is  thus  a  legitimate  use  of  the  world.  I  have  no  sympathy 
with  those  who  cry  out  agtinst  a  proper  employment  and  enjoyment  of  the  good 
things  of  this  life.  No  man  has  so  good  a  right  to  enjoy  these  things  as  a  Christian. 
The  things  of  the  world  are  not  in  themselves  evil.     They  become  so  only  when,  by 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  491 

the  deeeitfulness  of  our  hearts,  we  seek  to  put  them  in  an  improper  place ;  when 
■we  derive  our  entire  enjoyment  from  them,  or  find  our  entire  happiness  in  them. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  our  noblest  use  of  them  is  to  employ  them  in  the  service  of 
the  Lord.  If  you  have  money,  use  it ;  do  not  let  it  lie  rotting  in  iiileness,  but  let 
it  be  employed  in  the  promotion  of  God's  glory,  and  the  well-being  of  your 
fellows.  If  you  have  position,  ur  rank,  do  not  throw  its  weigijt  into  the 
scale  of  evil,  neither  seek  to  denude  yourself  entirely  of  it ;  but  abide  in  it, 
and  employ  all  the  intluenpe  it  gives  you  on  the  side  of  God.  ((!'.  M.  Taylor.) 
A  drama  in  fire  acta  : — 1.  Holy  Scripture  gives  not  a  special  rule  for  each  particular 
case,  but  rather  instructs  us  by  general  principles  applicable  to  all  cases,  otherwise 
a  library  would  be  required  rather  than  a  volume.  The  apostle  had  to  answer 
several  questions  with  legard  to  marriage.  These  he  answers  with  an  "I  suppose," 
or  again,  "  Howbeit,  for  this  speak  I,  not  the  Lord"  ;  as  if  he  felt  himself  quite 
unequal  to  meet  every  case ;  but  he  lands  here  on  sure  ground,  and  seems  to  say, 
"  Of  this  one  thing  I  am  quite  sia-e  ;  that  the  time  is  short,  and  therefore,  whether 
ye  are  married  or  not,  &c.,  d'C,  ye  should  act  in  all  these  things  as  knowing  their 
temp  nary  character."  2.  This  morning  we  sball  go  to  a  play,  for  the  word 
"  fashion  "  is  borrowed  from  the  changing  scenes  of  the  drama.  I.  The  drajia,  as 
WITNESSED  BY  THE  woiiLDi.iNG.  I.  Act  I.  introduces  those  that  have  wives.  Scene  1. 
is  a  wedding.  Scene  2.  Domestic  happiness  and  prosperity.  Scene  3.  Chiidren 
climbing  the  father's  knee  and  lisping  tneir  mother's  name.  "  Now,"  says  our 
companion,  "I  crave  for  nothing  more  than  this."  He  is  right  in  valuing  the 
blessmg,  but  wrong  in  making  it  his  all.  Will  he  see  his  error  before  the  curtain 
falls  ?  Scene  4.  A  cemetery,  and  the  headstone,  with  "  Here  he  lies."  Alas, 
deluded  wordling  !  Where  hast  thou  now  a  home  ?  What  family  hast  thou  now 
to  care  for?  The  first  act  is  over;  "  This  also  is  vanity."  2.  Act  H.  introduces 
"they  that  weep."  The  cloudy  and  dark  days  havp  come.  A  beloved  child  dies. 
Anon,  the  merchant  sutlers  a  tremendous  loss.  Then  the  wife  is  smitten.  Our 
man  of  the  world,  much  moved,  foreset-ing  bis  own  soirnws  therein,  cries,  "  Surely 
this  is  real ;  you  cannot  call  this  a  fleeting  sorrow  or  a  light  affliction.  Everything 
worth  living  for  is  gone!"  Sympathising  deeply;  we  nevertheless  venture  to  say 
that  th.  se  trial>i  to  the  Christian  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.  Let  the  curtain  drop — let  us  enter  into  an  eternal 
state,  and  what  and  where  are  these  temporary  griefs  ?  3.  Act  HI.  presents  us 
with  a  view  of  those  who  i-ejoice.  The  first-born  son  has  come  of  age,  or  it  is  the 
daughter's  wedding,  or  it  is  a  gain  in  business,  and  the  man  is  full  of  rejoicing. 
Our  friend  is  smiling  at  this  sunny  iDicture.  "There,"  says  he,  "  is  not  that  real? 
What  more  do  you  want  ?  "  If  we  gently  hint  to  our  friend  that  all  this  passes 
awny  he  lauuhs  us  to  scorn.  4.  In  Act  IV.  they  that  buy  demand  our 
attention.  The  merchant  is  neither  a  mourner  nor  a  man  of  mirth ;  he  is 
attending  to  the  one  thing  needful,  the  most  substantial  of  all  concerns. 
There  are  his  money-bags,  the  rolls  of  bonds,  the  banker's  books,  the  title- 
deeds,  &c.  He  has  made  a  good  thing  of  life,  and  still  he  adheres  to 
business,  and  is  still  piling  up  his  heap,  adding  field  to  field  and  estate  to 
estate.  "Is  that  all  a  shadow?"  says  our  friend.  "It  will  satisfy  me  at 
any  rate."  Alas,  poor  fool,  the  snow  melts  not  sooner  than  the  joy  of  wealth, 
and  the  smoke  of  the  chimney  is  as  solid  as  the  comfort  of  riches.  5.  In  Act  V. 
the  rich  man  whom  lately  we  saw  mariied,  then  saw  in  trouble,  then  rejoicing  and 
then  prospering  in  business,  has  entered  upon  a  green  old  age ;  he  has  retired,  and 
has  now  come  to  use  the  world.  Now  he  keeps  a  liberal  tuble,  excellent  horses, 
and  many  servants,  &c.,  and  our  friend  savs,  "  Ay,  there  is  sumething  very  real 
here;  what  do  you  think  of  this?  "  When  we  hint  that  the  grey  hairs  of  the  owner 
of  all  these  riches  betoken  that  his  time  is  short,  and  that  if  this  be  all  he  has  he  is 
a  very  poor  man,  our  friend  replies,  "  Ah  !  ah  !  you  are  always  talking  in  this  way." 
O  world,  thou  hast  fine  actors,  to  cheat  men  so  well.  The  whoie  matter  is  a  mere 
show,  but  yet  men  give  their  souls  to  win  it.  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for 
that  which  is  not  bread  ?  ''  II.  The  Christian  view  of  this  drama.  Life  is  real ; 
life  is  earnest  to  the  Christian  for  activity  for  God ;  in  the  solemn  responsibility 
which  it  brings  ;  in  the  gratitude  which  we  owe  to  God.  The  unreality  of  this 
world  to  him  is  found  in  tbe  fact  that  time  is  short.  This  is  the  wand  which 
touches  the  substance  and  makes  it,  before  the  eye  of  wisdom,  diss'dve  into  a 
shade.  1.  When  the  apostle  dechires  that  they  that  have  wives  should  be  as 
though  they  had  none,  he  does  not  teach  us  to  despise  the  married  state,  but  not  to 
seek  our  heaven  in  it,  nor  let  it  hinder  our  serving  the  Lord.     It  is  supposed  that 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

a  man  without  a  wife — (1)  Can  give  his  time  to  the  cause  of  God  :  the  man  with  a 
wife  should  do  the  same,  and  so  he  will  if  God  hath  blessed  him  with  one  who  will 
second  his  holy  endeavours.  (2)  Has  no  care  :  a  man  with  a  wife  should  have 
none,  for  he  should  cast  all  his  cares  on  God  who  careth  for  him.  (.3)  Will  find  it 
easier  to  die,  for  there  will  be  none  of  that  sorrow  at  leaving  his  beloved  family  : 
the  man  with  a  wife  and  family  should,  by  faith,  find  it  just  as  easy  since  the 
promise  runs,  "  Leave  thy  fatherless  children,  and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  Me."  2. 
Every  Christian  man  must  weep ;  but  the  apostle  says  that  our  sorrows  are  to  be 
regarded  by  us,  because  time  is  short,  as  though  ihey  were  no  sorrows  at  all.  A 
man  who  knows  that  his  trials  will  not  last  long,  can  be  cheerful  under  them. 
3.  The  Chris-tian  has  his  rejoicings,  indeed,  he  is  commanded  to  rejoice.  But  still, 
believer,  in  all  thy  joys,  remember  to  hold  them  with  a  loose  hand.  4.  So,  too,  in 
the  matter  of  buying  and  possessing.  It  is  not  wrong  for  a  Christian  to  trade  and 
to  trade  well,  but,  still,  while  we  buy  and  sell  it  should  always  be  thus — "  This  is 
not  my  real  trade  ;  for  my  treasure  is  beyond  the  skies,  where  moth  devours  not, 
and  where  rust  cannot  consume."  5.  The  creatures  of  God  are  given  us  to  be 
used,  but  the  Christian  must  use  them  as  though  he  did  not  use  them,  and  learn  in 
whatsoever  state  he  is  to  be  content.  That  man  is  the  full-grown  and  true  Christian 
whom  circumstances  cannot  alter  !  III.  The  cdktain  wuich  is  soon  to  drop  bears 
the  device,  "  Time  is  short."  At  what  a  rate  we  whirl  along!  Childhood  seems 
to  travel  in  a  waggon,  but  manhood  at  express  speed.  As  we  grow  older  the  speed 
increases  till  the  grey-headtd  old  man  looks  back  upon  all  his  life  as  but  a  day. 
We  heard  of  one  who  had  seen  Wesley  preach,  and  he  knew  others  in  his  youth 
who  told  him  of  the  yet  older  time,  and  going  through  the  history  of  some  ten  or 
twelve  persons  you  are  carried  back  to  the  days  of  the  Conqueror.  But  while  time 
is  thus  short  its  end  is  absolutely  sure.  That  curtain  yonder  must  fall  soon  !  It 
must  fall ;  it  is  inevitable,  and  it  may  be  very  near.  How  s^on  it  may  be  we  cannot 
tell !  And  to  those  who  have  no  God,  death,  while  inevitable  and  very  near,  will 
be  most  awful.  When  men  buy  property  on  a  short  lease  they  will  not  give  much 
for  it;  wherefore  spendest  thou  thy  soul  to  buy  this  world?  What  will  it  profit 
thee,  if  thou  gain  it,  if  thy  soul  be  lost  ?  IV.  Let  vs  walk  out  of  this  theatre  of 
UNREAL  SHOW  ANi>  SEE  soiiETHiNG  REAL  AND  LASTING.  There  is — 1.  The  soul.  Then 
let  me  see  to  it  and  make  my  calling  and  election  sure  ;  for  I  shall  have  been  of  all 
fools  the  most  mad  if  I  shall  have  trifled  with  these  things  and  yet  have  neglected 
my  soul.  The  Roman  emi^eror,  Claudius,  invaded  Britain,  but.  his  performance 
only  consisted  of  gathering  jjebbles  and  shells  from  the  sea-coast.  This  shall  be 
my  triumph,  if  here  in  this  world  I  live  only  to  gather  wealth.  2.  Other  men's 
souls.  What  am  I  doing  for  them  ?  Dig  up  jour  buried  talents  and  work  while  it 
is  called  day.  3.  Clnisfs  Church.  The  Church  that  is  to  shine  like  the  stars  in 
heaven  for  ever,  what  am  I  doing  for  her?  As  a  member,  do  I  contribute  to  its 
strength  ?  4.  Christ  Himself.  Am  I  glorifyicg  Him  here  on  earth  ?  (C  H. 
Spurrieon.)  Christian  moderation: — Men  are  often  carried  away  by  the  desire 
for  things  inferior  and  insignificant,  while  they  fail  to  realise  the  true  value  of 
things  all-important.  Note — I.  The  objects  specifically  mentioned.  1.  Social 
attachments.  These  are  not  to  be  despised.  The  relationship  of  husband  and  wife 
was  sanctified  even  by  our  Lord  Himst-lf.  The  apostle  was  no  ascetic.  But  even 
domestic  love  must  not  interfere  with  preparation  for  eternity.  2.  Worldly 
sorrows.  There  is  nothing  more  thoroughly  wrecks  a  man  than  this.  Hence  the 
apostle  saw  it  necessary  to  specify  it  as  a  special  ground  of  danger  against  which 
the  Christian  man  must  guard.  It  manifests  a  worldliness  which  is  incompatible 
with  true  piety,  an  idolatry  which  is  inconsistent  with  one  who  fully  worships  God. 
3.  Worldly  joy.  There  aie  many  legitimate  sources  of  jov.  But  if  these  are  to  be 
the  only  motive-powers  of  life,  they  will  lead  to  a  sorry  end.  It  is  quite  p)ossible  to 
use  them  and  not  to  be  so  engrossed  by  them.  A  man  in  a  railway  carriage  enjoys 
the  scenery,  but  he  is  not  of  it  as  is  the  owner  or  the  farmer  who  is  cultivating  the 
fields.  4.  Worldly  business.  This,  perhaps,  engrosses  men's  thoughts  more 
intensely  than  anything  else.  It  is  eugrossiug  in  itself,  and  more  particularly  in 
its  results ;  in  many  cases  it  is  a  sort  of  gaming  for  large  stakes.  This  is  not  the 
Christian's  view  of  trade.  5.  The  u=e  of  the  world.  There  is  no  obligation  to  give 
up  our  use  of  the  world  as  citizens,  &c.  For  whom  was  this  beautiful  earth  created 
if  not  for  the  Christian  ?  But  he  must  not  prostitute  it  for  his  own  pleasures  or 
debasement.  It  is  his.  "  All  things  are  yours,"  but  only  in  the  higher  sense.  II. 
The  arguments  by  which  this  course  is  enforced.— 1.  The  brevity  of  life.  It  is 
short  in  comparison  with  the  age  of  the  world  and  with  the  development  of  earthly 


CHAP,  vii.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  493 


tilings.  It  is  more  particulavlj'  short  in  comparison  with  eternitv.  The  average 
duration  of  life  is  only  thirty-five  years.  A  retrospect  of  life  shows  ns  painfully 
how  terribly  brief  is  its  duration.  2.  The  changeableness  of  temporal  things. 
The  world  is  only  a  play.  One  after  another  the  scenes  pass  away.  Wliat  madness, 
then,  to  give  our  love  and  energies  to  that  which  nnist  pass  away  from  us  when  we 
step  out  of  the  doors  of  the  playhouse,  and  we  shall  retain  nothing  more  than  the 
remembrance!  Our  duty  is  to  attend  to  that  real  business  of  our  existence — the 
eternal  interests  of  our  soul.     (J.  J.  S.  Jiird,  M.A.)         Moderation  in  everi/tliinfi  ;— 

1.  What  it  implies.     1.  That  our  affections  are  subordinated  to  the  love  of  God. 

2.  That  our  sorrow  does  not  interrupt  our  joy  in  Him.  3.  That  our  earthly  joy  is 
controlled  by  a  consciousness  of  His  presence.  4.  That  our  transactions  are 
governed  by  His  will.  5.  That  our  use  of  the  world  is  regulated  by  His  law. 
II.  How  IT  IS  TO  BE  .\TTAixED.  By  remembering— 1.  That  the  world  is  evanescent. 
2.  That  it  is  not  the  end  of  our  existence.  3.  That  it  must  be  used  for  the  glory 
of  God.  4.  That  it  will  soon  come  to  an  end,  when  every  man  will  have  to  give  an 
account  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ.  (J.  LytJi,  D.D.)  ClirMian  unnunidli- 
nesn  : — 1.  Christ  had  said  of  His  disciples,  "  They  are  not  of  the  world."  It  was  a 
question  therefore,  Can  a  Christian  lawfully  enter  the  married  state?  Can  he 
remain  a  slave  and  be  a  Christian  too?  itc.  The  apostle  says  in  effect,  You  may, 
but  I  cannot  judge  for  you  ;  you  must  judge  for  yourselves.  All  that  I  lay  down  is, 
you  must  in  spirit  live  above  the  love  of  earthly  things.  2.  Christianity  is  a  spirit ; 
it  is  not  a  mapping  out  of  the  chart  of  life,  with  every  shoal  and  rock,  and  the 
exact  line  of  the  ship's  course  laid  down.  It  does  not  say.  Do  not  go  to  this,  abstain 
from  that,  wear  this,  &c.,  &c.  A  principle  is  announced;  but  the  application  of 
that  principle  is  left  to  each  man's  own  conscience.  3.  Herein  Christianity  differed 
from  Judaism.  Judaism  was  the  education  of  the  spiritual  child,  Christianity  that 
of  the  spiritual  man.  You  must  teach  a  child  by  rules,  but  a  man  governed  by 
rules  is  a  pedant  or  a  slave.  Note — I.  The  .motives  for  Christian  unworldliness.  1. 
The  shoitness  of  time.  That  mysterious  word  "time,"  which  is  a  matter  of  sensa- 
tion, dependent  on  the  flight  of  ideas,  may  be  long  to  one  and  short  to  another. 
The  buttertly's  life  is  long  compared  with  the  ephemeron's,  short  compared  with 
the  cedar's.  An  hour  is  long  to  a  child,  a  yeai  liitle  to  a  man.  Shortness  a  term 
relative — (1)  To  the  way  in  which  we  look  on  Time.  Time  past  is  a  dream,  time 
to  come  seems  immense ;  the  longest  night,  which  seemed  as  if  it  would  never 
drag  through,  is  but  a  speck  of  memory  when  it  is  gone.  At  sixty-five  a  man  has 
on  an  average  five  years  to  live  ;  yet  his  imagination  obstinately  attaches  stal)ility 
to  them,  though  the  sixty-five  seem  but  a  moment.  To  the  young  life  is  an 
inexhaustible  treasure.  But  ask  the  old  man  what  he  thinks  of  the  past.  (2)  To 
opportunities.  Literally  these  words  mean — "  The  opportunity  is  compressed — 
narrowed,"  i.e.,  every  season  has  its  own  opportunity,  which  never  comes  back. 
The  autumn  sun  shines  as  brightly  as  that  of  spring,  but  the  seed  of  spring  cannot 
be  sown  in  autumn.  The  work  of  boyhood  cannot  be  done  in  manhood.  There  is 
a  solemn  feeling,  in  beginning  any  new  work,  in  the  thought,  shall  I  ever  complete 
it?  (3)  To  eternity.  The  great  idea  brought  out  by  Christianity  was  immortality. 
With  this  the  Corinthian  Church  was  struggling.  The  thouj^'ht  arose,  "  Oh !  in 
comparison  of  that  great  Hereafter,  this  little  life  shrivels  into  nothingness  !  "  All 
deep  minds  have  felt  this  at  some  period  or  other  of  their  career.  Let  but  a  man 
possess  his  soul  with  this  idea  of  Time,  and  then  unworldliness  will  be  the  native 
atmosphere  he  breathes.  2.  The  changefulness  of  the  external  world:  "The 
fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  The  word  refers  here  to  all  that  has  form, 
and  shape,  and  scenery ;  the  visible  in  contradistinction  to  the  invisible.  (1)  God 
has  written  decay  on  all  around  us.  On  the  hills  their  outlines  changing  within 
the  memory  of  man.  On  the  sea-coast.  On  our  own  frames.  Even  in  the  infant 
the  progress  of  dissolution  has  visibly  begun.  We  stand  amidst  the  ruins  of  other 
days,  and  as  they  moulder  before  our  eyes  they  tell  us  of  generations  which  have 
mouldered  before  them,  and  of  nations  which  have  crossed  the  theatre  of  life  and 
have  dii^appearcd.  We  join  in  the  gladness  of  the  baptism,  and  the  years  roll  on 
so  rapidly  that  we  are  almost  startled  to  find  ourselves  standing  at  the  wedding. 
But  pass  on  a  few  years  more,  and  the  young  heart  for  which  there  was  so  much 
gladness  in  the  future  drops  silently  into  the  grave  to  make  way  for  others.  One 
of  our  deepest  thinkers  has  told  us,  "All  the  world's  a  stage,"  &c.  Look 
at  our  own  neighHourhood.  Those  with  whom  we  walked  in  youth  are  goiie 
and  others  have  filled  their  places.  Every  day  new  circumstances  are  occurring 
which  call  upon  us  to  act  promptly;  for  the  past  is  gone.     (2)  "The  fashion  of 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

the  world  "  passes  away  in  us.  Our  very  minds  change.  All  except  the  perpetually- 
repeated  sensations  of  eternity,  sjjace,  time,  alters.  There  is  no  atiiictiou  so  sharp, 
no  ]oy  so  bright,  no  shock  so  severe,  but  Time  modifies  and  cures  all.  Our 
memories  are  like  monumental  brasses  :  the  deepest  graven  inscription  becomes  at 
last  illegible.  Of  such  a  world  the  aj^ostle  seems  to  ask,  Is  this  a  world  for  an 
immortal  being  to  waste  itself  upon  ?  II.  Its  nature.  1.  The  spirit  or  principle 
of  nnworldliness  ;  to  use  this  v\orld  as  n-it  abusins?  it.  The  worldly  spirit  says, 
"  Time  is  short ;  take  your  fill ;  live  while  you  can."  The  narrow  religious  spirit 
saxs,  "  All  pleasure  is  a  snare;  keep  out  of  it  altogether."  In  opposition  to  the 
one,  Christianity  says,  "Use  the  world,"  and  to  the  other,  "Do  not  abuse  it." 
Unworldliness  is  not  to  put  life  and  God's  lovely  world  aside  with  ^elf-torturing 
hand.  It  is  to  have  the  world,  and  not  to  let  the  world  have  you  ;  to  be  its  master, 
and  not  its  slave.  2.  The  ap,.lication  of  this  iDrinciple— (1)  To  domestic  life. 
The  idea  was  just  then  beginning  to  be  discussed,  whicli  was  the  higher  state,  the 
single  or  the  married.  In  alter  ages  this  qu-  si  ion  was  decided  in  a  very  disastrous 
way  ;  for  it  was  taught  that  celibacy  was  the  only  really  pure  and  angelic  life. 
Marriage  was  reg^rded  as  earthly  and  sensual,  unfit  for  those  who  were  lo  serve  as 
priests.  Now  observe  the  apostolic  wisdom.  He  does  not  say  celibncy  is  the 
saintly,  and  marriage  the  e:irthlier  state.  He  says,  "In  whatever  state  you  can 
most  undistractedly  serve  God,  that  is  the  unworldly  one  to  you."  God  made 
man  for  domestic  life,  and  he  who  would  be  wiser  than  his  Maker  is  only 
wise  in  appearance.  He  is  not  the  highest  Christian  who  lives  alone  and 
single,  but  he  who,  whether  single  or  m  irried,  lives  superior  to  this  earth. 
(2)  To  sorrow.  This  unworldliness  consists  of  two  parts :  (a)  The  duty  and 
the  right  of  sorrow,  "Weep."  Christianity  does  not  sear  the  human  heart; 
it  softens  it.  If  joy  be  felr,  in  the  presence  of  the  loved  objet:t,  grief  mast 
be  felt  in  its  absence.  Christianity  destroys  selfishness,  makes  a  man  quick 
and  sensitive  for  others.  Moreover,  it  impaits  something  of  its  own  infinitude 
to  every  feeling.  The  Master  wept.  We  may  admire  the  stern  old  iioman 
heart ;  but  we  must  not  forget  thai  the  Koman  stoicism  is  not  of  the  spirit  of 
Christianity,  (b)  The  limit  tion  of  sorrow,  "  as  though  they  wept  not  "  ;  that  is, 
as  though  God  had  already  lemoved  their  grief.  FamiHarity  with  eternal  things 
sui'dues  grief,  fiives  it  a  true  per-pective.  Have  you  lost  a  dear  relative?  Well, 
you  may  weep;  but  even  wnile  weeping  Christ  comes  to  you  and  says,  "Thy 
brother  shall  rise  again."  (3)  To  joy— earthly  joy ;  for,  it  it  had  been  spiritual  joy, 
the  apostle  could  not  have  put  any  limitation  to  it.  Therefore  Christians  may 
have  earthly  joy.  Christ  had  no  sympathv  with  that  tone  of  mmd  which  scowls  un 
human  happiness:  His  first  manifestation  of  power  was  at  a  marriage  least. 
Look  round  thi-  beautiful  world  of  God's.  Yo.i  cannot,  ex.  ept  wilfully,  nrisroad 
its  meaning.  God  says,  "  Be  glad !  "  But  now  everlasting  considerations  are  to 
come  in,  not  to  sadden  joy,  but  to  moderate  its  transports.  We  aie  to  sit  loose  to 
all  these  sources  of  enjoyment,  masters  <d  ourselves.  Eespei-ting  worldly  amuse- 
ments, I  he  apostle  does  not  say,  You  must  avoid  this  or  that,  but  he  lays  down 
broad  princip  es.  If  your  enjoy ments  are  such  that  the  th.'nt.dit  of  jiassing  Time 
and  coming;  Eternity  presents  it  elf  as  an  intrusive  thought,  which  has  no  business 
there;  if  you  become  secularised,  excited,  and  artificial;  then  it  is  at  your  own 
peril  that  you  say.  All  is  left  open  to  me,  and  permitted.  Unwoildly  you  must 
become — or  die.  (4)  To  the  acqui  ition  of  property.  Unw.irl  iliness  is  not 
measured  by  what  you  possess,  but  by  ihe  spirit  in  which  you  poss^'SS  it.  It  is  not 
said,  "  Do  not  buy,"  but  rather  "  Buy— pos-e>s."  You  may  be  a  large  merchant, 
Ac,  if  only  your  heart  be  separate  from  the  love  of  these  earthiy  things,  with 
God's  love  paramount  with  n.  The  amount  of  property  is  jjurely  a  relative 
consideration.  You  go  into  a  reg.l  palace,  and  peihaps,  unaccustomed  to  the 
splendour,  you  say,  "  All  this  is  worldliness."  But  the  poor  man  comes  to  your 
house,  and'to  him  this  seems  worldlmess  too.  No!  we  must  take  ano.her  test. 
The  Christian  is  one  who,  if  a  shipwreck  or  a  fire  were  to  take  all  lnxuiy  away, 
could  descend,  without  being  crushed,  into  the  valley.  He  wears  all  this  on  the 
outside,  carelessly,  and  could  say,  "  My  aU  was  not  laid  there."  Concl  sion :  1. 
Let  there  be  no  censoriousness  How  others  live,  and  what  they  permit  themselves, 
judge  not.  It  is  work  enough  for  any  one  of  us  to  save  his  own  sonl.  2.  Let  there 
be  no  self-deception.  This  su'  ject  gives  large  latitude,  and  any  one  may  a  .use  it 
if  he  will.  "  Remember,  however,  that  worldliness  is  a  more  decisive  test  of  a 
man's  spiritual  state  than  even  sin.  Sin  may  he  sudden,  the  result  of  t  mptation, 
yet  afterwards  hated— forsaken.     But  if  a  man  he  at  home  in  the  world's  pleasure 


CHAP,  vit,]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  495 

and  pursuits,  happy  if  they  conUl  but  last  for  ever,  is  not  his  state,  genealogy,  and 
charactir  cleaily  stamped?  Theref.ire  does  St.  John  draw  the  distinction — "If 
any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father"  ; — but  "If  any  man  love  the 
world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him.  [F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Let  those 
that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none. — The  marriaije  state,  right  views  of : 
— "  Let  those  that  have  wives  be  as  though  they  had  none."  What  I  to  use  them 
as  if  they  had  none  ?  To  care  for  them  as  it  they  hud  none  ?  No ;  "  but  to  be  as  if 
they  had  none."  That  is,  let  them  be  as  i-esolute  for  God's  truth  as  if  they  had  no 
wives  to  hinder  theiu  ;  as  willing  to  sutler  crosses,  as  ready  to  good  duties.  Let 
them  avoid  distracting  cares  and  worhily  incumbrances,  as  if  they  had  none  ;  let 
them  not  pretend  their  mari-iage  for  b;isene>s  and  worldliness,  and  for  avoiding  of 
atHictions  when  God  is  pleased  to  call  them  unto  them;  let  them  not  pretend 
marriage  for  their  doublii  g  in  religion  and  dissembling,  "  I  stiall  undo  my  wife 
and  children,"  "  Let.  them  be  as  if  they  had  none,"  for  Christ  hath  given  us 
direction  to  hate  all  for  Christ.  A  man  is  not  worthy  of  Christ  that  undervalues 
not  wife  and  children  and  all,  for  the  gospel.  If  things  stand  in  question,  whether 
shall  I  stick  to  them  or  to  Christ,  my  chief  husband;  I  must  stick  to  Christ.  The 
reason  is,  the  bond  of  religion  is  above  all  bonds.  And  the  bond  that  binds  us  to 
Christ  it  abides  when  all  bonds  cease ;  for  all  bonds  between  husband  and  wife, 
between  father  and  children,  end  in  death ;  but  the  bond  of  Christ  is  eternal. 
Every  bond  must  serve  the  main  bond.  We  must  so  labour  to  please  others,  that 
we  displease  not  our  chief  Husband.  For  the  time  will  be  when  we  shall  neither 
marry,  nor  be  given  in  maniage.  but  we  shall  be  as  the  angels  (Matt.  xsii.  30); 
and  that  time  shall  be  without  bounds  and  limits,  for  eternity;  and  we  must  look 
to  that.  You  know  how  it  fared  with  him  in  the  gospel,  that  pretended  this,  for 
his  not  coming  to  Cln-ist ;  he  that  was  married  saith,  "  I  cannot  come."  His 
excuse  was  more  peremptory  than  the  rest,  "he  could  not."  (H.  Silibes,  D.D.) 
How  to  nse  the  world  so  as  not  to  abuse  it : — I.  I  begin  with  remarking  the  wisdom 
of  the  apostle  in  teaching  us  how  to  bear  the  loss  of  fkiends,  by  fikst  teaching 
us  how  to  enjoy  them.  These  two  pomts  are  very  closely  connected.  If  a  man 
has  enjoyed  prosperity  in  a  proper  Christian  manner,  he  will  be  prepared  to  suffer 
adversity  with  the  least  degree  of  distress.  As  he  will  not  rejoice,  like  one  i"toxi- 
cated,  with  extravagant  joy,  so  he  will  not  be  depressed  by  a  grief  that  overwhelms 
him  with  intolerable  anguish.  On  the  other  hand,  I  would  remark  also,  that  tha 
proper  use  of  adversity  teaches  us  to  bear  prosperity  aright.  The  Ch'istian  prin- 
ciple, then,  to  which  I  have  alluded  as  equally  enablmg  us  to  bear  prosperity  and 
adversity,  is  faith.  By  this  we  are  taught  to  feel  the  vanity,  the  shortness,  the 
emptiness  of  everything  in  this  world,  and  to  realise  the  views  of  et^'rnal  things 
which  are  given  us  in  Scripture.  A  Christian  is  one  who  looks  not  at  things  v\hich 
are  seen,  but  at  those  which  are  unseen.  But  in  order  that  this  view  of  eternal 
things  should  have  any  considerable  influence  upon  the  mind,  it  is  necessary  that  it 
should  have  two  qualities.  1.  It  should  be  abiding.  However  vivid  our  impres- 
sion of  eternal  things  may  be  for  a  time,  yet  we  know  that  such  is  the  nature  of  the 
human  mind  that  the  very  strongest  impression  will  soon  wear  awny  if  not  repeated. 
Nay,  a  very  slight  impression,  frequently  repeated,  will  have  more  effect  upon  us 
than  any  single  impression,  however  stiong.  Now  the  things  of  this  life  are  per- 
petually before  our  eyes.  They  are,  in  this  respect,  like  a  force  which  is  constantly 
acting.  Will  not  the  consideration  of  eternal  things,  therefore,  require  to  be  often 
set  before  the  mind  in  order  to  counteract  this  fore*'?  From  this  con-titution  of 
things  arises  the  necessity  of  continually  hparing  and  reading  the  Word  of  God.  It 
is  tiierefore  of  the  utmost  importance  to  keep  up  a  lively  impression  of  eternal 
things  on  the  soul  ;  and  this  cannot  be  Hone  without  daily  retirement,  meditation, 
and  prayer.  2.  But  in  order  that  the  things  of  the  eternal  world  may  become  fre- 
quently the  objects  of  contemplation,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  view  of 
them  should  be  pleasant  to  us.  No  man  loves  to  dwell  upon  painful  or  unpleasing 
objects :  no  man  loves  to  meditate  upon  the  shortness  of  life,  whos"  prospects  of 
happmess  terminate  here  below.  A  man  must  therefore  have  a  good  hope  beyond 
the  grave  before  he  can  accustom  himself  to  extend  his  view  to  this  close  of  his 
earthly  hopes.  He  that  is  afraid  of  God  will  not  often  meditate  upon  His  power 
and  His  omnipresence.  Now  it  is  the  business  of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  gospel 
alone,  to  render  the  thoughts  of  death,  of  eternity,  and  of  God,  pleasing  to  the  soul. 
Christ  is  there  held  up  to  our  view  as  having  made  atonement  for  our  sins  and 
procured  reconciliation  with  the  Father,  in  oid'^r  that  "  whosoever  believetli  in  Him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."    But  it  will  be  asked,  What  has  the  con- 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

sideratiou  of  the  next  world  to  do  with  our  concerns  in  this?  I  answer,  Much. 
The  proper  use  of  this  world  depends  wholly  upon  our  views  of  that  which  is  to 
come.     II.  This  principle,  then,  rightly  felt,  will  teach  vs  how  to  use  the 

WORLD  WITHOUT   ABUSING    IT;    HOW    TO    ENJOY    THE    SOCIETY   OF    OUR    NEAREST    CONNKC- 

TioNS,  AND  HOW  TO  SORROW  IN  THEIR  LOSS.  In  the  enjoyment  of  domestic  relations, 
the  rule  laid  ilown,  "Let  those  who  have  w.ves  be  as  thougli  they  had  none,"  is  not 
to  be  undeistood  as  if  it  excluded  the  gra'ification  of  socinl  feeling,  the  pleasures  of 
tenderness,  or  the  indulgence  of  domestic  happiness.  But  how,  then,  are  we  to  be 
preserved  from  worldliness  of  mind,  and  from  misery  when  we  are  deprived  of  our 
couifons?  I  answer,  By  the  principle  alrendy  laid  down  ;  by  a  deep  and  abiding 
impression  of  the  superiority  of  tbings  spiritual  and  eternal.  Let  me,  therefore, 
wh.le  I  enjoy  all  my  domestic  aud  temporal  comforts  with  pleasure,  and  with  addi- 
tional pleasure  because  I  receive  them  from  Thee  ;  let  me  still  consider  them  fis  but 
subordinate  and  inferior  to  the  blessings  which  Christ  has  purchased.  While  I 
bave  them,  let  me  consider  well  their  nature:  they  are  transitory  and  vain;  let 
the  chief  desire  of  my  soul,  therefore,  be  towards  those  things  that  are  above. 
App  y  the  same  principle  to  the  losses  we  must  expect  to  meet  with  in  life.  Let  me 
address  your  feelings.  You  know  that  you  hold  all  your  temporal  enjoyments  by  a 
precarious  tenure.  You  that  have  wives,  and  in  them  all  that  gives  enjoyment  to 
life,  consider  how  soon  the  stroke  of  death  may  toarthem  from  you.  (-/.  Venn,  M.A.) 
And  they  that  weep  as  though  they  wept  not.— Religion  in  its  relation  to  comncon 
life: — L  To  irs  sorrows.  1.  It  prepares  for  them.  2.  Moderates  their  effect.  3. 
Mixes  them  with  hope.  II.  To  its  joys.  It  teaches  us — 1.  To  regard  them  as  the 
gift  of  God.  2.  To  use  them  moderately.  3.  To  employ  them  as  a  means  to 
invigorate  us  for  the  more  serious  business  of  life.  III.  To  business.  It  inculcates 
— 1.  Diligence.     2.  Contentment.     3.  The  vanity  of  earthly  gain.     (./.  Lyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  And  they  that  use  this  world,  as  not  abusing  it. — Using  this  world 
(Election  sermon) : — 1.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  Cliristian,  so  long  as  he  is  a  citizen  of  this 
world,  to  take  a  part  in  its  concerns.  "  I  pray  not  that  Thoa  shouldst  take  them  out 
of  the  world,"  <i'c.  (chap.  v.  10).  How  can  salt  season,  or  yeast  leaven,  if  it  do  not 
come  in  contact  with  that  which  it  is  to  season  or  to  rai^e  ?  2.  Christ  was  removed 
above  all  the  conventionalities  and  systems  of  this  world  ;  and  yet  He  conformed 
t.)  them  all.  He  touched  on  tlie  political  questions  ;  He  had  teachings  about 
Church  and  State,  and  gave  His  authority  to  the  great  principle  of  taxation. 
And  yet  how  heavenly  the  tone  of  every  word  aud  act !  I.  The  believer, 
'•uses"  the  world,  which  conveys  the  ideas  of — 1.  Elevation.  What  I 
"use,"  I  am  above.  It  is  the  implement  I  employ,  and  not  the  power  I  obey. 
That  is  just  what  the  world  is  to  a  Christian.  2.  Intention.  What  I  "  use  "  is 
never  final.  It  is  to  work  uj)  to  an  end.  Say  it  is  an  amusement — I  use  it,  it  is 
to  fit  me  for  something  I  have  yet  to  do.  Say  it  is  money,  it  is  that  I  may  have 
greater  power  to  do  good.  Say  it  is  influence,  it  is  that  I  may  the  better  extend 
truth.  Say  it  is  public  life,  it  is  that  I  may  throw  weight  into  the  side  of  g'lod. 
Or  say  it  is  the  whole  world,  it  is  with  an  eye  to  eternity,  to  make  myself  or 
others  ready,  for  a  higher  state  that  is  coming.  II.  What,  then,  is  lt  to  "  abuse  "  ? 
1.  If  the  world  rule  you,  aud  you  do  not  rule  it — if  you  do  not  keep  it  within  fixed 
bounds  which  your  own  conscience  lays  down — if  you  have  not  a  further  end 
in  every  natural  thing  beyond  the  immediate  gratification — if  that  end  is  not 
worthy — then  you  are  abusing  the  world.  2.  If  it  separate  you  from  Him  to 
whom  this  whole  world  belongs,  or  if  you  use  any  part  of  it  for  uny  other  end  but 
the  glory  of  the  great  Bropriirtor,  you  abuse  the  world.  Conclusion  :  Now  for 
present  duty.  In  this  representative  country  every  man  both  l^■gislates  and 
governs.  Therefore,  it  is  no  simple  thing  to  exercise  the  franchise.  1.  You 
will  "  abuse  "  and  not  "use"  the  power  which  the  law  has  given  you  if  you  do 
not  accept  it  as  a  solemn  trust  which  has  been  committed  to  you  by  God,  to  be 
exercised  for  Hmi.  Great  things  are  at  stake,  and  in  your  degree  God  has  made 
you  the  arbiter  of  them.  Therefore  — (1)  Discharge  the  duty  calmly,  according  to 
your  real  conviction,  bringing  the  best  reflection  you  can  to  bear  upon  it,  as  before 
God.  (2)  Pray  for  a  right  judgment  in  this  matter.  (8)  1  his  done,  it  will  help 
your  decision,  as  to  what  line  of  policy  will  best  promote  the  great  ends  that  all 
have  in  view.  Assuredly,  the  religious  aspect  of  every  subject  ought  to  be  the  first 
considered.  Therefore,  regard  should  certainly  be  had  to  the  religious  character 
of  the  man  whom  you  would  entrust  with  power.  He  who  would  put  first  the 
glory  of  God,  cannot  rest  in  devolving  high  trust  to  one  who  has  no  such  aim. 


CHAi'.  VII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  497 

2.  Let  all  be  done  with  charity  of  judgment.  Let  no  personal  feeling  embitter 
a  great  work.  And  then,  whatever  be  tiie  result,  accept  it  as  the  will  of  God  to 
you.  And  though  the  course  of  events  may  run  counter  with  your  wishes,  still 
honour  God  by  taking  loving  views  of  man,  and  trusting  views  of  the  future. 
And  be  they  what  tliey  may,  be  loyal  to  the  powers  that  be.  (•/.  Vaucflmn,  M.A.) 
The  use  of  the  world — I.  Is  lawflh..  Its  enjoyments,  associations,  bu*;iness,  &c., 
must  be  made  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  life  and  salvation.  II.  May  become 
SINFUL — 1.  By  excess.      2.  By   abuse.     3.  By  making   it   the   end   of   existence. 

III.    Is   ENFOKCED    BY    THE    CONSIDEKATION    OF    ITS    VANITY. 1.    Il,S    fashion    changes. 

2.  Its  joys  wither.  3.  Its  glory  must  ultimately  perish.  (J.  I.yth,  D.D.)  The 
use  and  abuse  of  the  world: — I.  Thk  reason  why  we  should  not  abuse  this 
woKLD  :  the  fashion  of  it  passes  away;  literally,  the  scene  changes.  1.  The  world 
itself  is  a  stable  thing.  Its  face  changes,  but  its  matter  and  laws  are  fixed.  The 
same  mountain-tops  point  toward  the  sky  to-day  that  seemed  to  touch  it  when  we 
were  children.  The  same  plain  stretches  out  Irom  the  Pyramids  that  the  Pharaohs 
saw  from  their  summits.  The  inhabitant  is  often  changed  ;  the  habitation  reniMius 
the  same.  2.  But  it  does  not  remain  the  same  to  me.  The  preen  grass  looks  not 
so  ligiitsome  when  those  whom  I  loved  are  laid  beneath  it.  This  is  not  the  world 
on  which  I  trod  so  lightly  when  I  was  a  child.  It  was  a  brighter  world  then. 
That  fash'on  went  out,  and  the  one  that  came  in  after  it,  was  bard  and  busy. 
Faster  and  taster  it  moved,  and  I  moved  with  it,  until  I  became  giddy  with  the 
whirl.     At    the    next    change    of   fashion    the    breathless    runner    is   left    behind. 

3.  But,  besides  those  which  time  inexorably  brings  to  all,  there  are  other  changes 
peculiar  to  each.  (1)  The  owner  of  a  beautiful  estate  was  conducting  a  visitor 
through  Lis  park.  At  a  bend  in  the  path  a  lofty  beech-tree  suddenly  hove  in  sight, 
wanting  one  hemisphere  of  its  once  symmetrical  and  stately  head.  In  the  last 
winter's  blast  one  of  these  twin  boughs  had  been  rent  off,  and  the  survivor,  bare  on 
the  side  where  his  marrow  grew,  seemed  a  stricken,  widowed  thing.  "  Hee,"  said 
the  visitor,  "  the  emblem  of  a  husband  standing  alone  in  the  world,  after  death  has 
torn  away  the  wife  of  his  youth!  "  Then  a  stided  sigh  reveahd  to  the  speaker 
that  he  had  uucjnsciously  hurt,  by  touching,  a  wound  still  green  in  his  companion's 
side.  (2)  How  many  living  victims  are  kept  in  continual  torture!  Clinging  to 
wealth,  when  wealth  is  taking  wings;  to  the  trappings  of  beauty,  when  the  beauty 
has  gone;  to  the  gaiety  of  y. mth,  when  age,  unwelcome,  unconfessed,  is  stealing 
quieily,  quickly  on.  If  you  allow  your  heart-strings  to  twine  around  the  fashion  of 
the  world,  you  are  torn  and  tortured  every  day  you  live  ;  for  the  fashion  of  the 
world  is  moving  past  you.  The  only  possible  method  of  living  either  pleasantly 
or  safely  on  a  shift  ng  scene  is  to  sit  loosely  on  its  surface.  II.  The  abuse  of  this 
WORLD  WHICH  THE  TEXT  KOEBiLs.  When  the  gifts  are  turned  aside  from  their  wise 
and  kind  intent,  the  Giver  takes  it  ill  (Ezek.  svi.  19).  The  abuses  of  the  world  cannot 
be  all  nrtined ;  let  two  or  three  suffice.  1.  Day  and  night  are  precious  constituents  of 
"  this  world."  To  shutHe  them  out  of  their  places  is  to  abuse  them.  An  assembly 
of  dancing  men  and  women  in  a  heated  hall,  a  merchant  leaning  over  his  ledger 
in  the  counting-house,  a  student  before  his  lamp  in  the  silent  chamber,  are  all 
guilty  of  abusing  the  world,  it  they  occupy  the  long  dark  nipiht,  and  sleep  on  the 
morrow  while  the  sun  is  running  his  race  rejoicing.  2.  The  fruitful  earth  is 
systematically  and  to  a  great  extent  compelled  to  minister  to  the  vice  of  men. 
Nothing  in  nature  is  lovelier  than  the  poppy- fields  of  India.  Thfi  best  land,  in  the 
most  sheltered  situation,  is  appropriated  to  the  cultivation  of  the  plant,  and  its 
product — opium — is  a  most  precious  medicine.  But  when  we  presume  to  use  it  as  an 
indulgence  to  an  unhealthy  craving,  and  force  it  upon  an  unwilling  people  on  whom 
its  effects  can  he  only  baneful,  then  we  abuse  it.  At  home,  too,  in  a  similar  way, 
we  ab  ise  the  world,  by  converting  a  large  portion  of  the  grain  which  it  brings  forth 
for  the  food  of  man,  into  a  stimulant  which  is  chiefly  employed  in  ministering  to 
h  s  vices.  3.  Civilised  nations  have  long  abused  in  the  gross  a  whole  continent  of 
the  world.  Instead  of  buying  from  the  Africans  the  products  of  the  soil,  so  stimu- 
lating arts  and  industry,  we  boug''t  the  people— the  weak  from  the  strong — so 
stimulating  war  and.  rapine.  III.  The  use  of  this  world  which  the  text  permits 
and  enjoins.  Observe  how  God  uses  this  world,  that  we  may  fall  in  with  His 
purpose.  He  has  made  it  the  dwelling-place  of  creatures  formed  after  His  own 
image,  and  capable  of  communion  with  Himself ;  but  the  grandest  use  of  the 
habitation  was  made  after  the  inhabitant  fell  by  sin.  Leaving  behind  all  the 
shining  worHs,  the  Son  of  God  lived  here;  here  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the 
Lord  obtained  their  birthright,  and  are  prepared  for  their  inheritance.     Such  are 

VOL.   I.  32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

the  purposes  for  which  the  Father  employs  this  world;  and  for  these  chiefly  the 
dear  child  val  les  it.  This  earth  shines  only  in  the  suulight :  if  it  were  dark  it 
would  be  al^o  barren.  So,  morally  for  man,  the  world  in  which  we  live  owes  its 
beauty  and  its  woith  to  the  light  which  reaches  it  from  heaven.  Cliristians — 
1.  May  use  the  world.  Practical  religion  does  not  consist  in  denying  ourselves  the 
use  of  temporal  good,  or  in  tastiug  it  with  terror.  Every  creature  of  God  is  good. 
A  Christinn,  with  a  clear  mind  and  a  good  conscience,  tastes  more  sweetness  in 
this  world  than  he  whp  has  no  other  portion.  The  relations  of  the  family,  e.g., 
are  touched  in  the  context.  He  who  has  entered  the  family  of  God,  has  not 
thereiiy  forfeited  his  f)lace  or  his  rights  in  the  families  of  men.  Make  one  thing 
sure,  that  it  is  the  use  of  the  world,  not  the  abuse  of  it ;  and  then  u^e  it  with  a 
will.  2.  Must  use  it.  Don't  permit  the  riches,  e.g.,  to  lie  so  long  still  that  they 
shall  rust.  Whatever  God  may  have  given  you  of  personal  qualiiication,  or  social 
position,  or  material  means,  take  the  use  of  it  yourself,  and  let  your  neighbours 
participate  in  the  benefit.  Conclusion  :  Jn  vain  do  you  tell  a  man  that  the  fashion 
of  this  world  pa-seth  away,  if  j'ou  have  nothing  more  to  tell.  A  drowning  man 
will  gra.'^p  straws  ;  and  you  cannot  put  an  end  to  the  useless  effort  by  standing  on 
the  rivet's  brink  and  pioving  that  straws  will  not  avail  to  make  his  liody  buoycint. 
How  shall  we  persuade  him  to  let  them  go?  Heave  him  a  life-buoy,  and  no  persuasion 
will  be  necessiry.  When  he  feels  the  contact  of  the  better  preserver,  he  will  throw 
away  the  worse.  So  no  demonstration  of  the  world's  cliangefulness  will  keep  a 
human  soul  from  cleaving  to  its  dust.  Nothing  but  faith's  possession  of  the  better 
p  rtion  can  wean  our  hearts  from  the  vvoise.  [iV.  Anwt,  D.D.)  The  use  and 
abuse  of  the  world  : — To  "  use"  anything  is  to  turn  it  to  account  in  the  direction 
of  those  ends  for  which  it  is  really  needed.  To  "  abuse  "  is  situplv  to  turn  a  thing 
away  from  its  true  and  proper  use.  This  "world"  has  its  "uses."  According  to 
the  original  purpose  of  God,  it  is  a  servant  to  minister  to  our  wants,  not  a  tyrant 
to  oppress  or  degrade  us.  It  may  become  a  dangerous  foe  ;  but  only  when  we 
stand  in  false  relations  to  it.  This  world  is  designed  to  aid— I.  In  revealing  God 
TO  rs.  "The  heavens  declare  His  glory,  Ac."  What  an  "  abuse,"  then,  of  the 
world  it  is,  when  men  employ  it  to  conceal  God  !  An  astronomer  once  said  that 
what  he  found  in  the  study  of  the  starry  sky  was  the  "  glory  "  of  Newton,  &c.,  and 
,not  the  "glory  of  God."  And  it  would  st-eni  as  if  some  men  deliberately  try  to 
Iforget  God,  by  busying  themselves  about  the  tilings  which  God  has  made.  They 
plunge  into  business  and  into  politics,  as  if  they  would  forget  that  the  Most  High 
has  anything  to  do  either  with  the  growth  of  cotton  or  the  growth  of  nations. 
Even  the  faces  of  their  little  children  cease  to  speak  to  them  of  "The  Father"; 
the  selfish,  worldly  love  they  have  for  them  becomes  a  pretext  for  ignoring  the  claims 
and  commands  of  God.  II.  In  the  forjiation  and  develophent  of  spiritual 
CHARACTER.  The  material  exists  for  the  sake  of  the  spiritual.  This  earth  has 
been  furnished  as  a  school  for  man's  education.  The  monastic  life  is  just  a 
kind  of  "  iJlaying  trunnt. "  The  true  "use"  of  a  school  cannot  be  to  run 
away  from  it.  On  the  other  hand,  there  ai'e  those  who  turn  the  school- 
room into  a  playgriiuud — who  seek  to  convert  the  means  of  education  and 
training  into  the  instruments  of  mere  selfish  gratification.  Some  men  are 
like  little  children  burning  their  lesson-books  for  the  momentary  pleasure  of 
the  blaze  !  Others  are  like  children  trying  to  carve  out  their  names  on  forms 
and  desks  of  the  school,  when  they  ought  to  be  learning  lessons.  Others  are 
like  children,  with  heads  bent  over  their  books,  making  a  show  of  diligence,  in 
order  to  conceal  an  indolent,  frivolity.  And  others,  alas  !  are  like  children  who, 
through  self-willed  folly,  break  their  limbs  in  the  very  gymnasium  which  was  intended 
and  adapted  to  strengthen  them  !  Oh  what  an  "  abuse  "  is  here  !  A  whole  world; 
made  for  men — and,  all  the  while,  men  living  as  if  they  had  been  made  for  thei 
world!  in.  In  serving  God.  He  appoints  us  duties  to  discharge,  and  burd^-ns  to 
bear.  His  holy  and  loving  coni'iiandment  meets  us  evei'ywhere — at  home  and  in 
the  market,  &c. ;  and  not  a  day  passes  in  which  He  does  not  jiive  us  opportunities  of 
expressing  our  loyalty  to  His  law.  Only  see,  again,  how  men  "  abuse  "  the  world! 
.They  consert  it  into  a  sphere  of  disobedience.  Suppose  that,  in  order  to  secure  a 
/higher  kind  of  service  from  an  employee  you  were  to  promote  him  to  a  contideutial 
I  position — giving  him  full  access  to  your  books,  and  an  insight  into  the  secr-ts  of 
(your  business;  and  suppose  that  he  were  forthwith  to  employ  the  knowledge 
thus  obtained  in  order  to  injure  your  business  or  embezzle  your  property  !  And  yet 
this  is  but  a  faint  emblem  of  your  own  conduct  towards  the  Heavenly  Master ! 
You   take   the   bread   which  He  places  on   your  table ;    you  come  out  into  His 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  499 

sunshine ;  you  breathe  His  air ;  and  then,  with  the  health  and  strength  you  thus 
obtain,  you  pollute  His  air  with  words  that  ought  never  to  be  siJoiit-n,  or  cdmrait 
actions  too  foul  to  bear  the  light  of  His  sun.  God  reveals  to  you  some  of  those 
wondrous  seerfts  which  He  has  lodged  in  the  bosom  of  Nature,  and  then  you  go, 
perhaps,  and  employ  this  very  knowledge  for  the  retarding  of  His  spiritual  king'fom. 
You  take  tlie  subtle  eUctricity,  and  with  it  you  lla^h  your  lying,  fraudulent  message 
along  the  wire — breaking  God's  own  law  of  truth  and  justice  with  God's  own 
mvsterious  forces !  He  gives  you  wife  and  children  and  friends  ;  and  lo !  you 
make  them  do  the  devil's  work.  Here  is  one  man  whom  God's  Providence  places 
in  a  position  of  power.  How  that  man  might  use  his  power  in  the  cause  of  truth 
and  justice  and  liberty  !  But,  instead  of  this,  he  becomes  tyrannical.  Here  is 
another  man  who  lias  been  placed  in  a  position  of  wealth.  How  that  man  might 
multiply  iuanilestatioi;s  of  lo\alty  to  God!  But,  instead  of  thi-^,  he  practically 
worships  his  Kold,  and  employs  it  to  corrupt  and  degra^le  others,  and  to  supply 
fuel  for  tiis  own  lu^-ts.  Conclusion  :  "  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away." 
Let  us,  then,  not  live  as  if  the  visible  were  the  eternal.  And  let  us  remember  that 
we  do  not  necessarily  escape  worldliness,  by  belonging  to  what  is  called  "  the 
religions  world."  Men  may  seem  to  be  engaged  in  the  service  of  God,  and  yet  all 
the  while  be  only  serving  themselves.  A  selfish  ambition  does  not  cease  to  be 
worldly  merely  because  it  is  ecclesiastical.  Slander  and  spite  do  not  cease  to  be 
worldly  merely  because  they  appear  in  a  "religious  newspaper."  "The  lust  of 
the  tiesli,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life,"  do  not  cease  to  be  worldly, 
even  in  a  household  that  is  daily  summoned  to  family  prayers.  (T.  C.  Finhnjson.) 
The  use  and  abuse  of  the  icorld. — I.  Paul's  present  observation  about  this  world. 
That  its  "  fashion"  "  passeth  away."  It  passes  away — 1.  Before  our  e\es.  2.  To 
our  hearts.  II.  The  use  which  paul  il\kes  of  this  fact.  That  they  that  use  this 
world  sho'dd  use  it  as  not  abusing  it.  1.  The  world  is  abused  when  we  suffer  it — 
(1)  To  supplant  in  our  hearts  its  Creator;  (2)  To  banish  other  worlds  from  the 
sphere  of  our  attraction  ;  (3)  To  overcome  us ;  (4)  To  make  us  carry  the  lawful 
use  of  it  to  excess.  2.  The  world  should  be  used  with — (1)  A  pilgrim's;  (2)  A 
godly  ;  (3)  A  free  and  independent ;  (4)  A  generous  and  holy  spirit.  (,S'.  Martin.) 
On  the  use  and  abuse  of  the  world  : — The  world  is  always  represented  in  Scripture 
as  the  great  scene  of  trial  to  a  Christian.  The  part  which  is  proper  for  him  to  act 
may  be  compiised  in  these  two  expressive  words  of  the  text ;  "  using  the  woild,  and 
not  abusing  it"  ;  the  significancy  and  extent  of  which  I  propose  now  to  expl.in. 
The  subject  is  of  the  higher  importance,  as  in  the  world  we  must  live ;  and  accord- 
ina  as  we  use  or  abuse  it,  it  will  prove  either  our  fiiend  or  our  greatest  foe.  It  is 
natural  to  begin  with  observing  that  the  Christian  is  here  supposed  to  "  use  the 
world  "  ;  by  which  we  must  certainly  understand  tlie  apostle  to  mean  maintaining 
intercourse  and  connection  with  the  world ;  living  in  it  as  one  of  the  members  of 
human  society,  assuming  that  rank  which  belongs  to  his  station.  No  one  can  be 
said  to  use  the  world  who  lives  not  thus.  Hence  it  follows  that  sequestration 
from  the  world  is  no  part  of  Christian  duty.  Instead  of  employir  g  their  infiutnce 
to  regulate  and  temper  the  plensures  of  the  world  by  a  moderate  participation  of 
those  that  are  it.nocent,  they  deliver  up  all  the  entertainments  of  societ\  into  the 
hands  of  the  lo  se  and  giddy.  It  may  be  assumed,  therefore,  as  a  principle  justified 
by  the  text,  and  by  the  whole  strain  of  Scripture,  that  to  use,  and  in  a  certam 
degree  to  enjoy,  the  world,  is  altogether  consistent  with  religion.  We  shall  have  a 
clearer  view  of  the  proper  use  of  tne  world  when  we  contrast  it  with  that  abuse  of  the 
world  which  we  too  often  observe.  Those  abuses  manifest  themselves  in  various 
forms;  but  in  general  may  be  classed  umier  three  great  heads.  I.  They  arenl/usevs 
of  the  world  who  intemperately  give  themselves  up  to  its  pleasuies,  and  lead  a  life 
of  licentiousness,  riot,  and  dissipation.  Amidst  the  wealth  and  luxury  of  the 
present  age,  it  will  be  admitted  that  persons  of  this  description  are  not  nnfreqnent, 
who,  being  opulent  in  fortune,  and  perhaps  high  in  rank,  think  themselves  entithd 
to  pass  their  days  in  a  careless  manner,  without  any  other  object  in  view  than  the 
gratification  of  their  senses  and  passions.  By  the  train  of  life  which  they  lead  they 
defeat  every  purpose  for  which  Providence  bestowed  on  them  the  blessin^js  of  pros- 
perity. Tliey  sink  every  talent  which  they  possess  into  useless  insi^'uificancy. 
They  corrupt  the  publii-  manners  by  their  exainple,  and  diffuse  among  others  the 
spirit  of  extravagance  and  folly.  They  behave  in  a  manner  altogether  unsuiia'  le 
to  the  coi  dition  of  the  world  in  which  we  live.  With  indignant  eyes  the  sober  and 
thinking  piut  of  mankind  view  the  luxury  and  riot  of  those  abusers  of  the  world. 
To  them  are  owing  the  discontents  of  the  poor,  their  disaffection  to  their  superiors, 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vii, 

their  proneness  to  disturb  the  peace  of  the  world.  The  conduct  of  such  abusers  of 
the  world  is  not  only  pernicious  to  the  welfare  of  society  and  to  the  interests  of 
virtue,  it  is  equally  ruinous  to  themselves.  At  the  bottom  of  the  hearts  of  all  men 
there  lies  a  seciet  sense  of  propriety,  virtue,  and  honour.  This  sense  uiay  be  so 
far  blunted  as  to  lose  its  influence  in  guidinf,'  men  to  what  is  right,  while  yet  it 
retains  its  power  of  making  them  feel  that  they  are  acting  wrong.  Hence  remorse 
often  gna«  s  the  heart  which  afl'ects  to  appear  light  and  guy  befoi  e  the  world.  Eetreat, 
then,  from  your  dishonourable  courses,  ye  who  by  licentiousness,  extravagance,  and 
vice,  are  abusers  of  the  world  !  You  are  degrading,  you  are  ruining  yourselves. 
You  are  grossly  misemploying  the  gfts  of  God,  and  the  Giver  will  not  fail  to  punish. 
II.  The  world  is  alai  ed,  not  only  by  an  intemperate  puisuitof  its  pleasures,  but  by 
a  sordid  attachment  to  its  gains.  This  respects  a  set  of  men  of  a  very  different 
description  from  the  former,  more  decent  in  th?ir  carriage,  and  less  fla<;rant  in 
their  vices,  but  corrupted  by  the  woild  in  no  less  a  degree.  For  the  world  is  often 
abused  by  the  men  of  businf^ss  as  much  as  by  the  men  of  pleasure.  The  world, 
with  its  advantages,  is  a  lawful  object  of  pursuit  to  a  Christian.  He  may  seek,  by 
fair  industiy,  to  render  his  circumstance  alHuent.  His  care  ix,  not  merely  to  amass 
^  and  possess,  but  to  use  his  po^se^sions  well,  as  one  who  is  accountable  to  God.  He 
i  is  not  a  slave,  either  to  the  hopes  or  the  fears  of  the  world.  He  would  rather  forfeit 
lany  present  advantage  than  obtain  it  at  the  expense  of  violating  the  Divine  law 
lor  neglecting  his  duty.  This  is  using  the  world  like  a  good  man.  This  is  living  in 
lit  as  a  subject  of  God  and  a  member  of  the  great  community  of  mankind.  Very 
opposite  to  this  is  the  chaiacer  of  the  worldly-minded.  To  them  the  mere  attain- 
ment of  eaithly  possessions  is  an  ultimate  aim.  They  cannot  be  said  to  u>e  the 
world  ;  for  to  possess,  not  to  u.^e  or  enjoy,  is  their  object.  He  is  an  abuser  of  the 
world  who  cannot  occasionally  retreat  from  it  to  consider  what  character  he  bears 
in  the  .siyht  of  God,  and  to  what  issue  his  conduct  will  bring  him  at  last.  In  a 
word,  the  woild  is  then  proper'y  used  when  it  is  generously  and  beneficially 
enjoyed  ;  neither  hoarded  up  by  a\aiice,  nor  squandered  by  ostentation.  III.  The 
world  is  abused  by  Ihofe  who  tmploy  its  advantages  to  the  injury  or  oppression 
of  their  brethren.  Under  this  class  are  included  the  worst  and  most  criminal 
abusers  of  the  world,  who  turn  against  their  fellow- creatures  those  advantages 
with  which  it  has  pleased  Heaven  to  distinguish  them.  The  licentious,  the 
avaricious,  and  the  insolent,  lonn  the  three  gieat  classes  of  abusers  of  the 
world.  Let  net  those  who  are  in  wealthy  and  flourishing  circumstances  complain 
of  the  restraints  which  religious  doctrine  attempts  to  impose  on  their  enjoyments. 
For  to  what  do  the~e  restraints  amount?  To  no  more  than  this,  that,  by  their 
pleasures,  they  would  neither  injure  themselves  nor  injure  others.  (H.  Blair.  D.D.) 
The  use  and  abuse  of  the  icurld  : — I.  A  good  man  jiay  jiake  use  of  the  wokld. 
1.  The  persons  of  the  world.  2.  The  things  of  the  world,  for  they  are  his  own: 
"  All  things  are  yours."  It  is  an  incivility  and  unthankfulness  not  to  make  use  of 
a  gift,  and  the  tilings  of  this  world  are  God's  gift.  We  are  all  travellers  to  another 
country,  so  far  therefore  as  things  are  necessary  for  our  journey,  we  may  make  use 
thereof.  II.  Bdt  we  most  use  the  world  as  though  we  used  it  not.  As  wicked 
men  do  use  the  things  of  God,  and  of  the  other  woild,  so  a  good  man  should  use 
the  things  of  this  world.  A  wicked  man  prays  as  if  he  prayed  not,  and  hears  as 
if  he  lieard  not,  because  his  mind  is  upon  otner  things.  "  Set  your  affections  on 
thiuKS  that  are  above."  As  good  men  are  where  they  yet  are  not,  namely  in 
heaven,  so  they  are  not  where  they  now  are,  namely  on  earth,  for  your  conversation 
is  in  heaven.  The  things  of  this  world  are  but  to.s<,'rve  a  purpose,  and  are  not  to 
be  enjoyed  for  theinsHlve«.  Clothes  are  but  to  cover  nakedness  ;  meat  and  drink 
but  to  serve  hun^icr  and  thirst;  only  God  is  to  be  enjoyed;  therefore  wliy  should 
we  not  use  the  world  as  if  we  used  it  not?  And  then  the  world  uses  us  as  if  it 
used  us  not,  and  cares  for  us  as  if  it  cared  not  for  us.     III.  What  are  those 

PARTICILAR    CONCERNMENTS    WHERKIN    WE    ARE    TO    USE     THE    WORLD    AS    IF    WE    USED    IT 

NOT  ?  1.  Our  relations  (ver.  29).  Be  as  zealous  for  the  truth  and  as  ready  to  suffer 
for  the  cause  of  Christ  as  if  you  had  none.  2.  Grief  (ver.  20).  It  is  lawful  to 
grieve,  but  we  must  m.t  weep  too  much,  or  otherwise  it  will  argue  tliat  we  have  too 
much  love  to  the  world.  If  we  are  to  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord  evermore,"  then  surely 
we  are  to  weep  as  if  we  wept  not.  3.  Joy.  Why  should  I  joy  much  in  that  which 
I  cannot  enjoy  ?  God  only  is  t  <  be  enjoyed.  There  is  a  crack  in  the  finest  crystal. 
4.  Our  possessions  (ver.  80).  How  can  a  man  be  patient  in  the  loss  of  things  if  he 
be  not  weaned  from  them  while  he  hath  theiu.  And  if  good  men  have  greater 
possessions  to  mind,  and  they  cannot   intensively  mind  both,    then  surely  they 


CHAP,  vir.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  501 

must  so  possess,  as  if  they  possessed  not.     IV.  What  is  there  in  these  reasons 

OF    THE   AI'OSTLE    THAT    MAY   ENFORCE    THE    EXHORTATION  ?      1.    The  time  is  short.      We 

have  a  gre>it  business  to  do,  and  but  little  time  to  do  it  in.     If  a  citizen  go  into  the 
couutr.v  about  some  business  that  conrerns  his  life,  will  he  run  up  and  down  to 
catch  butterflies,  when  all  his  time  is  but  little  enough  for  to  do  his  business  in? 
2.  The  fashion  of  this  world,  it  is  but  a  piece  of  pa;,'eantry,  a  stage — one  goes  off 
and  anothtr  comes  on.     As  thnt  is  a  fashion  to-day  which  was  not  yesterday,  that 
is  a  fashion  to-day  which  is  none  to-morrow;  so  the  fashion  of  the  world  passeth 
away.     Will  you  instance  a  natural,  civil,  sinful,  leligious,  or  cumlortable  fashion 
of  the  world  that  does  not  pass  away  ?     V.   When  may  a  man  be  said  so  to  use 
THE  world  as  if  HE  USED  IT  NOT?     When  a  man  so  uses  the  world  as  to  walk 
with  God  in  the  use  thereof :  when  one  man  walk^<  with  another  he  turns  as  he 
turns  ;    so  wlien  a  man  walks  with   God  in  the  world,  he  turns  as  God  turns. 
When  God  calls  to  joy,  he  joys ;  when  God  calls  to  giief,  he  grieves,  etc.     VI. 
Suppose  I  do  not  use  the  world  as  ie  I  used  it  not,  what  then  ?     1.  You  do 
want  this  character  of  a  good  man.     2.  You  ate  not  dead  to  the  world,  and  if  not 
dead  to  the  world,  then  uot  dead  with  Christ.     B.  You  are  defiled  by  the  world. 
4.   Y'our  hearts  will  reproach  you  when  you  come  to  die.     5.   You  cannot  more 
prejudice  the  thing  you  love,  nor  wrong  yourselves  more,  than   by  loving  it  too 
much.     A  man  leans  upon  a  slender  stick,  and  both  breaks  the  stick  and  runs  it 
into  his  hand.     VII.  What  shall  we  do  th\t  we  may  get  our  hearts  into  this 
GRAdous  AND  HOLY  FRAME?     Note — 1.    What  that  man  does  that  uses  the  world 
as  if  he  used  it  not.     (1)  He  will  be  sure  to  use  grace  in  the  use  of  the  woild.     (2) 
He  will  be  ready  to  give  up  that  part  of  the  world  unto  God  wherein  his  affections 
are  most  engaged.     (3)  He  will  stand  at  a  distance  from  the  world,  in  the  getting 
as  well  as  in  the  keeping.     (4)  He  will  not  place  his  religion  in  a  morning  and  in 
an  evening  duty,  bat  in  his  walking  with  God  in  liis  place.     2.   TIjc  means.     (1) 
Labour  to  possess  your  hearts  much  with  God's  allsufliciency  (Psa.  Ixii.  10,  11). 
(2)  Look  upon  the  world  with  the  prospective  of  the  Scripture,  not  with  the  world's 
multiplying  glass.     (3)  Never  fall  in  love  with  any  condition  for  itself,  but  for  the 
good  of  the  condition.     (4)  Take  all  God's  alarums  of   death,  and  mingle  those 
with  the  consideration  of  the  di'ath  of  Christ,  and  then  you  will  die  to  the  world. 
(5)  Afford  the  world  and  the  things  thereof,  so  much  of  your  love,  as  better  things 
do  leave.     (G)  Let  the  name  of  the  Lord  be  very  preirious  in  your  hearts  and  in 
your  eyes.     (7)  Go  to  the  Lord  and  beg  of  the  Lord  to  fulfil  His  promises.     (8) 
Consider  what  a  good  thing  it  is  to  use  this  world  as  if  we  used  it  not.     Thereby — ■ 
('()  You  sliall  be  able  to  want  and  to  part  with  the  world  with  ease:  "  I  know  how 
to  want,"  saith  Paul,  and  "I  know  how  to  abound."     (h)  You  shall  have  more  of 
the  world,  and  have  it  in  a  better  edition,  in  a  better  impression,  for  it  will  be 
sanctified  unto  you.     (c)  You  shall  liave  that  which  is  better  than  all,  the  mind  of 
Christ,     (ir.  Bridue,  M.A.)        For  the  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away. — The 
fa^'hion   of  the    vorld  : — The  words  contain — I.    A    metaphorical   allusi  n  to  a 
public  exhibition  or  a  dramatic  representation.     1.   The  state  and  constitution  of 
things  as  they  now  exist  pass  away  ;  not  so  much  the  world  itsel',  as  to  its  material 
substance,  as   its   fashion  with   respect   to   us.     Do  we  now  behold  a  beautiful 
appearance  of  nature  or  art  ?     To  us  they  will  soon  be  as  the  reminiscence  of  a 
giddy  dream.     2.    Our  employments  and  pursuits  here.     In  these  we  are  as  the 
actors   of   a   diama.     Some    assume   fictitious   cha'-aotevs  ;    our   possessions   and 
enjoyments  change;  our  feelings  change,  not  oiily  as   to  their  nature,  but  their 
keenness.     3.    Our  present  ties   and  connections.     These  pass   away  to  assume 
another  fashion.     lu  the  world  to  come  "  we  shall  know  no  man  afier  the  flesh." 
II.  Doctrinal  truth.     1.  The  present  world  bears  evident  marks  of  imperfection  ; 
but  "  God  is  a  rock.  His  work  is  perfect."     2.  The  present  world  does  not  exhibit 
that  discrimination  which  exists  between  the  righteous  and  the  v\icked.     3.  The 
grand  end  of  all  revelation  is  to  prepare  men  for  another  life.     Why  have  human 
beings    an  intelligent  existence?     Why  did  Jehovah    style   Plimself    the  God   of 
Abraham,  Is'ac,  and  Jacob?     Why  select  a  people  and  inspire  prophets  to  insti-uct 
them  ?    Why  send  His  Son  to  live,  *c.  ?    Why  alarm  the  fears  or  excite  the  hopes  ? 
Verily  there  is  an  after  state,  &c.     HI.  A  practical  application.    1.  All  are  equally 
concerned  in  it.     Young  persons  of   robust  constitution  must  die  as  well  as  the 
greyheaded  and  infirm.     The  knowing  or  witty  must  all  pass  away.     2.  This  alone 
is  our  state  of  probation.     Fleeting  as  this  state  is,  when  once  gone  it  returns  no 
more  ;  "  time  is  short,"  not  so  eternity.     "Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time,"  &c. 
3.  The  change  of  worlds,  with  respect  to  the  righteous,  will  be  highly  advantageous. 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

4.  The  cliange  of  worlds  to  the  unconverted  distressing  and  terrible.  What  will 
become  of  the  proud  ?  (Mai.  iv.  1.)  Of  the  worldly  person  ?  (James  v.  1-3.)  Of  the 
carnally  mimled  ?  (Eom.  viii.  6.)  Of  the  vain  and  giddy  ?  (Luke  vi.  25.)  In  a  word — ■ 
"  If  therifjhteous  scarcelyare  suvcd,"  etc.  Conclusion  :  Does  the  fashion  of  the  world 
pass  away?  Then  let  us  improve  every  occunence  which  may  tend  to  loosen  our 
attachment  to  this  world,  and  every  means  to  prepare  us  for  a  better.  (HomilLt.) 
The  passing  nature  of  this   world  : — I.    By   this  world  we  are  to  understand 

THE    VISIBLE,     IN     OPPOSITION     TO     THE     INVISIBLE     STATE     OF     EXISTENCE.         For    intO 

these  two  the  whole  wurld,  or  entire  system  of  the  creation,  is  resolved  :  the 
world  that  is  unseen,  and  is  in  its  nature  eternal ;  and  the  world  that  is  seen, 
and  is  in  its  constitution  temporal.  And  by  the  attention  that  every  man 
pays  to  the  one  or  the  other,  his  character  is  determined  and  his  lot  is  fixed. 
He  is  either  carnally  or  spiritually  minded,  and  his  recompense  accordingly, 
death  or  life  (Bom.  viii.  6).  Here  things  look  quite  otherwise  than  they  are. 
Mourning  and  poverty  bear  the  face  of  misery  ;  mirth  and  riches  appear  to 
be  happiness ;  fame  and  preferment  are  styled  honour ;  slander  and  oppression 
are  accounted  disgrace;  hypocrisy  has  the  face  of  devotion;  pride  the  mask 
of  humility  ;  vanity  the  air  of  greatness.  In  short,  truth  is  currently  counter- 
feited and  concealed  under  false  colours ;  and,  as  the  Psalmist  sings,  man 
spends  his  life  in  a  vain  show.  Yet,  in  truth,  they  may  be  blessed  that  mourn — 
they  may  be  happy  that  are  poor — they  may  be  truly  honourable  that  are 
in  disgrace  in  this  world — they  may  be  great  and  good  who  look  mean. 
And,  on  the  contrary,  they  may  be  worthless,  wretched,  misei-able,  blind,  and 
naked,  who  are  accounted  rich,  and  great,  and  famous  among  men.  Here 
things  have  no  solid  bottom.  All  moves  in  a  perpetual  tendency  to  another 
state,  where  false  appearances  shall  for  ever  vanish  away,  and  everything 
appear  as  it  really  is.  The  whole  frame  of  things  here  is  continually  hastening 
to   a   dissolution — continually   shifting  place   and   time.      II.  This   world   is  in 

ITS    NATURE    A    FLUCTUATING    AND    TRANSITORY    STATE    OF    THINGS.         1.      Time    is    the 

element  in  which  all  creatures  below  are  calculated  to  exist;  in  which  they 
begin,  go  on,  and  end :  and  an  element  continually  changing  ;  always  in  motion, 
never  resting,  never  returning.  2.  The  numberless  creatures  that  exist  in 
time,  and  compose  this  world,  are  continually  changing  with  time,  and  passing 
away.  III.  The  use  we  should  make  of  this  important  and  extensive  truth. 
1.  To  avoid  all  anxious  care  and  immoderate  concern  about  the  things  of  this 
life.  2.  To  be  moderate  in  the  use  of  worldly  enjoyments.  3.  To  be  contented 
with  our  lot  in  the  world.  4.  Here  we  have  read  a  lesson  that  redeems  poverty 
from  contempt,  and  reduces  riches  to  little.  5.  Hence  we  may  observe  the 
sin  and  folly  of  those  who  trust  to  their  riches  for  supporting  their  life,  credit, 
and  comfort  in  this  world.  6.  From  this  subject  we  should  learn  patience 
under  afflictions.  They  cannot  last  in  a  world  continunlly  changing  and  passing 
away.  A  little  time  longer  will  either  end  or  amend  them.  7.  We  should 
study  to  wean  our  affections  from  the  things  of  time;  to  leave  the  world  as 
fast  as  it  leaves  us  ;  to  be  more  and  more  indiderent  about  the  pains  or  pleasures 
of  it,  the  longer  we  live  in  it.  8.  What  we  have  heard  serves  to  abate  the 
love  of  life  and  the  terrors  of  death,  which  naturally  keep  the  mind  of  man 
under  bondage.  9.  Here  Christians  m»j  read  consolation  under  the  loss  of 
Christian  friends,  relations,  or  acquaintances.  10.  Let  us  bless  God  with 
thankful  hearts  that  we  have  another  and  a  better  world  to  look  for,  a  state 
that  can  never  know  either  time  or  change  (Wm.  Beat.)  On  the  fashion  of 
the  world  jia-sing  away  : — I.  The  fashion  of  the  woild  passeth  away,  as  the 
opinions,  ideas,  and  manners  of  men  are  always  changing.  We  look  in  vain 
for  a  standard  to  ascertain  and  fix  any  of  these  ;  in  vain  expect  that  what 
has  been  approved  and  established  for  a  while,  is  always  to  endure.  Principles 
which  were  of  high  authority  among  our  ancestors  are  now  exploded.  When 
we  read  an  account  of  the  manners  and  oocupations,  of  the  studies  and  opinions, 
even  of  our  own  countrymen,  in  some  remote  age,  we  seem  to  be  reading  the 
history  of  a  different  world  from  what  we  now  inhabit.  Coming  downwards, 
through  some  generations,  a  new  face  of  things  apjiears.  As  one  wave  effaces 
the  ridse  which  the  former  had  made  on  the  sand  by  the  sea-shore,  so  every 
succeeding  age  obliterates  the  opinions  aud  modes  of  the  age  which  had  gone 
before  it.  Let  us  only  think  of  the  changes  which  our  own  ideas  and  opinions 
undergo  in  the  j^rogress  of  life.  One  man  differs  not  more  from  another,  than 
the  same  man  varies  from  himself  in  different  jjeriods  of  his  age,  and  in  different 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  508 

Bituations  of  fortune.  In  youth  and  in  opulence  everything  appears  pmihng  and 
gay.  But  let  some  more  years  have  passed  over  our  heads,  or  let  disappointments 
in  the  world  have  depressed  our  spirits ;  and  what  a  change  takes  place  !  The 
world  itself  remains  the  same.  But  its  form,  its  Appearance,  is  changed  to  our 
view  ;  its  fashion,  as  to  us,  hath  passed  away.  II.  Wliile  our  opinions  and  ideas 
a,re  thus  changing  within,  the  condition  of  all  external  things  is,  at  the  same  time, 
ever  changing  without  us  and  around  us.  Wherever  we  cast  our  eyes  over  the 
face  of  nature,  or  the  monuments  of  art,  we  discern  the  marks  of  alteration  and 
vicissitude.  We  cannot  travel  far  upon  the  earth  without  being  presented  with 
many  a  striking  memorial  of  the  changes  made  by  time,  ^^'hat  was  once  a 
flourishing  city  is  now  a  netjlecteii  village.  When  from  the  public  scene  we  turn 
our  eye  to  our  own  private  connections,  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  in 
the  fashion  of  the  world  must  touch  every  reflecting  mind  with  a  more  tender 
sensibility.  For  where  are  now  many  of  the  companions  of  our  eaily  years? 
III.  Not  only  our  connections  with  all  things  around  us  change,  but  our  own 
life,  throu'jh  all  its  stages  and  conditions,  is  ever  passing  away.  As  the  life  of 
man,  considered  in  its  duration,  thus  fleets  and  passes  away,  so,  during  the  time 
it  lasts,  its  condition  is  perpetually  changing.  It  affords  us  nothing  on  which  we 
can  set  up  our  rest;  no  enjoyment  or  possession  which  we  can  properly  call 
our  own.  IV.  That  the  world  itself  in  which  we  dwell,  the  basis  of  all  our  present 
enjoyments,  is  itself  contrived  for  change,  and  designed  to  pass  away.  There 
are  three  fixed  and  permanent  objects  to  which  I  must  now  call  your  attention, 
as  the  great  supports  of  human  constancy  amidst  this  fugitive  state.  1.  Virtue 
and  goodness  never  change.  Let  opinions  and  m>mners,  conditions  and  situations, 
in  public  and  in  private  life,  alter  as  they  will,  virtue  is  ever  the  same.  It  rests  on 
the  immovable  basis  of  eternal  truth.  Every  terrestrial  glory  sparkles  only  for 
a  little,  with  transient  brightness.  But  virtue  shines  with  eternal  and  unalterable 
splendour.  It  derives  its  origin  from  heaven  ;  and  partakes  both  of  the  lustre  and 
the  stability  of  celestial  objects.  2.  God  never  changes.  Amidst  the  unceasing 
vicissitude  of  earthly  things,  there  remains  at  the  head  of  th^  universe  an  Eternal 
Protector  of  virtue,  whose  throne  is  established  for  ever.  W^ith  Him  there  is  no 
variableness,  neither  any  shadow  of  turning ;  no  inconstancy  of  purpose,  and  no 
decay  of  wisdom  or  of  power.  How  much  soever  worbily  things  iiiay  change  in 
themselves,  they  are  all  united  in  His  plan;  they  constitute  one  great  system  or 
whole  of  which  He  is  the  author  ;  and  which,  at  its  final  completion,  shall  appear 
to  be  perfect.  His  dominion  holds  together,  in  a  continued  chain,  the  successive 
variety  of  human  events ;  gives  stability  to  things  that  in  themselves  are  fluctua- 
ting ;  gives  constancy  even  to  the  fashion  of  the  world  while  it  is  passing  away. 
3.  Heaven  and  iirimortality  pass  not  awny.  The  fleeting  scenes  of  this  life  are  to 
be  considered  as  no  more  than  an  introduction  to  a  nobler  and  more  permanent 
order  of  things,  when  man  shall  have  attained  the  maturity  of  his  being.  {H. 
Blair,  D.JJ.)  The  chaiirjhhi  nutvre  o/n-orhlhj  tliiiips  : — I.  All  things  abound  us 
ARE  CHANGING.  The  visible  heavens  daily  vary  their  appearance,  the  seasons  walk 
their  rounds,  and  in  each  we  experience  a  ereat  variety  in  the  temperature.  Nature 
is  continually  diversifying  her  dress.  Time  makes  observable  changes  in  the 
surface  of  our  globe.  Every  age  introduces  great  alterations  in  the  bounds  of 
empires,  in  the  politics  and  commerce  of  nations.  Famdies,  as  well  as  nations, 
are  changing.  New  ones  are  forming  as  elder  ones  pass  away.  The  lands  which 
have  been  acquired,  and  the  property  which  has  been  accumulated,  by  the  industry 
of  the  proprietor,  are  often  alienated  by  the  misfortune  or  folly  of  the  descendants. 
The  condition  of  every  person  is  in  continual  mutation.  As  we  advance  in  life,  our 
views  and  apprehensions  of  men  and  things,  and  our  taste  and  inclination  for  the 
objects  around  us,  greatly  alter.  The  inhabitants  of  the  world  are  changing. 
There  is  a  mighty  change  which  awaits  us  all.  II.  Let  us  improve  the  sentiment. 
The  mutable  condition  of  the  world  may  lead  us — 1.  To  contemplate  the  im- 
mutability of  the  Creator  (Heb.  i.  10-12).  2.  To  see  much  of  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  of  God.  (1)  The  mutability  of  things  is  on  the  whole  a  source  of  enjoy- 
ment. We  are  formed  to  love  variety.  The  traveller  passing  over  a  level  plain 
where,  all  along,  a  train  of  similar  objects  meets  his  eyes,  soon  finds  the  scene 
tedious.  Let  a  man  choose  his  own  condition,  and  place  himself  in  the  most 
agreeable  circumstances ;  will  he  enjoy  it  ?  No,  not  for  a  single  week.  There 
must  be  something  new,  or  every  pleasure  becomes  insipid.  (2)  As  our  pleasures 
are  heightened,  so  our  pains  are  mitigated,  by  variety.  On  the  roughest  roads 
there  is  some  smooth  way  where  we  can  walk  with  ease.     Many  are  the  troubles  of 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vir, 

the  world,  but  they  are  intermixed  with  pleasures.  And  our  troubles  are  not 
always  the  same ;  one  passes  away  as  another  comes.  We  tind  some  relief  by 
shifting  it  from  shoulder  to  shoulder.  3.  To  direct  our  thoughts  to  a  future  state 
of  exisr.f'nce.  One  change  leads  to  another.  Each  season  is  preparatory  to  the 
next.  Youtli  is  i)reparatory  to  manhood,  and  this  to  old  a;-'e.  We  may  naturally 
then  conclude  that  death  is  introductory  to  a  new  state  of  existence.  Pain,  in  this 
state,  usually  precedes  high  enjoyment ;  the  humiliating  circumstances  of  death 
are  preludes  to  glory  and  immortality.  4.  To  rejoice  as  if  we  rejoiced  not,  and 
weep  as  if  we  wept  not.  5.  To  remember  our  great  change.  When  we  see  the 
fashion  of  the  world  passing  away,  it  becomes  us  to  realise  that  we  are  jDassing 
away  also,  and  have  here  no  continuing  city.  The  seaman,  in  a  feeble  bark,  tossed 
on  the  tumultuous  ocean,  surely  will  not  imagine  himself  on  firm  ground,  nor 
forget  his  danger  of  being  swallowed  up  in  the  deep.  G.  To  direct  our  tdoughts  to 
heaven,  where  none  of  the  painful  vicissitudes  of  the  present  stage  will  attend  us. 
Changes  thete  will  be  in  h^aven,  but  they  will  be  only  changes  for  the  better,  from 
glory  to  glory,  from  perfection  to  perfection.  (•/.  Latlirop,  D.D.)  The  world 
changes: — Ah,  this  beautiful  world!  I  know  not  what  to  think  of  it.  Sometimes 
it  is  all  sunshine  and  gladness,  and  heaven  itself  lies  not  far  off ;  and  then  it 
suddenly  changes,  and  is  dark  and  sorrowful,  and  the  clouds  shut  out  the  day.  In 
the  lives  of  the  saddest  of  us  there  are  bright  days  like  this,  when  we  feel  as  if  we 
could  take  the  great  world  in  our  arms.  Then  come  gloomy  hours,  when  the  fire 
will  not  burn  on  our  hearths,  and  all  without  and  within  is  dismal,  cold,  and  dark. 
Believe  me,  every  heart  has  its  secret  sorrows,  which  the  world  knows  not ;  and 
ofttimes  we  call  a  man  cold  when  he  is  only  sad.  {H.  W.  Loiififellmv.)  The 
Janhion  of  the  u-orhl  imssith  away  : — The  crust  of  the  globe  is  constantly  changing 
in  some  form  or  other  in  all  places.  It  is  true  in  a  material  sense  that  the  fashion 
of  the  world  passeth  away.  {Scientific  IlliDttrations:  and  Symbols.)  Eternal 
things  and  fleeting  : — Afar  off  one  can  hardly  tell  which  is  mountain  and  which  is 
cloud.  The  clouds  rise  with  peaks  and  summits,  all  apparently'  as  s'did,  and 
certainly  as  glistening,  as  the  snow-clad  Alps,  so  that  the  clearest  eye  might  readily 
be  deceived.  Yet  the  mountain  is  unsubstantial  as  the  cloud,  and  the  cloud  is 
never  permanent  as  the  mountain.  So  do  the  things  of  time  appear  to  be  all- 
important,  far-reaching  and  enduring,  and  eternal  things  are  not  always  of  equal 
weight  to  the  soul  with  those  nearer  at  hand.  Yet,  despite  all  our  instinctive 
judgments  may  suggest  to  the  contrary,  nothing  earthly  can  ever  be  lasting, 
nothing  in  time  can  be  worth  considering  compared  w^ith  eternity.  The  cloudy 
philosophies  of  mt-n  may  assume  the  shiipe  of  eternal  truth,  but  the  wind  shall 
scatter  them,  while  the  great  mountains  of  the  Divine  Word  shall  stand  fast  for 
ever  and  ever.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  32-40.  Eut  I  ■would  have  you  without  carefulness. — "  Without  careful- 
ness "  ; — I.  By  avoiding  those  states  which  involve  carefulness.  Take,  e.g. — 1. 
The  question  of  marriage.  Paul  bids  Chiis-tians,  in  the  first  place,  not  to  marry. 
(1)  But  that  was  a  time  of  ijersecution.  The  Christian  man  who  had  no  family 
could  flee  in  a  moment  if  it  was  right  to  flee,  and  if  caught  he  had  not  to  ihink 
about  his  wife  and  fatherless  childien.  Paul  wished  the  Church  to  be  like  an  army 
which  is  not  encumbered  with  baggage  ;  his  own  consisted  of  half  a  dozen  needles 
and  a  reel  of  thread.  He  was  thus  without  carefulness.  (2)  But  to-day  the 
circumstances  are  decidedly  different,  and  we  are  to  follow  the  principle  )ather 
than  the  i^articular  instnnce.  I  have  known  brethren  who  had  a  grt^at  deal  more 
care  before  than  after  marriage,  and  who  served  God  better  in  the  married  estate. 
That  is  the  rule  to  judge  by.  But  numbers  of  you  never  judge  at  all  in  this  way. 
Many  men  and  women  rush  into  marriage  when  they  know  that  it  must  involve 
them  in  all  sorts  of  c;ire  and  hinder  them  in  the  Master's  service.  2.  Increased 
worldly  business.  Now,  if  you  can  serve  God  better  by  having  a  dozen  shops,  have 
a  dozen  ;  but  I  have  known  i^ersous  whom  God  blessed  in  one  shop,  and  they  lost 
the  blessing  when  they  opened  two  or  three.  When  invited  to  take  their  jjiirt  in 
the  Lord's  work,  they  replied — "You  see,  I  cannot  get  out,"  or  "I  am  so  tied." 
But  as  the  disability  is  entirely  of  your  own  creation,  how  can  it  excuse  you  ?  Do 
not  fill  your  pocket  at  the  expense  of  your  soul.  God  can  prosper  you  and  make 
you  happy  with  a  more  manageable  business,  and  he  can  make  you  miserable  if  you 
wilfully  increase  your  cares.  Piemember  how  Napoleon  tried  to  do  too  much,  and 
did  it,  and  did  for  himself.  3.  Public  engagements.  Everything  which  concerns 
a  man   concerns  a  Christian,  and   God  never  wished  His  servants  to  leave  the 


CHAP,  vir.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  505 

government  of  this  realm  to  all  the  place-hunters  who  look  for  a  seat  in  Parliament. 
To  abandon  law-iuakint;  to  the  worst  of  men  would  be  infamous.  So  with  every- 
thing which  concerns  the  public  weal.  But  let  the  rule  be — first  God,  and  then  our 
feUow-men.  Ye  are  the  servants  of  God  ;  do  not  make  yourselves  the  slaves  of 
men.  4.  Occupations  prevent  attendance  at  the  house  of  God.  When  a  young 
man  with  a  moderate  salary,  and  the  whole  Sabbath  and  some  week-evenings  to 
himself,  is  offered  twice  as  much  in  a  place  where  he  must  be  shut  out  from  worship 
and  service,  I  hope  he  will  look  long  before  he  makes  the  bargain.  For  Christians, 
the  best  place  is  where  they  can  do  mcist  for  Jesus.  II.  By  keeping  away  from 
THOSE  PURSUITS  WHICH  NATURALLY  FOSTER  IT.  1.  When  a  mail  makes  the  gaining 
of  riches  the  first  thing  in  life  he  cannot  be  without  carefulness.  Where  his 
treasure  is,  there  will  his  heart  be  also.  2.  If  you  live  with  the  view  of  gaining 
honour  among  men,  you  will  be  full  of  cares.  To  please  everybody  is  as  impossible 
as  to  make  ice  and  bake  bread  at  the  same  moment  in  one  oven.  3.  Those  who 
are  ambitious  to  be  very  respectable  will  never  be  without  carefulness ;  they  have  a 
pound  coming  in,  but  they  spend  a  guinea.  Some  have  a  favourite  object  in  life — 
not  God  ;  and  these  cannot  be  without  carefulness.  Dear  mother,  love  your 
children  by  all  means,  but  if  that  little  one  has  become  an  idol,  you  cannot  be 
without  carefulness.  Lots  of  children  Lave  suffered  a  martyrdom  from  too  much 
nursing,  and  excessive  cart  fulness  has  created  cause  for  care.  If  anything  else 
becomes  the  hobby  of  life,  a  horse,  a  dog,  a  iiower,  a  painting,  it  will  entan:.'le  you 
ift  nets  of  care.  III.  By  exercising  a  childlike  faith  in  God.  He  sends  you 
troubles  and  trials,  but  be  without  carefuhiess — 1.  By  never  trying  to  anticipate 
them.  Never  meet  them  half-way.  Commit  your  way  unto  the  Lord,  and  then  be 
without  carefulness.  2.  By  being  quite  content  with  tlip  Lord's  will.  J)o  your  best 
and  leave  business,  health,  friends,  &c.,  in  the  hands  of  God.  3.  By  being  quite  sure 
about  the  love  of  God.  He  cannot  make  a  niistiike,  nnd  He  cannot  fail  His  people. 
If  the  worst  thing,  as  it  seems  tons,  should  happen,  it  must  be  the  rit'ht  thing,  iiccause 
God  has  sent  it.  4.  By  believing  in  the  power  of  prayer,  and  in  the  fact  that  God 
does  actually  answer  it.  5.  By  giving  all  our  thought  and  care  to  this  one  object — 
How  can  I  live  as  Christ  would  have  lived  ?  You  never  find  Jesus  worrying.  (C.  H. 
Spvrfieon.)  Against  carefulness  : — I.  The  evil  and  danger  of  "carefulness." 
Every  kind  of  care  is  not  evil ;  but  only  that  care  wliich  is  attended  with  anxiety. 
And  this  is  evil — 1.  As  distracting  our  mind.  2.  As  impeding  our  progress.  3.  As 
tending  to  turn  us  from  the  path  of  strict  integrity.  11.  How  we  jla.y  most  effec- 
tually divest  ourselves  of  it.  We  must  get — 1.  A  deep  sense  of  the  obligations 
which  God  has  laid  upon  us.  2.  A  lively  sense  of  the  obligations  which  He  has 
laid  upon  Himself  also  respecting  us.  {C.  Siiiieo7i,  M.A.)  Free  from  cares: — I. 
Why  should  we  be  "  free  from  cares"  ? — 1.  The  approach  of  the  end.  (1)  "  The 
time  is  shortened,"  between  now  and  the  Lord's  coming;  or — (2)  Between  now  and 
our  last  hour.  2.  The  transiency  of  all  earthly  things.  "  The  fashion  of  this 
world  passeth  away."  Do  not  many  of  the  circumstances  of  past  life,  that  were 
then  subjects  of  absorbing  anxiety,  look  now  like  so  many  shifting  scenes  of  a 
stage  play?  II.  How  should  we  be  "free  from  cares"?  1.  By  contentment 
with  our  present  lot.  This  is  the  lesson  of  vers.  10,  11,  27,  18,  21,  &c.  "Let  every 
man  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called  "  (ver.  20).  2.  By  using  all 
temporal  relations  without  worldly  absorption  in  them.  (1)  All  relative  duties — 
husband  and  wife  an  example.  (2)  All  sorrowful  and  joyous  events.  (3)  All 
acqui>itions.  3.  By  using  all  temporal  relations  with  a  view  of  pleasing  God  (vers. 
32,  34,  35).  {Clerical  World.)  'I'orment  of  little  cares  : — One  of  the  most  cruel 
torments  of  the  Inquisition  was  to  place  a  poor  victim  beneath  a  tap,  and  let  the 
cold  water  fall  upon  the  head  drop  by  drop.  This  was  not  felt  at  first,  but  at  last 
the  monotony  of  the  water  dropping  always  on  one  spot  became  almost  unendurab'e  ; 
the  agony  was  too  great  to  be  expressed.  It,  is  just  so  with  little  cares.  When  they 
keep  constantly  falling  drop  by  drop  u])<>x\  one  individual  they  tend  to  produce 
irritation,  calculated  to  make  life  well-nigh  insupportable.  (Clerical  Library.) 
He  that  is  umnarried  .  .  .  but  he  that  is  married. —  'ftie  cares  of  married  life : — I. 
Abe  un.woidaele.  Marriage  involves  not  merely  new  anxieties  and  troubles,  but 
new  claims  which  may  interfere  with  our  duty  to  God.  II.  May  be  moderated.  1. 
By  considering  the  sinfulness  of  excessive  care.  2.  By  a  supreme  aim  to  please 
God.  3.  By  pleasing  the  partner  of  our  life  for  good  to  edification.  (J.  l.yth,  D.D.) 
This  I  speak  for  your  own  profit. — Advice  should  he  given  : — I.  Wnii  a  pure 
MOTIVE — for  another's  profit.  II.  In  a  Christian  spirit — so  as  not  to  <'verrule 
conscience  and  bring  a  snare.   III.  Fob  a  wise  end — to  secure  what  is  honourable  and 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

subservient  to  piety.  (Ibid.)  Characteristics  of  Christianity  : — The  apostle  here 
specifies  in  dealing  with  one  particular  subject  some  of  the  grand  features  which 
commend  the  Christian  life.  The  expansion  of  the  test  is  not  unwarrantable,  for 
religion  is — I.  Teue  profit.  "  This  I  speak  for  j-our  profit"  might  preface  nearly 
every  Biblical  injunction;  for  godliness  in  its  widest  scope  and  minutest  details 
is  "  profitable  unto  all  things."  This  fact  appeals  to  the  practical  side  of  our 
nature,  and  should  have  some  force  in  this  utilitariHU  age.  IT.  Perfect  freedom. 
The  last  thing  Paul  had  in  view  was  to  cast  a  noose  over  the  Corintliians,  or  to  lay 
a  restraint  on  them.  The  very  key  note  of  his  teaching,  as  of  tte  whole  gospel,  is 
"  liberty."  This  appeals  to  the  volitional  side  of  our  nature,  and  should  arrest  the 
attention  of  an  age  one  of  whose  loudest  watchwords  is  "freedom" — of  thought, 
trade,  &c.  Eeligion  fetters  us  in  nothing,  but  in  that  which  would  restrict  our  true 
liberty.  Hence  it  is  "  a  perfect  Za?y  of  /i'lJ^er?;/."  III.  Ee.\l  beauty.  "That  which 
is  comely."  Much  which  goes  by  the  name  is  unreal  because  unsubstantial  and 
fading.  One  of  the  synonyms  of  Christianity  is  ' '  grace  " — what  is  becoming  the 
uncreated  beauty  of  God,  and  what  becomes  the  creature  made  in  His  image.  By 
the  common  consent  of  all  who  are  entitled  to  judge,  the  most  beautiful  characters 
are  those  who  are  formed  on  the  model  of  Him  who  is  "the  altogether  lovely." 
Eeligion  thus  appeals  to  the  jEsthetic  side  of  nature,  an^l  should  gain  an  hearing  in 
an  age  which  has  witnessed  a  wonderful  revival  of  art.  IV.  Happy  service.  "  That 
ye  mav  attend  upon  tbe  Lord  without  distraction."  To  attend  upon  anything  with- 
out distraction  is  a  desideratum  in  this  busy  age.  The  lowest  and  simplest  services 
bring  their  cares,  and  men  and  women  are  overwhelmed  with  them,  Eeligion 
sanctifies  th^se  and  wnuld  have  us  nt  home,  and  in  the  world,  "without  careful- 
ness." But  in  the  highest  and  most  difficult  service — work  for  God,  and  for  the 
eternal  interests  of  man — here  anxiety  is  often  the  acutest.  Paul's  contention  is 
that  tkis  should  not,  must  not  be.  And  when  we  consider  the  nature  of  the  work, 
its  issues,  and  its  helps,  we  shall  say  with  our  Master  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O 
My  God."  Conclusion  :  What  more  can  be  added  to  commend  religion  ?  Seemingly 
two  things.  The  great  questions  yet  remain — Is  it  reasonable  ?  Is  it  right  ?  But 
these  are  answeied  already  practically.  A  thing  that  is  profitable,  liberating, 
beautiful,  useful  and  blessed  cannot  be  irrational  and  wrong.  (./.  IF.  Burn.) 
Power  over  his  own  will. — Will-poicer : — What  is  your  conception  of  the  best 
manhood  ?  Clearly,  there  may  be  various  conceptions  of  it,  each  with  much 
to  say  for  itself.  One  may  think  to  discover  it  in  the  domain  of  mind,  where  the 
mellow  and  perfect  culture  of  a  vigorous  understanding  claims  and  wins  homage. 
Another  detects  it  in  physical  beauty  and  vigour,  and  in  that  deli^htiul  condition 
of  body  which  makes  it  the  obedient  and  ready  organ  of  the  spirit.  Another,  again, 
finds  it  in  tlie  moral  nature  of  man.  The  best  is  the  manliest.  The  purest, 
gentlest,  kindest,  truest,  tenderest ;  he  is  the  most  worthy,  and  therefore  the  most 
admirable.  But  surely  our  text  has  the  real  key  to  the  question.  It  is  in  the 
quality,  and  use,  and  dominance  of  the  will  that  the  test  of  manhood  is  to  be 
discovered.  It  has  been  well  said  that  every  act  is  made  up  of  a  purpose,  a 
method,  and  a  i^ower.  But  the  purpose  comes  first.  Also,  what  is  true  of  an  act 
is  doubly  true  of  a  life.  If  the  will  is  the  meclianical  force  of  the  s<  ul,  before  all 
things  let  it  be  strong.  Only  a  strong  will  can  make  a  strong  man.  If  the  will 
initiates  action  in  purposing  it,  it  must  persevere  in  it  for  the  accomplishing  of  the 
purpose ;  and,  perhaps,  even  more  needful  than  the  volition  that  starts  an  act  is 
the  firmness  that  stays.  What  we  all  want  in  life  is  staying  power.  The  beginning 
of  the  race  is  brisk,  facile,  and  pleasant ;  but  it  needs  more  than  high  spirits  and  a 
vivid  fancy  to  go  on  to  the  far  end.  See,  oh,  clearly  see,  that  it  is  not  from  force 
of  will,  so  much  as  from  weakness  of  it,  that  the  world  breeds  its  miseries  and  its 
failures.  Of  course  a  strong  will  misdirected  is  bad.  The  apostle,  you  observe,  is 
careful  to  add  "his  own  will."  Perhaps  in  nothmg  is  a  real  man's  individuality 
so  marked  as  in  his  own  will.  Each  man,  as  says  Shelley,  must  "  be  himself 
alone,"  and  he  is  most  specifically  hmiself  by  his  will.  If  it  deserves  the  natne, 
your  will  differs  from  mine,  and  every  other  man's,  in  its  surroundings,  its 
flexibility,  and  original  force ;  and  we  have  to  do  thp  best  with  it  that  we  can. 
For  if  you  say,  as  well  you  may,  is  not  will  an  inheritance  by  birth,  God's  original 
gift,  as  much  as  brain,  or  animal  strength,  or  those  surroundings  which  make  such 
a  difference  in  our  start — I  say,  in  a  degree,  yes:  but  not  so  as  to  justify  us  in  a 
base  despair  because  our  pound  is  but  one,  when  our  neighbour  has  five.  Like 
memory,  like  reason,  like  the  brain  itself,  which  they  say  grows  all  through  a 
man's  life,  with  the  steady  work  that  does  it  honour,  it  is  made  stronger  by  regular, 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  507 

definite,  and  repeated  use.  Then  there  is  the  control  of  the  will,  which  St.  Paul 
describes  as  power  over  it,  or  as  the  Eevised  Version  gives  it,  power  touching  it. 
To  rule  the  will,  we  must  first  consecrate  it,  in  surrendering  it  with  the  tntire 
beinj;  which  it  both  commands  and  energ  ses  at  the  footstool  of  the  most  high  God. 
You  remember  of  Him,  who  lived  as  no  other  man  lived,  and  died  as  no  other  man 
died,  what  He  said  about  His  will — His  human  will — a  wi;l  like  yours  and  mme, 
"Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  To  give  our  will  back,  up  to  Him  who  has 
bestowed  it  upon  us,  with  its  terrible  honourable  freedom,  is  at  once  our  dignity 
and  our  blessedness.  Our  dignity,  because  thereby  we  recognise  the  Divine  Father- 
hood, and  plead  our  own  sonship,  as  the  children  of  God.  Our  blessedness,  tor 
sometimes  the  noblest  use  of  liberty  is  to  surrender  it :  and  what  St.  James  calls 
the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  is  only  learnt  in  the  school  of  love.  "  Ye  are  not  your 
own,  ye  are  bought  with  a  price.  Wherefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in 
your  spirit,  which  are  (rod's."  To  rule  it,  again,  implies  that  we  use  it.  By  using 
it  I  mean  giving  it  a  first  place  in  the  continuous  activities  of  life  ;  not  only  Hbout 
plans,  but  about  details  ;  not  only  for  what  gets  credit,  but  for  what  no  one  sees 
but  God ;  not  only  for  the  problems  of  the  thmker,  but  for  the  homely  plodding 
tasks  of  the  honest  student,  who  wanting  but  his  degree,  sees  Alps  that  he  must 
climb  b^-fore  he  can  reach  it,  yet  means  to  reach  it.  Not  for  any  one  department, 
or  corner,  or  phase,  or  period  of  life,  but  io\:  the  whole.  A  strong  man  resolves, 
sometimes  it  must  be  admitted  with  precipitateness,  ai.d  an  incomplete  knowledge 
of  resources.  Then  he  suffers,  and  peihaps  others  as  well.  But  is  it  not  far  better 
in  the  end  to  suffer  for  over-much  doing — a  rare  fault,  and  one  which  has  a  knack 
of  taking  its  own  cure  with  it — than  to  suffer  for  too  little  duiug,  which  usually 
results,  if  not  in  a  paralysis  of  our  finer  powers,  certainly  in  a  deterioration  of 
them  ?  and  it  is  deterioration,  so  subtle,  so  Ccisy,  so  rapid,  so  hidden,  that  we  all  of 
us,  but  especially  those  who  are  in  the  autumn  of  our  years,  have  so  much  to  dread. 
Power  over  the  will  also  means  the  regilating  it,  in  its  impulsis,  prejudices  and 
resolves.  By  impulse  I  mean  its  first  id-as  and  stirrings,  which  if  not  watched 
and  restrained  will  sometimes  land  us  in  inextricable  disaster.  Prejudice  it  must 
examine  and  allow  for;  neither  ignore,  nor  too  much  dread.  Every  intelligent 
human  being  is  constantly  and  inevitably  storing  up  iu  his  mind  those  final  and 
essential  and  condensed  results  of  his  past,  which  tend,  and  ought  to  tend,  to  bias 
him  in  this  direction  rather  than  that ;  and  which  swaying  conduct  with  an 
invisible  but  potent  influence,  a  wise  man  will  recognise  and  make  allowance  for, 
just  as  the  navigator  of  an  iron  vessel  is  careful  to  have  his  compassts  verified 
before  he  goes  to  sea  ;  then  goes,  and  feels  safe.  Intention,  too,  needs  regulating, 
sometimes  in  the  w^ay  not  only  of  modifying  it,  but  even  of  surrendering  it,  should 
alteied  circumstances  make  it  expedient.  Self-will  has  nothing  strong  about  it, 
though  it  affects,  and  even  caricatiires,  firmness.  But  what  is  the  area  of  this  will 
over  which  we  are  to  claim  and  exerci:^e  power?  First,  it  moves  about  faith  ;  for  if 
Si;.  Panl  be  correct,  both  the  will  in  God  and  the  will  in  man  have  a  concurrent 
share  in  what  touches  our  salvation — salvation  being  a  condition  of  the  entire 
being,  and  not  only  one  part  of  it ;  as  much  of  the  intellect  which  ponders  and 
accepts  truth,  as  of  the  conscience  that  feels  after  righteousness.  Let  us  instantly 
admit  that  the  will  must  not  be  suffered  an  undue  preponderance  in  the  dealings 
of  the  mind,  with  what  we  call  revelation.  Our  first  question  is  not  wliat  do  I 
wish  truth  to  be,  but  what  truth  is  actually  found  to  be  ;  not  what  I  hope  can  be 
proved,  but  what  by  the  evidence  suitable  to  the  question  is  capable  of  proof. 
Keep  your  will  set  on  truth ;  still  seek  it,  desire  it,  wait  for  it,  pray  for  it,  more 
than  tor  your  necessary  food.  Do  not  despise  it  as  if  it  was  not  worth  waiting  for ; 
do  not  despair  about  it,  as  if  it  would  never  come.  Then  for  culture  is  not  the  will 
required  to  keep  men  from  dreaming,  instead  of  thinking  ;  to  stir  this  one  to  study, 
that  one  to  ambition  ?  Surely  will  has  its  place  here,  with  its  function  of  selection, 
and  its  duty  of  application,  with  its  aim  in  concentration,  and  with  its  reward  in 
power.  Once  more,  see  what  the  will  has  to  do  with  character.  An  ap.  stle  of 
culture,  who  describes  Salvation  as  "  a  harmonious  perfection  only  to  be  won  by 
unreservedly  cultivating  many  sides  in  us,"  admits  that  "conduct,  not  culture,  is 
three  parts  of  human  life."  If  there  is  one  rule  more  than  another  that  I  wish  to 
leave  in  your  minds  it  is  the  will  for  goodness.  The  one  sentence  that  I  impress  on 
you  about  it  is  "  to  keep  yourselves  unspotted  from  the  world."  Remember  how 
"all  grossness  and  self-indulgence  go  to  weaken  the  physical  powers,  and  degrade 
your  personal  dignity,  and  wait  for  their  implacable  revenge,  when  the  autumn  of 
life  arrives,  and,  almost  worst  of  all,  spoil  that  fine  instinctive  sense  of  goodness 


503  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vil. 

which  is  the  reward  of  a  soul  that  has  never  stained  its  whiteness,  which  goes, 
never  quite  to  come  back  even  after  years  of  devotedness  and  sanctity :  and  so  with  all 
the  power  of  your  will,  and  with  all  the  passion  of  your  heart,  and  with  all  the 
conviction  of  your  reason,  and  with  all  the  weight  of  your  conscience,  say,  when 
the  tempter  comes — I  may  not,  I  must  not,  I  will  not,  I  cannot,  for  am  not  I  the 
child  of  God,  the  brother  of  Jesus  Christ?  Lastly,  the  will  of  the  Father,  the  will 
of  the  Son,  the  will  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  all  for  you.  The  will  of  the  Father 
about  you  and  your  life  in  front  will  open  out  in  the  way  of  His  providence  as  the 
years  go  on.  Trust  it.  The  will  of  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  is  for  you.  From  His 
place  of  glory  He  looks  down  and  thinks  of  you  all,  some  with  fear,  some  with 
delight — all  with  unspeakable  love.  His  will  is  to  bless  you.  Is  it  your  will  to  be 
blessed  ?  And  the  will  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  give  you  strength,  to  sanctify  you  in 
body,  soul,  and  spirit,  and  dignify  and  irradiate  your  studies  with  His  divine 
presence,  to  stir  your  thirst  for  knowledge— all  knowledge — but  supremely  that 
which  manifests  the  face  of  God.  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which 
strengtheueth  me."  And  then  this  power  over  your  own  will  shall  mean  in  a 
perfect  and  joyous  freedom  the  service  of  men  and  the  fruition  of  God.  {Bishop 
Thorold.) 

Vers.  39,  40.  .  .  .  She  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom  she  will ;  only  in  the 
Lord. — On  marriage  : — Let  me — I.  Explain  and  justify  the  kule  laid  down  in 
THE  TF.xT.  1.  To  be  in  the  Lord  is  to  be  a  believer  in  Christ,  to  be  united  to  Him 
by  a  living  faith,  and  to  be  interested  by  reason  of  that,  in  all  the  blessings  of  His 
great  salvation.  In  short,  believers  in  Christ  should  marry  believers,  and  none 
other.  Now,  this  law  does  not  require — (1)  Perfect  unanimity  in  rtlit^ious  senti- 
ment. Creeds  may  differ,  but  hearts  may  be  the  same.  (2)  That  both  should  be 
members  of  the  same  religious  society.  This  is,  however,  exceedingly  desirable, 
for  it  is  unseemly,  indeed,  when  they  who  are  together  in  all  the  most  endearing 
intercourse  of  life,  go  as  solitary  individuals  to  the  sanctuary.  (3)  Thu't  both 
or  either  of  the  i^arties  should  be  in  full  communinn  with  any  Christian 
Church.  Now,  I  believe  that  a  man  who  lives  in  the  neglect  of  such  com- 
munion lives  in  the  violation  of  a  positive  command,  and  in  the  abandon- 
ment of  a  precious  privilege,  and,  by  so  doing,  subjects  his  Christianity  to 
susiDicion  by  the  Church,  and  to  animadversion  from  the  world.  Yet  still,  there 
are  some  who,  notwithstanding  this  serious  drawbaiik,  we  ai'e  compelled  to  believe 
love  the  Saviour.  2.  Having  thus  ascertained  the  rule,  we  proceed  to  justify  it 
by  an  appeal — (1)  To  the  reasonings  of  Scripture  (Josh,  xxiii.  11,  &c. ;  Ezra  ix.  1, 
2;  Deut.  vii.  1-4).  Now,  if  such  a  principle  as  this  was  thus  established  under  a 
dispensation  comparatively  lax  and  dim,  how  much  more  reasonable  and  binding 
must  it  appear  as  a  law  of  Christianity  (2  Cor.  vi.  14-18).  (2)  To  history,  observa- 
tion, and  experience.  With  all  the  excuses  persons  have  made,  and  all  the 
disinterested  motives  they  have  assigned  for  their  conduct,  did  you  ever  know  any 
good  come  of  it  ?  Scripture  and  the  Church  are  big  with  examples  of  domestic 
misery  and  spiritual  ruin,  the  result  of  these  monstrous  and  unnatural  connections. 
What  became  of  the  daughters  of  Lot,  who  preferred  the  sons  of  Sodom  to  the  sous 
of  God  ?  Was  there  ever  a  greater  monster,  a  more  fearful  prodigy  of  vice  than 
Ahab?  (see  also  Nehem.  xiii.  23-27).  3.  To  analogy.  If  you  wished  for  a  com- 
mercial partner,  would  you  choose  a  man  utterly  averse  to,  or  totally  ignorant  of, 
trade?  Would  you  choose  for  tbe  companion  of  a  long  journey  a  man  whose 
disposition  and  principles  were  opposite  to  your  own  ?  Would  you,  as  a  man  of 
taste  and  of  education,  prefer  being  shut  up  for  weeks  in  a  carriage  with  a  fool 
or  a  clown?  4.  To  acknowledged  obligation  (chap.  vi.  20).  And  how  is  such  a 
marriage  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  ?  5.  To  conscience — whatsoever  is  not  of 
faith  is  sin.  Now,  is  this  of  faith,  the  union  of  a  believer  with  an  infidel  ? — of 
a  friend  of  Jesus  with  an  enemy?  II.  Consider  and  expose  some  of  the  most 
OBVIOUS  temptations  to  its  violation  and  the  most  common  excuses  fob  IT.  1. 
Fortune.  It  is  this  which  constitutes  a  good  match.  2.  Eauk  and  station.  3. 
Parental  advice.  4.  An  ill-directed  but  sinceie  attachment.  5.  But  some  are 
ready  to  say,  the  object  of  my  attachment  has  everything  but  real  religion.  Well, 
and  wanting  that,  everything  is  wanting.  III.  Some  hints  of  caution  and  advice. 
1.  There  may  be  marringes  within  the  letter  of  the  apostolic  rule,  which  yet  are 
neither  loveiy  nor  of  good  report.  There  may  be  piety  in  both  parties,  yet — (1) 
Such  discrepancies  of  age  as  to  render  the  union  odious.  (2)  Such  an  evident 
impropriety  in  the  connection  as  to  render  it  a  subject  of  grief  to  the  Church,  and 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  509 

animadversion  to  the  world.  (3)  Such  indecorous  haste  in  the  formation  of  a  new 
alhance,  immediately  after  the  dissohition  of  an  old  one,  as  to  excite  the  grievest 
censure.  2.  There  may  be  marriages  in  which  the  law  of  Script'ire  is  observed 
with  regard  to  piety,  but  the  dictates  of  prudence  utteily  disregarded.  There  may 
be  man-iages  where  there  is  neither  strength  of  affection,  suit  ibleness  of  character, 
adaptation  of  temper,  or  similarity  of  views,  sufficient  to  ensure  permanent 
happiness  and  domestic  harmony.  3.  There  may  be  cases  in  which  it  is  difficult 
to  apply  the  rule  of  Scri[)ture,  and  to  determine  in  what  way  to  act.  There  may 
be  a  ui..st  distressing  ambiguity  about  a  charricter.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  how 
far  the  influence  of  circumstances,  so  peculiarly  interesting,  may  give  a  more 
favourable  appearance  than  actual  principle  would  warrant :  the  mind  perpetually 
alternates  between  hope  and  fear,  and  dares  not  to  decide.  In  such  a  case  it  were 
well  to  wait  and  watch,  and,  after  all,  if  there  should  be  error,  to  err  on  the  side 
of  conscience  and  of  safety.  Finally,  let  the  husband  and  wife,  who  neither  of 
them  fear  God,  think  how  terrible  a  thing  it  is  to  walk  hand  in  hand  to  hell.  Let 
the  pious  husband  who  has  an  unbelieving  wife,  or  the  pious  wife  who  has  an  un- 
believing husband,  strive  by  all  means,  by  meekne'-s,  gentleness,  and  affection,  to 
win  the  uubelieving  party  to  the  truth  (ver.  IG).  (T.  Raffles,  LL.D.)  Clirititiaii 
manidije: — I.  This  command  must  be  explained.  1.  In  what  resj)ects  it  allows 
freedom.  A  believer  may  marry— (1)  A  second  time.  This  is  the  particailar  case 
here  referred  to.  (2)  Under  various  circumstances  of  inequality.  If  he  marry 
"in  the  Lord,"  he  "is  at  liberty  to  marry  whom  he  will."  There  maybe  in- 
equality of  mind,  age,  station  in  life.  Marrying  "  in  the  Lord "  is  of  such 
infinite  importance  that  in  comparison  with  it  every  other  consi'ieration  is  almost 
trivial.  Yet  it  sliould  be  seriously  considered  that  any  great  inequality,  though 
not  expressly  forbidden,  is  yet  very  undesirable.  The  God  of  grace  is  also  the  God 
of  nitu>e — the  God  of  order,  too,  and  not  of  confusion.  "All  these  things  are 
lawful  for  me,  but  all  these  things  are  not  expedient."  2.  In  what  respect  it  binds. 
"  Only  in  the  Lord."  (1)  Only  to  a  Christian.  For  a  believer  to  marry  an  uncon- 
verted person  may  be  to  marry  in  carnality,  or  in  covetousuess,  or  in  pride,  or  in 
the  world  ;  but  certainly  not  in  the  Lord.  It  is  against  the  Lord  ;  in  opi^osition  t'.> 
one  of  His  plainest  commandments,  and  also  to  all  reason  and  propriety.  Such  a 
junction  (for  union  it  cannot  be)  partakes  of  the  monstrous.  For  the  difference 
between  a  regenerate  and  an  unregenerate  person  is  next  to  infinite  (2  Cor.  vi.  14- 
16).  (2)  Only  as  a  Christian — religiously  and  with  the  fear  of  God.  They,  there- 
fore, wlio  anxiously  desire  to  marry  only  in  the  Lord,  will  remember  that  "a 
prudent  wife  (or  husband)  cometh  from  Him";  they  will,  therefore,  by  prayer 
seek  this  good  gift  from  the  only  Giver.  II.  This  command  must  be  enforced. 
Obedience  here — 1.  Tends  to  the  g'ory  of  God.  God  is  glorilied  in  this  woild  by 
the  visible  holiness  of  His  people.  When  professors  marry  jiersons  "  of  the 
world,"  for  money,  or  connection,  or  personal  attraction,  how  is  the  mouth  of  the 
ungodly  opened,  the  Church  scandalised,  and  the  cause  of  Christ  dishonoured! 
2.  Prevent-  many  most  deplorable  evils.  He  who  obeys  this  precept  will  be  saved 
from  the  shame  of  inconsistency  before  the  world,  from  the  loss  of  the  esteem  of 
holy  persous,  and  from  the  remorse  of  his  own  conscience.  Even  in  those  cases 
of  mixed  mairiages  where  the  professing  partner  is  not  drawn  aside  by  the  other 
into  apostacy ;  usually,  he  sutlers  great  si^iritual  loss,  and  loses  all  zeal  in  doing 
good.  And  should  there  be  children,  the  mischief  spreads.  3.  Promotes  tlie  true 
interest  and  happiness  of  those  who  obey  it.  The  advantages  that  attend  the 
spiritual  and  h>dy  union  of  two  believing  persous  are  inestimable.  They  walk 
together,  for  they  are  agreed.  They  are  helpers  of  each  other's  faith  and  joy, 
being  made,  through  grace,  the  instruments  of  each  other's  spiritual  growth  in 
fruitfulne-s  and  happiness.  They  have  their  sorrows;  but  these  they  lessen  by 
dividing  tiiem,  bearing  each  other's  burden.  They  have  their  faults;  but  these 
"they  confess,  the  one  to  the  other,  and  pray  one  for  another,  that  they  may  be 
healed."  But  among  all  the  changing  scenes  of  life,  they  have  a  look  that  pene- 
trates •'  within  the  veil,"  where  their  umon  will  be  perfected,  and  crowned  with 
immorta  ity.  Hence  they  habitually  wa  k,  "as  being  heirs  t  gether  of  the  grace 
of  lif^;."'  If  children  are  giveu  to  them,  they  cordially  unite  in  the  work  of  bring- 
ing them  up  "  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  Exhortations:  1. 
To  Christians  who  are  yet  free  to  obey  this  command.  You  see  what  the  will  of 
the  Lord  is.  Reg >ir  i  with  horror  the  thought  of  being  united  to  an  unconverted . 
person.  2.  To  tliose  wuo  have  »lready  transgressed  this  command.  If,  by  having 
married  inconsistently,  you  have  awakened  in  your  partner's  mind  the  suspicion 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

that  jour  religion  is  all  a  delusion,  now  seek  to  dislodge  that  suspicion,  and  to 
imjjlaat  in  its  stead  the  conviction  that  religion  is  a  great  reality.  3.  To  those 
who  ha>e  married  in  accordance  with  this  )irecept.  "Happy  are  ye;  for  the 
spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  rt'steih  upon  you."  (Kii>iex  Congrcfidtional  Renieiitbrancer.) 
But  she  is  happier  if  she  so  abide,  after  my  judgment. — Tlie  widow's  liappiu'-ss — I. 
Is  CONDITIONAL.  1.  Upon  her  union  with  Christ.  2.  Upon  times  and  circum- 
stances. II.  Consists  in— 1.  Freedom  and  care.  2.  Holy  service.  3.  The  assur- 
ance of  the  Divine  pretecticin  and  blessing.  III.  Is  confirmed  bx — ^1.  Apostolic 
judgment.  2.  Enlighteufd  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  And  I  think 
also  that  I  have  the  Spirit  of  God. — Deip-ees  of  apostolical  authority  : — The  apostle 
on  this  point  does  not  arrogate  more  to  himself  than  a  view,  an  advice,  the  value 
of  which  every  one  can  appraise  at  pleasure.  It  is  evident  how  far  he  was 
re  iioved  from  tliat  exaltation  which  makes  fanwtics  take  all  their  ideas  for  revela- 
tions. Nevertheless,  he  certainly  claims  an  inspiration,  and  traces  it  to  tlie  Divine 
Spirit.  But  we  must  bew.ire  of  coucl  ding  that  he  did  not  claim,  besides  this, 
revelations  of  a  wholly  special  kind.  In  other  cases  he  is  careful  to  affirm  that  his 
directions  proceed  "from  the  Lord"  (chap.  xiv.  37,  vii.  17).  And  if  he  thus 
expresses  hims'df  in  connection  wiih  simple  directions  about  public  worship  or 
ChristiHn  practice,  how  murh  more  conscious  was  he  of  being  the  organ  of  a 
Divine  revelation  of  a  wholly  personal  kind  when  the  matter  in  question  was  the 
very  essence  of  "  his  guspel  "  !  We  are  led,  therefore,  to  distinguish  three  degrees 
of  autliority.  I.  The  dikhct  commands  or  the  Lord,  which  He  gave  during  His 
sojourn  on  earth,  and  which  Paul  merely  quotes  without  discussing  their  grounds 
(ver.  10).  I[.  The  apostolic  commands  of  the  apostle,  which  are  imposed  on 
Chuiches  subjec;t  to  his  jurisdiction,  and  which  he  gives  them  as  the  oryan  of  a 
higher  illumination  attach  d  to  his  sfiecial  mission.  As  to  tbese  he  is  careful  to 
exjjound  t^eir  reasons,  being  unwilling  to  ask  liis  brethren  to  give  a  blind 
obedience  (vers.  12-17,  cf.  x.  15).  III.  The  directions  which  he  gives  as  a 
SIMPLE  Christian,  which  he  hims  If  declares  to  be  optional,  and  which  he  leaves 
to  the  judgment  of  every  believer  (ver.  25).  In  the  text  there  is  a  vein  of  irony. 
"  Now,  I  hope,  however,  even  if  my  apostolic  authoritv  is  disputed  among  you, 
that  you  will  not  deny  to  me  the  possession  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  such  hs  you 
recognise  in  all  Christians,  and  specially  in  the  numerous  spiritual  guides  to 
whom  you  give  your  confidence."     (Proj.  Godet.) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Vers.  1-13.  How  as  touching  things  offered  to  idols. — Liherty  and  love : — 1. 
The  question  about  meats  necessarily  arose  in  a  society  partly  heathen  and  partly 
ChristiMU.  Every  meal  WHS  dedicated  to  the  In  uschoJd  gods  by  layinc  some  poition 
of  it  on  the  family  altar.  On  a  birthday,  a  marriage,  or  a  safe  return  from  sea,  Ac, 
it  was  customary  lo  sacrifice  in  some  public  temple.  And  after  the  le^s  of  the 
victim,  enclosed  in  fat,  and  the  enirails  had  been  burnt  on  the  ahar,  the  worshipper 
received  the  remainder,  and  invited  Ijis  friends  to  partake  of  it  either  in  the  temple 
it-elf,  or  in  the  surrounding  grove,  or  at  home.  A  convert  might  theiefore 
natuTrilly  ask  himself  whetlier  he  was  justified  in  conforming  to  this  custom.  Thus 
jiersonal  friendships  and  the  harmony  of  family  life  were  thieatened;  and  on 
public  occasions  the  Christian  was  in  danger  o'  branding  himself  as  no  t/ood  citizen, 
or  hy  compliance  of  seeming  unfaithful  to  Chiist.  2.  Apparently  a  good  deal  of 
ill-fielint.'  had  been  engende  ed  by  the  dillerent  views  taken,  as  is  always  the  case 
with  morally  indifferent  matters.  They  do  little  haim  if  each  holds  his  own 
opiiii  n  genially  and  endeavours  to  intli  ence  others  in  a  friend  y  way.  But  in 
most  instances  it  haj)pens  as  in  Corinih  :  thos"  who  saw  that  they  could  eat  without 
contamination  scorned  those  who  had  scrnp'es;  while  the  scrupulous  juclgtd  the 
eaters  to  be  worldly  tinie-.servers.  3.  As  a  first  step  towards  the  seitlement  of  this 
matter,  Paul  niak  s  the  hirgest  concession  to  the  parly  of  liberty.  U'heir  clear 
perception  that  an  idol  was  nothing  in  the  wuild  vas  sound  and  commendable. 
"  But  do  not,"  siiys  the  apostle,  "  think  tliat  you  have  settled  the  question  by 
reiterating  that  you  are  better  instructed  than  \our  brethren.  You  must  add  love, 
consideration  of  your  neighbour,  to  your  knowledge."     Men  of  ready  insight  into 


CHAP,  viir.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  511 

truth  are  prone  to  despise  less  enlightened  spirits ;  but  however  such  vaunt  them- 
selves as  the  meu  of  progress  and  the  hope  of  the  Church,  it  is  not  by  knowledge 
alone  the  Church  can  ever  solidly  grow.  Knowledge  does  produce  a  puffing-up,  an 
unhealthy,  morbid,  mushroom  groA'th  ;  but  that  which  buibis  up  the  Church  stone 
by  stone,  a  strong,  enduring  edilice,  is  love.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  Ijave  clear  views 
of  Christian  liberty ;  but  exercise  it  without  love,  and  you  become  a  poor  inflated 
creature,  puffed  up  with  a  noxious  gas  destructive  of  all  higher  life  in  yourself  and 
in  others.  4.  It  is  ea^y  to  imagine  how  all  this  would  be  exemplified  at  a  Corinthian 
table.  Three  Christians  are  invited  to  a  party  in  the  house  of  a  heathen  friend. 
One  is  weakly  scrupulous,  the  others  are  men  of  ampler  view  and  more  enlightened 
conscience.  As  the  meal  goes  on  the  weak  brother  discerns  some  mark  which 
identities  the  meat  as  sacrificial,  or,  fearing  it  may  be  so,  he  inquires  of  the 
servant,  and  finds  it  lias  been  offered  in  tlje  temple,  and  at  once  says  to  his 
friends,  "  Tiiis  has  been  offered  to  idols."  One  of  them,  knowing  that  heathen  eyes 
are  watching,  and  wishing  to  show  how  superior  to  all  such  scruples  the  enlightened 
Christian  is,  and  how  genial  and  free  the  religion  of  Christ  is,  smiles  at  his  friend's 
scruples,  and  accepts  the  meat.  The  other,  more  geuei'ous  and  truly  couras-'eous, 
declines  the  disb,  lest  by  leaving  the  scrupulous  man  without  support  he  should 
tempt  him  to  follow  their  example,  contrary  to  his  own  conviction,  and  so  lead 
him  into  sin.  It  need  not  be  said  whicli  of  these  men  comes  nearest  to  the 
Cliristian  principle  of  Paul.  5.  In  our  own  society  similar  cases  necessarily  arise. 
I,  as  a  Christian  man,  and  knowing  that  the  earth  and  its  fulness  are  the  Lord's, 
may  feel  at  perfect  liberty  to  drink  wine.  But  I  must  consider  the  effect  my 
conduct  will  have  oh  others.  There  may  be  some  among  my  friends  whose 
temptation  lies  that  way,  and  whose  conscience  bids  them  refrain.  If  by  my 
example  such  persons  are  encouraged  to  silence  their  conscience,  then  I  incur  the 
guilt  of  helping  to  destroy  a  brother  for  whom  Christ  died.  Or  again,  a  lad  brought 
up  in  a  Puritanic  household  has  been  taught,  e.g.,  that  the  influence  of  the  theatre 
is  demoralising ;  but  on  entering  the  life  of  a  great  city  he  is  soon  brought  in 
contact  with  some  genuine  Christians  who  visit  the  theatre  without  the  slightest 
twinge  of  conscience.  Now  either  of  two  things  will  probably  happen.  The 
young  man's  ideas  of  Christian  liberty  may  become  clearer;  or  being  daunted  by 
overpowering  example  and  chafing  uuder  the  raillery  of  his  companions,  may  do  as 
others  do,  though  still  uneasy  in  his  own  conscience.  What  is  to  be  observed  is 
that  the  emboldening  of  conscience  is  one  thing,  its  enlightenment  quite  another. 
Constantly  it  happens  that  men  who  once  shrank  from  certain  practices  now  freely 
engage  in  them,  and  they  will  tell  yon  that  at  first  they  felt  as  if  they  were  stealing 
the  indulgence,  and  that  they  had  to  drown  the  voice  of  conscience  by  the  louder 
voice  of  example.  The  results  of  this  are  disa'^trous.  Conscieice  is  dethroned. 
The  ship  no  longer  obeys  her  helm,  and  lies  in  the  trough  of  the  sea  swept  by 
every  wave  and  driven  by  every  wind.  It  may  indeed  be  said,  What  harm  can 
come  of  persons  less  enlightened  being  emboldened  to  do  as  we  do  if  what  we  do 
is  right?  The  harm  is  this,  that  if  the  weak  brother  does  a  right  thing  wliile  his 
conscience  tells  liim  it  is  wrong,  to  him  it  is  wrong.  "  Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith 
is  sin."  Note  two  permanent  les-ons — I.  The  sacredness  or  sopremacy  of 
CONSCIENCE.  "  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuad- d  in  his  own  mind."  A  man  may 
possibly  do  a  wrong  thing  when  he  obeys  conscience  ;  he  is  certainly  wronj?  when 
he  acts  contrary  to  conscience.  He  may  be  helped  to  a  decision  by  the  advice  of 
others,  but  it  is  his  own  decision  by  which  he  must  abide.  His  conscience  may  not 
be  as  enlightened  as  it  ought  to  be.  Still  his  duty  is  to  enlighten,  not  to  violate,  it. 
It  is  the  guide  God  has  gis-en  us,  and  we  must  not  choose  another.     II.  That  we 

MUST    EVER    USE    OUR  CHRISTIAN    LIBERTY    WITH   CHRISTIAN  CONSIDERATION    OF   OTHERS. 

Love  must  mingle  with  all  we  do.  There  are  many  things  which  are  lawful  for  a 
Christian,  but  which  are  not  compulsory  or  obligatory,  and  which  he  may  refrain 
from  doing  on  cause  shown.  Duties  he  must,  of  course,  discharge,  regardless  of 
the  effect  his  conduct  may  have  on  otliers.  But  where  conscience  says,  not  "  You 
must,"  but  only  "  You  may,"  then  we  must  consider  the  effect  our  using  our  liberty 
will  have  on  others.  We  must  forego  our  liberty  to  do  this  or  that  if  by  doing  it  we 
should  shock  a  weak  brother  or  encourage  him  to  overstep  his  conscience.  As  the 
Arctic  voyaser  who  has  been  frozen  up  all  winter  does  not  seize  the  first  opportunity 
to  escape,  but  wait^  till  his  weaker  companions  gain  strength  enough  to  accompany 
him,  so  must  the  Christian  accommodate  himself  to  the  weaknesses  of  others,  lest 
by  using  his  liberty  he  should  injure  him  for  whom  Christ  died.  (M.  DocU,  D.D.) 
Knowledge  pufifeth  up,  but  charity  edifletli. — A  twofold  knowledge: — I.  A  pkide- 


512  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

GENEEATiNG  KNOWLEDGE.  "Knowledge  puffeth  up."  One  that  is — 1.  Merely 
intellectual.  A  stock  of  mental  conceptions,  concerning  objects  material  or 
spiritual,  referring  to  tlie  creature  or  to  the  Creator.  Now  such  knowledge  tends 
to  self-conceit.  2.  Essentially  superficial.  The  more  superficial  mere  intellectual 
knowledge  tiie  stronger  its  tendency.  The  men  who  go  farthest  into  the  essence  of 
things,  take  the  widest  view  of  the  domain  of  knowledge,  will  be  the  least  disposed 
to  self-elation.  II.  A  max-edifyixg  knowledge.  1.  "  Charity,"  or  love  to  God, 
is  the  true  knowledge.  Love  is  the  life  and  soul  of  all  true  science.  Love  is  the 
root  of  the  universe,  and  you  must  have  love  rightly  to  interpret  love.  2.  This 
true  knowledge  builds  up  the  soul;  not  as  a  house  is  built  up,  by  putting  dead 
stones  and  timber  t^'gether,  but  as  the  oak  is  built  up,  by  the  appropriating  force  of 
its  own  life,  compelling  nature  to  deepen  its  roots,  extend  its  bulk,  multiply  its 
branches,  and  push  it  higher  townrds  the  heavens.  3.  This  true  knowledge  insures 
the  approval  of  God  (ver.  3).  In  the  last  day,  Christ  will  say  to  those  who  have 
not  this  love,  "I  never  knew" — i.e.,  appiovedof — "you."  This  love  for  God  in  the 
heart  converts  the  tree  of  intellectual  knowledge  into  the  tree  of  life.  (T>.  lltomns, 
D.D.)  The  difference  between  Christian  and  secula7-  knowledge  : — A  great  con- 
troversy is  going  on  in  the  matter  of  education.  One  partly  extols  the  value  of 
instruction,  the  other  insists  that  secular  education  without  religion  is  worse  than 
useless  :  Paul  spoke  of  both  as  secular  and  worthless  without  love.  That  know- 
ledge which  he  treated  so  slightin^-ly  was — I.  Knowleuge  without  hdjiility.  It 
is  not  so  much  what  is  known  as  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  acquired  which  makes 
the  difference  between  secular  and  Chiistian  knowledge  (ver.  2).  The  greatest 
of  mo'lern  philosopliers  and  historians:,  Humboldt  and  Niebuhr,  were  both  eminently 
humi  le  men.  So,  too,  you  will  find  that  real  talent  among  mechanics  is  generally 
united  to  great  humility.  Whereas  those  puffeii  up  by  knowledge  are  those  who 
have  a  few  religious  maxims  and  shallow  doctrines.  There  are  two  ways  therefore 
of  knowing.  One  is  that  of  the  man  who  loves  to  calculate  how  far  he  is  advanced 
beyond  others  ;  the  other,  that  of  the  man  who  feels  how  infinite  knowledge  is,  and 
how  little  he  knows.  II.  Liberty  without  revekence.  The  men  whom  the 
apostle  rebukes  were  free  from  luany  superstitions.  An  idol,  they  said,  was  nothing 
in  the  world.  But  it  is  not  merely  freedom  from  superstition  which  is  worship  of 
God,  but  loving  dependence  on  Him;  the  surrender  of  self.  "If  any  man  love 
God,  the  same  is  known  of  Him,"  i.e.,  God  acknowledges  the  likeness  of  spirit. 
There  is  much  of  the  spirit  of  these  Corinthians  now.  Men  throw  off  what  they 
call  the  trammels  of  superstitions,  and  then  call  themselves  free  :  they  think  it  a 
grand  thing  to  reverence  nothing.  This  is  not  high  knowledge.  It  is  a  great 
thing  to  be  free  from  mental  slavery,  but  suppose  you  are  still  a  slave  to  your 
passions?  From  bonds  of  the  spirit  Christianity  has  freed  us,  but  it  has  bound  us 
to  God  (vers.  5,  6).  The  true  freedom  from  superstition  is  free  service  to  religion  : 
the  real  emancipation  from  false  gods  is  reverence  for  the  true  God.  And  not 
merely  is  this  the  only  real  knowledge,  but  no  other  knowledge  "  buildeth  up  "  the 
soul.  "He  that  increaseth  knowledge  increaseth  sorrow."  Sep<rate  from  love, 
the  more  we  know,  the  profounder  the  mystery  of  life,  and  the  more  dreary 
existence  becomes.  I  can  conceive  no  dying  hour  more  awful  than  that  of  one  who 
has  aspired  to  know  instead  of  to  love,  and  finds  himself  at  last  amidst  a  world  of 
barren  facts  and  lifeless  theories.  III.  Coiipkehension  without  love  to  man. 
These  CorinthiMus  had  got  a  most  clear  conception  of  what  Christianity  was 
(vers.  4-6).  "  Well,"  said  the  apostle,  "  and  what  signifies  your  profession  c.f  that, 
if  you  look  down  with  supreme  contempt  on  your  ignorant  brothers,  who  cannot 
reach  to  these  sublime  contemplations?  "  Knowledge  such  as  this  is  not  advance, 
but  retrogression.  How  immeasurably  superior  in  the  sight  of  God  is  some 
benighted  Eomanist  who  has  gone  about  doing  good,  or  some  ignorant,  narrow 
religionist  who  has  sacrificed  time  and  property  to  Christ,  to  the  most  correct 
theologian  in  whose  heart  there  is  no  love  for  his  fellow-men.  Breadth  of  view  is 
not  breadth  of  heart ;  the  substance  of  Christianity  is  love  to  God  and  man.  Hence 
it  is  a  precious  fact  that  St.  Paul,  the  apostle  of  liberty,  whose  burning  intellect 
expounded  the  whole  philosophy  of  Christianity,  should  have  been  the  one  to  say 
that  knowledge  is  nothing  compared  to  charity,  nay,  worse  than  nothing  without 
it:  should  have  been  the  one  to  declare  that  "knowledge  «hall  vanish  away,  but 
love  never  faileth."  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Knowledge  and  charity: — No 
person  ever  entertained  a  higher  idea  of  true  wisdom  than  St.  Paul,  but  he  saw  that 
learning  makes  not  the  man  of  God  perfect,  and  that  the  complete  scholar  may 
fall  short  at  last  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     He  saw  that  spiritual,  like  bodily 


CHAP.  VIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  513 

wealth,  unless  used  for  the  benefit  of  others,  would  prove  no  blessing  to  its  owner. 
And  therefore,  that  the  wise  man  might  not  glory  in  his  wisdom,  the  apostle 
detei'ruines  that,  not  only  human  learning,  but  the  knowledge  of  all  prophecies  and 
mysteries,  will  profit  nothing  if  charity  be  not  superadded.  I.  Kxowlp;i)ge  without 
CH.VRITY  ENDETH  IN  PKiDE.  1.  It  produces  an  inflation  in  the  mind,  which,  like  a 
tumour  in  the  body,  carries  the  appearance  of  solidity,  but  has  in  rt-ality  nothing 
within,  and  only  indicates  a  distempered  habit.  And,  indeed,  knowledge,  as  well 
as  faith,  if  it  be  alone,  is  vain — it  is  dead.  For  all  knowledge  is  given  as  a  means 
to  some  end.  The  means,  abstracted  from  their  end,  cease  to  be  means,  and  answer 
no  purpose  whatsoever.  The  end  of  knowledge  is  action  (John  xiii.  17).  Every 
article  of  the  creed  involves  in  it  a  correspondent  duty,  and  it  is  j^ractice  aloua 
that  gives  life  to  faith  and  realises  knowledge.  "The  manifestation  of  the  Si^irit 
(as  that  Spirit  Himself  testifies)  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal. "  Otherwise 
it  is  of  no  effect,  and  the  man  becomes  "  a  cloud  without  water  "  ;  raised  aloft  it 
sails  before  the  wind,  proudly  swelling  in  the  sufficiency  of  its  own  emptiness, 
instead  of  dropping  plenty  on  the  lands  over  which  it  passes.  2.  Consider  the 
instances  of  this  truth.  (1)  Ascend  into  heaven  and  there  view  the  glories  that 
once  encircled  Lucifer  (cf.  Ezek.  xxviii.  12).  He  saw,  he  knew  ;  but  he  loved  not, 
and  through  pride  he  fell.  A  proof,  to  the  learned  of  all  ages,  that  knowledge 
without  charity  will  turn  a  good  angel  into  an  evil  one.  (2)  Yet  this  has  all  along 
been  the  fatal  mistake,  and  the  tree  of  knowledge  still  proved  the  occasion  of 
a  fall.  Knowledge  wrought  destruction  by  pride.  "The  serpent,"  says  Eve, 
"beguiled  me";  lit.,  elated,  puffed  me  up.  AH  the  fruits  of  error  and  vice  have 
sprung  from  the  same  root  of  bitterness.  (3)  Take  the  case  of  the  Gentiles 
(Kom.  i.  21).  Lack  of  knowledge  was  not  their  original  fault;  "they  knew  God." 
But  knowledge  in  the  understanding  for  want  of  charity  in  the  heart  did  not 
operate  to  a  holy  obedience.  "  When  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  Him  not 
as  God,  neither  were  thankful."  (-1)  Turn  to  the  Jew.  "  Having  the  form  of 
knowledge,  and  of  the  truth  in  the  law."  Yet  knowledge  puffed  him  up;  his 
privileges  became  an  occasion  of  boasting  himself  against  his  biethren,  and  envy 
ate  out  his  charity.  "Going  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness"  upon  the 
strength  of  his  own  wisdom,  he  rejected  the  Lord  his  righteousness,  and  nailed 
Him,  who  is  the  source  of  wisdom,  to  the  Cross.  (5)  \Yhen  the  distinction  of  Jew 
and  Gentile  ceased,  and  one  Church  comprehended  all  believers,  knowledge  puffed 
men  up  into  heretics  and  schismatics.  Pride  made  them  rather  choose  to  see 
themselves  exalted  at  the  head  of  a  faction,  than  the  Church  edified  by  their 
labours  in  an  inferior  station.  This  was  the  case  in  the  Church  of  Corinth,  and 
has  been  the  cause  of  every  heresy  and  schis-m  since.  II.  Charity  dieecteth 
KNOWLEDGE  TO  ITS  EIGHT  END — the  edification  of  the  Church.  This  will  be  seen 
in  some  instances  the  reverse  of  the  foregoin<r.  1.  If  we  ascend  a  second  time  into 
heaven,  we  shall  find  that  the  principle  which  triumphed  over  the  proud  knowledge 
of  Lucifer  was  the  wisdom  of  God  actuated  by  love.  In  our  redemption,  wisdom 
contrived,  power  executed,  but  love  set  all  to  work,  and  perfected  and  crowned  the 
whole.  2.  To  reverse  the  sad  effects  of  a  vain  thirst  after  knowledge  in  our  first 
parent.  Divine  love  became  incarnate.  All  that  He  did  and  suffered  was  because  He 
loved  us.  Because  man,  by  the  temptation  of  knowledge,  was  seduced  to  infidelity 
and  disobedience.  He  encountered  and  overcame  the  tempter  by  the  ^Vord  of  God, 
and  by  love  keeping  the  commandments.  The  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge 
in  Him  were  not  suffered  to  rust  and  canker,  locked  up  from  the  public  by  a 
supercilious  reservedness,  but  out  of  them  He  continually  dispersed  abroad,  and 
gave  to  the  poor  in  spirit.  On  the  Cross  love  regained  what  pride  had  lost,  and 
the  wound  made  in  our  nature  by  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  was  healed  by 
the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  life.  3.  To  combat  the  vain  wisdom  of  the  Greek,  and  the 
self-justifying  arrogance  of  the  Jew,  the  apostles  were  sent  forth.  The  strong- 
holds of  false  knowledge  could  not  stand  before  the  gos-pel.  Blasted  by  the  lightning 
of  inspired  eloquence,  the  arm  of  false  philosophy  withered  and  lost  all  its  holds 
on  the  minds  of  men.  The  Eoman  empire  wondered  to  see  itself  Christian  ;  to  see 
the  Cross  exalted  in  triumph  over  the  globe,  and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world 
become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  His  Christ.  But  what  was  it  that  gained  this 
victory  over  the  pride  of  earth  and  bell?  What,  but  the  same  all-suffering,  and, 
therefore,  all-subduing  charity  which  taught  the  disciples  of  a  crucified  Jesus,  after 
His  example,  to  endure  all  things  for  the  salvation  of  their  brethren?  4.  If  we 
view  the  unity  of  a  primitive  church,  as  opposed  to  the  sad  divisions  and  dis- 
tractions since  produced  by  heresy  and  schism,  it  will  appear  that  charity  built 
VOL.  I.  33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

up  that  solid  and  durable  edifice.    As  at  its  formation,  the  Spirit  descended  upon 
the  disciples,  when   "  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  one  place,"  so,  in  like 
manner,  after  more  were  added  to  them,  it  is  remarked  that  "  the  multitude  of  the 
believers  were  of  one  heart   and  one  mind."     The  spirit  of  unity  kuit   all   the 
members  together,  insomuch  that  if  one  member  suffered  the  rest  sympathised 
with  it.      And  thus  they  "  grew  up   into  Him  in  all  things,  even   Christ  .   .  , 
made  increase  of  the  body  to  the  edifying  itself  in  love."     (Bih  Home.)        Know- 
ledge  and    love: — I.    Knowledge   pdffeth   up.       1.   This    applies   to    all   know- 
ledge, whether  human  or  Divine,  when  unaccompanied  with  love  to  God.     2.  Its 
effect  is — (1)  To  inflate  men's  notions  of  the  powers  of  human  reason  and  the  im- 
portance of  human  knowledge.     (2)  To  encourage  self-confidence  and  conceit.     3. 
The  reason — (1)  Knowledge  without  faith  acts  upon  the  intellect,  but  leaves  the 
heart  untouched.    II.  Love  edifieth.    1.  Love — (1)  Depends  on  faith.    (2)  Implies 
confidence,    submission,    obedience,    sacrifice.      2.  Its   effect.      It  edifies — (1)  By 
strengthening  the   understanding  and  the  will.      (2)   By  building  up  the  moral 
character.     (3)  By  elevating  the  spirit.      (4)  By  bringing  man  into  direct  com- 
munion with  God.     {J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Knoicledcje  and  love: — This  knowledge  is 
not  secular  as  distinguished  from  Divine  and  theological,  but  knowledge  of  Divine 
things  icithout  love — knowledge  by  itself  as  distinguished  from  the  knowledge  of 
Divine  things  ivith  love.     The  same  contrast  is  drawn  out  more  at  length  in  chap, 
xiii. ;  but  as  there  he  is  led  to  speak  of  it  cbiefly  by  insisting  on  the  superiority  of 
active  usefulness  to  spiritual  ecstasies,  so  here  he  is  led  to  speak  of  it  by  insisting 
on  the  superiority  of  that  love  which  shows  a  regard  for  the  consciences  of  others, 
over  that  knowledge  which  rests  satisfied  in  its  own  enlightened  insight  into  the 
folly  of  human  superstition.     Knowledge  such  as  this  may  indeed  expand  the  mind, 
but  it  is  a  mere  inflation,  as  of  a  bubble,  which  bursts  and  vanishes  away.     Love 
alone  succeeds  in  building  up  an  edifice  tier  above  tier,  sohd  alike  in  superstructure 
and  in  basis,  so  as  to  last  for  ever.     [Dean  Stanley.)       The  tuo  guides — knowledge 
and  love  : — I.  They  are  both  excellent.      1.  The  pupil  of  Gamaliel  would  have 
been  the  last  to  speak  slightingly  of  real  knowledge.     How  much  has  knowledge 
accomplished  in  the  world  !      Ignorance  is  a  fool's  paradise  ;  knowledge  is  power. 
2.  And  how  excellent  is  love.      How  dull  and  sad  and  more  prohfic  in  crime  the 
world  would  be  without  it !    One's  only  regret  is  that  there  is  so  little  of  it.    Herein 
heaven  and  earth  contrast.     The  triumphs  of  knowledge  are  great,  but  greater  are 
the  victories  of  love.      II.  They  are  complementary.     1.  Knowledge  without  love 
leads  to— (1)  Pride.     (2)  Intolerance.     (3)  Selfishness.     (4)  Injury  to  others.     (5) 
Many  blunders  in  thought,  feeling,  and  action.    2.  Love  without  knowledge  leads  to 
moral  catastrophe.     Knowledge  is  necessary  to  determine  within  what  limits  we 
may  rightly  act ;  love  determines  what  within  the  limits  of  the  "  lawful  "  we  should 
choose.     3.  Knowledge  and  love  united  lead  to  that  more  perfect,  penetrating,  true 
practical  knowledge,  the  opposite  of  that  described  in  ver.  2.     E.g.,  a  man  may 
know  God  as  God — have  some  conception  of  the  Divine  attributes,  &c.,  but  when 
he  loves  God  his  knowledge  makes  incalculable  strides.      (W.  E.  Hurndall,  M.A.) 
Knowledge  and  love  : — These   beautiful   words  are  introduced   into  a  discussion 
which  has  long  ceased  to   have  any  practical  interest.      In  pagan   Corinth   the 
banquet  and  the  sacrifice  were  part  of  the  same  proceeding.     The  animal  was  slain 
and  offered  to  the  gods.     Then  the  priest  claimed  his  part,  and  the  rest  was  taken 
home  and  used  in  providing  a  feast.     To  these  feasts  the  pagans  invited  their 
friends,  and  some  of  these  friends  might  be  Chiistians.     The  question  was.  Could 
they  conscientiously  go  ?     Some,  the  most  simple,  honest,  earnest  souls,  said.  No. 
It  was  recognising  idolatry,  it  was  disloyalty  to  Christ ;  or,  to  say  the  best  of  it 
that  could  be  said,  it  was  going  into  evil  associations  and  temptation.     Others  who 
prided  themselves  on  their  superior  knowledge  laughed  at  these  scruples.      We 
know,  they  said,  that  there  are  no  gods  except  One.     The  offering  of  the  sacrifice 
to  them  is  an  empty  farce.     The  meat  has  not  been  polluted  at  all.     We  have 
discernment  enough  to  share  in  the  feast  without  recognising  the  occasion  of  it. 
We  can  rejoice  with  these  pagans,  and  at  the  same  time  smile  at  their  superstitions. 
It  is  only  weak,  ignorant  natures  that  will  hold  aloof  from  these  harmless  enjoy- 
ments through  the  fear  of  being  drawn  into  sin.     The  pride  of  knowledge  and  its 
accompanying  disdain  and    want   of    consideration  towards   their  less-instructed 
brethren  were  their  distinguishing  features.    Knowledge  pnfieth  up,  charity  edifieth. 
Knowledge  passeth  away,  charity  abides  for  ever.    Knowledge  sees  through  coloured 
glass  darkly,  love  sees  face  to  face.     Knowledge  may  be  greatest  in  devils,  love 
makes  angels  and  saints.     Knowledge  is  temporal  and  earthly,  ever  changing  with 


CHAP.  VIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  515 

the  fashions  of  earth ;  love  is  God-like,  heavenly,  immoi'tal,  enduring  like  the 
mercy  of  the  Loni  for  ever.  Now,  if  any  other  of  the  apostles  had  written  in  this 
way  about  knowlc  ^,  men  would  have  been  found  ready  to  quote  against  him  the 
old  fable  of  ^Esop  auout  the  grapes.  Untutored  peasants  and  fishermen  lifting  up 
their  voices  in  disparagement  of  knowledge  would  have  furnished  the  intellectual 
scorner  with  a  convenient  sarcasm.  All,  yes,  these  men  were  ignorant !  Knowledge 
was  beyond  their  reach,  and  therefore  they  depreciated  it.  Singularly  enough, 
however,  it  is  St.  Paul,  the  one  learned  man  in  the  apostolic  band,  who  talks  in  this 
way.  Never  once  did  those  unlearned  fishermen,  Peter,  James,  and  .John,  write 
slightingly  of  knowledge.  That  was  left  to  Paul,  the  scholarly  man.  Had  not  his 
own  learning  made  him  a  hard,  haughty,  cruel  Pharisee,  shutting  out  the  vision  of 
God,  hiding  from  him  the  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ,  filling  him  with  violent  prejudice 
and  hatred  against  all  men  save  those  of  his  own  class?  With  all  his  knowledge, 
he  had  been  blind  to  whatsoever  things  were  lovely,  and  just,  and  reverent,  and 
Divine.  He  had  reason,  indeed,  to  write,  Knowledge  putfeth  up,  but  charity  edifieth. 
Knowledge  puffeth  up.  Yes,  from  the  raw  schoolgirl  to  the  man  of  greatest 
literary  attamments,  this  is  the  effect  of  knowledge  when  it  is  found  without  the 
warm  and  generous  and  tender  emotions  of  the  heart.  There  is  the  young  man 
with  his  smattering  of  literary  attainments,  with  little  more  than  an  outward  daub 
of  culture.  He  has  little  reason  to  be  proud ;  not  a  bit  of  that  knowledge  of  which 
he  makes  his  boast  has  been  his  own  discovering.  It  has  been  drilled  into  him  by 
patient,  painstaking  teachers.  There  is  no  more  reason  to  be  proud  of  knowledge 
received  from  another  person  than  there  is  for  a  beggar  to  be  proud  of  receiving 
alms.  How  wise  he  thinks  himself  in  dealing  with  religious  things,  in  measuring 
the  preacher,  in  criticising  the  Bible,  in  disposing  of  questions  of  faith,  in  setting 
down  the  old-fashioned  people  who  in  their  simple  ignorance  have  been  content  to 
believe  all  that  has  been  taught  thei/. !  You  see  it  in  literai'y  circles,  and  in  the 
utterances  of  the  scientist.  How  conspicuous  by  its  absence  is  the  grace  of  humility ! 
Because  they  know  something  more  about  letters,  and  words,  and  cells,  and  germs, 
and  rocks,  and  chemical  elements  than  other  people,  they  write  and  talk  as  if  their 
judgments  on  all  subjects  were  to  be  received  ex  cathedra  as  authoritative  and 
unquestionable.  Their  word  on  all  the  great  subjects  of  morality,  faith,  inspiration, 
the  Bible,  God,  is  to  be  deemed  final  and  conclusive.  They  write  as  if  all  men 
were  fools  who  dare  to  dispute  their  conclusions.  I'et  there  is  more  genius,  insight, 
and  real  vision  in  one  of  David's  psalms  than  there  is  in  all  the  books  they  have 
written.  An  artist  or  a  poet  who  has  none  of  their  knowledge  will  see  more  of 
beauty  and  glory  and  reality  in  a  moment  than  they  would  see  in  a  thousand  years. 
We  are  always  boasting  that  knowledge  is  power,  that  knowledge  has  enriched  the 
world,  that  knowledge  has  done  wonderful  things  for  humanity.  It  is  the  idlest  of 
delusions.  Knowledge  by  itself  has  done  very  little.  Even  the  greatest  material 
inventions  have  come  through  men  who  had  rather  the  swift  insight  of  genius  than 
the  lore  of  the  schools.  They  were  not  knowing  men  who  gave  us  the  railway,  the 
steam-engine,  the  telegraph.  Still  less  were  they  knowing  men  who  enriched  the 
world  with  the  sweetest  poems,  with  the  noblest  pictures,  with  the  most  charming 
stories.  Titian,  and  Raphael,  and  Shakespeare,  and  Bunyan,  and  Burns,  and 
Thomas  a  Kempis,  not  to  speak  of  Homer,  and  David,  and  Isaiah,  and  the 
evangelists,  and  the  fishermen,  Peter  and  John — from  these  men,  who  bad  less 
knowledge  on  most  things  than  any  undergraduate  of  the  present  day,  we  have 
inherited  the  wisdom  and  the  immortal  thoughts  and  words  which  are  beyond  all 
wealth.  They  wei-e  men  with  great  hearts,  seeing  things  with  the  keen,  clear  eyes 
of  love,  rather  than  men  whose  heads  had  gathered  a  large  stock  of  culture.  Heart 
rather  than  head  has  given  to  humanity  its  noble  inheritance;  love  rather  than 
kn  wledgp.  Think  of  the  martyrs,  the  reformers,  the  defenders  of  lilierty,  the 
philanthroiists,  the  missionaries.  And  who  are  doing  the  best  work  in  the  world 
now? — its  purifying,  saving,  uplifting  work?  Not  the  men  who  call  themselves  the 
cultured  cla-^s.  No;  knowledge  for  the  most  part  sits  in  judgment  on  the  work  of 
others,  criticises,  and  sneers  ;  while  love  goes  ou  its  way,  its  loins  girded  for  service 
with  quenchless  faith  in  God,  and  hope  which  nothing  can  discourage.  It  is  love, 
not  knowledge,  that  carries  light  and  sweetness  a.nd  health  into  the  dark,  foul 
places  of  city  life  ;  it  is  love,  not  knowledge,  that  generates  all  the  power  of  sweet 
activities.  In  the  hif^hest  kind  of  knowledge  what  the  world  calls  knowledge  breaks 
down  utterly.  What  can  mere  intellect  know  about  God?  His  greatness mfinitely 
transcends  the  g'asp  of  the  most  cultured  mind.  Before  His  wisdom  the  pro- 
fit .^udest  reaches  of  the  human  intellect  are  folly.     Yes,  it  is  to  the  pure,  gentle, 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chas.  vm. 

tender  heart  that  God  tells  His  secrets.  Yoii  can  hardly  prove  the  simple  fact  of 
God's  existence,  still  less  the  supremely  good,  loving,  and  tender  character  of  God, 
except  to  those  whose  hearts  by  their  very  likeness  to  Him  beget  their  own  witness 
of  Him.  His  own  love  helps  him  to  grasp  the  love  Divine.  So  with  immortality. 
All  the  knowledge  of  Butler  and  Plato  could  not  prove  it.  Men  who  are  only  wise 
in  the  things  of  nature  never  find  it  there.  But  when  the  heart  of  man  has  found 
by  experience  the  measureless  jjower  of  its  own  love,  found  out  vv'hat  a  human  soul 
is  capable  of  in  long-suffering,  patience,  self-forgetfulness — how  great,  how  even 
infinite  the  soul  is  in  the  power  of  loving — then  the  proof  comes.  God  could  not 
have  made  the  soul  thus  and  not  made  it  immortal.  And  the  loving  heart,  too, 
understands  the  mystery  of  sorrow  and  pain  as  the  head  does  not  and  never  can. 
The  heart  which  loves  God,  and  feels  His  love,  knows  that  beyond  all  the  sorrows 
and  the  darkness  there  is  brightness  and  joy.  So  give  me  love  and  not  know- 
ledge, for  knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifieth.  (J.  G.  Greenhouph,  M.A.) 
'' Love  edifieth"  : — Think  of  love — I.  As  the  essextial  spirit  or  all  other  graces. 
It  is  the  life,  beauty,  strength,  very  soul  of  them  all.  Consider  its  position  in  the 
circle  of  the  Divine  attributes.  Truth,  justice,  purity,  &c.,  are  perfections  of  the 
Divine  character;  but  "  God  is  love."  A  similar  position  does  love  occupy  in  the  ideal 
character  of  His  true  children.  11.  As  the  bond  of  Christian  unitt.  Keenness  of 
spiritual  insight,  zeal  for  truth,  fidelity  to  conscience,  may  of  themselves  have  a  sepa- 
rating effect;  but  love  draws  and  cements  men  together  in  a  real  fellowship.  Differ- 
ences in  opinion,  &c.,  become  of  comparatively  small  account.  III.  As  an  incentive 
TO  Christian  activity.  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,"  the  end  of  the  com- 
mandment. Get  your  soul  filled  with  love,  and  you  will  never  want  for  an  effectual 
motive  to  all  noble  living.  As  the  materials  of  the  building  arrange  themselves  and 
rise  into  their  finished  form  in  obedience  to  the  thought  and  will  of  the  architect ; 
as  the  notes  fall,  as  if  by  an  instinct  of  their  own,  into  their  due  place  according  to 
the  inspiration  of  the  musician ;  as  the  words  flow  in  rhythmic  cadence  in  answer 
to  the  mood  of  the  poet's  genius  ;  as  the  grass,  flowers,  and  corn  grow  by  the  spon- 
taneous energy  of  the  creative  and  formative  mind  that  animates  them  all — so  will 
you  rear  for  yourself  the  structure  of  a  beautiful  and  useful  Christian  life,  if  your 
heart  is  filled  with  love.  IV.  As  the  mightiest  of  all  ixstrujients  of  blessing  to 
others.  By  the  sweet  constraint  of  His  love  Christ  wins  the  heart  of  those  for 
whom  He  died.  By  the  almightmess  of  His  love  He  will  ultimately  conquer  the 
world  and  build  up  that  glorious  temple  to  His  pra'se — a  redeemed  humanity.  Let 
His  love  be  the  inspiration  of  o'lr  life,  and  we  wield  a  moral  force  akin  to  His  and 
share  His  triumph.     (J.  Waite,  B.A.) 

Ver.  2.  If  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  anything,  he  knoweth  nothing  yet  as 
he  ought  to  know. — FrUlc  vitiatea  reliijiuus  hnou-ledge  : — St.  Paul  would  teach  those 
who  placed  a  high  estimate  upon  a  philosophical  comprehension  of  religious  truth, 
and  who  therefore  were  liable  to  a  spurious  kind  of  knowledge,  that  if  any  one  of 
them  conceitedly  imagined  himself  to  comprehend  the  gospel  mysteries,  he  was  in 
reality  utterly  ignorant  concerning  them.  Pride  injures  our  religious  knowledge  as 
to — I.  Its  quanthy  or  extent.  The  apostle  refers  to  that  disposition  which  leads 
a  man,  when  he  has  made  some  addition  to  his  stock  of  knowledge,  to  stop  and 
review  it,  and  boast  of  it.  These  Corinthians  were  anxious  to  gee  the  credit  of 
superior  insight  into  Christian  doctrine,  hence  St.  Paul  says  to  them,  "If  any  man 
among  you,"  etc.  (chap.  lii.  18-20).  Such  a  self-complacent  spirit  prevents  a  man 
from  surveying  and  travelling  over  the  whole  field.  It  is  like  a  traveller  among  the 
Alps,  who,  having  ascended  the  first  range  of  hills,  and  seeing  the  lower  valleys, 
should  "think"  that  he  had  exhausted  Switzerland.  The  instant  a  Christian 
begins  to  dwell  upon  his  knowledge  of  God,  or  of  himself,  with  any  degree  of  self- 
comp'acency,  he  creates  an  eddy  in  the  flowing  stream  of  his  self-reflection,  and 
whirls  round  instead  of  moving  onward.  And  unless  the  volume  of  water  starts 
once  more,  and  gets  out  of  this  whirlpool;  unless  the  ChristiHn  ceases  to  think  of 
how  much  he  knows,  and  to  boast  of  it,  he  will  never  know  any  more  than  he  now 
knows.  And  even  the  little  knowledge,  over  which  he  has  boasted,  will  be  absorbed 
in  tlie  pride  of  the  heart  and  disappear.  But  he  who  contemplates  the  character 
of  God,  e.g.,  with  no  side  glances  at  himself,  and  bows  down  before  it  in  reverence 
and  awe,  is  carried  forward  from  one  vision  to  another.  So  with  the  knowledge  of 
our  own  heart,  of  the  atonement,  &c.  II.  Its  quality,  or  depth.  The  moment  the 
mind  begins  to  compute  the  distance  it  has  gone,  it  stop-i  going.  If,  therefore, 
under  the  influence  of  pride  it  pauses  to  see  how  profound  it  has  become,  and  to 


CHAP.  VIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  517 

tell  the  world  its  success,  it  adopts  a  suicidal  course.  Suppose  that  a  man  fixes  his 
attention  upon  some  one  sinful  habit,  and  begins  to  see  plainly  its  odiousness.  The 
longer  this  process  continues,  the  deeper  and  clearer  is  his  view.  Now  suppose  that 
his  attention  is  diverted  from  his  sin  itself,  to  the  consideration  of  the  fact  that  he 
has  been  exploring  it,  his  sense  of  the  iniquity  of  his  sin  will  begin  to  grow  more 
Bhallow,  and  he  will  come  up  to  the  surface  of  his  heart  again,  instead  of  pene- 
trating to  its  recesses.  The  siu  will  not  appear  so  odious  to  him  ;  he  will  know 
nothing  as  he  ought  to  know.  III.  Its  practicality.  The  great  purpose  of 
religious  truth  is,  that  we  may  be  made  better  by  it.  We  ought  not  to  desire  to 
know  God  except  that  we  may  become  like  Him.  We  ought  not  to  make  any  scrutiny 
into  our  own  sin  except  to  get  rid  of  it.  When  religious  knowledge  loses  this  prac- 
ticality, it  degenerates  into  mere  speculation,  and  hardens  the  heart  instead  of 
melting  it  into  sorrow  and  love.  Man's  first  duty  on  obtaining  some  new  view  of 
Divine  truth  is  to  apply  it.  But  nothing  so  interferes  with  this  as  pride  or  self- 
gratulatiou.  "  Seest  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  there  is  more  hope  of  a 
fool  than  of  him. "  When  a  man  feels  himself  destitute  of  knowledge,  instruction  can 
be  imparted.  But  when  he  thinks  that  he  comprehends  the  whole  subject,  the 
prospect  of  his  becoming  enlightened  is  hopeless.  Conclusion  :  Spiritual  pride — 1. 
Is  the  most  subtle  of  sins.  It  is  the  sin  of  Satan.  He  fell  from  a  purely  intel- 
lectual temptation,  and  his  wickedness  was  "spiritual  wickedness."  In  wrestling 
against  it,  we  "  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,"  etc.  (Eph.  vi.  12).  When  the 
believer  proves  to  be  on  his  guard  against  the  more  common  and  outward  tempta- 
tions of  earth,  then  the  arch-deceiver  fills  him  with  the  conceit  of  holiness  and  of 
knowledge.  2.  Especially  requires  the  aid  and  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
overcome  it.  No  spirit  is  a  match  for  the  subtlety  of  Satan  but  the  Eternal  Spirit. 
{Prof.  Sliedd.)  The  pride  of  intellect: — I.  Its  indications.  1.  Assumption.  2. 
Dogmatism.  3.  Contempt  of  the  opinion  of  others.  II.  Its  rebuke.  Human 
knowledge  is — 1.  Very  limited.  2.  Mixed  with  much  error.  3.  Morally  defective. 
{J,  Lyth,  D.D.)  Tlie  modesty  of  true  knowledge  : — The  wisest  men  feel  that  they 
know  nothing  compared  with  what  they  are  capable  of  knowing.  I  was  struck  with 
a  remark  that  a  man  once  made  to  me  on  this  subject.  To  my  mind  he  was  a 
marvel  of  learning.  He  seemed  thoroughly  educated  in  every  direction.  As  now 
there  is  not  a  tree  in  the  forest  which,  if  you  tap  it,  will  not  run  sap,  so  there  was 
not  a  side  on  which  you  could  touch  him  where  his  knowledge  did  not  seem  com- 
plete. I  said  to  him  one  day,  "  If  I  knew  a  tithe  of  what  you  know,  I  should  think 
myself  very  fortunate."  Said  he,  "  Henry,  I  seem  to  myself  like  a  basket  in  which 
are  being  carried  away  the  fragments  of  a  hotel — a  bit  of  this,  the  fag-end  of  that, 
and  all  sorts  of  things  jnmbled  up  together.  I  do  not  know  anything  except  little 
fragmentary  parts  of  this,  that,  and  the  other."     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  3.  But  if  any  man  love  God,  the  same  is  known  of  Him. — Love  the  viedinm 
of  Divine  hnowledqe : — I.  Its  natuke.  1.  Whence  it  proceeds.  2.  What  it  implies. 
3.  What  its  fruits.  II.  Its  privilege.  It  secures — 1.  The  favour  of  God. 
2.  Fellowship  with  Him.  3.  The  enlightening  influence  of  His  Holy  Spirit. 
(•/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Superiority  of  lore  to  knowledge  : — "  Papa,"  said  the  son  of 
Bishop  Berkeley,  "  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  '  cherubim  '  and  '  seraphim,' 
which  we  meet  with  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  ?  "  "Cherubim,"  replied  his  father, 
"is  a  Hebrew  word,  signifying  knowledge;  seraphim  is  another  word  of  tlie  same 
language,  and  signifies  flame.  Whence  it  is  supposed  that  the  cherubim  are 
angels  who  excel  in  knowledge,  and  that  the  seraphim  are  angels  likewise  who 
excel  in  loving  God."  "  I  hope,  then,"  said  the  little  boy,  "  when  I  die  I  shall  be 
a  seraph  ;  for  I  would  rather  love  God  than  know  all  things."  The  love  and  know- 
ledge of  God : — From  the  love  of  man,  which  must  be  the  sense  of  the  word  in 
ver.  1  (see  chap.  xiii.  1),  the  apostle  passes  insensibly  to  the  love  of  God,  partly 
because  God  is  the  implied,  though  not  expressed,  subject  of  the  previous  clause, 
partly  because  He  is  the  only  worthy  and  adequate  object  of  Christian  love. 
I.  For  the  connection  of  knowledge  and  love  (1  John  iv.  7,  8).  St.  Paul  substi- 
tutes "is  known  of  Him,"  for  "knows  Him,"  to  express  that  man  can,  in  this 
life,  hardly  be  said,  in  any  sense,  to  know  God.  It  is  sufficient  to  be  the  object  of 
His  knowledge,  which  in  itself  implies  that  we  are  brought  into  so  close  a  relation 
with  Him,  as  to  be  the  object  of  His  care  and  love,  and  ultimately,  therefore,  to 
know  Him.  II.  For  the  identification  of  God's  knowledge  with  His  love 
compare  Exod.  xxxiii.  17  ;  John  x.  3.  III.  For  the  identification  of  God's 
knowledge  of  man  with  man's  knowledge  of  God  compare  the  similar  blending  of 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

the  spirit  of  man  with  the  Spirit  of  God  in  Eom.  viii.  15,  16  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  11  ;  also 
John  X.  15.  "As  the  Father  knoweth  me,  even  so  I  the  Father."  IV.  For  the 
GENEKAL  TURN  OF  THE  WHOLE  EXPRESSION,  as  implying  that  every  part  of  our 
redemption,  but  especially  our  knowledge  of  God,  is  more  properly  His  act  than 
ours  see  chap.  xiii.  12  ;  Gal.  iv.  9 ;  Phil.  iii.  12.  For  the  unexpected  substitution 
of  one  thought  and  word  for  another  see  chap.  ix.  17,  x.  18.  {Dean  Stanley.) 
Known  of  God  : — I.  The  character  that  is  here  presented  to  tjs,  the  man  that 
loves  God.  Tliis  love  will  be  manifested  by — 1.  The  state  of  the  heart.  2.  The 
tenor  of  the  thoughts.  3.  The  iufluence  of  God"s  Word.  4.  Delight  in  holy 
pursuits.  II.  The  privilege  asserted.  "  The  same  is  known  of  Him" — 1.  This 
knowledge  is  individual  and  personal.  2.  It  embraces  all  the  circumstances  of  his 
present  state.  3.  It  is  a  loving,  parental  delight  in  him.  4.  It  is  a  pledge  of  final 
acknowledgment.  Application  :  1.  What  a  source  of  pure  and  solid  delight ! 
2.  What  a  powerful  incentive  to  holiness !  {C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  Known  of 
God : — This  verse  is  the  antithesis  of  ver.  2.  Without  love,  no  knowledge  ;  with 
love,  true  knowledge.  But  why  instead  of  "  The  same  knoweth  God,"  does  the 
apostle  say,  "  The  same  is  known  of  God  "  ?  Does  he  mean  to  deny  the  first  of 
these  two  ideas  ?  Assuredly  not.  But  he  clears,  as  it  were,  this  first  stage,  which 
is  self-understood,  to  rise  at  a  bound  to  the  higher  stage  which  implies  it.  To  bo 
known  of  God  is  more  than  to  know  Him  (Gal.  iv.  9).  In  a  residence  every  one 
knows  the  monarch  ;  but  every  one  is  not  known  by  him.  This  second  stage  of 
knowledge  supposes  personal  intimacy,  familiarity  of  a  kind ;  a  character  which  is 
foreign  from  the  first.  We  need  not  therefore  take  "  known  of  God  "  as  equivalent 
to  "  acknowledged  by,"  or  "  approved  of,"  or  "  put  into  the  possession  of  the  know- 
ledge of,"  God.  The  word  "  know  "  is  taken  in  the  same  sense  as  in  Psa.  i.  6, 
The  eye  of  God  can  penetrate  into  the  heart  that  loves  Him  and  His  light,  to  illuminate 
it.  In  this  light  an  intimate  communion  is  formed  between  him  and  God  ;  and  this 
commuiiion  is  the  condition  of  all  true  knowledge — of  man's  being  known  by  God 
as  of  God's  bfcing  known  by  man.  {Prof.  Godet.)  God's  knowledge  of  us  : — 
Sinner,  let  this  be  thy  comfort,  that  God  sees  thee  when  thou  beginnest  to  repent, 
He  does  not  see  thee  with  His  usual  gaze,  with  which  He  looks  ou  all  men,  but  He 
sees  thee  with  an  eye  of  intense  interest.  He  has  been  looking  on  thee  in  all  thy 
sin,  and  in  all  thy  sorrow,  hoping  that  thou  wouldst  repent,  and  when  He  sees  the 
first  gleam  of  grace,  He  beholds  it  with  joy.  Never  warder  on  the  lonely  castle-top 
saw  the  first  gray  light  of  morning  with  more  joy  than  that  with  which  God 
beholds  the  first  desire  in  thy  heart.  Never  physician  rejoiced  more  when  he  saw 
the  first  heaving  of  the  lungs  in  one  that  was  supposed  to  be  dead,  than  God  doth 
rejoice  over  thee,  now  that  He  sees  the  first  token  for  good.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Intimacy  between  God  and  man  : — I.  Its  condihon.  It  is  a  condition — 1.  Which 
could  scarcely  occur  to  man  apart  from  revelation.  Men  fear,  reverence,  worship, 
seek  to  avert  the  wrath  of  God  ;  but  to  love  Him  is  not  an  exercise  of  mind  which 
seems  congruous  to  the  relation  between  the  Cieator  and  His  creatures.  2.  Which 
Christianity  makes  possible  and  natural.  By  revealing  God  as  love,  by  bringing 
that  love  home  to  the  heart  in  Christ's  atonement  and  sacrifice  it  makes  a  claim 
upon  human  love.  3.  Capable  of  universal  fultilment,  "If  any  man."  There  are 
many  whose  natural  powers  of  body  and  mind  are  very  limited  ;  but  there  is  none 
who  has  not  the  capacity  of  love.  II.  Its  character.  Love  is  represented  as 
leading  to,  as  involving  knowledge.  1.  On  the  side  of  God  Himself  knowledge  is 
often  used  as  equivalent  to  favour.  Of  course  the  Omniscient  knows  all  His 
creatures  ;  but  He  has  a  Fatherly,  affectionate  knowledge  of  those  who  love  Him. 
He  knows  them  to  watch  over,  keep,  guide,  govern,  strengthen,  and  save  them. 
2.  On  the  side  of  man.  This  is  the  implicit  statement  of  the  text ;  for  he  who  in 
the  sense  affirmed  is  known  by  God  also  knows  God.  How  true  it  is  that  he  who 
loves  God  knows  Him  too  !  We  cannot  know  our  earthly  friends  thoroughly  unless 
we  love  them.  Love  opens  the  doors  of  knowledge.  It  creates  that  sympathy 
which  gives  intensity  to  the  intuitive  gaze  of  the  soul.  Thus  it  is  that  while 
many  learned  minds  are  ignorant  of  God,  many  lowly  saints  whose  hearts  are 
quickened  with  love,  live  in  hallowed  intimacy  with  Him.  (Prof.  J.  R.  lliomson.) 
lite  man  ivlio  loves  God  known  of  Han : — You  and  I  would  dearly  like  to  be  known 
of  God.  Day  by  day  we  would  like  to  be  consciously  at  peace  with  God.  We  may 
know  that  there  is  no  condemnation  for  us,  that  the  gulf  of  spiritual  death  is 
behind  and  not  in  front  of  us,  that  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the 
gospel  are  ours  through  grace,  if  love  for  God  and  our  brethren  reigns  supreme 
within  us.     And  now  let  us  look,  each  one,  into  his  heart  and  conscience,  and 


CHAP,  vni.]  1.  CORINTHIANS.  519 

examine  himself  as  to  how  far  he  can  truthfully  say  and  feel,  "  I  love  God  :  I  am 
known  of  Him."  "We  love  God,  because  He  first  loved  us."  He,  in  the  first 
instance,  did  so  infinitely  much  that  a  rightly  affected  person  could  not  possibly 
dweU  upon  without  loving  Him.  And  again,  the  statement  of  the  inspired  apostle 
bears  yet  another  sense.  We  cannot  love  God  without  the  Holy  Spirit  having  been 
first  given  to,  and  dwelling  within  us,  as  His  consecrated  temples.  But,  again,  let 
me  press  home  the  question,  "  Do  we  love  God  ?  "  I  think  we  seem  to  fall  back 
into  the  days  of  our  childhood  again  when  we  answer  this  question  truly  and 
profitably.  In  our  memories  of  those  earliest  years  we  shall  certainly  find  experi- 
ences of  our  past  feelings  treasured  up  that  will  help  us  in  our  endeavour  to  find 
an  answer  to  it.  Those  of  ns  who  had  good,  loving  parents  dearly  loved  them  in 
return.  We  grew  up  beneath  the  sunshine  of  their  smiles,  and  thrilled  at  the 
sound  of  their  loving  words.  We  strove  to  do  all  things  that  we  knew  would  give 
them  pleasure.  We  tried  to  obey  all  their  commandments.  We  knew,  too,  what 
■would  please  them,  even  though  they  did  not  ask  us  to  study  closely  everything 
that  they  wanted  of  us.  Our  love  for  them  was  not  fickle  or  changeable.  Now 
and  then,  indeed,  we  had  our  naughty,  rebellious  passions  hindering  the  outward 
flow  of  our  love  for  them,  but,  underneath  the  strong  torrent  of  those  passions,  our 
love  for  our  good  parents  lingered  on  calm  and  unmoved,  just  as,  fathoms  down 
below  the  storm-tossed  waves  of  the  sea,  the  water  is  calm  and  still.  And  when 
our  childhood's  offences  had  been  atoned  for  by  our  soul-felt  tears  of  penitence, 
then  we  were  ready  enough  to  inveigh  against  ourselves  as  having  been  solely  to 
blame  for  the  interruption  of  the  happy  interchange  of  parental  and  filial  love, 
with  a  great  joy  we  threw  ourselves  into  our  fathers'  or  mothers'  arms  again,  when 
we  saw  that  they  had  forgiven  our  offence  completely,  and  again  our  hearts  welled 
forth  their  love  for  them,  and  all  was  once  mure  peace  and  joy  within  us.  Now 
have  you  these  sacred  memories  of  your  childhood  to  help  you  to  reply  to  my 
question  ?  If  so,  it  is  very  well,  for  are  not  God's  people  as  just  so  many  little 
children  in  His  sight  ?  And  will  they  not  then  be  happiest  when  they  act  towards 
Him,  in  all  His  dealings  with  them  in  providence  and  grace,  as  well-disposed  little 
children  act  towards  their  earthly  parents  ?  Will  they  not  then  feel  consciously 
that  they   love   God,    and   that   God   loves   them?      {J.    C.   Boyce.)  Known 

to  God  althou(]h  unknown  to  the  icorld : — In  the  midst  of  His  glory  the  Almighty 
is  not  inattentive  to  the  meanest  of  His  subjects.  Neither  obscurity  of  station, 
nor  imperfection  of  knowledge  sinks  those  below  His  regard  who  worship  and 
obey  Him.  Every  prayer  wliich  they  send  up  from  their  secret  retirements  is 
listened  to  by  Him  ;  and  every  work  of  charity  which  they  perform,  how  unknown 
soever  to  the  world,  attracts  His  notice.  (J.  Blair.)  Known  of  God  : — Thick  on 
the  moors,  pushing  up  through  the  mosses,  side  by  side  where  the  blueberries  grow, 
sprang  up  and  blossomed  the  wild  rose.  There  was  no  one  to  see  its  beauty,  to 
breathe  its  fragrance.  Mile  after  mile  spread  the  moor,  purple  in  the  dawn,  glowing 
in  the  noontide,  rosy  in  the  sunset  after-glow,  yet  there  was  none  to  see.  Overhead 
there  was  the  blue  vault,  soft  and  deep  and  silent.  The  wild,  sweet  breath  of  the 
sea  swept  over  the  moors,  and  tenderly  touched  the  cheek  of  the  wild  rose.  "  In 
thy  heart,  0  Kose,"  it  said,  "  what  beauty,  in  thy  form  what  loveliness  !  .  Yet  there 
is  none  to  see.  Wherefore,  0  Rose,  give  thy  fulness  of  bloom  where  no  eye  may 
see,  where  nought  looketh  down  but  the  sun  and  the  stars,  and  no  voice  save  mine 
may  whisper  to  thee?"  "God  looketh  down,"  answered  the  Eose.  "  He  seeth 
me,  and  remembereth  His  gracious  promise,  '  The  desert  shall  rejoice,  and  blossom 
as  the  rose. '  In  the  day  when  He  turueth  the  captivity  of  His  people  Israel  and 
His  ransomed  shall  come  to  Zion  with  everlasting  joy,  shall  my  mission  be  fulfilled. 
But  now,  I  look  up  to  God  and  whisper,  '  Though  He  tarry,  wait.'  Even  so  I 
praise  Him  and  magnify  Him  for  ever."     (Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  4-7.  .  .  .  We  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world. — An  idol  nothing 
in  the  world : — A  singular  phenomenon,  known  as  the  Spectre  of  the  Brocken,  is 
seen  on  a  certain  mountain  in  Germany.  The  traveller  who  at  dawn  stands  on  the 
topmost  ridge  beholds  a  colossal  shadowy  spectre,  moving  on  the  summits  of  the 
distant  hills.  But,  in  fact,  it  is  only  his  own  shadow  projected  upon  the  morning 
mists  by  the  rising  sun ;  and  it  imitates,  of  course,  every  movement  of  its  creator. 
So  heathen  nations  have  mistaken  their  own  image  for  Deity.  Their  gods  display 
human  frailties  and  passions  and  scanty  virtues,  projected  and  magnified  upon  the 
heavens,  just  as  the  small  figures  on  the  slide  of  a  magic-lantern  are  projected, 
magnified,  and  illuminated  upon  a  white  sheet.     Idolatry  : — I.  Its  folly.    1.  An 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

idol  is  a  thing  of  the  imagination.  2.  For  there  is  but  one  God.  3.  He  is  incap- 
able of  any  representation.  II.  Its  forms.  Manifold.  1.  Among  the  heathen. 
2.  Among  professed  Christinns,  as — (1)  Love  of  the  wo)ld.  (2)  Undue  attachment 
or  subservience  to  the  creature.  (3)  Forgetfuli  ess  of  God.  III.  Its  antidote 
Consider — 1.  His  true  character.  2.  His  relation  to  His  people.  3.  His  revelation 
in  Christ.  (•/.  Li/th,  D.D.)  Idolatry: — I.  In  its  general  history.  Notice — 
1.  The  awful  principle  in  which  it  originated  (Eom.  i.  28) — aversion  to  God.  But 
the  knowledge  of  its  origia  may  direct  as  to  the  means  of  its  overthrow.  Nothing 
in  eartli  or  heaven  can  efi'ectually  overcome  it  but  the  power  and  grace  of  Christ; 
not  force  of  arms  nor  power  of  reasoning.  2.  The  degraded  objects  to  which  it 
was  outwardly  paid  (Psa.  cxv. ;  Kom.  i.).  Surely,  then,  those  who  worship  them 
demand  our  pity,  our  prayers,  and  our  exertions  for  their  reclamation.  3.  The 
infernal  spirit  to  whom  it  was  really  directed  (chap.  x.  20).  4.  The  amazing 
wealth  and  power  by  which  it  has  hitherto  been  upheld.  Talk  we  of  the  magnifi- 
cence of  some  of  the  churches  of  Christendom.  Think  of  the  temple  of  Diana 
at  Ephesus.  Let  rich  Christians,  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  do  so  much  for  the 
propagation  of  their  religion,  but  who  do  so  little,  let  them  turn  to  Isa.  xlvi.  6,  and 
learn  a  lesson  of  liberality  worthy  of  a  better  cause.  II.  In  that  particular  view 
presented  in  the  text.  The  objector  to  missionary  exertions  may  possibly  be 
ready  to  say  that  if  an  idol  be  nothing,  there  is  no  need  of  the  efforts,  sacrifiees, 
and  prayers  on  which  you  have  been  insisting.  How  slightly  he  must  have  con- 
sidered the  matter  who  does  not  perceive  that  this  very  fact  furnishes  one  of 
the  strongest  grounds  of  appeal  on  behalf  of  the  unenlightened  heathen  !  If 
an  idol  is  nothing  it  follows — 1.  That  the  religious  offerings  of  idolaters 
have  not  only  been  useless,  but  an  abomination.  2.  That  the  very  religion 
of  idolaters  has  promoted  the  honour  and  glory  of  Satan.  3.  That  the  dying 
pravers  of  idolaters  have  been  a  delusion  and  a  lie.  (T.  Mortimer,  B.D.) 
And  that  there  is  none  other  God  but  one. — The  unity  of  God  : — 1.  What  it 
implies.  2.  What  are  its  evidences.  3.  What  is  its  bearing  upon  faith  and  prac- 
tice. (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  unity  of  God  is  demonstrsited — 1.  By  reason.  2.  By 
creation  and  providence.     3.  By  revelation.     (Ibid.)  Unity  of  God: — A  little 

boy  being  asked,  "  How  many  gods  are  there  ?  "  replied  "  One."  "  How  do  you 
know  that  ?  "  "  Because,"  said  the  boy,  "  there  is  only  room  for  one  ;  for  He  fills 
heaven  and  earth."  Aspects  of  responsihility  (1  Cor.  viii.  4-13) : — Note — I.  That 
the  moral  obligations  of  all  men  are  determined  by  their  relation  to  the 
ONE  God  and  His  Son.  There  are  many  objects  that  men  call  gods,  but  they  are 
really  nothing ;  they  therefore  impose  no  moral  obligation.  1.  There  is  One,  how- 
ever, and  only  One,  from  your  relation  to  whom  there  grows  up  all  moral  obliga- 
tions. ''One  God."  Monotheism  is  demonstrated  by  nature,  conscience,  and  the 
Bible.  (1)  He  is  a  Father.  The  Creator  of  the  universe,  but  the  Father  of  spirits. 
(2)  He  is  the  Source  of  all  things.  (3)  He  is  our  end.  "  We  in  "  or  "unto  Him." 
The  supreme  end  of  our  existence,  and  object  of  our  love.  2.  In  connection  with 
Him  there  is  "  One  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  not  only  His  creative  Agent,  "by 
whom  are  all  things,"  but  His  redemptive  Agent,  the  Mediator,  "  and  we  by"  or 
"through  Him."  As  Christians,  we  are  what  we  are  through  Him.  8.  New  the 
will  of  this  One  God,  as  coming  through  Christ  to  us,  we  are  morally  bound  to 
fulfil — an  obligation  which  can  never  be  abrogated  or  modified.     II.  That  what 

MIGHT    BE    WRONG    FOR    ONE    MAN    TO    DO    JIIGIIT    NOT  BE  SO  FOR  ANOTHER.       The  apOStle 

teaches  that  those  who  felt  that  an  idol  was  nothing  in  the  world,  and  that  conse- 
quently there  was  no  harm  to  them  personally  in  eating  meat  offered  to  it,  would 
commit  no  wrong  in  doing  so.  The  meat  had  not  been  corrupted  by  that,  and 
their  consciences  not  being  against  it,  there  would  be  no  wrong  in  eating  it  (ver.  8). 
On  the  other  hand,  those  who  had  a  superstitious  idea  that  they  ought  not  to  eat 
it  would  commit  wrong  in  doing  so  (ver.  7).  That  which  is  against  a  man's  con- 
science may  not  be  against  the  eternal  law  of  right,  but  is  against  his  own  sense  of 
right,  and  therefore  should  be  avoided.  Here  is  the  principle,  "  Whatsoever  is  not 
of  faith  is  sin."  "  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is 
Bin."     Therefore,  "  let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind."     III.  That 

TO    OFFEND    THE     CONSCIENCE     OF     A     GOOD     3IAN,    HOWEVER    WEAK,    IS   A   WRONG    IN   ALL 

(ver.  9).  Eespect  for  the  weak  consciences  of  good  men.  1.  May  require  self- 
denial  on  our  part.  2.  Is  urged  on  the  strongest  considerations.  (1)  The  lack  of 
it  may  infiict  serious  injuries  on  the  weak.  (a)  It  may  "become  a  stumbling-block 
to  them  that  are  weak  " — i.e.,  an  occasion  of  sin.  Their  faith  may  be  shaken,  and 
they  may  become  apostates,     [b)  They  may  be  "  emboldened,"  encouraged  to  do 


CHAP,  vni.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  521 

the  ■wrong.  Without  your  moral  strength  they  will  imitate  you  and  will  be  ruined 
(ver.  10).  (2)  The  lack  of  it  is  a  sin  both  against  the  weak  brethren  and  against 
Christ  (ver.  12).  3.  Is  exemplified  in  the  sublime  resolve  of  the  apostle  (ver.  13). 
Here  is  benevolent  expediency,  the  strongest  ground  on  which  the  temperance 
reformation  can  be  wist-ly  and  effectively  advocated.  Give  up  all  rather  than  ruin 
souls.  Such  an  utterance  as  this  is  characteristic  of  Paul  (Rom.  ix.  3).  (D.  Thoinan, 
D.D.)  But  thougli  there  be  that  are  called  gods,  ...  to  us  there  is  one  God, 
the  Father,  .  .  .  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Fuli/theism  : — 1.  Its  numerous  forms. 
2.  Awful  prevalence.  3.  Manifest  absurdity.  4.  Abominable  wickedness.  (J.Li/th, 
D.D.)  The  unity  of  God: — The  apostle  had  been  trained  in  the  monotheism 
•which  had  from  the  first  been  the  belief  of  his  race,  and  from  which  they  had  now 
not  swerved  for  centuries.  The  unity  of  God — I.  Is  contrasted  with  polytheistic 
BELIEF  AND  WORSHIP.  1.  The  heathen  deities  are  "  called,"  but  are  not,  gods  (ver. 
4).  2.  These  deities  are  deemed  "gods"  and  "lords."  They  were,  and  still  are, 
in  heathen  lands  thought  supernatural,  and  are  invested  by  the  imagination  with 
claims  to  the  homage  and  service  of  men.  3.  They  are  many  in  number,  every 
natural  object,  &c.,  having  its  deity.  4.  They  have  their  several  ranks  and  realms. 
The  superior  Olympian  deities  are  "in  heaven  " ;  the  inferior  numina  nymphs,  fauns, 
dryads,  &c.,  hauut  this  "  earth."  II.  Furnishes  a  centre  and  aixM  for  the  new 
KELiGious  LIFE  OF  MEN.  1.  In  Himself  He  is  "  the  one  God,  the  Father."  This 
■was  a  glorious  revelation,  and  in  Christ  provision  is  made  for  its  wide  promulgation 
and  acceptance.  2.  He  is  the  Creator  and  Upholder  of  all;  "Of  whom  are  all 
things."  3.  He  is  the  object  of  our  faith,  love,  and  devotion.  We  are  "  for," 
"  unto  Him."  It  is  at  this  point  that  the  great  revelation  of  the  new  theology 
becomes  the  great  motive  of  the  new  religion.  Polytheism  distracted  the  mind, 
and  made  it  impossible  that  faith  in  God  should  become  the  inspiration  of  a  new 
and  better  life.  For  it  was  a  question,  W^bat  measure  of  reverence  and  of  service 
should  be  offered  to  this  deity,  and  what  to  that?  But  Christianity  revealed  one 
God,  in  whom  are  all  perfections,  and  who  is  the  Creator,  Governor,  and  Saviour 
of  mankind.  They  who  live  to  serve  this  God  have  an  elevating,  purifying,  powerful 
aim  in  the  conduct  of  their  life.  III.  Furnishes  the  noblest  motive  to  the 
NEW  religious  LIFE.  1.  The  one  God  is  made  known  by  the  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
as  the  W^ord  reveals  the  utterer,  the  Son  the  Father,  which  conflicts  in  no  sense 
with  monotheism.  2.  Christ  is  the  universal  Mediator,  "  by  whom  are  all  things  " 
— the  moral  as  well  as  the  physical  creation.  All  blessings  which  the  Father 
destines  for  humanity  He  has  resolved  to  confer  by  Christ.  3.  We,  as  Christians, 
are  what  we  are  "  through  Him."  As  in  the  former  clause  we  recognised  the  great 
aim,  so  here  we  see  the  great  means  and  motive  of  the  new,  the  distinctively  Christian 
life.  The  Divine  nature  and  mediation  of  Immanuel,  so  far  from  obscuring  our 
belief  in  the  Divine  unity,  is  the  most  effectual  support  of  it.  Even  as  Jesus  said, 
"  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father  "  ;  and  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  Me."     (Prof.  J.  R.  Thomson.)  The  uniti/  of  God: — The  term 

"  unity  "  is  difficult  to  define.  It  may  mean  merely  the  numerical  basis  of  calcu- 
lation ;  the  contrast  between  one  thing  and  two  or  more  things  of  the  same  kind. 
But  if  used  in  the  sense  of  a  unit,  it  is  clear  that  every  one  thing  is  made  uj)  of 
many  parts,  possesses  many  qualities,  stands  in  various  relations,  and  though  in 
itself  only  one  thing,  is  also  a  part  of  many  other  things.  By  unity  is  often  meant 
more  than  the  antithesis  of  many.  Though  the  unity  of  God  means  that  there  is 
one  God,  in  opposition  to  the  claims  of  lords  many  and  gods  many,  yet  the  phrase 
implies  that  whatever  internal  distinctions  there  may  be  in  the  essence  of  the  Most 
High,  that  essence  is  one  essence — a  whole,  a  unity  in  itself.  Unity  is  individuality, 
in  spite  of  the  recognition  of  the  multiplicity  of  elements  of  which  it  is  com- 
pounded. Thus  a  crystal  of  quartz  is  a  unity  distinct  from  all  other  cry.-tals,  and 
from  the  hand  that  holds  it.  It  j^ossesses  a  multitude  of  curious  properties  as  long 
as  it  remains  one  thing ;  but  let  me  break  it  into  a  thousand  pieces,  and  it  might 
soon  be  proved  that  every  fragment  possessed  in  a  measure  all  those  properties. 
Yet  those  fragments,  though  many,  previously  formed  one  whole.  Consider,  again, 
a  tree  or  plant ;  its  root,  stem,  branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  seed  form  one  whole 
of  mysterious  beauty ;  and  though  each  twig  and  leaflet  is  a  perfect  creation, 
having  an  independent  life  in  itself,  yet  the  many  parts  do  not  fail  to  form  a  unity. 
Farther,  playing  in  the  branches  of  the  tree  there  is  a  world  of  more  mysterious 
life.  Every  leaf  has  its  colony  of  insects,  every  bough  its  parasitical  growth  ;  the 
bees  are  humming  in  its  fragrant  flowers,  and  the  birds  are  building  their  nests  in 
its  branches.      But  each  lichen,  moss,  insect,  and   bird  is  as  wonderful  in  its 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viir. 

mysterious  combination  of  manyopposites,  and  dependent  structures,  and  wondrous 
balancing  of  powers,  as  was  the  tree  itself.  But  while  I  am  considering  crystal  and 
tree,  and  insect  and  bird,  I  find  that  I  myself  am  just  such  a  combination  of  many 
parts,  faculties,  passions,  and  relations,  each  of  which  is  sufKciently  individual, 
and  yet  the  whole  of  which  seem  all  but  indispensable  to  constitute  my  self-con- 
scious unity.  I  am  a  strange  combination  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  and  yet  I  am 
reckoned  as  one  man.  My  senses,  reflections,  and  passions  ;  my  body,  understand- 
ing, and  will  seem  at  times  capable  of  individualisation,  and  to  be  unities  in  them- 
selves ;  but  it  is  the  mutual  relation  and  dependence  of  the  parts  that  constitute 
the  unity  of  the  whole.  With  this  self-consciousness  of  multiplicity  in  unity  to 
help  me,  the  revelation  that  God  has  made  of  His  threefold  nature  is  less  per- 
plexing than  it  otherwise  would  be.  The  unity  of  the  Divine  nature,  like  the 
unity  of  all  other  things,  is  a  unity  consistent  with  the  self-inclusions  of  various 
constituent  elements.     (J.  W.  Reynolds,  31. A.)  One  God,  one  Lord: — I.  The 

ONE  Gon.  The  oneness  of  Deity  is  here  emphasised.  It  is  insisted  on  throughout 
the  Scriptures.  The  conflict,  confusion,  and  absurdity  conspicuous  in  polytheism 
find  no  place  in  Judaism  or  Christianity.  This  oneness  is  confirmed  by  nature, 
providence,  and  the  moral  sense.  The  one  God  is — 1.  The  Source  of  all  things. 
We  know  not  liow  ;  the  manner  is  not  revealed  to  us  ;  the  fact  is.  God  may  have 
left  much  to  man's  scientific  instinct  to  discover.  He  may  have  intended  not  a 
little  to  remain  in  mystery.  We  may  travel  reverently  along  the  lines  of  true 
knowledge  till  they  cease  for  us;  then  the  great  truth  remains  still  for  our  enlighten- . 
ment  and  comfort.  The  marcla  backward  of  science  is  towards  unity ;  revelation 
began  with  it.  2.  The  end  of  all  things.  "  W^e  unto,"  not  "in,"  "  Him."  What 
is  here  asserted  of  some  of  God"s  works  applies  to  all  (Col.  i.  16).  The  whole 
universe  looks  God-wards.  So  far  as  intelligent  creatures  do  not  find  the  end  of 
their  existence  in  God  and  seek  His  glory,  so  far  they  fall  out  of  barmony  with  the 
rest  of  creation  and  bring  failure  into  tbeir  lives.  II.  The  one  Lord.  The  Head 
of  the  Church  was  the  active  power  in  creation.  This  verse  teaches  the  Divinity  of 
Christ  in  a  very  impressive  manner.  The  administrative,  mediating  position 
occupied  by  Christ  is  recognised  ;  but  the  assertion  that  ''  through  Him  "  all  things 
were,  is  only  explicable  on  the  supposition  of  His  Deity.  Moreover,  this  very 
expre!>sion  i^  applied  elsewhere  to  God  (Kom.  ix.  36;  Heb.  ii.  10),  aud  the  expres- 
sion  "  unto  Him  "  is  in  Col.  i.  15  applied  to  Christ.  Paul  is  speaking  about  idols 
as  "gods  and  lords."  These  were  all  regarded  as  deities.  In  carrying  over  the 
same  terms  to  the  realm  of  Christianity,  there  is  nothing  which  should  lead  us  to 
suppose  that  "Lord"  is  less  Divine  than  "God."     III.  The  special  eelations 

SUBSISTING    BETWEEN    BELIEVERS    AND     THE     ONE    LoRD    AND    ONE    GoD.         1.      They    are 

"  through  "  Christ — as  creatures,  amongst  "  all  things";  but  the  additional  "  we 
through  Him  "  indicates  special  relationship.  Believers  are  such  through  Christ ; 
they  believe  in  Him.  Through  Him  they  are  separated  from  "  all  things,"  and 
made  a  peculiar  people.  Apart  from  Christ  believers  are  nothing  ;  through  Him 
they  become  "heirs  of  God."  2.  They  are  "unto  God"  in  a  special  sense, "and 
through  Christ.  They  show  forth  the  Divine  glories  as  others  cannot.  They 
reflect  the  Divine  love  manifested  in  redemption.  They  are  presented  to  God  as 
the  fruits  of  Divine  grace.  Once  rebellious,  they  are  now  obedient ;  once  defiled, 
they  are  now  purified,  etc.  3.  God  is  their  Father.  In  a  certain  sense  He  is  the 
Father  of  all,  but  in  a  spiritual  sense  He  is  not  so.  Of  some  Christ  said,  "  Ye  are 
of  vour  father  the  devil."  But  the  believer  has  received  the  adoption  through 
Christ.      (IF.   E.    HurndaU,   M.A.)  The   many   gods   and    the    one    God  : — 

I.  The  world's  many  gods.  To  make  gods  for  himself  has  been  man's 
great  object  all  along.  Every  nation  has  had  its  gods,  and  every  age.  Is 
there  no  god-making  still,  even  in  our  day  ?  Money,  business,  pleasure, 
lusts,  luxuries  !  Will  they  prove  more  helpful  in  the  day  of  trouble  than  Baal, 
or  Jupiter,  or  Buddha?  Will  they  forgive,  and  save,  and  comfort?  II.  The 
saint's  one  God.  Yes  ;  one  only,  the  living  and  the  true  God.  Jehovah  is  His 
name.  With  undistracted  eye  the  Christian  looks  but  to  one,  not  many ;  with 
undivided  heart  he  fixes  on  one,  not  many  ;  and  that  one  sufficient  to  fill  his  whole 
heart,  and  soul,  and  being.  How  the  thought  of  that  one  God — infinite,  eternal, 
and  unchangeable— makes  all  that  are  called  gods  to  vanish  utterly  away!  "  Jehovah 
is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul."  We  need  no  other  ;  we  need  no  more.  III.  The 
saint's  one  Christ.  "To  us  there  is  but  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  As  there  are 
many  beings  who  go  under  the  name  of  God,  so  are  there  many  who  go  under  the 
name  of  Christ,  yet  there  is  but  one  Christ,  not  two,  nor  many.     The  tendency  of 


CHAP.  VIII.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  523 

the  present  day  is  to  multiply  Christs.  A  Christ  as  the  impersonation  or  repre- 
sentative of  humanity  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  age.  But  every 
one  wants  to  have  his  own  Christ,  just  as  each  heathen  wanted  to  have  his  own 
god ;  the  Christ  that  suits  his  own  fancy,  or  his  own  philusopby,  or  his  own 
intellect,  or  his  own  circumstances.  Some  want  a  Christ  who  is  not  God  ;  others 
a  Christ  who  is  not  a  sacrifice ;  a  Christ  without  a  cross,  and  without  blood ;  a 
Christ  who  will  teach  but  not  expiate  sin  ;  a  Christ  whose  life  and  death  are  an 
example  of  self-surrender  to  the  utmost,  but  not  an  atonement ;  a  Christ  who  is 
not  a  judge,  nor  a  law-giver,  nor  a  priest,  and  only  a  prophet  in  the  sense  of 
teacher.  If  thus,  then,  there  is  but  one  Christ,  then  there  is  but — 1.  One  Cross.  2. 
One  Priest.    3.  One  altar.  4.  One  sacrifice.  5.  One  way  to  the  kingdom.   (H.  Bonar.) 

Vers.  7-13.  Howbeit  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  knowledge. — Ignorance : — 1. 
Great  ignorance  may  consist  with  genuine  piety.  2.  Is  a  source  of  much  unneces- 
sary anxiety  and  peril.  3.  Is  to  be  deplored  and  pitied.  4.  May  find  relief  in  the 
study  of  Divine  truth.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.)  Christian  lihertij  : — I.  Its  natuke.  1. 
Implies  freedom  of  action  in  things  indifferent.  2.  Depends  on  knowledge.  3. 
Bequires  conscientious  conviction.  II.  Its  limits — 1.  Defined  by  a  brother's 
weakness.  2.  By  love  to  Christ.  3.  By  self-sacriticing  love.  {Ibid.)  For  some 
with  conscience  of  the  idol  .  .  .  eat  .  .  .  and  their  conscience  being'  weak  is 
defiled. — The  Imv  of  Christian  conscience : — I.  The  exposition  of  the  law  itself 
(vers.  7,  8).  The  apostle  tells  the  strong-minded  Corinthians  that  the  superstitions 
of  their  weaker  brethren  are  unquestionably  wrong  (ver.  8) ;  but  he  also  tells  them 
that  "  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  knowledge,"  &c.  (ver.  7),  i.e.,  some  have  an 
ignorant,  mistaken  conscience ;  and  yet  he  insists  that  this  conscience,  so  ill- 
informed,  yet  binds  the  possessor  of  it :  "  and  their  conscience  being  weak,  is 
defiled."  Here,  then,  we  have  the  distinction  between  absolute  and  relative  right 
and  wrong.  Absolute  right  and  wrong  are  unalterable.  But  the  right  or  wrong  of 
any  action  done  by  any  particular  man  is  a  matter  relative  to  his  particular  cir- 
cumstances. That  charity  and  self-denial,  e.g.,  are  right — this  we  see  recognised 
in  almost  every  nation.  But  when  and  how  far  self-denial  is  right,  and  what  are 
the  bounds  of  charity,  this  is  for  different  circumstances  to  deteimine.  And  so  it 
will  be  found  that  there  is  a  different  standard  among  different  nations  and  in 
different  ages,  e.//.,  the  standard  among  the  Israelites  in  the  early  ages  was  very 
dift'erent  from  that  recognised  by  the  later  prophets.  And  the  standard  in  the 
third  and  fourth  centuries  was  an  entirely  different  one  from  that  recognised  among 
ourselves.  The  principle  laid  down  by  the  apostle  is  this.  That  which  seems  to 
a  man  to  be  right  is,  in  a  certain  sense,  right  to  him ;  and  that  which  seems  to  a 
man  to  be  wrong,  in  a  certain  sense  is  wrong  to  him  (Rom.  v.  14,  xiv.  14).  II. 
The  applications  which  akise  out  of  it.  1.  Personally.  Do  what  seems  to  you 
to  be  right:  it  is  only  so  that  you  will  at  last  learn  by  the  grace  of  God  to  see 
clearly  what  is  right.  A  man  is  responsible  for  the  opinions  be  holds,  and  still 
more  for  the  way  in  which  he  arrived  at  them — whether  in  a  slothful  and  selfish, 
or  in  an  honest  and  truth-seekmg  manner ;  but  being  now  his  soul's  convictions, 
you  can  give  no  other  law  than  this — "  You  must  obey  your  conscience."  For  no 
man's  conscience  gets  so  seared  by  doing  what  is  wrong  uuknowingly  as  by  doing  that 
which  appears  to  be  wrong  to  his  conscience.  2.  To  others.  To  the  large,  free, 
enlightened  mind  of  Paul,  all  these  scruples  and  superstitions  must  have  seemed 
mean  and  trivial.  But  cod  science  was  far  more  sacred  to  him  than  even  liberty. 
The  scruple  may  be  small  and  foolish,  but  it  may  be  impossible  to  uproot  it  without 
tearing  up  the  feeling  of  the  sanctity  of  conscience,  and  of  reverence  to  the  law  of 
God,  associated  with  this  scruple.  And  therefore  the  Apostle  Paul  counsels  these 
men  to  abridge  their  Christian  liberty,  and  not  to  eat  of  those  things  which  had 
been  sacrificed  to  idols,  but  to  have  compassion  upon  the  scruples  of  their  weaker 
brethren.  And  this  for  two  reasons.  (1)  Christian  feeling.  It  might  cause 
exquisite  pain  to  sensitive  minds  to  see  those  things  which  appeared  to  them  to  be 
wrong  done  by  Christian  brethren.  Take  a  parallel  case.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
it  causes  much  pain  to  many  Christians  to  see  a  carriage  used  on  the  Lord's  day. 
But  you,  with  higher  views  of  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  can  exercise  your  liberty. 
But  is  it  not  your  duty  to  abridge  your  Christian  liberty,  and  to  go  through  rain, 
and  mud,  and  snow,  rather  than  give  pain  to  one  Christian  conscience  ?  (2)  It 
might  even  lead  their  brethren  into  sin.  If  any  man  should  eat  of  the  flesh  offered 
to  an  idol,  feeling  himself  justified  by  his  conscience,  it  were  well :  but  if  any  man, 
overborne  by  authority  or  interest,  were  to  do  this  against  conscience,  his  compliance 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

would  as  much  damage  his  moral  sense  as  if  the  act  had  been  wrong  in  itself.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  Distinguish  between  this  tenderness  for  a  brother's  conscience  and 
mere  time-serving.  This  same  apostle  whom  we  here  see  so  gracefully  giving  way 
upon  the  ground  of  expediency,  stood  firm  as  a  rock  when  anything  was  demanded 
which  trenched  upon  Christian  principle  (Gal.  ii.  5).  2.  This  abridgment  of 
liberty  is  a  duty  especially  incumbent  upon  all  who  are  possessed  of  influence.  If 
the  landlord  uses  his  authority  and  influence  to  induce  his  tenant  to  vote  against 
his  conscience,  it  may  be  he  has  secured  one  voice  to  the  principle  which  is 
right;  but  he  has  gained  that  single  voice  at  the  sacrifice  and  expense  of  a  brother's 
soul.  Or  again,  if  for  the  sake  of  ensuring  personal  attention,  the  rich  man  puts  a 
gratuity  into  the  hand  of  a  servant  of  some  company  which  has  forbidden 
him  to  receive  it,  he  gains  the  attention  at  the  expense  of  a  man  and  a  Christian 
brother.  3.  How  possible  it  is  to  mix  manliness  with  charity !  No  man  ever 
breathed  so  freely  the  atmosphere  of  heaven  as  Paul — no  man  ever  soared  so  high 
above  all  scrui^les  as  he :  and  yet  no  man  ever  bound  himself  as  St.  Paul 
bound  himself  to  the  scruples  of  his  bi'ethren.  So  that,  what  in  other  cases 
was  infirmity,  imbecility,  and  superstition,  gathered  round  it  in  his  case  the 
pure  high  spirit  of  Christian  delicacy.  And  now,  out  of  the  sayings  of  those  who 
loudly  proclaim  "  the  rights  of  man  "  and  "  the  rights  of  liberty,"  match  us  if  you 
can  with  one  sentence  so  sublime  as  ver.  13.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  A  weak 
conscience,  i.e.,  as  we  might  say  "diseased,"  incapable  of  forming  a  sound  healthy- 
judgment.  As  we  speak  of  weak  nerves  the  apostle  speaks  of  a  weak  conscience. 
A  person  who  has  been  taught  when  a  child  to  believe  in  ghosts,  will  some- 
times be  seized  with  dread  if  he  is  alone  at  night,  though  his  reason  has 
long  since  convinced  him  that  spectres  do  not  appear.  Similarly,  though  the 
moral  reason  of  a  Christian  tells  him  that  the  heathen  deities  which  he 
formerly  worshipped  do  not  exist,  yet  it  requires  spiritual  knowledge  of 
the  true  God  to  allay  his  dread.  Cf.  1  Tim.  i.  5,  where  the  apostle 
joins  "  a  good  conscience  "  with  "  faith  unfeigned."  {Principal  Edicards.) 
Abstinence  for  the  sake  of  others : — Of  the  flesh  of  beasts  slain  by  the  heathen 
priests  in  the  service  of  their  gods  only  a  portion  being  required  for  the  religious 
rites,  the  remainder  was  consumed  as  food  by  the  priests  or  exposed  for  sale  in  the 
public  markets.  Entertainments  were  sometimes  given  in  localities  more  or  less 
closely  associated  with  the  idolatrous  worship,  and  these  meats  were  offered  to  the 
guests.  Was  it  right  to  partake  of  such  food  ?  There  may  be  at  least  four  different 
methods  of  treating  a  question  of  that  sort.  It  may  be  determined  merely  upon 
considerations  of  per.-onal  inclination  and  enjoyment.  "  Those  are  the  only  con- 
siderations," some  might  say.  "  If  the  meat  is  good,  and  I  want  it,  why  refuse 
it  ?  "  With  others  the  case  would  be  at  once  submitted  to  the  judgment  of  society  : 
"What  is  the  custom?  How  do  my  associates  dispose  of  the  problem?"  A 
third  and  manifestly  higher  method  asks,  "  What  is  ri^rht  ?  What  does  an 
enlightened  conscience  approve?"  Here  are  three  entirely  distinct  methods  of 
dealing  with  a  question  of  practical  morality.  But  neither  of  these  schemes  suit 
Paul.  There  is  a  larger  question  of  charity  :  "  How  might  my  habit  alf  ect  others, 
and  especially  my  religious  associates  ?  "     I.  In  this  golden  sentence  is  seen  the 

SENSITIVENESS     OF     CHRISTIANITY    WITH    REGAED    TO     THE    WEAK    AND     THE     OBSCURE. 

Such  a  sentiment  was  practically  new.  "  Christianity  for  the  first  time  made 
charity  a  rudimentary  virtue,"  says  Lecky,  the  historian  of  European  morals.  How 
strange  was  this  method  is  apparent  also  from  the  early  criticisms  of  Christianity 
— that  of  Celsus,  for  example.  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  woollen-manufacturers,  shoe- 
makers, and  curriers,  the  most  uneducated  and  boorish  of  men,  are  zealous  advo- 
cates of  this  religion  !  "  By  the  apostle,  however,  the  opprobrium  was  turned  into 
a  sort  of  boast :  "  Ye  see  your  calling,  brethren.  .  .  .  God  hath  chosen  the  weak 
things  to  confound  the  mighty."  These  "weak  things"  Paul  never  made  the 
mistake  of  despising.  We,  too,  shall  deal  most  successfully  with  similar  cases  of 
conscience  when  we  are  nearest  to  Paul's  Master  and  ours,  having  most  of  his  life 
in  us,  his  mind  of  love.  Many  a  boy  proudly  drops  his  bat  and  ball  to  run  and 
serve  his  mother  or  his  sister.  Such  surrenders  love  counts  among  its  privileges 
and  joys.  And  if  the  earthly  affection  can  easily  do  this,  is  it  likely  that  a  mightier 
passion  will  fail?  II.  We  are  taught,  further,  that  the  individu.al  is  of  less 
CONSEQUENCE  THAN  SOCIETY.  That  seems  too  plain  to  need  reiteration.  But 
practically  it  is  not  always  acknowledged.  Writers  like  Mill  put  the  stress  upon 
personal  liberty.  They  are  slow  to  justify  legal  measures  or  social  laws  which  in 
any  degree  abridge  the  privileges  of  the  individual.     Such  invasion  of  rights  they 


CHAP,  vni.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  525 

would  condemn,  except  lui'ler  the  greatest  necesfity.  They  seem  to  estimate  a 
man  too  hish,  and  mankind  too  low.  But  Providence  does  not  make  such 
estimates.  What  we  call  the  laws  of  nature  constantly  subordinate  us  to  the 
general  good.  The  progress  of  history  is  achieved  through  suffering  and  martj'rdom. 
Father  and  mother  must  deny  themselves  for  the  family.  Sons  and  brothers  die 
that  the  republic  may  live.  Science  and  invention  go  forward  through  unrequited 
sacrifices.  In  the  fact  that  men  have  so  often  tried  to  reverse  God's  computations, 
and  make  the  one  to  be  worth  more  than  the  many,  lies  the  secret  of  much  of  the 
misery  of  the  human  race.  Along  the  lines  of  this  vicious  calculation  rivers  of 
blood  have  flowed.  Think  of  the  kings  and  princes  who  from  thrones  of  gold  have 
looked  down  upon  the  millions  of  their  subjects  only  as  the  small  dust  of  the 
balance.      III.  It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that  in   the  comparison  of   these 

OPPOSITE     methods,    AND     IN     DETERMINING    THE    ISSUES    WHICH    THEY   INVOLVE,    IS    TO 

BE  FOUND  AN  IMPORTANT  ELEMENT  OF  EDUCATION.  The  Settlement  of  moral  ques- 
tions to  which  we  are  daily  summoned  is  designed  for  our  discipline,  a  means  both 
of  testing  and  increasing  our  love  for  the  Master  and  for  His  people.  With  a  child 
we  are  best  satisfied  not  when  he  promptly  obeys  an  express  command,  but  wlien, 
left  to  choose  for  himself,  he  deliberately  prefers  another's  pleasure  to  his  own. 
That  shows,  and  at  the  same  time  develops,  the  kindness  of  his  heart.  It  is  often 
objected,  however,  that  the  requirements  of  such  a  charity  may  become  unreasonable 
and  oppressive — that  there  are  narrow-minded  and  captious  per.-ons  who,  upon 
any  pretext,  will  seek  to  obstruct  our  freedom  and  spoil  our  innocent  pleasures. 
Where,  then,  shall  the  line  be  drawn  ?  The  only  answer  must  be  that  a  line 
cannot  be  definitely  drawn.  We  are  left  to  the  impulses  of  our  natural  or  gracious 
hearts.  They  will  put  their  own  constructions  upon  every  principle  laid  down  for 
guidance.  The  problem  is  not,  "  Who  is  technically  right?  "  nor,  "  Who  has  the 
better  head  and  the  more  enlightened  conscience?  "  nor,  "  Who  is  moi'e  prominent 
in  the  w>irld's  work  ?  "  This  is  not  a  matter  of  pride,  but  of  self-forgetting  charity. 
The  stress  and  point  lie  in  the  question,  "  W^hat  will  save  this  brother  whom  my 
liberty  might  offend  ?  "  The  more  unreasonable  the  prejudice,  likewise,  to  which 
we  yield,  the  weaker  the  opinion  to  which  we  make  our  offering  of  peace  and  good- 
will, the  more  tenderly  will  God  be  sure  to  regard  it.  W'e  may  be  thankful  if 
instead  of  being  among  those  who  ask  for  concessions,  we  have  reached  the 
high  place  of  those  who  are  delighted  to  grant  them.  IV.  The  superiority  op 
"love  as  a  law  "  IS  manifest,  therefore.  Such  a  force  is  not  only  disciplinary, 
but  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  disciplinary ;  it  secures  the  best  advantage  and  growth. 
"  This  law  is  not  arbitrary.  It  is  no  law  of  fanaticism  or  enthusiasm  or  self- 
torture."  In  2>referring  it  we  only  surrender  a  lower,  because  we  seek  a  manifestly 
higher,  good.  "  To  work  from  fear  is  slavery;  to  work  under  the  compulsion  of 
animal  want  is  a  hardship,  and  if  not  a  positive  yet  a  relative  curse ;  to  work  for 
personal  ends,  as  for  pride  or  ambition  or  the  accumulation  of  property,  either  for 
its  own  sake  or  our  own  sake,  is  compatible  with  freedom,  but  has  in  it  nothing 
either  purifying  or  ennobling ;  it  finds  and  leaves  the  soul  dry  and  hard.  But 
activity  from  love  is  the  perfection  of  freedom  and  of  joy."  We  are  never  so  high 
and  great  as  when  for  love  we  can  easily  make  sacrifices  to  advance  the  unity  and 
power  of  Christ's  Church  or  the  welfare  of  those  for  whom  He  died.  Y.  How 
various  are  the  problems  of  our  modern  life  which  this  lesson  touches  we 
MAY  READILY  DISCOVER.  Shall  I  diiuk  winc  ?  What  shall  be  my  attitude  toward 
the  theatre  and  the  opera  ?  How  shall  I  deal  with  the  question  as  to  promiscuous 
dancing  ?  Shall  I  on  Sunday  patronise  the  street-railway  ?  What  games  shall  I 
approve?  How  far  may  I  indulge  a  taste  for  personal  adornment,  iDarticulaiiy  in 
places  of  public  worship  ?  W'hat  principles  and  limitations  of  expenditure  are  to 
be  preferred  in  building,  beautifying,  and  administering  a  home  ?  These  and  a 
thousand  like  inquiries  are  to  be  treated  in  the  spirit  with  which  Paul  approached 
the  Corinthian  problem  about  meat.  They  are  not  merely  ethical,  but  Christian, 
problems.  (H.  A.  Edson,  D.D.)  Ahstinmice  for  the  sake  of  others: — Slight  acts 
may  loose  vast  lorces,  as  a  shout  starts  an  Alpine  avalanche.  Insignificant 
questions  may  involve  great  principles.  So  was  it  with  the  Corinthian  Church. 
The  body  of  Christ  was  torn  about  a  piece  of  meat ;  but  the  strife  involved  solemn 
matters — love  for  Christ  and  dying  souls.  I.  The  law  of  knowledge.  We  com- 
monly reckon  knowledge  to  be  a  product  of  the  intellect,  including  the  powers  by 
which  we  learn  facts,  reason  upon  them,  and  draw  ccnclusions.  The  kind  of 
knowledge  determines  the  instrument  by  which  we  are  to  acquire  it.  Pure  mathe- 
matics, abstract  logic,  may  seem  to  use  only  the  seeing  eye  and  reasoning  mind. 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

But  really  to  know  a  thing,  the  student  must  have  some  affinity  for  the  object.  It 
must  tind  him,  must  stir  a  response  in  his  nature.  True  of  nature  and  art,  this  is 
more  commandingly  true  of  our  fellow  man.  We  cannot  know  him  or  any  truth 
concerning  his  life  and  character  except  as  we  love  him.  This  is  the  only  way  to 
get  God's  way  of  looking  at  him,  God's  ideal  for  him.  Love  is  the  discoverer,  love 
is  the  interpreter,  love  the  guide.  Knowledge  without  love  is  the  turbine  without 
waterfall,  wire  without  electricity.  Love  without  knowledge  is  cataract  minus 
wheel,  loose  lightning  in  the  heavens.  Love  with  knowledge  is  the  servant  and 
benefactor  of  mankind.  Love  has  chemic  tests,  microscope,  clairvoyance.  It  is 
the  expert  picking  up  the  pebble  a  settler's  child  is  playing  with  and  telling  the 
man  he  is  farming  over  a  gold  mine.  Knowledge  despises  his  ignorance  and  leaves 
him  to  its  poverty.  The  characteristic  of  modern  charity  is  the  combination  of 
scientific  method  with  personal  devotion.  It  studies  the  case  with  minute  pains, 
then  helps  it  with  cool  head  and  steady  hand  as  well  as  warm  heart.  The  worst 
enemy  of  true  charity  is  indiscriminate  giving ;  and  true  giving  means  personal 
contact.  It  is  so  much  cheaper  to  give  money  than  to  give  one's  self,  and  the 
reward  is  correspondingly  small.  This  is  the  law :  True  knowledge  includes  love ; 
it  comes  through  head  and  heart  together.  II.  The  law  op  conscience.  But 
what  law  can  there  be  to  a  faculty  divided  against  itself,  that,  seeing  two  men 
doing  the  same  thing,  smiles  upon  one  and  smites  the  other?  Which  of  them  is 
right  ?  How  can  any  one  ever  be  sure  he  is  right  ?  Conscience  is  called  the  voice 
of  God  in  the  soul  of  man ;  but  can  God  say  Yea  and  Nay  together  ?  The  faculty 
we  name  conscience  is  not  simple,  but  complex.  It  includes  the  impulse  which 
commands.  Do  right ;  when  you  know  the  right,  do  it,  whatever  the  cost.  But 
back  of  this  lies  the  judgment  which  tells  us  what  is  right.  Not  attempting  the 
philosophical  definitions,  call  the  one  moral  impulse,  the  other  moral  judgment. 
The  first  of  these  is  essentially  the  same  in  all  sound  souls,  while  differing  in  force 
and  accepted  control.  The  second  differs  according  to  birth,  training,  personal 
experience.  Plainly,  then,  persons  equally  anxious  to  do  right  may  difl'er  as  to  the 
right  or  wrong  of  a  specific  act.  Equally  conscientious,  they  conscientiously  dis- 
agree. Each,  trying  to  do  right,  does  what  the  other  condemns.  They  agree  in 
moral  impulse,  but  disagree  in  moral  judgment.  The  difficulty  is  great,  and  to 
recognise  its  occasion  does  not  remove  it.  Two  precepts  are  to  be  ui-ged — 1.  Culti- 
vate the  moral  impulse,  which  insists  upon  obedience  to  known  right.  Guard  this 
high  conception  of  the  majesty  of  righteousness.  Listen  to  the  whispers  of  con- 
science rather  than  to  the  shouts  of  interest  or  socgs  of  pleasure.  Protect  the 
sensitiveness  of  moral  discernment  as  a  piano  tuner  guards  the  accuracy  of  his 
ear.  Eecur  constantly  to  the  invariable  standard.  Crowd  forward  conviction  into 
action.  2.  Train  the  moral  judgment,  which  decides  whether  a  specific  act  is  right 
or  wrong.  Extend  the  control  of  conscience  to  the  formation  of  opinions.  Educators 
of  the  moral  judgment  are — (1)  Revelation.  A  clear  word  from  God  is  end  of 
debate.  (2)  The  teachings  of  reason,  vitalised  by  love.  (3)  Experience  ;  our  own, 
that  of  the  wise  and  good,  and  the  broad  testimony  of  history.  (4)  A  spiritual 
life.  Constant  fellowship  with  Christ,  effort  to  grow  like  Him  and  to  win  others  to 
Him,  furnish  the  finest  tests  and  incitements  to  right  moral  decisions.  We  can 
have  God's  wisdom  for  the  asking,  the  especial  illumination  of  the  Holy  Spii'it. 
Changes  of  conviction  will  issue  in  changes  of  practice,  and  with  these  may  come 
a  period  of  unrest,  while  the  moral  sense  is  becoming  adjusted  to  the  judgment. 
The  immorality  of  false  opinions  and  virtue  of  right  c  mvictions  are  often  dis- 
credited ;  but  they  make  life,  character,  destmy.  This  is  the  law  of  conscience  : 
Cultivate  a  sensitive  and  positive  moral  impulse  ;  train  the  moral  judgment  to 
clear  and  spiritual  views.  III.  The  law  of  conduct.  Conduct  has  two  relations 
— between  myself  and  God,  and  between  myself  and  my  neighbour.  An  ant  done 
in  the  sight  of  others  becomes  example,  and  what  is  innocent  kept  to  myself  alone 
may  be  hurtful  if  indiscriminately  followed.  Unfortunately,  doing  in  secret  what 
is  condemned  in  public  savours  of  insincerity  and  hurts  a  delicate  honour.  As  a 
rule,  what  is  good  for  me  is  good  for  my  neighbour,  and  what  hurts  him  is  bad  for 
me.  Which  of  us  has  suffered  much  from  giving  the  weak  brother,  the  holy 
Christ,  the  benefit  of  the  doubt?  That  weak  brother,  he  is  ever  with  us;  what 
shall  we  do  about  him  ?  Would  that  he  were  strong !  How  we  admire  the  well- 
poised  man,  clear  head  at  the  top  and  firmly  set  feet  beneHth;  physical  passions 
and  temper  and  tongue  following  obediently  at  the  heel  of  sound  reason  ;  warm 
heart  and  positive  will,  handmaids  of  a  sensitive  and  proud  conscience !  Such 
there  are,  and  how  simple  to  them  is  life !   But  they  are  as  rare  as  admirable.    The 


CHAP,  vni.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  527 

weak  brother,  whose  claim  is  mainly  his  weakness — he  ought  to  train  his  moral 
judgment,  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind,  then  be  content  to  stand  or  fall  to 
his  own  Master  ;  but  it  is  not  so  with  him.     He  keeps  looking  to  see  what  we  do, 
putting  us  on  a  pedestal  we  have  no  wish  to  occupy.     Have  not  we  rights  also  ? 
Yes ;  and  what  right  higher  than  to  surrender  rights  to  gain  blessings  ?   To  hesitate 
between  tickling  one's  palate  and  saving  a  soul  from  death  would  be  worse  than 
brutish.     Grant  that  this  means  surrender  of  what  we  might  claim  but  for  this 
weak  brother,  are  we  losers  ?     Am  I  impoverished  by  putting  helpfulness  above 
self-assertion?     What  is  self-denial  but  choosing  the  nobler  and  better  part?    Give 
the  weak  brother  and  the  spiritual  life  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.     The  example  of 
abstinence  involves  no  risks.     Grow  rich  by  giving  up,  gain  life  by  dying  to  self 
and  the  world.     While  this  law  is  general,  its  application  in  a  temperance  lesson  is 
peculiarly  clear.     Here,  of  all  cases,  abstinence  involves  no  risks;  and  appeals  to 
the  weaker  without  example  of  abstinence  come  to  nothing.     {Clia7-Ies  BI.  South- 
gate.)        Abstinence  for  the  sake  of  others  : — Not  a  few  of  the  church  members  in 
Corinth  reserved  the  right  to  purchase  and  partake  of  these  meats.     Where  is  the 
flaw  in  their  argument  ?    The  apostle  meets  and  controverts  it  with  great  clearness. 
I.  He  alleges  that  charity  is  better  than   knowledge.       "  We  all,"  says  he, 
"  have  knowledge."     We  ate  all  able  to  make  a  showing  of  reasonableness  for  our 
foibles  and  prejudices.      The  poorest  cause  may  be  bolstered  by  an  argument. 
Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifieth,  literally  buildeth  up.     Self-vindication 
makes  us  conceited  and  dogmatic  ;  but  charity  helps  both  us  and  others.     The 
charity  here  referred  to  is  the  largest  of  the  Christian  graces.     It  is  the  Greek 
ayaTTt},  the   Vulgate  charitos ;    it  is  love  in  its   broadest  and  deepest  sense.     It 
includes  love  towards  God  as  well  as  towards  men.     It  is  like  the  constant  com- 
merce which  is  going  on  between  the  waters  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  the 
rills  trickle  into  tbe  brooks,  the  brooks  murmur  towards  the  rivers,  the  rivers  roll 
onward  to  the  sea,  and  the  seas  are  exhaled  into  the  clouds  above  to  distil  again  in 
grateful  showers  and  morning  dews.   So  love  is  the  constant  means  and  communion 
between  God  and  His  children.     "  W"e  know  our  franchise,"  said  the  Christian 
banqueters  of  Corinth  ;  "  we  have  knowledge  as  to  the  true  character  of  idols  and 
idol-worshij),  and  are  therefore  in  no  danger  of  being  led  astray."     "  Knowledge  ! 
knowledge !  "   replies  the  apostle,  "  but  what  about  love  ?     If  any  man  love  God 
the  same  is  known  unto  Him,  and  that  is  the  knowledge  worth  having."    All  the 
wisdom  of  the  schools  is  not  to  be  valued  with  the  assurance  that  we  love  God ; 
and  "  the  same  may  be  known  unto  us."     II.  The  apostle  turns,  secondly,  to  a 
CONSIDERATION  OF  INDIVIDUAL   FREEDOM.      Fot  thcse  Corinthi>in  Christians  were 
disposed  to  stand  upon  their  rights.     They  said  in  effect,  "  There  is  no  specific 
injunction  as  to  these  idol-meats  in  Scripture.    The  question  is  left  to  the  individual 
conscience.     Our  consciences  are  clear  ;  the  meats  do  not  injure  us.     We  therefore 
propose  to  do  as  we  please  about  them."    "  Granted,"  says  Paul,  "  I  do  not  dispute 
your  rights  in  these  premises;  but  there  are  some  important  facts  which  you  are 
in  danger  of  losing  sight  of."     He  then  reminds  them — 1.  That  the  mere  matter 
of  eating  or  abstaining  is  in  itself  of  slight  consequence  ;  "  for  meat  commendeth 
us  not  to  God ;  neither  if  we  eat  are  we  the  better,  nor  if  we  eat  not  are  we  the 
worse."     So  small  a  matter  therefore  as  a  dish  upon  one's  table  should  not  be 
permitted  to  jeopardise  the  spiritual  interests  of  any.     2.  There  are  some  weaker 
brethren  who  have  less  knowledge.     These  weaker  brethren  must  not  be  left  out  of 
the  reckoning.     We  are  in  a  measure  resi^onsible  for  them.     Am  I,  then,  my 
brother's  keeper?     Aye,  and  if  he  fall  over  a  stumbling-block  of  my  making,  I 
shall  be  held  responsible  for  it.     3.  Eights  are  relative.     Some  of  them  must  bow 
down  to  others,  as  did  the  lesser  stars  to  the  greater  in  the  patriarch's  dream.     A 
man's  lowest  right  is  to  please  himself ;  his  highest  is  to  deny  himself  for  others. 
Eights  may  conflict,  but  duties  never ;  and  duty  always  has  the  highest  and  utter- 
most claim.     4.  As  to  individual  freedom  there  is  no  such  thing.     If  there  were 
only  one  man  in  the  universe  he  might  be  absolutely  free  to  serve  his  own  pleasure, 
but  the  moment  you  introduce  another  man  thf^re  is  a  mutual  restriction.     Each  is 
now  free  only  so  far  as  his  freedom  does  not  infringe  upon  the  other.     It  is  a  mis- 
take to  think  of  freedom  as  license.     There  is,  in  fact,  nothing  in  the  world  more 
circumscribed  than   true  freedom.      It  is  not  lawlessness  nor   deliverance  from 
restraint.     Its  best  definition  is,  "Perfect  obedience  to  perfect  law."     True,  "we 
are  no  longer  children  of  the  bond-woman,  but  of  the  free."     He  who  comes  forth 
from  the  bondage  of  the  law  into  the  liberty  of  the  gospel  bows  down,  at  the  very 
threshold  of  his  new  life,  and  gives  himself  as  a  slave  to  serve  the  interests  of  his 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viii. 

fellow  men.  III.  This  leads  us,  thirdly,  to  consider  with  the  apostle  the 
EXAMPLE  OF  Cheist  Himsblf.  "  Through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak  brother 
perish  for  whom  Christ  died  ?  "  For  whom  Christ  died !  Is  it  true,  then,  that 
Jesus  stooped  to  the  infirmity  of  the  least  of  His  little  ones  ?  Aye,  and  here  are 
we,  followers  of  His,  haggling  about  meats  and  drinks  !  God  forgive  us,  that  we 
fall  so  far  short  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  In  Phil.  ii.  7  occurs 
a  word  about  which  there  is  much  controversy.  The  word  is  kenosis ;  it  means 
an  "  utter  emptying,"  and  is  applied  to  Christ's  humiliation.  When  He  crossed 
the  threshold  of  heaven  to  undertake  His  redemptive  work  He  laid  aside  crown, 
royal  robes,  heavenly  retinue,  everything,  that  He  might  restore  the  race  of  fallen 
men.  He  was  free  to  remain  where  He  was  ;  but  He  put  away  His  freedom  and 
took  upon  Himself  the  form  of  a  servant  for  our  sake.  Oh,  by  the  love  and  devo- 
tion of  our  Lord,  let  us  cease  our  clamouring  for  rights,  and  begin  to  ask,  "  How 
may  we  empty  ourselves  as  He  did  for  the  uplifting  of  the  children  of  men  ?  " 
The  point  at  which  humanity  comes  nearest  to  Deity  is  self-denial.  Its  best  illus- 
tration is  at  Calvary,  where  God  stoops  down  to  embrace  His  penitent  children. 
The  summit  of  human  character  is  reached  when  a  man  gives  himself  for  others. 
Christ  did  it.     We  also,  for  Christ's  sake,  must  do  it.     (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-1.3.  And  through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak  brother  perish,  for 
whom  Christ  died  ? — Sufi'eriuri,  the  vieasiire  of  worth  : — I.  The  "  weak  brother  "  is 

NOT  OF  SIUCH  value  IN  HIMSELF;    BUT  HE   IS  MADE  VALUABLE  BY  THE  FACT  THAT    ChEIST 

DIED  FOR  HIM.  1.  How  much  of  theiiiselves  men  will  give  for  one  another,  mea- 
sures the  worth  in  which  that  other  is  held.  "  I  love  yon,"  may  mean  only  "  you 
are  my  plaything,"  or  "  I  love  myself"  ;  but  true  love  will  give  up  for  another's 
sake  time  and  convenience.  It  will  employ  all  the  resources  of  its  being  for  the 
sake  of  that  friend.  And  when,  in  some  great  exigency,  all  this  will  not  avail,  then 
love,  in  the  glory  of  its  power,  goes  to  death  as  to  the  consummation  of  itself,  and 
leaves  a  witness  to  itself  which  all  mankind  recognises  (John  xv.  13).  2.  Even  when 
this  is  the  fruit  of  instinct,  it  is  impressive.  The  bear  that  dies  defending  its  cubs, 
the  hound  that  pines  and  dies  on  its  master's  grave,  the  little  sparrow  that  fights 
the  hawk  and  owl,  not  for  itself,  but  its  nest — one  must  be  heartless  indeed  to  feel 
no  admiration  for  these  fidelities  of  love.  3.  But  how  much  more  when  one's  love 
and  suffering  spring  from  a  perception  of  excellence  in  an  object  loved  ?  The 
greater  the  nature  that  suffers,  the  higher  is  the  estimate  which  his  example  gives 
of  that  for  which  he  suffers.  And  by  this  analogue,  the  suffering  and  sacrifice  of  a 
Divine  Being  carries  out  the  witness  to  its  utmost  conceivable  extent.  4.  We  see 
at  once  a  new  element  in  the  bands  of  the  apostles  after  this  testimony  of  the 
Master.  No  sooner  was  He  gone  up  than  they  began  to  preach  that  man  was  valu- 
able on  account  of  what  Christ  suffered  for  him.  A  man  for  whom  Christ  died 
became  a  very  different  creature  from  a  man  before  Christ  had  died  for  him.  The  fact 
that  Christ  died  for  a  man  made  him  worth  protecting  if  he  was  weak.  5.  This 
suffering  was  not  founded  upon  man's  character.  It  would  be  a  testimony  to  the 
value  of  good  character  if  Christ  had  come  to  die  for  it ;  but  that  was  the  very  point 
of  conflict  between  Him  and  the  Pharisees.  They  held  that  Christ  ought  to  suffer  and 
identify  Himself  with  them;  but  He  most  scornfully  rejected  that,  and  said,  "  I  came 
not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners.  I  came  to  give  My  life  for  the  lowest  and 
worst  men."  He  more  sharply  than  any  other  discriminated  between  good  and  bad 
character ;  yet  there  was  something  behind  character  to  which  Christ  was  bearing 
witness,  viz.,  the  abstract  original  value  which  inheres  in  human  life.  The  death 
of  Christ  is  a  testimony  to  the  value  of  man  in  his  very  substance,  if  I  may  so  say ; 
so  that  the  least  and  the  lowest  have  the  essence  of  value  in  them.    II.  The  effect 

WHICH  THIS  FACT    HAS  OF    DETERMINING    MAn's  PLACE,  HIS    EIGHTS,  AND    HIS  WORTH.       1. 

Consider  what  the  world's  way  of  estimation  has  been  in  judging  men.  Earliest, 
men  measured  physical  power.  Now  the  habit  of  society  is  to  classify  men  into 
relative  ranks  of  value  by  the  effects  which  they  are  able  to  produce ;  by  what  they 
are  worth  to  society.  Therefore,  when  a  great  man  dies  men  say,  "  The  world  has 
met  with  a  great  loss."  If  a  poor  man  dies,  men  say,  "The  world  has  one  less 
incumbrance."  The  dog  that  hunts  well  is  better  than  a  pauper  that  does  not  do 
anything,  in  the  estimation  of  men.  If  a  race  are  not  able  to  hold  their  own 
against  aggressive  peoples  men  say,  "  There  is  no  help  for  it ;  they  must  go."  They 
judge  men  by  the  standard  of  political  economy.  There  is  no  such  contempt  on 
the  globe  for  anything  as  man  has  for  man.  We  need  therefore  to  go  back  to  this 
testimony  of  our  Master's  example,  who  came  by  His  suffering  and  death  to  bear  a 


CHAP.  VIII.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  529 

testimony  of  that  element  in  human  nature  which  every  man  has  hke  every  other. 
2.  This  view  interprets  the  futuie.  A  man  in  the  lowest  condition  here  is  not  the 
man  that  he  is  to  be  ;  anci  when  you  have  measured  and  weighed  him,  you  have  not 
estimated  what  lie  is  worth  in  the  kingiiom  to  come.  He  has  before  him  another 
world  ;  and  we  are  told  most  solemnly  by  our  Saviour  that  the  men  who  are  the 
most  regarded  here  will  be  worth  the  least  there.  "  The  lirst  shall  be  last,  the  last 
first."  Many  of  the  plants  of  our  northern  summer  come  up  quickly,  and  do 
exceedingly  well ;  but  they  are  coarse  and  rank  at  that.  And  there  are  many  seeds 
that  I  plant  by  the  side  of  them  every  spring,  which  in  the  first  summer  only  grow 
a  few  leaves  high.  There  is  not  sun  enough  to  make  them  do  what  it  is  in  them 
to  do.  But  if  1  put  them  in  some  sheltered  hot-house,  and  give  them  the  continuous 
growth  of  autumn  »nd  winter,  and  then,  the  next  summer,  jiut  them  out  once  more, 
they  gather  strength  by  this  second  planting,  and  lift  up  their  arms  and  s^jread  out 
the  abundance  of  their  blossoms.  The  plants  that  grew  quickest  the  year  before, 
are  now  called  weeds  by  their  side.  And  I  doubt  not  that  there  is  many  am:in  who 
rushes  up  to  a  rank  growth  in  the  soil  of  this  world,  and  of  whom  men  seeing  him, 
say,  "  That  is  a  great  mau,"  but  there  are  many  poor,  feeble  creatures  in  this  world 
who  will  be  carried  safely  on  and  up,  and  rooted  in  a  better  clime  ;  and  then,  lifting 
up  their  whole  nature,  they  will  come  out  into  that  glorious  summer  of  fervent  love 
in  heaven,  wh'  re  they  will  be  more  majestic,  more  fruitful,  than  those  who  so  far 
surpass  them  here.  III.  The  effects  which  this  doctrine  will  have  upon  our 
FEELINGS  AND  coNnucT  TO  OUR  FELLOW-MEN.  1.  Let  US  suppose  that  we  are  in 
full  possession  of  the  Christian  feeling — Christ  died  for  that  man.  It  will  be  a 
powerful  lestraint  upon  lawless  liberty,  and  will  bring  us  into  such  sym]iathy  with 
all  our  fellow  nu^n,  that,  at  the  sacrifice  of  our  own  convenience  and  rights,  it  will 
be  a  privilege  and  a  pleasure  for  us  to  serve  them.  Some  men  go  through  life, 
saying,  "  I  will  take  care  of  myself,  and  you  must  take  care  of  yourself  "  ;  and  they 
feel  that  thej'  have  a  right  to  go  through  life  thus.  Now  no  one  who  has  drunk 
deeply  of  the  spirit  of  the  Master  will  refuse  to  accept  the  injunction,  "  We  tliat 
are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak."  It  i>*  as  if  a  strong  swimmer 
should  turn  buck  and  lend  a  helping  hand  to  buoy  up  and  lift  across  tbe  flood  one 
that  was  weaker  or  less  able  to  swim  than  himself.  \\'e  have  no  right  to  disregard, 
much  less  to  hinder,  the  welfnre  of  any  human  being.  Have  I  aright  to  go  tramp, 
tramp,  tramp,  accordiig  to  the  law  of  my  physical  strength,  among  little  children  ? 
If  I  have  had  better  privileges  than  otheis,  and  have  come  to  conclusions  which 
they  cannot  understand,  have  I  a  right  to  scatter  sceptical  notions  through  society? 
A  man  is  bound  to  hold  his  knowledge,  his  conscience,  his  pleasures,  &c.,  subject 
to  this  great  law :  "  Christ  died  for  men,  and  I  must  live  for  men,  and  restrain  my 
power,  and  forego  my  rights,  even  for  their  sake."  We  have  a  right  to  employ 
men,  of  course ;  but  there  is  a  habit  which  prevails  in  society  of  thinking  that  a 
man  has  a  right  to  just  so  much  of  his  fellow-men  as  he  is  able  to  extract  from 
them.  A  man  may  fleece  a  hundred  men  during  the  week,  and  take  the  communion 
on  Sund;iy,  and  nobody  thinks  that  there  is  any  violation  of  good-fellowship  or 
of  orthodoxy.  But  that  great  law  of  fellowship  which  knits  every  man  to  every  other 
man  on  the  globe  says  not  only  "  Thou  art  his  brother,"  but,  "Thou  art  respon- 
sible for  his  weal  as  well  as  thine  own.  Thou  shalt  not  in  any  wise  harm  him."  2. 
This  is  one  of  the  most  precious  of  doctrines  to  those  that  look  and  long  for  a  better 
period  of  the  world.  It  was  almost  the  only  thing  we  could  urge  when  slavery  rent 
our  land.  The  single  strand  that  held  against  the  storms  of  aviirice  and  the  Are  of 
lurid  lusts  was  the  single  argument,  "For  these  Christ  died."  And  that  held  ;  and 
the  most  wonderful  change  toward  regeneration  that  the  world  ever  saw  has  taken 
place  by  the  simple  operation  of  that  great  law.  And  what  have  we  now  for  tho 
weak  races  ?  Men  of  a  hard  heart  and  an  iron-shod  f^ot  are  preparing  to  tread 
these  people  down  and  deny  them  their  rights.  And  I  take  my  stand  by  the  side  of 
every  weak  creature,  whatever  his  nationality  may  be,  and  I  say,  "For  him  Christ 
died."  Give  men  at  the  bottom  a  chance  to  come  up.  God,  the  highest,  bowed 
down  His  head  and  came  upon  the  earth  and  suffered  for  the  w  eakest  and  the  worst. 
3.  Christian  brethren,  we  must  arm  ourselves  betimes.  The  seeds  of  a  better  public 
sentiment  must  be  s  wn.  Then  let  no  man  be  discouraged  because  he  is  labouring 
with  a  veiy  much  neglected  class.  There  is  no  material  in  this  world  which  is  un- 
promising. Mo  man  is  beyond  salvation  since  "  Christ  died  "  for  him.  {H.  W. 
Beech  r.)  But  when  ye  s'n  so  against  tlie  brethren,  and  wound  their  weak  con- 
fcience,  ye  sin  against  Christ. — Siu  against  Clirixt : — It  is  a  proof  of  the  intimate 
character  of  the  relation  between  Christ  and  His  people  that  it  should  be  the  very 
V&L.    I.  34 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

climax  of  reijroach  as^iinst  Christians  because  of  any  course  they  followed,  to  charge 
them  with  sin  against  Christ.  Language  like  this  could  be  used  of  no  merely 
human  teacher  and  leader.  To  act  without  due  charity  is  a  sin  against  Christ 
because  it  is — I.  To  offexd  against  Christ's  comjiandjient,  viz.,  to  love  one 
another.  This  was  to  be  the  test  of  Cliristian  discipleship.  II.  To  coxtkadict 
Christ's  example.  What  Christ  enjoined  He  exemplified  in  His  whole  life,  and  at 
last  in  His  death.  III.  To  injure  Christ  in  the  person  of  one  of  His  little 
ONES.  Christ  so  identified  Himself  with  His  disciples  as  to  regard  what  was  done 
to  them  as  done  to  Himself.  Whosoever  is  indifferent  to  the  welfare  of  the  Lord's 
servants,  sins  against  the  Lord  Himself,  and  shall  not  be  held  guiltless.  (Prof.  J. 
R.  Thomson.)  Woiindinij  a  iceak  conttcieiice  : — I.  What  a  weak  conscience  is. 

1.  Such  a  conscience  is  impr'iperly  called  tender  ;  for  tenderness  imports  quickness 
and  exactness  of  sense,  which  is  the  pfrfecticn  of  this  faculty,  whose  duty  it  is  to 
be  a  spiritual  watch  to  give  us  warning  of  whatsoever  concerns  us.  It  is  opposed  to 
a  hard  or  seared  conscience  ;  but  a  weak  conscience  is  opposed  to  a  strong,  which 
vf-ry  strength  consists  in  the  tenderress  or  quickness  of  its  discerning  power.  2. 
The  weakness  of  con=cience  here  spoken  of  is  opposed  to  fa,ith  (Ecm.  xiv.  2),  by 
which  is  not  meant  that  act  by  which  a  man  is  justified,  but  signifies  the  same  with 
knowledge  (vers.  7,  10).  The  clear  discernment  of  what  is  unlawful,  and  what  is 
only  indifferent,  together  with  a  firm  persuasion  of  the  lawful  use  of  such  indif-' 
ferent  things,  all  circumstances  being  duly  observed  in  the  using  of  them.  And 
therefore,  on  the  other  siile,  the  weak  conscience  is  such  a  one  as  judges  otherwise 
of  the  nature  of  things  than  indeed  it  is,  supposing  that  to  be  unlawful  in  itself 
which  really  is  not  so.  3.  From  wlience  it  follows  that  weakness  of  conscience 
implies — (1)  An  ignorance  of  the  lawf ahiess  of  si  me  certain  thing  or  action.  That 
ignorance  must  be  such  a  one  as  is  not  willing,  (a)  Because  it  must  be  such  a  one 
as  renders  it  in  some  degree  excusable  ;  but  so  far  as  any  defect  is  resolved  into  the 
will,  it  is  in  that  degree  inexcusable.  {b)  Because  it  must  be  such  an  ignorance 
as  renders  the  person  having  it  the  object  of  compassion.  But  no  man  pities 
another  for  any  evil  lying  upon  him,  which  he  would  not  help,  but  which  he  could 
not.  And  consequently  it  must  be  resolved  into  the  natural  weakness  of  the  under- 
standing faculty,  or  e  se  the  want  of  opportunities  or  means  of  knowledge.  Either 
of  which  makes  ignorance  necessary,  as  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  see  who  wants 
eyes,  and  equally  impossible  for  him  who  wants  light.  (2)  A  suspicion  of  the  un- 
lawfulness of  any  thmg  or  action.  (3)  A  religious  abstinence  from  the  use  of  that 
thing  of  the  lawfulness  whereof  it  is  thus  ignorant  or  suspicious.  It  brings  a  man 
to  that  condition  in  Col.  ii.  21.  II.  Wh^t  it  is  to  wound  or  sin  against  it.  1.  To 
afiflict  or  discompose  it ;  i.e.,  to  rob  it  of  its  peace.  For  there  is  that  concernment 
for  God's  honour  dwelling  in  every  truly  pious  heart  wbich  makes  it  troubled  at  the 
sight  of  any  action  by  which  it  supposes  God  to  be  dishonoured.  And  as  piety 
commands  us  not  to  offend  God,  so  charity  enjoins  us  not  to  grieve  our  neighbour. 

2.  To  encourage  or  embolden  it  to  act  against  its  present  judgment  or  persuasion  : 
which  is,  in  other  terms,  to  offend,  or  cast  a  stumbling-block  before  it:  i.e.,  to  do 
something  which  may  administer  to  it  an  occasion  of  falling  or  bringing  it=elf 
under  the  guilt  of  sin.  So  that  as  the  former  was  a  breach  upon  the  peace,  this  is 
properly  a  wound  upon  the  purity  of  the  conscience.  3.  The  conscience  may  be 
induced  to  act  counter  to  its  present  persuasion.  (1)  By  exRinple ;  which  is  the 
case  here  expressly  mentioned,  and  principally  intended.  (2)  By  command;  as 
when  a  person  in  power  enjoins  the  doing  something,  of  the  lawfulness  of 
which  a  man  is  not  persuaded.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  Dissvasives  against 
an  undue  ■n$e  of  Cliristian  liberty  : — 1.  A  weak  conscience  is  easily  wounded, 
2.  The  infliction  of  such  a  wound  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of  love.  3.  It 
is  a  sin  against  Christ  Himself.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Wherefore,  if  meat 
make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth. — • 
The  great  argument  for  abstinence  : — I.  Arguments  for  abstinence  are  often 
GROUNDED  ON — 1.  Danger  to  ourselves.  (1)  We  may  be  led  to  excess.  (2)  We 
may  injure  ourselves,  physically  or  morally.  2.  Wastefulness.  3.  Intrinsical 
wrongness.  II.  Such  arguments  frequently  lack  cogenct.  1.  The  third  will 
have  no  application  to  a  large  class  of  things  indifferent  in  themselves,  and  it 
is  generally  in  respect  of  such  that  the  war  is  waged.  2.  The  others  are  open  to 
question.  Conflicting  facts  will  be  adduced,  and  where  knowledge  is  imperfect  the 
contest  is  likely  to  continue.  And  the  argument  often  acts  as  a  temptation,  for 
when  human  nature  is  warned  of  peril  it  often  delights  to  show  how  brave  and 
steadfast  it  can  be.     III.  The  apostolic  aegument.     St.  Paul — 1.  Enlarges  the 


CHAP.  viTi.]  I.   CORINTHTANS.  531 

view  so  that  others  are  incluled  as  well  as  ourselves.  Abstinence  is  sometimes  not 
for  ourselves  at  all,  but  only  for  our  fellows  (Phil.  ii.  4).  We  are  units,  but  united 
units.  We  cannot  legislate  fbr  that  little  area  which  we  ourselves  occupy.  2. 
Recognises  the  influence  of  example.  Our  words  are  a  spider's  web  ;  our  acis  are  a 
cab^e.  Men  do  what  we  show  them,  not  what  we  tell  them.  And  we  cannot 
persuade  men  that  we  are  strong  and  they  weak.  3.  Asserts  the  obligation  of  self- 
sacrifice  for  the  welfare  of  others.  That  which  is  "  indifferent  "  becomes  anything 
but  that  if  our  indulgence  is  injurious  to  others.  Our  sacrifice  is  small  indeed 
compared  with  their  possible  loss.  This  argument  has  special  force  for  Chris- 
tians. (1)  They  have  the  example  of  self-sacrifice  in  their  Master  (ver.  12).  They 
have  a  more  impressive  view  of  the  issues  involved  in  the  fall  of  a  fellow-creature. 
(2)  Their  non-abstinence  may  be  a  sin  against  a  fellow-Christian  (ver.  11).  The 
fall  may  be,  not  of  an  unbeliever,  but  of  a  brother  associated  in  Christian  fellowship 
and  service,  and  thus  be — (3)  A  sin  against  the  brethren  (ver.  12),  (.^.,the  Church, 
bringing  scandal  and  disgrace  through  a  brother's  fall.  And  also — (4)  A  sin 
against  Christ  (ver.  12).  For  Christ  and  Christians  are  one— He  the  Head  and  they 
the  members.  (5)  They  have  in  their  ears  such  utterances  of  tlieir  Master's  as 
Matt,  xviii.  6,  xxv.  40.  {W.E.  Httrndall,  M.A.)  Personal  sacrifice  is — I.  Neces- 
SARV.  1.  \ot  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  but  in  many  other  things.  2.  To  avoid 
otfence.  II.  Is  obligatoey — 1.  On  Christians.  2.  By  the  law  of  love,  and — 3.  The 
example  of  Christ.  III.  Is  magnaximods.  It  is — 1.  A  conquest  of  self.  2.  An  ;  ci 
of  benevolence.  3.  A  feature  of  renewed  nature.  IV.  Will  be  abundantly  com- 
pensated. 1.  By  the  approval  of  conscience.  2.  The  benefit  of  others.  3.  The 
approbation  of  God.     4.  Final  reward.     (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Ahstnining  for  the 

(lood  of  others  : — Do  you  not  think,  dear  friends,  that  thoujjh  it  may  be  quite 
proper  for  you  to  take  a  glass  of  wine  or  a  glass  of  beer,  and  there  is  no  sin  in  the 
thing  at  all,  your  example  may  be  injurious  to  somebody  to  whom  it  would  be  a 
sin  to  take  it  ?  Perhaps  some  persons  cannot  take  a  glass  without  taking  two, 
three,  four,  five,  or  six  glasses.  You  can  stop,  you  know ;  bat  if  your  example 
leads  them  to  start,  and  they  cannot  stop,  is  it  right  to  set  them  going  ?  Though 
you  have  a  clear  head,  anl  csn  stand  in  a  dangerous  place,  I  would  not  rpcommend 
you  to  go  there  if  somebody  else  would  thus  be  phiced  in  danger.  If  I  were  walking 
by  the  cliffs  of  Dover,  and  I  happened  to  have  a  very  fine  cool  head,  yet,  if  I  had 
my  sons  with  me,  and  I  knew  that  they  had  ordinary  kinds  of  heads,  I  should  not 
like  to  go  and  stnnd  just  on  a  jutting  piece  of  crag  so  as  to  induce  them  to  try  the 
same  position.  No  ;  I  should  feA,  "  Though  I  can  stand  here,  you  cannot  ;  and 
if  I  stand  here,  perhaps  you  will  attempt  it,  and  fall,  and  I  shall  be  guilty  of 
your  blood."  Let  us  treat  men  as  we  would  treat  our  sons ;  and  let  us  be  weak  to 
their  weakness,  and  deny  ourselves  for  their  sakes.  Is  not  tl'at  good  and  proper 
reasoning?  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is.  If  it  is  not  good  reasoning,  it  is  safe.  I 
never  have  asked  God  to  forgive  me  for  my  sin  in  going  without  strong  drink.  I 
liave  never  seen  any  commandment  in  Scripture  showing  that  I  am  bound  to  take 
it.  I  feel  free  to  do  as  I  like  about  abstaining  ;  but  e-pecinlly  free  when  for  the 
good  of  others  I  prefer  to  abstain  altogether.  (C.  H.  Sj^itrtieon.)  Christian  con- 
sideration for  others: — Now  ^ou  may  say  to  me  if  you  please  as  a  man,  "Mr. 
Oough,  I  am  a  modera'e  drinker ;  I  use  these  things  in  moderation,  and  therefore 
I  set  you  a  good  e?;ample."  I  say  at  once,  "  Sir,  you  do  not."  "  Well,  if  I  drink 
one  glass  and  thei'e  stop,  is  not  that  an  example  for  others?  "  "  No,  sir  ;  no,  sir; 
no  more  than  if  there  was  a  bridge  built  over  a  gulf,  to  fall  into  which  was  utter 
ruin,  and  that  bridge  will  bear  1-50  lbs.,  and  you  weigh  150  lbs.,  and  you  say  to  that 
young  man  (and  he  weighs  200  lbs.), '  Follow  my  example.' — '  I  don't  like  the  look  of 
that  bridge.'  'Don't  be  a  fool,  I  have  walked  it  forty  years;  proved  it  perfec-tly 
safe  ;  never  cracked  with  me  ;  never  sprung  with  me  ;  perfectly  safe.' — 'But  I  don't 
like  it.'  '  Don't  be  foolish ;  you  can  do  that  which  I  can  do  ;  now  I  am  setting 
you  a  good  example;  follow  me  step  by  step.'  That  young  man  attempts  to 
follow  it ;  he  sets  his  foot  on  the  centre  ;  crash  !  crash  !  down  he  goes,  with  a 
shriek,  into  destruftion.  Now.  did  you  set  a  good  example?  No,  because  you 
didn't  take  into  consideration  the  difference  of  weight."  Before  yon  can  sav  to  a 
young  man,  "  I  set  you  a  good  example,"  you  must  take  into  consideration  the 
difference  between  his  temperament  and  yours,  his  susceptibility  and  yours.  (J. 
1j.  Gough.) 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  k. 


CHAPTEB  IX, 

Vees.  1-22.  Am  I  not  an  apostle  ?  Am  I  not  free  ?  Have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  '? — Signs  of  apoatleship  : — Why  should  Paul,  departing  from  his  usual 
custom,  speak  here  of  himself  and  his  claims  ?  Undoubtedly  because  these  were 
questioned.  Now  wishing  to  incite  the  Corinthians  to  self-denial,  Paul  exemplified 
this  virtue ;  but  to  make  this  effective  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  assert  and 
vindicate  his  position  and  rights.  If  he  had  no  special  commission  from  Christ, 
there  was  no  virtue  in  renouncing  privileges  which  never  were  his.  The  signs  of 
his  apostleship  were — I.  The  vision  of  Christ.  Not  that  every  one  who  saw  Jesus 
became  an  apostle ;  but  that  none  became  an  apostle  who  had  not  seen  and  been 
commissioned  by  Him.  No  doubt  he  had  been  contrasted  with  the  twelve  to  his 
disadvantage  in  these  respects.  But  Paul  would  not  submit  to  an  imputation 
which  must  needs  weaken  his  authority.  He  had  seen  the  Lord  on  the  way  to 
Damascus,  had  heard  His  voice,  and  been  entrusted  with  a  special  mission  to  the 
Gentiles.  He  had  not  been  preaching  the  gospi-1  at  the  instigation  of  his  own 
inclinations,  but  in  obedience  to  the  authority  of  Christ.  II.  Success  in  apostolic 
LABouE.  The  craftsman  proves  his  ability  by  the  work  he  does ;  the  sailor  by  his 
navigation  of  the  vessel ;  the  soldier  by  his  courage  and  skill.  So  the  apostle 
acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  practical  test.  1.  Paul  appealed  to  his  work. 
Labour  is  misspent  when  no  results  ensue.     But  his  labour  had  not  been  in  vain. 

2.  The  workmanship  of  the  ap  'stle  was  also  his  seal,  i.e.,  it  bore  the  mark  and 
witness  of  his  character,  aljilitv  and  office.  A  competent  judge,  looking  to  the 
Churches  Paul  had  founded,  would  admit  them  to  be  evidence  of  his  apostleship. 

3.  The  signs  were  manifest  in  the  very  community  where  his  authority  was 
questioned.  There  is  irony  and  force  iu  the  appeal  made  to  the  Corinthians. 
Whoever  raised  a  question  they  should  not.  {Prof.  J.  R.  Thomson.)  The  leading 
characteristics  of  a  truly  great  gospel  minister: — The  greater  minister  of  Christ — 
I.  The  more  independent  op  cere-  onial  restrictions.  Paul  was  an  apostle,  and 
had  "  seen  Christ,"  a  qualification  that  distinguished  him  ns  a  minister  from  all 
but  eleven  others.  Besides  this,  his  natural  and  acquired  endowments  placed 
him  in  the  first  rank  of  reasoners,  scholars,  and  orators.  He  was  brought  up  at  the 
feet  of  Gamaliel,  &c.  But  see  how  he  regarded  the  mere  conventionalities  of 
religious  society.  "  Am  I  not  an  ap  istle  ?  Am  I  not  free  ?  " — referring  to  the  eating 
of  meat  offered  to  idols,  &c.  (chap.  viii.  13).  The  greater  the  man,  always  the  more 
independent  he  is  of  forms,  fashions,  customs.  Hezekiah  called  that  which  his 
countrymen  worshipped  "  Nehushtan,"  a  piece  of  brass.  Cromwell  called  that 
glittering  insignia  of  authority  on  the  table  of  the  House  of  Commons  a  "bauble." 
Thomas  Carlyle  called  all  the  pageantry  of  otHce  and  the  glitter  of  wealth  "shams." 
Burns  called  the  swaggering  lordling  a  "coof. "  A  famous  French  preacher  began 
his  funeral  address  over  tne  coffin  of  his  sovereicn  with  "  There  is  nothing  great 
but  God."  What  cared  Elijah  for  kings  ?  Nothing.  Felix  trembled  before  the 
moral  majesty  of  Paul,  even  in  chains.  II.  The  highee  the  services  he  renders  to 
society  (vers.  1,  2).  "  He  that  converteth  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  ways,"  &c. 
What  work  approaches  this  in  grandeur  and  importance  ?  And  the  man  who 
succeeds  in  accomplishing  it  demonstrates  the  divinity  of  his  ministry  (ver.  3). 

III.  The  more  independent  he  is  op  the  innocent  enjoyments  of  life  (vers.  4,  5). 
Paul  claims  the  privilege  to  eat  and  drink  as  he  pleased,  and  to  mirry  or  not. 

IV.  The  more  claim  he  has  to  the  temporal  support  of  those  whom  hk 
spiritually  serves  (vers.  6-14).  The  reasons  are — 1.  'I  he  general  usage  of  mankind 
(ver.  7).  He  illustrates  the  equity  of  the  principle  from  the  cases  of  the  soldier,  the 
ag'iculturist,  and  the  shepherd.  2.  The  principle  of  the  Jewish  law  (vers.  8,  9). 
"  Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen  ?  "  Yes  ;  but  is  not  man  greater  than  the  ox  ?  And 
shall  he  work  and  be  deprived  of  temporal  supplies '?  3.  The  principles  of  common 
equity  (ver.  11).  4.  Other  apostles  and  their  wives  were  thus  supported  (vers.  6-12). 
Have  we  done  less  ?  Is  our  authoritv  inferior  ?  5.  The  support  of  the  Jewish 
priesthood  (ver.  13).  6.  The  ordination  of  Christ  (ver.  14;  cf.  Matt.  x.  10), 
Looking  at  all  that  Paul  says  on  that  question  here,  the  conviction  cannot  be 
avoided  that  no  man  has  a  stronger  claim  to  a  tempn-al  recompense  than  a  true 
gospel  minister.  A  belt  no  claims  are  so  universally  ignor-  d.  Call  the  money  von 
pay  to  your  butcher,  baker,  lawyer,  doctor,  "  charity";  but  in  the  name  of  all  that 
is  just,  do  not  call  that  ch  irity  which  you  tender  to  the  man  who  consecrates  his 
entire  being  and  time  to  impart  to  you  the  elements  of  etern  d  life.     V.  The  more 


CHAP.  IS.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  533 

BEADY  TO  SURRENDER  HIS   CLAIMS  FOE   THE    SAKE    OF    USEFULNESS.       (D.  ThoinOS,  D.D.) 

A  true  minister  : — We  see  in  these  verses — T.  What  it  is  that  constitutes  a  true 
MINISTER.  1.  Communion  with  Christ.  "  Have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord?  " 
2,  Souls  won  for  Christ.  "Are  not  ye  my  work  in  the  Lord?"  II.  The  true 
minister  ought  to  be  recoonised  by  HIS  PEOPLE.  1.  Couitesy  demands  it.  2.  His 
message  demands  it.     3.  His  work  requires  it.     4.  Their  consciousness  declares  it. 

III.  It  is  OFTEN  BETTER  TO  ANSWER  FOOLISH  QUESTIONS  THAN  TO  PASS  THEM  BY.      1.  Foi" 

the  sake  of  individual  character.  2.  For  the  sake  of  the  Christian  Church.  3.  For 
the  sake  of  mankind.     {A.  F.  Barjield.)         lite  claims  of  the  Christidu  minister  : — 

1.  Are  founded — 1.  Upon  his  character  as — (1)  A  messenger  of  Christ.  (2)  A  man. 
(3)  A  Christian.      2.  Upon  his  work.     II.  Include — 1.  The  common  rights  of  man. 

2.  The  particular  right  to  a  just  compensation  for  his  labour.  III.  Should  be 
ENFORCED — 1.  With  moderation.  2.  With  a  due  regard  for  the  interests  of  the 
gospel.  IV.  Ought  to  be  relinquished  rather  than  occasion  repi'.oach  :  still  the 
right  remains,  and  will  finally  be  established.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  Maintniance  of 
the  ministrij  : — In  the  preceding  chapter  Paul  has  disposed  of  the  question  as  to 
meats  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols.  He  has  inculcated  the  duty  of  accommodating 
ourselves  to  the  consciences  of  others,  and  is  prepared  to  abridge  his  own  Christian 
liberty.  Lut  keeping  pane,  as  he  always  does,  with  the  thought  of  his  readers,  it  at 
once  occurs  to  him  that  his  opponents  will  declare  that  his  apostlesljip  stands  on  so 
insecure  a  basis  that  he  has  no  option  in  the  matter,  but  must  curry  favour  with 
all  parties.  The  original  apostles  may  reasonably  claim  exemption  from  manual 
labour,  and  dpmand  maintenance  both  for  themselves  and  their  wives ;  but  Paul 
has  no  such  claim  to  mauitenance,  and  is  aware  that  his  apostle>:hip  is  doubtful.  He 
therefore — I.  Asserts  his  bight  to  the  same  privileges  and  maintenance  as  the 
other  apostles  (1-14).  He  rests  his  claim  on — 1.  His  apostleship  (vers.  l-tj).  No  one 
could  be  an  apostle  who  had  not  seen  Christ  after  His  resurrection.  I'aul  therefore, 
both  in  his  speeches  and  in  his  letters,  insists  that  on  the  way  to  Damascus  he  had 
seen  the  risen  Lord.  But  an  apostle  was  also  one  who  was  commissioned  to  bear 
witness  to  this  fact;  and  that  Paul  had  been  thus  commissioned  he  thinks  the 
Corinthians  may  conclude  from  the  results  among  thems-eUesof  his  preaching.  In 
presence  of  the  finished  structure  that  draws  the  world  to  gaze,  it  is  too  late  to  ask 
if  he  who  built  it  is  an  architect.  2.  The  principle  of  remuneration  everywhere 
observed  in  human  atTairs  (ver.  7).  However  difficult  it  is  to  lay  down  an  absolute 
law  of  wages,  it  may  be  affirmed  as  a  natural  principle  that  labour  must  be  so  paid 
as  to  maintain  the  labourer  in  life  and  efficiency ;  as  to  enable  him  to  bring  up  a 
family  which  shall  be  useful  and  not  burdensome  to  society,  and  as  to  secure  for 
him  some  reserve  of  leisure  for  his  own  enjovment  and  advantage.  Paul  antici- 
pates the  objection  that  these  secular  i^rinciples  have  no  application  to  sacred 
things  (vers.  8,  9).  But  this  law  is  two-edged.  If  a  man  produce  what  the  com- 
munity needs,  he  should  himself  profit  by  the  production  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
if  a  man  w'll  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat.  3.  Ordinary  pratiturle  (ver.  11). 
And  some  of  the  Churches  founded  by  Paul  felt  that  the  benefit  they  had  derived 
from  him  could  not  be  stated  in  terms  of  money  ;  but  prompted  by  irrepressible 
gratitude,  they  could  not  hut  seek  to  relieve  him  from  manual  labour  and  set  him 
free  for  higher  work.  The  method  of  gauging  the  amount  of  spiritual  benefit 
absorbed,  by  its  overflow  in  material  aid  given  to  the  propagation  of  the  gospel 
would,  I  daresav,  scarce'y  be  relished  by  that  monstrous  development  the  niggardly 
Christian.  4.  The  Levitical  usage  (vers.  13,  14).  That  evils  may  result  from  the 
existence  of  a  paid  ministry  no  one  will  be  disposed  to  deny.  But  if  the  work 
of  the  ministry  is  to  be  thoroughly  done,  men  must  give  their  whole  time  to  it ;  and 
therefore  must  be  paid  for  it ;  a  circurc stance  which  is  not  likely  to  lead  to  much 
evil  while  the  great  mass  of  ministers  are  paid  as  they  are.  II.  (iivKS  the  true 
REASON  FOR  FOREGOING  HIS  LAWFUL  CLAIM.  Paul  felt  the  more  fi-ee  to  urge  them 
because  his  custom  was  to  forego  them  (ver.  1.5).  How  apt  are  self-denying  men  to 
spoil  their  self-denial  by  dropping  a  sneer  at  the  weaker  souls  that  cannot  follow 
their  heroic  example.  Not  so  Paul.  He  first  fights  the  battle  of  the  weak  for  them, 
and  then  disclaims  all  i^articipation  in  the  spoils.  Nor  does  he  consider  that  his 
self-denial  is  at  all  meritorious.  On  the  contrary,  he  makes  it  appear  as  if  no 
choice  were  left  to  him.  His  fear  was  that  if  he  took  remuneration,  he  "  should 
hinder  the  gospel  of  Christ."  Some  of  the  best  incomes  in  Greece  were  made  by 
clever  lecturers ;  Paul  was  resolved  he  should  never  be  mistaken  for  one  of  these. 
And  no  doubt  his  success  was  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  men  recognised  that  his 
teaching  was  a  labour  of  love.     Every  man  finds  an  audience  who  speaks,  not 


534  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

because  he  is  paid  for  doing  so,  but  because  there  is  that  in  him  which  must  find 
utterance.  Paul  felt  that  on  him  lay  the  gravest  responsibilities.  Had  he  com- 
plained of  bad  usage,  and  stipulated  for  higher  terms,  and  withdrawn,  who  could 
have  taken  up  the  task  he  laid  down  ?  But  while  Paul  could  not  but  be 
conscious  of  his  importance,  he  would  arrogate  to  himself  no  credit.  Whether 
he  does  his  work  willingly  or  unwillingly,  still  he  must  do  it.  If  he  does 
it  wilaugly,  he  has  a  reward  ;  if  he  does  it  unwillingly,  still  he  is  entrusted  with  a 
stewardship  he  dare  not  neglect.  What,  then,  is  the  reward?  The  satisfaction  of 
knowing  that,  having  freely  received,  he  had  freely  given  (ver.  18).  III.  Pieaffikjis 
THE  PEixciPLE  OK  WHICH  HE  HAS  UNIFORMLY  ACTED.  It  was  from  Paul  (vcr.  19)  tbat 
Luther  derived  the  keynote  of  his  blast  "on  Christian  Liberty"  with  which  he 
stirred  Europe  into  new  lite :  "  A  Christian  man  is  the  most  free  lord  of  all,  and 
subject  to  none  ;  a  Christian  man  is  the  most  dutiful  servant  of  all,  and  subject  to 
every  one."  But  Paul  was  no  mere  latitudinarian.  While  accommodating  himself 
to  the  practice  of  those  around  him  in  all  matters  (vers.  20-23)  in  all  matters  of 
mere  outward  observance,  he  held  very  definite  opinions  on  the  chief  articles  of  the 
Christian  creed.  No  hberality  can  ever  induce  a  thoughtful  man  to  discourage  the 
formation  of  opinion  on  all  matters  of  imjDortauce.  No  doubt  righteousness  of  life 
is  better  than  soundness  of  creed.  But  is  it  not  possible  to  have  both?  Again, 
Paul  had  an  end  in  view  which  preserved  his  liberality  from  degenerating  (ver.  22). 
In  order  to  remove  a  man's  difficulties,  you  must  look  at  them  from  his  point  of 
view  and  feel  the  pressure  he  feels.  In  order  to  "  gain  "  men,  you  must  credit 
them  with  some  desire  to  see  the  truth,  and  you  must  have  sympathy  enough  to  see 
with  their  eyes.  Parents  sometimes  weaken  their  influence  with  their  children  by 
inability  to  look  at  things  with  the  eyes  of  youth.  Put  yourself  in  the  place  of  the 
inquiring,  perplexed,  embittered  soul,  find  out  the  good  that  is  in  it,  patiently 
accommodate  yourself  to  its  ways  so  far  as  you  legitimately  may,  and  you  will  be 
rewarded  by  "gaining  some."  [M.  Dods,  D.D.)  Abstinence  from  rightful 
privileges: — Ver.  27  is  commonly  quoted  in  the  Calvinistic  Controversy,  to  prove 
the  possii'ility  of  the  believer's  final  fall.  In  reality,  it  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  it.  The  word  "  castaway,"  is  literally  "  reprobate,"  that  which,  being  tested, 
fails.  "  Eeprobate  silver  shall  men  call  them."  St.  Paul  says,  "  Lest  when  I  have 
preached  to  others,  I  myself,  when  tried  by  the  same  standard,  should  fail."  In 
chap.  viii.  Paul  had  laid  down  the  principle  that  it  was  good  to  respect  the  scruples 
of  weaker  brethren  (ver.  13).  But  to  this  teaching  an  objection  might  be  raised.  Does 
the  apostle  practise  wbat  he  preaches  ?  Or  it  is  merely  a  fine  sentiment  ?  Does  he 
preach  to  others,  himself  being  a  castaway,  i.e.,  one  who  being  tested  is  found 
wanting?  The  whole  of  the  chapter  is  an  assertion  of  his  consistency.  Note: — 
I.  Paul's  eight  to  certain  privileges,  viz.,  domestic  solaces  and  ministerial  main- 
tenance. This  right  he  bases  on  four  arguments :  1.  By  a  principle  universally 
recognised  in  human  practice.  A  king  warring  on  behalf  of  a  people,  wars  a,t  their 
charge — a  planter  of  a  vineyard  expects  to  eat  of  the  fruit — a  shepherd  is  entitled 
to  the  milk  of  the  flock.  All  who  toil  for  the  good  of  others  derive  an  equivalent 
from  them.  Gratuitous  devotion  of  life  is  nowhere  considered  obligatory.  2.  By 
a  principle  implied  in  a  Scriptural  enactment  (ver.  9).  The  ox  was  provided  for, 
not  because  it  was  an  ox,  but  because  it  was  a  labourer.  3.  By  a  principle  of 
fairness  and  reciprocity.  Great  services  establish  a  claim.  If  they  owed  to  the 
apostle  their  souls,  his  time  had  a  claim  on  their  gold.  4.  By  the  law  of  the 
Temple  Service.  The  whole  institution  of  Levites  and  priests  implied  the 
principle  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  labour — of  band  and  of  brain  :  and  that  the 
toilers  with  the  braiu,  though  not  producers,  have  a  claim  on  the  community! 
They  are  essential  to  its  well-being,  and  are  not  mere  drones.  II.  His  valiant 
ABSTINENCE  FROM  THESE  PRIVILEGES  (vers.  12, 1.5).  Notc — 1.  His  rcasous.  (1)  He  was 
forced  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  for  the  preaching  of  it,  therefore,  no  thanks  were 
due.  But  he  turned  his  necessity  to  glorious  gain.  By  forfeiting  pay  he  got 
reward  :  and  in  doing  freely  what  he  must  do,  he  became  free.  When  "  I  must  " 
is  changed  into  "  I  will,"  you  are  free.  (2)  His  object  was  to  gain  others  (ver.  19) 
His  whole  life  was  one  great  illustration  of  this  principle :  free  from  all,  he  became 
the  servant  of  all.  2.  The  general  principles  of  our  human  life.  You  cannot  run 
as  you  will ;  there  are  conditions  (ver.  24).  You  cannot  go  on  saying,  I  have  a  right 
to  do  this,  therefore  I  will  do  it.  You  must  think  how  it  will  appear,  not  for  the 
sake  of  mere  respectability,  or  to  obtain  a  character  for  consistency,  but  for  the  sake 
of  others.  And  its  conditions  are  as  those  of  a  wrestling  match — you  must  be 
temperate  in  all  things — i.e.,  abstain  from  even  lawful  indulgences.    Bememberno 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  535 

man  liveth  to  himself.  The  cry,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  is  met  by  St. 
Paurs  clear,  steadfast  answer,  "  You  are."  {F.  W.  Robertson.  M.A.)  If  I  be  not 
an  apostle  unto  others  ...  I  am  to  you ;  for  the  seal  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye 
in  the  Lord. —  The  successful  minister  : — I.  His  happiness.  1.  Success.  2.  Divine 
attestation.  II.  His  claims  upon — 1.  The  respect.  2.  Affection.  B.  Help.  4. 
Support  of  his  charge.  (•/.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  seal  of  apostlesldp  : — I.  Consists 
i\  ACTUAL  SUCCESS— in  the  conviction  and  conversion  of  sinners.  II.  Establishes 
THE  CLAI3I  TO  APOSTLESHIP — bccausc  it — 1.  Indicates  the  Divine  call  and  blessing. 

2.  Is  of  more  value  than  human  authorisation.     III.  Entitles  a  minister  to  the 

SPECIAL   REGABD     OF    THOSE    TO    WHOSE    SPIRITUAL   BENEFIT    HE    HAS    CONTRIBUTED.       If 

no  claim  on  others — yet  on  you  for  sympathy,  love,  support.  (Ibid.)  Mine 
answer  to  those  that  do  examine  me  is  this. — Ministerial  independence  : — I. 
Attempts  are  often  made  to  lijiit  the  free  action  op  Christian  ministers  ;  as  in 
apostolic  times,  so  now.  II.  These  attempts  should  be  resisted  with  Christian 
dignity  and  in  a  Christian  spirit — Paul's  answer — he  excludes  all  interference  with — 
1.  His  manner  of  life.  2.  His  personal  and  domestic  associations.  His  mode  of 
working.       {Ibid.)  The  right  of  the  ministri/   to   support: — Observe — I.  The 

occasion  of  the  apostle's  appeal.  1.  Not  selfish  (ver.  12).  2.  Some  disputed  his 
apostleship  and  its  rights  (ver.  3).  II.  His  assertion  of  his  eight — 1.  To  support 
for  himself — for  his  wife  if  he  thought  proper  to  marry.  2.  Sufficient  to  free 
him  from  tlie  necessity  of  manual  labour.  III.  His  defence  of  his  eight — is 
sustained  by  an  appeal  to — 1.  Human  justice.  2.  The  law.  3.  The  sense  of 
gratitude.      4.  Divine    ordination    under    the    law,    under    the   gospel.       (Ibid.) 

Vers.  7-14.  Who  goeth  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charg'es  ? — The  battle  of 
life : — We  have  here — I.  An  inspiriting  metaphor.  When  life  is  represented  as  a 
warfare,  some  peaceful  minds  may  feel  a  little  alarmed,  yet  there  are  others  who 
feel  their  blood  pulsing  the  stronger  at  the  thought  that  life  is  to  be  one  continued 
contest.  It  were  ill  for  us  if  our  love  of  peace,  as  a  nation,  should  degenerate  into 
a  fear  of  danger  or  an  indifference  to  exploits.  For  me  the  battle-field  has  no 
charms  ;  but  I  buckle  on  my  armour  at  the  very  thought  that  life  is  to  be  a  conflict 
in  which  it  behoves  me  to  get  the  nnstery.  1.  It  is  wise  to  begin  the  battle  of  life 
early.  We  have  all  so  little  time  to  live,  and  our  first  years  are  so  evidently  the 
best,  that  it  is  a  pity  to  waste  them.  2.  We  have  to  tight  with  that  trinity  of 
enemies — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  3.  This  is  not  an  engagement  to  be 
quickly  terminated.  Unlike  the  laconic  despatch  of  the  ancient  Pioinan — "  Veni, 
vidi,  vici,"  this  is  a  continuous  fight.  Like  the  old  knights  who  slept  in  their 
armour,  you  must  be  prepared  for  reprisals — always  watchful,  and  ready  to  resist. 

4.  You  may  hope  to  conquer,  for  others  have  done  so  before  you  (Rev.  iii.  21,  vii.  14). 

5.  You  may  be  defeated.  Make  bankruptcy  in  your  secular  business,  why,  you  can 
start  again  ;  but  once  make  bankruptcy  in  soul  afi'aiis,  and  there  is  no  second  life 
in  which  to  start  afresh.  If  you  are  defeated  in  the  battle  of  life  you  can  never 
begin  again,  or  turn  the  defeat  into  a  victory.  If  you  go  down  to  your  grave  a 
captive  of  sin,  the  iron  bands  will  be  about  you  for  ever.  II.  A  kindly  hint. 
There  are  charges  in  this  life-battle.  Let  lis  just  glance  at  some  of  them.  If  any 
man  shall  get  up  to  heaven  he  will  have  to  meet  a  demand  for — 1.  Courage.  How 
many  enemies  he   must   face!      2.  Patience.      How  he  must  bear  and  forbear! 

3.  Perseverance.  4.  Watchfulness.  5.  Zeal.  6.  Strength.  7.  Wisdom.  The 
difficulties  of  an  expedition  may  be  intensely  aggravated  by  a  lack  of  knowledge  as 
to  the  country  to  be  invaded;  and  in  the  battle  of  life  who  knows  what  lies  next 
before  him  ?  Hence  I  beseech  you  to  consider  the  greatness  of  the  charge  of  this 
warfare.  Our  British  soldiers  must  press  forward,  though  they  are  landed  on  a 
blazing  beach,  before  steep  mountains,  dismal  swamps,  or  savage  tribes.  But  in 
our  eventful  battle  of  life  the  checks  and  bars  to  progress  are  more  than  I  can 
describe'.  No  marvel  that  Pliable  should  say,  as  he  turned  back,  "  You  may  have 
the  brave  country  yourself  for  me."  Apart  from  Divine  strength  Pliable  was  a  wise 
man.  There  is  no  "  royal  road  "  to  heaven,  except  that  the  King's  highway  leads 
there.  There  is  no  road  skilfully  levelled  or  scientifically  macadamised.  The 
labour  is  too  exhaustive,  the  difficulties  are  too  serious,  unless  God  Himself  c^me 
to  our  help.  Who,  then,  can  go  this  warfare  at  his  own  charges?  III.  .\ 
GRACIOUS  reminder.  You  cauuot  go  this  warfare  in  your  own  strength.  Then  do 
not  try  it.  If  you  do  you  will  rue  it.  But  you  may  rely  on  God  to  help  you.  You 
may  reckon  on — 1.  His  watchful  Providence.  You  little  know  how  easy  tbe 
Almighty   can   make   a   path   which   otherwise  would    have    been    difficult    and 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  •  [chap,  rs, 

dangeroup.  All  things  shall  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.  2.  The 
help  of  Christ.  He  will  be  always  i^resent  to  revive  you  with  His  i^recious  blood, 
to  sprinkle  your  hearts  from  an  evil  conscience,  to  wash  your  bodies  with  pure 
water.  3.  The  assistance  of  the  Spirit.  There  is  nothing  too  obdurate  for  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  to  over-ome.  Conclusion :  Let  me  urge  upon  those  who  are 
beginning  trjis  battle — 1.  The  wisdom  of  diffidence.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he 
standeth  take  heed  lest  be  fall."  2.  The  dianity  of  reliance  upon  God.  3.  The 
importance  i  f  prayer.  If  all  our  charges  in  the  life-war  are  to  be  paid  us  by  the 
Paymaster,  let  us  go  to  the  treasury.  4.  The  necessity  of  holiness.  5.  The  power 
of  faith.  The  beginning  of  true  spiritual  life  is  here — trusting  what  Christ  has 
wrought  for  us.  The  continuation  of  sjiiritual  life  is  here — trusting  still  in  what 
Christ  has  done  and  is  doing.  The  consummation  of  spiritual  life  on  earth  is  still 
the  same— trusting  still,  trusting  ever.  (C.  H.  S2)urgeon.)  Clirlut  present  -with 
His  si'vvants : — About  two  centuries  ago,  during  the  persecutions  in  Scotland, 
Margaret  Wilson,  a  girl  of  eighteen,  along  with  an  aged  widow  of  sixty-thi-ee,  was 
doomed  to  die  for  insisting  that  Chri-t  alone  was  the  Head  of  the  Church.  They 
were  to  be  fastened  to  stakes  driven  into  the  oozy  sand  that  covere?!  the  beach,  and 
left  to  perish  in  the  rising  tide.  The  stake  to  which  the  aged  woman  was  fastened 
was  farther  down  the  beach  than  that  of  the  young  woman,  in  order  that,  being 
sooner  destroyed,  her  expiring  sufferings  might  shake  the  firmness  of  Margaret 
Wilson.  The  tide  began  to  How,  the  waters  swelled  and  mounted  to  the  chin  of 
the  old  woman,  and  when  almost  stifled  by  the  rising  tide,  they  put  to  the  girl  the 
question,  "  W^hat  think  you  of  your  friend  now  ? "  "What  do  I  see,"  she  answered, 
"  but  Christ  in  one  of  His  members,  wrestling  there  ?  Think  you  that  we  are  the 
sufferers?  No;  it  is  Christ  in  us.  He  who  sendeth  us  not  a  warfare  on  our  own 
charges. "  Say  I  these  things  as  a  man  ?  or  salth  not  the  law  the  same  also  ? — 
Principles  of  equiti/ : — 1.  Commend  themselves  to  human  reason.  2.  Are  enforced 
by  the  law  of  God.  3.  Are  of  universal  applicatiou.  4.  Contribute  by  their 
operation  to  the  best  interests  of  all.  (•/.  Lytli,  D.D.)  Hunuiii  consciousness  of 
the  rirjitt : — 1.  Is  but  an  echo  of  the  Divine  law.  2.  Is  only  explicable  on  the 
principle  of  moral  government.  3.  Establishes  the  authority  of  the  law.  (Ibid.) 
For  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses.— 27(e  inspiration  of  the  law  of  Mo^es  is 
established  by — 1.  Its  ascription  to  God.  2.  Its  moral  bearing.  3.  Its  compre- 
hensive application.  4.  Its  beneficial  tendency.  {Ibid.)  Doth  God  take  care  for 
oxen? — Oxen  nnniuzzlcd  : — This  is  a  favourite  text  with  Paul  (1  Tim.  v.  17,  18). 
If  Paul  wrote  this  twice  we  may  be  sure  the  words  were  often  on  his  lips ;  and  if  the 
Holy  Spirit  has  twice  put  this  fragment  of  the  old  law  into  the  New  Testament,  we 
may  be  sure  the  lesson  is  an  important  one.  The  text  is  racy  and  suggestive.  I. 
Ministers  and  theie  wokk.  1.  They  are  a  distinct  class.  Have  a  function  all 
their  own  like  oxen.  2.  Their  work  is  humble.  3.  And  hard.  4.  And  requiring 
patient  routine.  5.  And  withal  of  vital  importance.  II.  The  Saviour  has  taken 
CARE  FOR  their  SUPPORT.  They  have  the  same  wants  as  other  men,  but  are  not  at 
liberty  to  supplv  them  in  the  same  way :  they  are  oxen  whoso  strength  is  spent 
in  the  service  of  others.  Therefore  the  Master  laid  down  His  will  as  to  their 
temporal  sup^jort.  "  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  reward  "  (ver.  14).  Both 
charity  and  ordinary  bargain  are  excluded  by  this  rule  :  the  matter  is  raised  to  a 
liigher  level  altogether.  III.  The  rule  is  reasonable  (ver.  11).  Whatever  a  man 
pays  for  his  Bible  there  is  no  kind  of  proi)Oition  between  the  moiipy  given  and  the 
thing  got :  the  wealth  of  the  world  could  not  buy  one  text  of  the  W^ord  of  God  :  the 
money  is  the  equivalent  only  of  paper,  printing,  binding.  So  conversion,  sanctifica- 
tion,  organised  fellowship,  godly  training  of  the  young,  the  Lord's  Day,  the  sacra- 
ments, comfort  in  sickness  and  death — are  thincs  which  man  cannot  buy,  because 
man  cannot  give  them.  All  the  more  reasonable,  therefore,  that  the  simple  and 
inexiDcnsive  channel  by  which  God  dispenses  them  to  us  and  sends  them  on  to 
coming  generations  should  be  maintained.  IV.  The  support  should  be  oenerous. 
While  the  ox  is  working  he  will  not  be  the  worse  for  all  he  can  eat :  let  him  not  be 
muzzled.  Muzzling  is  poor  economy,  and  not  even  just.  All  the  more  should 
this  part  of  Bible  teaching  be  plainly  uttered,  because  the  true  minister  will  be  ready 
to  forego  even  righteous  claims  rather  than  allow  God's  message  of  love  with  which 
he  is  charged  to  be  discredited  by  urging  these  (vers.  15-lU).  The  minister  should 
receive  freely — not  what  his  education,  time,  gift-^,  may  be  worth  in  the  market,  for 
gain  and  bargain  have  no  place  here — but  what  is  needed  to  maintain  his  position. 
There  should  be  nothing  so  grand  about  him  as  to  estrange  him  from  the  poorest, 
and  nothing  so  mean  about  his  dress  or  personal  habits  as  to  render  him  unfit  for 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  537 

the  most  refined  society  ;  for,  lilse  the  gospel,  he  belongs  to  no  one  class  of  society, 
but  stands  equally  related  to  all  (Phil.  iv.  10-19).  (.4.  M.  Si/mington,  D.D.) 
That  he  that  ploug-heth  should  plough  in  hope. — Plouqhing  in  hope  : — When  you 
go  into  the  countiy  and  see  the  farmers  driving  their  ploughs,  you  have  no  occasion 
to  ask  them  why  they  are  turning  up  the  soil.  You  understand  as  well  as  they 
that  it  is  the  crop  they  have  in  view.  If  it  were  not  for  the  hope  of  the  harvest 
they  would  forego  this  toil.  And  what  is  true  of  the  farmer  is  true  of  the  mechanic, 
of  the  manufacturer,  of  the  tradesman,  of  people  of  all  occupations  and  conditions. 
Men  are  swayed  by  an  endless  variety  of  motives,  good  and  bad  ;  but  the  one  element 
which  blends  with  all  other  s]3rings  of  action  is  hope — the  desire  and  expectation  of 
future  good.  St.  Paul  takes  the  plougher  as  a  representative  character.  It  may  be  use- 
ful to  us  to  consider  the  same  principle  in  its  application  to  the  religious  life  and  the 
service  of  God  generally.  The  spiritual,  no  less  than  the  natural  husbandman,  has 
ample  reason  to  go  on  with  his  work  in  hope.  That  is  to  say,  in  doing  the  Divine  will 
w^e  have  ground  lo  hoije  for  a  beneficial  re-ult.  It  may  be  just  the  result  at  which 
we  have  been  aiming.  Herein  the  case  differs  from  that  of  the  ploughman,  who 
can  always  forecast  the  nature  of  his  crop  from  the  seed.  And  vet  the  difference 
is  rather  apparent  tbau  real.  For  the  spiritual  husbandman  does  after  all  reai)  what 
he  sows.  If  we  inquire  into  the  grounds  of  that  hope  which  should  animate  all 
true  workers  in  this  field,  it  may  be  observed  that  they  are  doing  what  their 
Heavenly  Father  has  directed  them  to  do.  Our  Saviour  said,  on  a  certain  occasion, 
"  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work."  We  are 
every  one  of  us  sent  into  the  world  on  a  similar  errand — i.e.,  to  do  the  will  of  Him 
who  placed  us  here.  The  few  who  do  try  to  conform  to  it  are  fulfilling  the  end  of 
their  being.  They  are  living  not  for  themselves,  but  for  God.  We  affirm  the  light 
of  the  believer,  and  of  all  who  have  their  faces  Ziouward,  to  labour  or  suff'er  for 
God  in  hope,  because  He  "  cannot  deny  Himself."  In  His  infinite  condescension 
He  has  been  pleased  to  link  His  own  glory  with  the  toils  and  trials,  the  prayers  and 
praises,  of  His  people.  To  sn  eye  capable  of  taking  in  its  vast  proportions,  our 
globe  must  present  a  busy  scene.  We  may  not  assert  that  the  overthrow  of  an 
empire  or  the  founding  of  a  dynasty  is  a  matter  of  no  moment  to  God  ;  but  we  are 
warranted  in  saying  that  events  of  this  kind  are  of  small  moment  with  Him  as  com- 
pared with  changes  in  the  condition  of  the  Church  ;  and,  indeed,  that  He  orders  or 
permits  those  very  events,  with  a  continual  reference  to  His  Church.  We  are  sure, 
then,  that  He  looks  with  approbation  upon  the  efforts  of  His  people  to  follow  and  to 
serve  Him  ;  and  that  in  doing  this  they  have  more  reason  to  be  hopeful  than  in 
attempting  any  other  service  whatever.  Let  us  rather  consider  the  lesson  of  the 
text  in  its  bearing  upon  various  parts  of  the  Christian  life.  To  begin  at  the  begin- 
ning— our  first  plougher  shall  be  one  who  is  just  awaking  from  the  sleep  of  sin,  and 
pondering  the  question.  Shall  I  nowatteud  to  the  matter  of  my  personal  salvation? 
Can  I  hope  to  secure  this  greatest  of  blessings  ?  Many  an  one,  brought  to  this 
point,  has  been  discouraged  by  the  apparent  obstacles  in  the  way,  and  declined  the 
effort.  Had  it  been  an  earthly  scheme  they  would  not  have  abandoned  it.  Men 
do  not  so  lightly  forego  the  prospect  of  wealth  and  honour.  But  where  the  soul  is 
concerned  the  quest  is  too  often  relinquished  on  the  vague  report  that  "  there  is  a 
lion  in  the  way."  Without  striving  there  is  no  entering  in  at  the  strait  gate.  But 
is  this  peculiar  to  relision?  Do  you  win  any  eartlily  prize  without  striving?  Why, 
then,  complain  that  Christianity  denies  its  treasures  to  the  torpid  and  the  indif- 
ferent ?  The  blessings  it  proposes  to  us  are  as  much  supeiior  to  the  noblest  distinc- 
tions of  the  world  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  eartli.  There  is  nothing  a 
man  may  go  about  more  hopefully  than  an  honest  and  faithful  endeavour  to  obtain 
forgiveness  and  reconciliation  to  God.  How  can  you  help  seeing  this  ?  For  what 
means  this  day  of  rest,  this  house  of  worship,  these  Christian  ordinances,  this 
precious  Bible  revealing  a  crucified  Saviour,  a  throne  of  grace,  and  an  ever-present 
compassionate  Spirit?  If,  with  these  testimonies  aiound  you,  you  cannot  "  plough 
in  hope,"  you  will  be  likely  to  wait  until  all  that  now  invites  you  to  hope  gives  place 
to  remediless  despair.  But  coming  to  Christ  is  only  the  first  step:  it  is  simply 
securing  the  charter  and  the  gracious  equipment  which  prepare  us  to  begin  ttie 
work  of  life.  The  ploughing  must  go  on.  The  field  is  large,  and  much  of  the  soil 
intractable.  But  the  allotted  task  can  be  accomplished,  provided  only  we  keep  up  a 
good  heart  as  we  tread  the  weary  furrows,  and  "  abound  in  hope."  You  will  know 
what  is  meant  by  this  "  intractable  soil."  Look  at  the  human  heart,  even  the 
renewed  heart,  and  see  what  a  work  is  to  be  done  there  before  it  can  "  bear  the 
image  of  the  heavenly !  "   This  whole  work  of  self- discipline  must  needs  be  arduous 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

and  painful,  because  it  is  in  the  face  of  nature.  Its  aim  is  the  subjugation  of  nature. 
We  need  this  conviction  as  a  stimulus  to  efi'ort.  You  have  to  deal,  e.g.,  with  some 
wayward  passion,  some  obliquity  of  temper,  some  inexorable  habit.  You  are  well 
aware  that  it  is  more  than  a  match  for  your  own  streugth.  But  you  must  also 
understand  that  you  henceforth  bring  into  the  contest  auxiliaries  which  insure  your 
ultimate  victory.  It  is  part  of  His  plan  that  "you  should  be  holy  and  without 
blame  before  Him  in  love."  And  what  He  proposes.  He  can  and  will  accomplish. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  case  which  need  discourage  ihem.  Let  them  "plough  in  hope." 
We  have  all  seen  the  proudest  men  clothed  with  humility  ;  the  profane  become 
patterns  of  godline-s  ;  the  passionate  put  on  the  geutleness  of  the  lamb  ;  even  the 
parsimonious  turned  into  generous  givers.  They  "  ploughed  in  hope,"  and  were  made 
"  partakers  of  their  hope."  And  thus  it  will  be  with  all  who  tread  in  their  steps.  We 
may  extend  the  application  of  this  principle.  It  deeply  concerns  parents  and  teachers 
to  understand  it,  and  all  who  have  to  do  with  the  training  of  the  youug.  How 
disheartening  this  work  is  may  be  seen  in  the  ill  success  which  so  often  attends  it. 
What  is  done  frequently  is  to  leave  them  to  themselves.  The  fruit  answers  to  the 
culture.  Their  early  infirmities  have  ripened  into  vices ;  and  the  habits  which 
were  barely  endurable  in  their  youth  are  intolerable  in  their  manhood.  The 
Scriptures  tfach  "  a  more  excellent  way  "  :  "  That  he  that  ploughetb,  should  plough 
in  hope."  It  will  be  conceded  that  the  field  here  indicated  is  not  very  attractive. 
One  would  not  choose  for  his  ploughing  a  common  that  was  overrun  with  brambles, 
or  a  hill  imbedded  with  stones  and  matted  roots.  But  if  that  happens  to  be  your 
only  inheritance,  you  have  no  alternative.  And  many  a  farmer  has  transformed 
just  such  a  plantation  into  a  scene  of  surpassing  fertility.  These  uninteresting 
children,  so  dull  and  torpid;  these  malicious  children;  these  deceitful  children; 
these  coarse,  unkempt  children  ;  it  matters  not  what  they  are,  they  belong  to  your 
patrimony  :  at  least  they  are,  for  the  time,  committed  to  your  guardianship.  It  is 
idle  to  look  abroad  and  say,  with  a  sigh,  "  Ob,  that  this  or  that  child  had  been  con- 
fided to  me  instead!"  God  has  given  you  this  field  to  plough;  and  however 
ungenial  the  task,  He  has  bid  you  "  plough  in  hope."  For  con-^ider  that  He  who 
made  nothing  in  vain  could  not  have  designed  that  these  children  should  remain 
in  perpetual  bondage  to  their  wayward  tempers  and  repulsive  habits.  And  is  there 
anything  in  the  sort  of  problems  here  presented  which  should  prevent  your 
"  ploughing  in  hope  "  ?  The  question  may  be  answered  by  another :  "  Is  there  any- 
thing too  hard  for  the  Almighty?  "  For  no  one  expects  these  children  to  be  roused 
into  action,  to  be  toned  down  into  submission,  to  be  cured  of  their  vicious  pro- 
pensities, to  be  moulded  into  shapes  of  symmetry  and  beauty,  except  by  the  help 
of  a  superhuman  arm.  But  God  can  do  it.  And  He  can  do  it  through  your  agency. 
And  if  it  be  thus  with  teachers  and  parents,  so  also  with  ministers  of  the  gospel. 
No  one  can  understand,  except  from  experience,  the  greatness  of  their  work,  or  the 
trials  and  discouragements  which  are  incident  to  it.  But  what  can  they  do?  What 
ought  they  to  do  ?  They  bear  a  Divine  commission.  They  preach  a  Divine  gospel. 
The  truth  they  proclaim  is  precisely  suited  to  its  end.  It  is  the  only  cure  for  the 
world's  maladies,  the  only  means  for  bringing  men  back  to  God.  They  must  pub- 
lish it.  And  they  may  well  publish  it  in  hope.  Appearances  may  be  adverse.  But 
there  is  no  alternative.  And  precisely  such  conditions  as  these  have  often  been  fol- 
lowed by  a  gene;  ous  harvest.  It  has  proved  thus  even  amidst  the  appalling  wastes  of 
paganism.  Let  them  "plough  in  hope."  The  cause  they  have  at  heart  is  God's  cause. 
His  eye  is  upon  them.  His  ear  hearkens  to  their  intercessions.  Especially  will  this 
be  the  case  with  those  who  make  it  a  part  of  the  real  business  of  life  to  seek  the  con- 
version of  their  fellow-sinners.  There  are  such  Christians.  They  are  always  on 
the  alert  for  opportunities  of  this  kind.  And  they  who  do  this,  who  make  the  con- 
version of  sinners  one  of  the  cherished  ends  of  life,  not  only  have  full  warrant  to 
"  plough  in  hope,"  but  uniformly  avail  themselves  of  it.  Hopefulness  is  of  their 
very  nature.  There  is  another  field  for  the  application  of  this  maxim,  covering  too 
many  broad  acres  to  be  traversed  now  ;  but  we  njay  just  glance  at  it.  I  refer  to 
the  multitudes  of  sufferers — those  who  are  struggling  with  inward  conflicts,  with 
poverty,  with  mi.-fortune.  There  is  a  lesson  in  our  text  even  for  these  suiferers.  It 
is  not  in  mockery  of  their  troubles,  but  with  a  full  appreciation  of  them,  we  say,  in 
the  face  of  these  trials,  you  must  "  plough  in  hope."  Despair  will  ruin  you. 
Despondency  will  paralyze  you.  Hope  will  bring  peace  and  strength.  These 
troubles  have  not  come  by  chance.  They  are  from  the  hand  of  an  infinitely  wise 
and  merciful  God.  "  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for 
the  salvation  of  the  Lord"  (Lam.  iii.  26).    Satan  will  if  possible  prevent  this.    Still 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  539 

another  wide  sphere  invites  our  notice  in  connection  with  the  text,  merely  glanced 
at  in  the  opening  of  this  sermon — viz.,  the  importance  of  this  principle  to  the  young 
in  i^rosecutiig  even  their  secular  plans.     It  is,  under  God,  one  of  the  great  secrets 
of  success,  this  "  ploughing  in  hope."     No  one  quality  has  been  more  uniformly 
characteristic  of   the  world's  heroes,  both  its  benefactors  and  its  scourges,  than 
hopefulness.  The  main  thing  is  to  assure  yourselves  that  you  are  in  the  right  path; 
that  your  ends  and  aims  have  been  sought  in  tbe  fear  of  God,  and  your  powers 
dedicated  to  Him.     With  this  condition  precedent,  you  may  and  sliould  be  hopeful. 
You  will  encounter  ditliculties.     But  never  despond.     Look  to  God  for  succour,  and 
"  plough  in  hope."     I  feel  that  I  have  done  injustice  to  this  text  by  restricting  it  so 
much  to  the  present  life,  to  immediate,  or  at  least  palpable,  success,  whether  in 
temporal  or  spiritual  things.      But  you  will  all  contemplate  it  in  its  higher  and 
nobler  aspect.     It  is  the  blood-bought  privilege  of  the  Christiitn  always  and  every- 
where to  "  plough  in  hope,"  because  he  may  be  certain  of  his  harvest  hereafter, 
even  if  it  fail  here.     Nothing  he  does  for  Christ  can  miss  its  fruitage  there.     Theie 
is  one  hope,  and  only  one,  that  never  misleads  and  never  disappoints.     Its  founda- 
tion is  laid  in  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ.     Its  object  is  the  friendship  of 
God  and  the  glories  of  the  heavenly  state.     (H.  A.  Boardman,  D.D.)        Flou(jhin(i 
in  hope  : — Ploughing  the  land  may  properly  be  considered  as  one  of  the   most 
laborious  of  those  services  to  which  husbandmen  are  called  :  much  strength,  skill, 
and  perseverance  are  required.      The  same  field  must  be  frequently  retiaced  by 
weary  steps,  till  the  whole  is  regularly  and  deejDly  furrowed.    But  arduous,  difficult, 
and  wearisome  as  this  employment  is,  we  find  persons  cheerfully  and  habitually 
engaged  in  it,  although  it  yields  no  immediate  return  of  profit,  and  is  only  pre- 
paratory to  tbfcir  other  toils.     Hope  animates  their  exertions,  not  the  expectation  of 
a  direct  benefit,  but  the  hope  of  suitable  weather  for  sowing  ;  the  blessing  of  heaven 
on  the  springing  of  t)ie  seed  ;  and,  remotely,  the  returns  of  harvest.     It  will  be  our 
purpose  to  illustrate  this  one  position — that  those  more  difficult  duties  of  religion 
which  do  not  promise  immediate  advantage,  yet  should  be  promptly  and  perse- 
veringly  engaged  in.     "  He  that  plougheth  should  plough  in  hope."     1.  We  shall 
see  the  proprietv  of  applying  the  sentiment  of  our  text,  primarily,  to  repentance 
towards  God.     This  is  indeed  the  gift  of  God,  but  clearly  the  duty  of  man.     Pain- 
ful, tedious,  and  distressing  as  this  toil  is,  it  is  preparatory  to  that  state  of  rich 
cultivation  which  is  the  honour  of  the  Christian  character.    Then  those  of  you  who 
are  convinced  of  sin,  and  are  sorrowing  in  the  bitterness  of  your  spirits,  persevere. 
2.  May  not  the  sentiment  of  these  words  be  considered  as  applicable  to  that  refor- 
mation and  regulation  of  heart  and  life  which  invariably  accompany,  yea,  may  be 
considered  as  essential  parts   of  true  repentance — as  the  necessary  products  of 
genuine  contrition  ?     Self-inquiry,  like  the  searching  and  separating  ploughshare, 
will  be  driven  over  every  part  of  the  heart :  irksome  as  the  service  may  appear,  no 
nook  or  corner  of  that  barren  field  shall  be  left  unbroken.     3.  There  are  numerous 
acts  of  self-denial  required  by  Him  who  for  our  sakes  bare  His  Cross  and  hung 
thereon.     These,  like  the  toils  of  tillage  to  which  our  text  alludes,  require  much 
skill  and  perseverance  in  their  discharge ;  and  but  for  a  better  hope  would  be  in 
e\ery  ease   ueulected.      4.  Various  are  the  duties  of  benevolence  He  performed 
towards  His  fellow  immortals.     Not  only  are  we  called  to  cultivate  our  own  hearts, 
but  to  labour  for  the  good  of  others,  that  they  may  not  be  barren  and  unfruitful  in 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  :  but  frequently  this  toil  is  so  irksome,  and  the 
advantage,  if  any,  so  remote,  that  but  for  the  principle  presented  in  our  text,  we 
should  refuse  to  commence  our  work,  or  cease  in  the  midst  of  our  labours.     1.  Are 
there  any  here  who  must  be  charged  and  convicted  of  having  put  their  hand  to  the 
plough  and  looked  back  ?     2.   Let  me  offer  consolation  to  such  as  have  long  toiled, 
and  have  hitherto  wrought  unrewarded  in  the  field  of  exertion.     3.  I  congratulate 
such  as  patiently  persevere,  even  where  success  appears  withheld.     (W.  Clayton.) 
He  that  thresheth  in  hope  should  be  partaker  of  his  hope. — Threshing  : — The  toils 
of  the  field  are  succeeded  by  those  of  the  flail :  and  perhaps  the  peasant  has  no 
employment  more  laborious  than  threshing  ;  indeed,  none  to  equal  it  in  severity  of 
exertion,  but  ploughing ;  for  which  reason  St.  Paul,  in  the  verse  before  us,  selects 
these  two  branches  of  agriculture  to  illustrate  the  work  of  a  minister.     I.  On  enter- 
ing a  barn  and  seeing  the  thresher  beat  the  corn  with  his  flail,  a  casual  observer 
would  almost  conclude  the  grain  would  be  materially  injured.      Censures,  in 
ignorance  of  the  process,  might  be  heard ;  and  ministerial  efforts  are  open  to  this 
misconstruction  (Isa.  xli.  15,  16;  2  Cor.  vii.  8-16).     II.  He  who  thresheth  intends, 
and  hopes,  to  succeed  in  sepaeatixg  the  grain  from  the  husk  :  and  he  does  succeed. 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

So  shall  the  Word  of  God  be,  by  it  character  is  detected  and  displayed.  After  our 
Lord  bad  urged  the  necessity  of  self-denial,  from  that  time  many  walked  no  more 
with  Him,  tiiey  were  offended  at  His  doctrine  :  while  His  genuine  followers  became 
by  the  same  ujeans  more  confirmed  in  their  attachment,  and  renewed  their  allegi- 
ance  to  their  chosen  sovereign.  Labours  for  the  spiritual  good  of  others  must  be 
discriminating  to  be  successful :  each  must  receive  his  portion  of  meat,  or  medicine, 
as  the  case  may  require,  in  due  season.  IH.  Does  not  the  toil  of  the  thresher 
receive  a  remarkable  and  instructive  commendation  in  the  eemoval  op  the  chaff 
when  the  corn  is  winnowed?  He  hopes  that  he  shall  so  thresh  as  that  the  subse- 
quent process  of  the  fan  shall  thoroughly  purge  the  floor.  Terrible  will  be  the 
sanction  that  God,  the  Judge  of  all,  will  give  to  every  rejected  message :  the  ungodly 
shall  not  star.d  in  the  judgment,  nor  sinners  in  the  congrepration  of  the  righteous: 
they  are  like  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away.  IV.  The  teejiination  of 
iMiNiSTEEiAL  TOIL  is  suggcsted  by  this  metaphor  :  when  the  husks  and  chaff  are 
separated  from  the  grain,  the  husbandman  threshes  it  no  longer.  Purther,  this 
specific  toil  of  all  wh'i  labour  for  the  immortal  welfare  of  others  shall  cease  for  ever 
when  the  number  of  the  elect  is  accomplished :  the  dusty  and  tedious  process  of 
threshing  is  not  needed  in  our  garners  ;  and  it  is  in  hope  of  this  remoter  happiness 
that  he  that  plougheth  and  he  that  thresheth  engage  in  their  respective  labours  ; 
they  shall  rejoice  together.  To  coirclude,  let  it  ever  be  remembered  that  though 
the  Word  of  God  is  the  ordinary  threshing  instrument,  yet  it  is  not  the  only  one; 
for  there  is  a  variety  of  implements  used  for  this  purpose  (Isa.  xxviii.  27).  So 
where  the  Word  fails  of  producmg  the  desired  eft"ect,  He  will  try  the  flail  of  adversity ; 
by  this,  therefore,  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be  purged,  and  this  is  all  the  fruit  to 
take  away  sin.  (G.  CUn/ton.)  If  we  have  sown  unto  you  spiritual  things, 
is  it  a  great  tiling  if  we  shall  reap  your  carnal  things? — Clirhtian  minUters : — 
I.  Are  sowers.  1.  They  toil  and  cast  in  the  seed.  2.  In  obedience  to  their 
Master's  command.  3.  The  result  depends  on  the  soil  and  the  Divine  bless- 
ing. II.  Bear  precious  seed.  Spiritual  things  as — -1.  Truth.  2.  Hope.  3.  Pro- 
mise. III.  Have  a  right  to  participate  in  the  fruit.  The  reasonableness 
of  some  return  is  shown  by — 1.  Gratitude.  2.  Justice.  \^H.  H.  Beamish, 
M.A.)  The    ohlif/ation    of    the    Churches   to   support    the   ministry : — I.    The 

Divine  APPoiNT:\rENT,  that  Churches  should  support  their  ministers.  1.  Under 
the  Mosaic  dispensation.  2.  As  enjoined  by  Christ  under  the  gospel.  3.  As 
the  dictate  of  natui-al  religion.  II.  The  various  modes  adopted  to  attain  this 
instituted  end.  1.  Tithes.  2.  Taxes.  3.  Voluntary  support.  III.  The  extent 
to  which  this  duty  should  ee  carried.  1.  To  satisfy  tlie  claims  of  justice.  2. 
To  accord  with  the  larguage  of  Scripture.  3.  To  promote  the  highest  interests  of 
the  Church.  4.  To  promote  in  the  best  way  the  conversion  of  the  world.  IV.  The 
AGENTS  BY  WHICH  THIS  WORK  MUST  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.  1.  The  deacons.  2.  The 
people.  (J.  Bennett,  D.D.)  The  Christin)i  ministry  : — Had  the  preaching  of 
the  gospel  been  committed  to  the  ministry  of  angels,  their  superior  natures 
would  have  rendered  them  incapable  of  receiving  those  services  of  gratittide 
which  are  evidences  and  effects  of  faith  and  obedience.  But  when  men,  subject 
to  wants  and  griefs,  come  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we  feel  ourselves 
called  upon  to  consult  their  temporal  comfort.    I.  From  the  nature  and  design 

OF  THE  MINISTERIAL  OFFICE,  FORCIRLE  ARGUMENTS  RESULT  FOR  THE  GRATITUDE  AND 
LIBERALITY    OF    THOSE    FOE    WHOSE    BENEFIT   IT     IS     EMPLOYED.         "  We     SOW    UUtO     yOU 

spiritual  things."  We  are  the  ministers  of  a  spu'itual  dispensation  which  has 
for  its  object  the  present  happiness  and  everlasting  salvation  of  mankind ;  we 
endeavour  to  implant  in  your  mind  those  sacred  principles  which,  when  nourished 
by  Divine  influence,  ripen  into  all  the  fruits  of  righteousness  and  peace ;  we 
willingly  spend  our  strength  for  your  imiDrovement.  Just  is  the  plea,  good 
men  will  reply.  From  your  ministrations  we  have  enjoyed  advantages  which  we 
can  never  repay  ;  through  your  instrumentality  we  have,  by  Divine  grace,  been 
rescued  from  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bond  of  iniquity  ;  have  learned  the 
vanity  of  created  joys,  and  been  taught  to  set  our  affections  on  the  nobler  things 
which  are  above.  We  know,  indeed,  that  to  the  God  of  all  grace  belongs  the 
supreme  unrivalled  praise  of  those  supports  and  joys  we  have  experienced.  But  ye 
are  the  servants  of  the  Most  High,  who  have  shown  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation, 
and  as  such  we  honour  you  ;  ye  have  administeied  to  us  benefits  far  more  valuable 
than  all  the  honours  and  treasures  and  joys  of  time.  And  what  can  we  render  you 
in  return?      What  can  we  do  for  you,  or  for  your  sons  or  daughters?      II.  The 

STATED    LABOURS    OF    A    EEGULAR    MINISTRY   ARE    OF    MUCH    IMPORTANCE    TO    THE    COMMU- 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  541 


NiTY.  The  preservation  of  a  state  depends  far  more  upon  the  prevention  of  crimes 
than  upon  the  punishment  of  them.  Civil  legislation  needs  to  be  aided  by  an 
authority  which  reaches  the  heart,  by  a  dominion  over  man  which  extends  to  his 
sentiments  and  pursi^its,  and  by  considerations  calculated  to  subdue  his  worst  dis- 
positions, to  restrain  him  from  every  evil  work,  and  to  regulate  by  internal  and 
governing  principles  the  whole  tenor  of  his  conduct.  Tliis  is  the  empire 
wiiich  religion  establishes.  If  this  representation  of  the  importance  of 
religion  to  human  society  is  just,  it  becomes  a  prudent  measure  in  all 
well-regulated  governments  to  secure  a  succession  of  persons  who  are  qualified 
by  education,  by  talents,  by  principle,  and  by  conduct,  for  explaining  the  rules  of 
piety  and  morality ;  and  for  recommending  that  glorious  scheme  of  salvation  which 
Christianity  reveals  to  us — thrtt  blessed  doctrine  of  salvation  which  came  down 
from  heaven,  which  alone  can  conquer  the  depravity  of  human  nature,  wliich  alone 
can  secure  the  reign  of  traiKiuillity  on  earth.  HI.  The  lahodks  of  a  keg'-lar 
MiNiSTEY  ARE  OF  MUCH  IMPORTANCE  TO  INDIVIDUALS.  A  faithful  pastor,  dwelling 
amongst  his  people,  observing  their  tempers  and  their  habits,  and  enjoying  their 
confidence  and  affection,  feels  himself  sincerely  interested  in  the  welfare  and 
happiness  of  every  individual  committed  to  his  charge.  He  regards  them  as  his 
family,  and  the  evidences  of  his  pastoral  care  will  bear  a  proportion  to  the  variety 
of  their  situations.  Animnted  by  his  careful  inspection,  and  awed  by  his  reproofs, 
the  \oung  are  trained  up  to  habits  of  application,  temperance,  and  subordination  ; 
and  thus  are  fitted  for  appearing  with  advantage  in  the  station  which  Providence 
allots  them.  In  estimating  the  advantages  of  religious  institutions  to  individuals, 
keep  it  in  remembrance  that  ministers  of  religion  are  messengers  of  consolation  to 
the  atHicted.  The  trials  of  life  are  far  too  numerous  to  be  mentioned  in  detail; 
suffice  it  to  remark  that  the  consolations  of  the  gospel  extend  to  all  the  variety  of 
hum  in  woes.  Another  evidence  of  the  importance  of  pastoral  ministrations  to 
individuals  is  taken  from  their  tendency  to  prepare  them  for  everlasting  happiness. 

IV.  The  hardships  and  difficulties  which  ministers  have  to  encounter  vindi- 
cate    THE     reasonableness     OF     THE     EXPECTATION     EXPRESSED    IN    MY   TEXT.        Long 

before  they  enter  on  their  sacred  employment,  they  look  forward  to  it  with  the 
mingled  emotions  of  hope  and  fear.  They  enter  on  the  arduous  work  with  the 
solicitude  of  men  who  know  that  earth  and  liell  unite  to  impede  their  progress  and 
to  ensnare  their  steps.  They  perceive  the  importance  of  preparing  new  and  diver- 
sified instruction  for  their  people.  (A.  Bonar.)  The  duty  of  ministerial  siipport : — • 
I.  The  WORK  of  the  minister  is  costly  to  himself.  1.  All  the  energies  of  the 
minister  must  be  devoted  to  his  work,  or  it  cannot  be  well  done.  2.  The  minister's 
work  is  relatively  expensive.  He  occupies  a  position  which  exposes  him  to  expenses 
that  cannot  be  met  with  small  means.  3.  Then  there  are  the  public  meetings  of 
the  churches  and  councils,  all  necessary  for  the  good  of  Zion,  yet  they  cost  some- 
thing to  the  minister.  He  must  also  read  much  ;  he  must  therefore  have  at  hand 
all  n^cessal■y  facilities  for  the  study  and  illustration  of  truth.  4.  The  work  of  the 
ministry  requires  a  large  amount  of  skill  and  a  sound  judgment,  and  imposes  great 
responsibility  upon  the  minister.  II.  The  minister's  services  are  valuable  to 
the  people.  The  pulpit  is  in  no  wise  indebted  to  its  supporters.  It  gives  them 
many  times  more  in  temporal  good  than  it  costs.  It  has  ever  been  the  first,  the 
most  important,  means  of  civilisation  and  social  refinement ;  of  gathering  around 
the  family  home  the  tokens  of  thrift  and  comfort ;  of  the  increase  of  wealth,  and 
of  the  productive  value  of  real  estate.  Life  and  property  are  more  secure  under 
the  int.uem-e  of  an  evangelical  ministry  than  where  the  gospel  is  not  preached. 
IH.  The  standing  and  reputation  of  a  minister  is  affected  by  his  compensa- 
tion.     IV.    Justice   requires   that   ministers  shocld  be  paid  like  other  men. 

V.  The  SYsrEM  so  prevalent  of  supportino  the  minister  as  a  gratuity  degrades 
the  ministry  in  the  estimation  of  the  people  and  tends  to  hake  the  minister 
SERVILE.  1.  To  avoid  misapprehension,  it  is  proper  to  say  that  this  discourse 
refers  to  the  duty  of  churches  in  forming  their  estimate  of  a  minister's  claims  ; 
not  of  the  minister's  duty  to  preach,  whether  paid  or  not.  Necessity  is  laid  upon 
him,  he  must  preach  the  gospel  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he  must  give  his 
services  to  th  se  who  able  to  pay  him.  2.  Ministers  should  preach  to  their  own 
people  on  this  subj  ct.  3.  Churches  may  not  expect  the  rich  effusion  of  Divine 
grace  wdiile  they  do  not  acknowledge  their  just  obligations  to  their  minister.  4.  If 
the  church  that  is  able  to  pay  a  just  compeusatiim  to  their  minister  does  not  and 
will  not  do  it,  their  minister  should  leave  them.  (71/.  H.  Wilier.)  If  others 
be  partakers  of   this  power    ovar    you,    are    not    we    rather?      Nevertheless 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

we  have  not  used  this  power.  —  Rights  asserted  avd  foregone  : — I.  The  just 
RIGHTS  WHICH  THE  APOSTLE  ASSERTED — that  like  Other  teachers  he  had  a  claim 
upon  his  scholars  for  recompense  and  support.  1.  He  supports  this  by  strik- 
ing illustrations  (ver.  7)  and  by  Scriptural  proof  (vers.  8,  9).  2.  He  urges  the 
superiority  of  the  advantages  bestowed  by  the  teacher  over  those  which  he  is 
justified  in  expecting  by  way  of  acknowledgment  if  not  of  return  (ver.  11). 
3.  This  right  he   claims  for   all  ministers,  himself  included.      II.  The  nobility 

OF    SPIRIT   WITH   WHICH     THE     APOSTLE    WAS    WON'T     DELIBERATELY     TO    FOREGO     THESE 

RIGHTS.  Observe — 1.  The  fact.  Paul  had  acted  on  this  principle  from  the 
beginning,  and  remembered  that  it  involved  hard  manual  labour.  Like  every  Jew 
he  had  been  taught  a  trade  ;  he  wove  the  Cilician  goat's  hair  into  the  fabric  used 
for  tents  and  sails.  It  was  a  tax  upon  his  energies  whilst  he  was  thinking,  wilting, 
and  preaching,  to  spend  part  of  the  day  in  hard  rough  toil.  2.  The  exception. 
From  the  Macedonian  Churches,  for  a  special  reason,  he  consented  to  receive  a  gift 
(Phil.  iv.).  3.  The  motive.  (1)  Not  pride:  whilst  preaching  was  a  necessity  in 
his  case,  so  that  he  could  take  no  credit  and  make  no  boast  for  his  ministry,  he 
gave  up  the  right  of  maintenance  that  he  might  have  the  pleasure  of  a  voluntary 
sacrifice,  a  ground  of  lowly  glorying.  (2)  That  there  might  be  no  hindrance  to  .the 
progress  of  the  gospel.  It  might  have  been  thought  that  he  preached  for  gain,  and 
such  a  supposition  would  render  his  hearers  suspicious  and  unreceptive.  {Prof. 
J.  R.  Thompson. )  But  suffer  all  things  lest  we  should  hinder  the  gospel. — Htno 
Christians  may  hinder  the  gospel : — 1.  In  one  sense  the  gospel  cannot  be  hindered. 
As  well  speak  of  hindering  tbe  advance  of  the  sun,  or  of  an  avalanche.  God  has 
promised,  "  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  Me  void,"  Ac,  and  Christian  history  is 
but  the  fulfilment  of  this  predicrion.  2.  But  wbilst  this  is  true  it  is  not  less  true 
that  the  work  of  sinner's  salvation  may  be  impeded.  I  will  not  refer  to  so-called 
hindrances  by  the  enemies  of  truth,  for  these  have  often  been  the  most  effective  aids 
to  its  advancement ;  nor  to  the  major  hindiances  such  as  Romanism,  superstition, 
hypocrisy,  rationalism,  &c.,  for  these  are  so  prominent  that  we  cannot  overlook 
them.  But  I  call  attention  to  some  serious  obstacles  which  are  too  much  over- 
looked. I.  Churches  may  hinder  the  gospel.  1.  By  the  want  of  a  clear  and 
definite  line  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  During  the  first  three  centuries 
this  was  distinct  enough,  and  then  the  Church  pro-pered.  And  if  this  distinction 
is  less  manifest  to-day  it  is  not  because  the  world  has  become  less  carnal.  A  false 
respectability  is  threatening  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  A  cause  is  often 
accounted  prosperous  according  as  its  finances  are  large  and  the  hearers  influential. 
This  cold  respectability  does  not  believe  much  in  conversions  or  aggressive  effort. 
2.  By  the  want  of  self-denial.  Instead  of  "  suffering  all  things  "  for  the  advance- 
ment of  the  gospel,  is  there  one  single  thing  that  we  really  suffer?  The  manifold 
artifices  we  have  to  adopt,  the  violent  efforts  we  have  to  make  to  raise  the  means 
of  spreading  the  gospel  are  an  evidence  of  the  unreality  of  much  religious  profession 
and  a  powerful  hindrance  to  the  truth.  How  different  in  those  early  days  amid  the 
glow  of  the  Church's  first  love,  when  they  that  had  money  brought  it  and  laid  it  at 
tbe  apostles'  feet.  3.  By  the  refusal  of  personal  and  active  service.  We  speak, 
indeed,  with  anxious  concern  of  tbe  heattien  abroad  and  at  home,  pray  for  their 
evangelisation,  and  bid  God-speed  to  the  official  labourers  among  them  ;  but  some- 
thing more  than  this  is  required  before  these  masses  will  be  brought  under  the  power 
of  the  gospel.  As  in  the  early  days  the  responsibility  must  be  felt  by  the  entire 
Church  ;  every  believer  must  be  a  herald  and  an  evangelist.  The  Ep  stle  to  the 
Hebrews  rebukes  those  who  are  still  babes  in  Christ,  but  ought  to  h".  teachers ;  and 
if  the  day  is  to  come  when  it  will  be  no  longer  necessary  to  say  "  Know  the  Lord," 
because  all  shall  know  Him,  it  will  only  come  by  every  one  teaching  bis  neighbour 
that  knowledge.  The  living  Church  has  not  yet  stretched  herself  Elijah-like  upon 
the  dead  body  whose  quickening  i-he  prays  for.  Like  the  atmosphere  she  must 
pre=s  with  equal  force  on  all  the  surfaces  of  society  ;  like  the  sea  flow  into  every  nook 
of  humanity ;  and  like  the  sun  shine  on  all  things  foul  and  low  as  well  as  fair 
and  high,  if  she  is  to  accnmplish  that  for  which  she  has  been  commissio'  ed  and 
equipped.  4.  By  self-complacency  and  spiritual  pride.  5.  By  a  spirit  of  capiious- 
riess,  ever  ready  to  pick  faults  with  existing  arrangements,  but  doing  nothing  to 
make  them  better.  6.  By  our  failure  to  recognise  the  absolute  sovereigny  of  <Tod 
in  the  salvation  of  souls.  7.  By  our  want  of  humble  dependence  on  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  our  neglect  of  earnest  perseveri'  g  prayer.  II.  Ministers  may  hinder 
THE  gospel.  If  Paul  felt  the  possibility  of  this,  why  may  not  we?  1.  By  a  c  Id 
perfunctoriness  in  ttie  discharge  of  our  duties.     It  is  no  easy  matter  to  escap  ■  this. 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  543 

To  address  to  the  same  people  every  week  the  same  verities  and  still  retain  fresh- 
ness and  power,  can  only  be  done  by  sustained  communion  with  God  and  living 
contact  with  the  realities  of  which  we  speak.  Incessant  preaching  apart  from 
careful  cultivation  of  the  inner  life  will  make  us  little  better  than  sermon  machines. 
2.  By  fi)rgetfulness  of  our  absolute  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  reliance 
on  human  strength.  3.  By  the  assumption  of  a  certain  distinctness  of  order  from 
our  people.  Our  office,  authority,  and  work  are  all  spiritual.  We  have  no  priest- 
hood in  any  other  sense  than  that  all  believers  are  priests.  The  more  we  make  our 
people  feel  that  we  are  not  above  them,  but  of  them,  the  more  influence  will  our 
preaching  exert  upon  them.  4.  By  our  want  of  confidence  in  the  success  of  the 
gospel.  How  many  sermons  have  we  preached  of  which  we  have  never  seen  any 
fruit  because  we  never  really  looked  for  it  ?  5.  By  our  want  of  the  spirit  of  self- 
sac-ritice  and  consecration  indicated  in  the  text.  {Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)  They 
which  wait  at  the  altar  are  partakers  with  the  altar. — Partakem  with  the  altar  : — 
Archdeacon  Farrar  says  that  Mr.  Gladstone  once  told  the  late  Bishop  Magee  that 
he  had  never  heard  a  sermon  presclied  on  the  text,  "  Thej'  who  wait  at  the  altar 
are  partakers  with  the  altar."  The  bishop  thereupon  promised  to  preach  on  the 
text,  and  on  the  occasion  Mr.  Gladstone  was  present.  Most  preachers  would  have 
seen  noUiing  in  the  text  but  a  sermon  on  the  right  of  ministers  to  maintenance. 
But  Dr.  Magee  drew  from  it  a  sermon  on  the  congruity  between  the  nature  of  a 
man's  life  and  the  results  he  reaps  from  it.  "  I  shall  never  forget,"  says  Dr. 
Farrar,  "  one  passage,  in  which  he  described  the  bitter  disappointment  and 
disillusionment  of  the  man  who  had  lived  for  sense,  for  pleasure,  and  for  self.  He 
described  such  a  man— his  own  worthless  idol — in  his  hoary  and  dishonoured  age 
seeking  in  vain  for  comfort  and  sustenance  from  the  source  of  his  idolatry  ;  the 
hungry  worshipper  holding  out  his  witliered  hand  to  his  dead  idol,  and  holding  it 
'out  in  vain."  Do  ye  not  know  that  they  .  .  .  which  preach  the  gospel  should 
live  of  the  gospel.  —  The  pastor's  chiti/  and  claims  : — I.  The  business  of  the  pastor  is 
IMPLIED  :  he  is  to  "  prea;-h  the  gospel."  Note — 1.  The  subject  of  his  ministry — "  the 
gospel,"  i.e.,  all  the  gospel  fairly  implies,  its  promises,  commands,  &c.  The  term 
taken  thus  comprehensively,  clearly  instructs  us  in — (1)  The  fallen  condition  of  man- 
kind. (2)  God's  great  pity  on  our  fallen  race  (John  iii.  16).  (3)  The  obligation  of 
those  who  believe  to  act  worthy  of  their  relation  to  the  Saviour.  2.  His  duty 
with  regard  to  it.  He  is  to  preach  "  the  gospel."  Every  pastor  is  bound  to  do  this 
out  of  regard  to— (1)  The  honour  of  Christ.  (2)  The  edification  of  the  Church. 
(3)  Tbe  conversion  of  sinners.  II.  The  duty  of  the  flock  pointed  out,  viz.,  to 
support  their  pastor.  There  are  two  ways  of  doing  this,  either  by  conipulsory  laws 
or  by  voluntary  contribution.  The  former  has,  indeed,  some  advantages.  It  renders 
the  minister  independent,  and  if  his  flock  is  destitute  of  principle  it  is  well  for  him 
that  the  law  compels  them  to  the  performance  of  duty.  But  the  law  of  Christ 
binds  the  pf^ople  voluntarily  to  the  support  of  their  minister,  i.e.,  it  binds  them  to 
the  duty,  but  leaves  the  amount  to  them  according  to  the  rule  in  chap.  xvi.  1,  2,  and 
Matt.  X.  8.  Now  this  is  to  be  done — 1.  From  a  principle  of  justice.  It  is  not 
benevolence,  but  equity,  and  he  is  not  just  who  withholds  from  the  minister  the  due 
remuneration  of  his  labours  (ver.  7).  The  person  who  refuses  to  meet  the  just 
claims  of  the  pliysician  is  reckoned  dishonest,  and  is  he  less  so  who  withholds  from 
the  pastor  his  equitable  support  ?  2.  From  a  regard  to  our  own  advantage.  We 
all  know  that  our  prosperity  depends  on  the  Divine  blessing  ;  and  should  we  not  be 
chiefly  concerned  respecting  soul  prosperity  ?  God's  blessing  may  be  hoped  for  in 
the  use  of  the  means  when  those  means  are  suitably  valued  and  employed.  But 
are  they  so  when  the  support  we  could  give  is  sinfully  withheld?  (2  Cor.  iv.  6-10  ; 
Mai.  8,  9).  3.  From  a  regard  to  our  final  account.  {J.  Dorrington.)  Ministers, 
pay  o/;  — Ministers  are  not  as  well  paid  as  cricket-players,  and  for  a  good  reason — 
religion  is  not  the  national  game.  The  utmost  a  minister  can  say  is  what  the 
farmer  said  of  his  cow  when  grazing  on  the  bare  top  of  a  lofty  hill,  "  If  she  has  a 
poor  pasture,  she  has  a  fine  prospect."  (J.  A.  Marfadyen,  D.D.)  Paying  the 
ministry  : — In  1662  the  town  of  Eastham  agreed  that  a  part  of  every  whale  cast  on 
shore  be  appropriated  for  the  support  of  the  ministry.  The  ministers  must  have 
sat  on  the  cliffs  in  every  storm,  and  watched  the  shore  with  anxiety.  And,  for  my 
part,  if  I  were  a  minister,  I  would  rather  trust  to  the  bowels  of  the  billows  to  cast 
up  a  whale  for  me  than  to  the  generosity  of  many  a  country  parish  that  I  know. 
(Thoreau.)  Payment  of  ministers: — It  must  be  remembered  as  among  the 
anomalies  of  Welsh  religious  life,  that  it  combines  an  insatiable  appetite  for 
sermons  with  a  marvellous  disregard  for  the  temporal  comfort  of  the  preacher.     On 


544  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


one  occasion  a  woman  said  to  Mr.  Evans,  as  he  came  out  of  the  pvilpit,  "  Well, 
Christmas  Evans,  we  are  back  with  your  stipend;  but  I  hope  you  will  be  paid  at 
the  resurrection.  You  have  given  us  a  wonderful  sermon."  "  Yes,  yes,"  was  his 
quick  reply;  "  no  doubt  of  that ;  but  what  am  I  to  do  till  I  get  there?  And  there 
is  the  old  white  mare  that  carries  me — what  will  she  do?  For  her  there  will  be  no 
resurrection.  But  what  will  you  do?  What  reward  will  you  get  for  your  unfaith- 
fulness at  the  resurrection  ?  It's  hard,  but  I  shall  get  on  at  the  resurrection;  but 
you,  who  got  on  so  well  in  the  world,  may  change  places  with  me  at  the  resurrec- 
tion." (Paxton  Hood.)  Support  of  the  ministry  : — A  clergyman  in  Wales  was 
apjjointed  by  an  ordaining  council  to  address  the  people  who  had  impoverished 
their  former  pastor  and  were  now  to  receive  a  new  one.  He  recommended  in  his 
address  that  Jacob's  ladder  be  let  down  from  the  skies  to  that  Welsh  parish,  in 
order  that  the  new  minister  might  "go  into  heaven  on  the  sabbath  evening  after 
preaching,  and  remain  there  all  the  week:  then  he  would  come  down  so  spiritually 
minded  and  so  full  of  heaven,  that  he  would  preach  almost  like  an  angel."  Now, 
the  people  insisted  on  having  their  pastor  with  them  on  other  days  than  the 
sabbath.  "That  may  be,"  replied  the  speaker;  "but  then,  it  he  remain  among 
you,  he  must  have  something  to  eat."  The  dignity  of  the  angels  was  not  incon- 
sistent with  their  ascending  and  descending  on  a  wooden  ladder  ;  and  one  ladder 'on 
which  our  ministering  angels  may  go  up  to  their  heavenly  studies  is  such  a  material 
sustenance  as  will  make  it  unnecessary  for  them  to  grovel  in  the  earth.    {Prof.  Park.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  But  I  have  used  none  of  tliese  things. — PauVs  conduct : — I.  Does 
NOT  ESTABLISH  a  GENERAL  RULE.  Because — 1.  He  maintains  his  rigbt.  2.  Volun- 
tarily concedes  it.  3.  Under  particular  circumstances.  II.  Cojimends  disin- 
terested EFFORT.  The  desire  of  personal  advantage — 1.  Should  never  be  the 
motive  of  Christian  effort.  2.  Is  unworthy  of  the  Christian  character.  3.  Kobs 
us  of  our  true  glory.      {J.  Lijtli,  D.D.)  Professional  Minister: — The  man  who 

has  adopted  the  Church  as  a  profession,  as  other  men  adopt  the  law,  the  army,  or 
the  navy,  and  goes  through  the  routine  of  its  duties  with  the  coldness  of  a  mere 
official — filled  by  him,  the  pulpit  seems  filled  by  the  ghastly  form  of  a  skeleton  that, 
iu  its  cold  and  bony  fingers,  holds  a  burning  lamp.       (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  For 

though  I  preach  the  gospel,  I  have  nothing  to  glory  of;  for  necessity  is  laid  upon 
me. — Preaching  the  gospel  is  to  prea'h  Christ  in  His  fulness,  in  His  attributes,  in 
His  relations  to  men  ;  is  to  preach  His  life  as  the  pattern  of  Christian  morals  ;  His 
atonement  as  the  substance  of  Christian  doctrine ;  His  resurrection  as  the  source 
of  Christian  assurance  ;  and  His  coming  again  as  the  fountain  of  hope  and  joy. 
(Bp.    Thorold.)  Preach   the  goq^cl  : — I.  What  is  it    to   preach  the  gospel  ? 

1.  To  state  every  doctrine  contained  in  God's  Word,  and  to  give  every  truth  its 
proper  prominence.  Men  may  preach  a  part  of  the  gospel.  I  would  not  say  that 
a  man  did  not  preach  the  gospel  if  he  did  but  maintain  the  doctrine  of  justification 
by  faith,  but  he  would  not  preach  the  whole  gospel.  No  man  can  be  said  to  do 
that  who  leaves  out  one  single  truth.  Some  men  purposely  confine  themselves 
to  four  or  five  toi^ics  and  make  an  iron  ring  of  their  doctrines,  and  he  who  dares 
to  step  beyond  that  narrow  circle  is  not  reckoned  orthodox.  God  bless  heretics, 
then,  and  send  us  more  of  them !  2.  To  exalt  Jesus  Christ.  A  great  many 
preachers  tell  poor  convinced  sinners,  "  You  must  go  home  aud  pray  and  read 
the  Scriptures ;  you  must  attend  the  ministry,"  and  so  on.  I  would  not  direct  to 
prayer,  Ac,  but  simply  to  faith.  Not  that  I  despise  prayer,  &c.— that  mast  come 
after  faith.  None  of  those  thiags  are  the  way  of  salvation.  3.  To  give  every  class 
of  character  his  due.  He  who  preaches  solely  to  saints,  or  solely  to  the  sinner, 
does  not  preach  the  whole  of  the  gospel.  We  have  amalgamation  here.  We  have 
the  saint  who  is  full  of  assurance  and  strong  ;  we  have  the  saint  who  is  weak  and 
low  in  faith  ;  we  have  the  young  convert ;  we  have  the  man  halting  between  two 
opinions  ;  we  have  the  moral  man  ;  we  have  the  sinner  ;  we  have  the  reprobate ; 
we  have  the  outcast.  Let  each  have  a  word.  4.  Not  to  preach  certain  truths  about 
the  gospel,  not  to  preach  about  the  people,  but  to  preach  to  the  people.  To  preach 
the  gospel  is  to  preach  it  into  the  heart,  not  by  your  own  might,  but  by  the  influence 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  How  is  it  that  ministers  are  not  allowed  to  glory? 
Because — 1.  They  are  conscious  of  their  own  imperfections.  2.  All  their  gifts  are 
borrowed.  The  life,  the  voice,  the  talent  are  the  gift  of  God  ;  and  he  who  has  the 
greatest  gifts  must  feel  that  unto  God  belongs  the  glory.  3.  They  are  absolutely 
dependent  on  the  Holy  Ghost.  III.  What  is  that  necessity  which  is  laid  upon  us 
TO  preach  the  gospel  ?     1.  The  call  itself.     If  a  man  be  truly  called  of  God  to  the 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORL\THIANS. 


niinistiT,  I  will  defy  him  to  withhold  himself  from  it.  He  must  preach.  2.  The  sad 
destitution  of  this  poor  fallen  world.  (C.  H.  Spurijeon. )  Every  Christian  a  preacher : 
— Mark — I.  The  oBLir.ATioN  of  speech.  No  doubt  the  apostle  had,  in  a  special 
sense,  a  "  necessity  laid  upon  "  him.  But  though  he  differs  from  us  in  his  direct 
supernatural  commission,  in  the  width  of  his  sphere  and  in  the  splendour  of  his 
gifts,  he  does  not  differ  from  us  in  the  reality  of  the  obligation.  The  commission 
does  not  depend  upon  apostolic  dignity.  Christ  said,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world," 
&c.,  to  all  generations  of  His  Church.  1.  That  commandment  is  i)ermanent.  It  ig 
exactly  contemporaneous  with  the  duration  of  the  promise  which  is  appended  to  it. 
Nay,  the  promise  is  made  conditional  upon  the  discharge  of  the  duty.  2.  Just 
because  this  commission  is  given  to  the  whole  Church  it  is  binding  on  every 
individual  member  of  the  Church.  The  whole  Church  is  nothing  more  than  the 
sum  total  of  all  its  members,  and  nothing  is  incumbent  upon  it  which  is  not 
incumbent  upon  each  of  them.  You  canuot  buy  yourselves  out  of  the  ranks,  as 
they  used  to  be  able  to  do  out  of  the  militia,  by  paying  for  a  substitute.  We  all,  if 
we  know  anything  of  Christ  aud  His  love  and  His  power,  are  bound  to  tell  it  to 
those  whom  we  can  reach.  You  cannot  all  stand  up  and  preach  in  the  sense  in 
which  I  do  it.  But  the  word  does  not-  imi^ly  a  pulpit,  a  set  discourse,  a  gathered 
multitude  ;  it  simply  implies  a  herald's  task  of  proclaiming.  Everybody  who  has 
found  Christ  can  say,  "  I  have  found  the  Messias,"  and  everybody  who  knows  Him 
can  say,  "  Come  and  hear,  and  I  will  tell  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  my  soul." 
No  man  can  force  you.  But  if  Christ  says  to  me,  "  Go  !  "  and  I  say,  "  I  had  rather 
not,"  Christ  and  1  have  to  settle  accounts  between  us.  3.  This  command  makes 
very  short  work  of  a  number  of  excuses.  (1)  There  is  a  great  deal  in  the  tone 
of  this  generation  which  tends  to  chill  the  missionary  spirit.  We  know  more 
about  the  healhei),  and  familiarity  diminishes  horror.  We  have  taken  up,  many 
of  us,  milder  ideas  about  the  condition  of  those  who  die  without  knowing  the  name 
of  Christ.  We  have  taken  to  the  study  of  comparative  religion,  forgetting  some- 
times that  the  thing  that  we  are  studying  as  a  science  is  spreading  a  dark  cloud 
of  ignorance  and  apathy  over  millions  of  men.  And  all  these  reasons  somewhat 
sap  the  strength  and  cool  the  fervour  of  a  good  many  Christian  people  nowadays. 
Jesus  Christ's  commandment  remains  just  as  it  was.  (2)  Then  some  of  us  say, 
"  I  prefer  working  at  home  !  "  Well,  if  you  are  doing  all  that  you  can  there,  the 
gi eat  principle  of  division  of  labour  comes  in  to  warrant  your  not  entering  upon 
other  fields ;  but  unless  you  are,  there  is  no  reasc^n  why  you  should  do  nothing 
in  the  other  direction.  Jesus  Christ  still  says,  "  Go  ye  iuto  all  the  world."  (3) 
Tlien  some  of  you  say,  "Well,  I  do  not  much  believe  in  your  missionary  societies. 
There  is  a  great  dealof  waste  of  money  about  them.  I  have  heard  stories  about 
missionaries  taking  too  much  pay,  and  doing  too  little  work."  Be  that  as  it  may, 
does  that  indictment  draw  a  wet  sponge  across  the  commandment  of  Jesus  Christ  ? 
4.  I  sometimes  venture  to  think  that  the  day  will  come  when  the  condition  of  being 
received  into  and  retained  in  the  Church  will  be  obedience  to  that  commandment. 
Why,  even  bees  have  the  sense  at  a  given  time  of  the  year  to  turn  the  drones  out  of 
the  hives.  Whether  it  is  a  condition  of  Church  membership  or  not,  sure  I  am  that 
it  is  a  condition  of  fellowship  with  Christ,  and  a  condition,  therefore,  of  health  in 
the  Christian  life.  H.  The  penalty  of  silexce.  "  Woe  is  me  if  I  preach  not  the 
gospel."  1.  If  you  are  a  dumb  and  idle  professor  of  Christ's  truth,  depend  upon  it 
that  your  dumb  idleness  will  rob  you  of  much  communion  with  Christ.  There  are 
many  Christians  who  would  be  ever  so  much  happier  and  more  assured  if  they 
would  go  and  talk  about  Christ  to  other  people.  Like  the  mist;,  which  will  be 
blown  awMy  with  the  least  puff  of  fresh  air,  there  lie  doleful  d-impnesses,  in  their 
sooty  folds,  over  many  a  Christian  heart,  shutting  out  the  sun,  and  a  httle  whiff'  of 
wholesome  activity  in  Christ's  cause  would  clear  them  all  away,  and  the  sun  would 
shine  again.  2.  The  woe  of  the  loss  of  sympathies,  and  the  gain  of  all  the  discom- 
forts and  miseries  of  a  self  absorbed  life.  3.  The  woe  of  the  loss  of  one  of  the 
best  ways  of  confirming  one's  own  faith  in  the  truth — viz.,  that  of  seeking  to 
impart  it  to  others.  If  you  want  to  learn  a  thing,  teach  it.  4.  The  woe  of  having 
none  that  can  look  to  you  and  say,  "  I  owe  myself  to  thee."  5.  Aye  !  but  that  is 
not  all.  There  is  a  future  to  be  taken  into  account.  Though  we  know,  and  there- 
fore dare  say,  little  about  that  Juture,  take  this  to  heart,  that  he  who  there  can 
stand  before  God,  aud  say,  "Behold!  I  and  the  children  whom  God  hath  given 
me  "  will  wear  a  crown  brighter  than  the  starless  ones  of  those  who  saved  them- 
selves and  have  brought  none  with  them.  III.  The  glad  obedience  which  tran- 
scends the  limits  of  obligation.  "  If  I  do  this  thing  willingly  I  have  a  reward." 
VOL.  I.  35 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

Paul  desired  to  bring  a  little  more  than  was  required,  in  token  of  his  love  to  his 
Master  and  of  his  thankful  acceptance  of  the  obligation.  The  artist  who  loves  his 
work  will  put  more  work  into  his  picture  than  is  absolutely  needed,  and  will  linger 
over  it,  lavishing  diligence  and  care  upon  it,  because  he  is  in  love  with  his  task. 
The  servant  that  seeks  to  do  as  little  as  he  can  scrape  through  with  without  rebuke 
is  actuated  by  no  high  motives.  The  trader  that  barely  puts  as  much  into  the 
scale  as  will  balance  the  weight  in  the  other  is  grudging  in  his  dealings ;  but  he 
who,  with  liberal  hand,  gives  "  shaken  down,  pressed  t<igether,  and  running  over" 
measure,  gives  because  he  delights  in  the  giving.  And  so  it  is  in  the  Christian 
life.  There  are  many  of  us  whose  question  seems  to  be,  "  How  little  can  I  get  off 
with?"  And  what  does  that  mean  ?  It  means  that  we  are  slaves.  It  means  that 
if  we  durst  we  would  give  nothing  and  do  nothing.  And  what  does  that  mean  ? 
It  menus  that  we  do  not  care  for  the  Lord,  and  have  no  joy  in  our  work.  And 
what  does  that  mean  ?  It  means  that  our  work  deserves  no  praise,  and  will  get 
no  reward.  If  we  love  Christ  we  shall  be  anxious,  if  it  were  possible,  to  do  more 
than  He  commands  us.  Of  course  He  has  the  right  to  all  our  work  ;  but  yet  there 
are  heights  of  Christian  consecration  and  self-sacrifice  which  a  man  will  not  be 
blamed  if  he  has  not  climbed,  and  will  be  praised  if  he  has.  What  we  want  is 
extravagances  of  service.  Judas  may  say,  "  To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  "  but 
Jesus  will  say,  "  He  hath  wrought  a  good  work  on  Me."  And  the  fragrance  of  the 
ointment  will  smell  sweet  through  the  centnries.       {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 

true  pulpit : — From  this  verse  we  infer  that  the  true  preacher — I.  Pkeaches  the 
GOSPEL  AS  HIS  GRAND  MISSION.  The  essence  of  this  good  news  is  that  God  loves 
man,  though  a  sinner,  and  that  Christ  is  the  demonstration  and  medium  of  this 
love.  This  is  the  heart  of  the  gospel,  and  to  preach  this  is  the  grand  mission  of 
the  true  preacher.  1.  In  contradistinction  to  natural  reli'iion.  Natural  religion 
does  not  reveal  Divine  love  for  sinners.  The  volume  was  written  before  sin  existed. 
.  In  contradistinction  to  human  theologies.  Neitlier  Calvinism,  Arininianism, 
nor  any  other  "  ism,"  constitute  the  gospel.  3.  In  contradistinction  to  legal 
maledictions.  A  terrible  condemnation,  it  is  true,  hangs  over  the  sinner,  but  the 
terrors  of  the  judgment,  &c.,  are  not  gospel.  II.  Disclauis  all  praise  in  the 
DISCHARGE  OF  HIS  MISSION.  "  Tliougli  I  preacli  the  gospel,  I  have  nothing  to 
glory  of."  1.  There  is  everything  in  the  nature  of  the  subjects  to  prevent  self- 
glory.  It  is — (1)  Undiscoverable  by  human  rea'^on.  (2)  Declaratory  of  human 
degradation.  (3)  Demonstrative  of  infinite  condescensiou.  2.  There  is  everything 
in  the  nature  of  the  work  to  prevent  self-glm-y.  Every  true  preacher  must  feel 
a  consciousness — (1)  Of  unworthiness  for  such  a  high  honour.  "  Unto  me,  who 
am  least  of  all  saints,"  cfec.  (2)  Of  incompetency  for  such  a  work.  "  Who  is 
sufficient  for  these  things?  "  &c.  (3)  Of  utter  inability  to  realise  success.  What- 
ever he  does,  however  well  he  preaches,  he  cannot  guarantee  efficiency.  "  Paul 
jilants,  and  Apollos  waters,"  &c.  3.  There  is  everything  in  the  nature  of  bis 
inspiration  to  pi'event  self-glory.  What  was  the  feeling  that  prompted  him  to 
undertake  it?  "The  love  of  Christ  that  constrained"  him.  It  was  scarcely 
optional  with  him.  He  was  drawn  to  it  by  this  new  and  heavenly  afflatus.  Man 
cannot  praise  himself  for  loving.     Does  a  mother  take  credit  for  loving  her  child  ? 

cfec.       III.    Is    IMPELLED  BY  AN  INWARD  NECESSITY  IN  THE  PROSECUTION    OF    HIS    MISSION. 

"  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me,"  <fec.  This  necessity  was  a  force  working  from  within, 
not  a  pressure  from  without.  It  was  the  foi'ce — 1.  Of  ingratitude.  Christ  had 
appeared  to  him,  rescued  his  soul  from  hell,  and  given  him  a  commission.  Grati- 
tude bound  him  to  the  service  of  such  a  deliverer.  2.  Of  justice.  The  gospel  had 
been  given  to  him  in  trust.  He  was  a  steward.  It  was  given  to  him  not  to 
monopolise,  but  to  communicate.  "  He  was  a  debtor,"  &c.  3.  Of  compassion. 
He  knew  that  souls  were  dying,  and  he  had  the  panacea  in  the  gospel.  Such  were 
the  necessities  that  bound  him  to  his  work.  He  felt  he  could  not  but  do  it ;  felt  a 
horrid  woe  over  him  if  he  dared  neglect  it.      (D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  The  mini<tnj 

and  its  j'esjjonsibilities : — We  have  here — I.  A  declaration  of  an  existing  office 
— to  preach  the  gospel.  1.  The  gospel  is  a  simple  statement  of  glad  tidings  to 
a  perishing  world.  To  speak  merely  of  the  nature  of  moral  duties,  to  discuss  the 
various  attributes  of  God,  to  describe  Christian  virtues,  to  speak  of  a  future  state 
and  its  retributions,  is  very  well  in  its  place,  but  it  is  not  the  gospel.  If  there  be 
not  warm  statements  of  the  atonement  then  there  is  a  blank  in  the  "  counsel 
of  God  "  !  2.  With  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  we  are  to  discharge  our  duty. 
These  principles  are  to  be  made  known  to  all  within  our  reach.  The  minister 
of  Christ  is  to  allow  no  limitations  or  restrictions  to  his  message.    He  must  "  warn 


CHAP.  IX.]  I    CORINTHIANS.  547 

every  man,  and  teach  every  man,"  &c.     3.  This  gospel  must  be  "  a  savour  of  Ufe 
unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death,"  to  those  who  hear  it.     II.  The  renodncement 

OF    ALL    EKiHT  TO  SELF-EXALTATION  ON  ACCOUNT    OF    THAT    OFFICE.       "  Though  I  preach 

the  gospel,  I  have  nothing  to  glory  of:  for  necessity  is  laid  upon  me."  There 
is  in  man  a  powerful  tendency  to  self-exaltation.  The  same  principle  would  fain 
accompany  us  in  our  work  of  preaching  the  gospel ;  but  ministers  have  nothing 
to  boast  of.  1.  Because  we  are  under  the  bond  of  absolute  necessity.  For  the 
apostle  says,  "Necessity  is  laid  upon  me."  There  is — (1)  The  positive  command 
of  God  :  "  Go  ye  into  all  th ;  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  (2) 
The  constraining  infiueuce  of  love  to  the  Redeemer.  (3)  A  sense  of  the  necessities 
of  men  around  us.  2.  Becau-^e,  whatever  talents  we  possess,  they  are  given  us 
entirely  by  God.  3.  Because  all  our  success  is  entirely  from  the  agency  of  Heaven. 
The  preacher  remembers  to  have  been  told,  "  My  son,  beware  of  the  bribe  of  talent  "  ; 
this  was  understood — "  Beware  of  the  bribe  of  applause,"  and  this  was  understood. 
But  then  there  was  another  caution,  which  was  a  secret — "  Beware  of  the  bribe  of 
usefulness  "  ;  this  could  not  be  understood.  We  are  apt  to  say,  "  My  success  !  My 
usefulness !  "  and  so  Satan  overcomes  us.  Now,  the  gospel  goes  to  destroy  this 
tendency.  It  says,  "  Not  by  might,"  &c.  III.  A  sense  of  certain  consequences 
RESULTING  FROM  INFIDELITY  IN  THIS  CAUSE.  "  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the 
gospel."  1.  Why  should  he  have  this  woe?  (1)  Because  it  is  an  intrusion  upon 
an  ofdce  which  God  would  have  occupied  only  by  His  own  servants.  (2)  Because 
it  is  an  act  of  absolute  wickedness  to  undertake  so  important  an  ofitice  and  not 
perform  it.  (3)  Because  it  is  an  attempt  to  sustain  the  w.  ight  of  immortal  souls 
without  being  able  to  bear  it.  2.  What  is  this  woe  ?  (1)  We  should  encounter  the 
censure  of  all  good  men.  (2)  Our  death-beds  can  else  be  nothing  but  desertion  and 
misery.  (3)  The  contemplation  of  condemnation  on  the  judgment-day.  (./.  Parsons.) 
The  burden  of  the  ministrti  : — I.  What  is  it  to  preach  the  gospel?  The  goi-pel 
is  the  revelation  of  God's  mercy  to  mankind,  disclosing  the  Divinely-appointed 
method  whereby  a  lost  and  degenerate  race  may  be  restored  to  the  favour  of  their 
Creator.  Consequently  it  cannot  be  rightly  understood,  or  fully  preached,  until 
there  be  a  distict  exhibition  of  man — 1.  As  fallen  in  Adam.  2.  As  renewed  in 
Christ.  II.  Why  woe  is  unto  the  minister,  if  he  preach  not  the  gospel. 
1.  Professing  that  he  thinks  himself  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  undertake  the 
solemn  othce  of  clergyman  ;  and  having  bound  his  soul  by  the  most  awful  vows ;  if 
he  deliver  a  false  message,  and  inculcate  a  strange  worship,  then  be  violates,  with 
Hagrant  audacity,  the  most  sacred  of  all  obligations,  and  is  a  thousand  times  a  fouler 
traitor  than  if  sent  on  an  embassage  by  his  earthly  monarch,  he  had  sold  that 
monarch  or  bartered  bis  honour.  2.  Woe  is  unto  him  who  preaches  not  the 
gospel,  because  he  deludes  into  error  the  souls  of  his  hearers  ;  and  at  his  hands 
shall  their  blood  be  required.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  u-atchivord  of  the  true 
viinister: — I.  The  function  of  the  true  minister  is  to  preach  the  gospel. 
Paul  was  not  a  politician,  to  turn  the  church  into  a  party  club,  and  the  pulpi-t  into 
a  hustings — not  a  mere  orator,  to  give  his  hearers  an  hour's  entertainment  ;  not  a 
devotee  of  science  ;  not  a  philologist,  to  spread  out  before  immortal  souls  scholastic 
criticisms  ;  not  a  mere  moralist,  to  discourse  of  flowers  that  never  grew  around  the 
Cross.  No!  his  was  a  nobler  and  more  difficult  work,  viz.,  to  preach  the  gospel! 
To  do  this  is — 1.  To  proclaim  all  the  precious  doctrines,  promises,  precepts,  and 
duties  recorded  in  the  Scriptures.  Some  conflne  themselves  to  a  few  favourite 
topics.  They  are  afraid  to  preach  the  whole  gospel,  lest  its  truths  contradict  each 
other.  Away  with  such  idle  fears  !  One  truth  can  no  more  clash  with  another 
truth  than  one  sunbeam  can  quench  another  sunbeam.  2.  To  preach  Christ 
crucified.  Some  excuse  their  non-preaching  of  Christ  on  the  ground  that  He  is  not 
in  the  text.  I  should  not  like  to  live  in  a  village  from  which  there  was  not  a  road 
to  London  ;  and  I  should  not  take  a  text  from  which  there  was  not  a  way  to  Christ. 
8.  To  preach  to  all.  A  deacon  once  said  to  a  minister,  "  If  you  go  into  that  pulpit, 
you  are  only  to  preach  to  God's  dear  people."  The  minister  replied,  "  Have  you 
marked  them  all  on  the  back,  so  that  I  may  know  them  ?  "  The  gospel  is  a  boon 
to  a  lost  world,  and  I  dare  not  monopolise  it.  II.  The  true  minister  is  impeller 
TO  his  holy  vocation.  Paul  did  not  preach  the  gospel  on  the  ground  of  expediency, 
or  to  gain  human  applause,  but  becHUse  of  an  irresistible  inspiration,  a  celestial 
impulse.  No  minister  is  now  called  in  the  miraculous  way  Paul  was,  but  every 
true  minister  feels  the  same  necessity.  John  Newton  was  summoned  from  the 
deck  of  the  slave  ship  to  the  pulpit.'  Thomas  Scott  thiew  aside  his  shepherd's 
frock  to  put  on  the  mantle  of  the  prophet.     The  true  ni'nis'er  cannot  help  preach- 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

ing.  "If  I  were  out  of  prison  to-day,"  said  Bunyan,  "I  would  preach  the  gospel 
again  to-morrow,  by  the  help  of  God."  You  might  as  well  try  to  uproot  the  moun- 
tains, roll  back  the  rivers,  tame  the  wild  ocean,  or  arrest  the  stars,  as  attempt  to 
silence  the  man  whose  mouth  God  has  opened.  It  is  said  that  ministers  are  all 
hypocrites;  and  when  a  specious  profe'^sor  stands  unmasked  the  cry  is  raised, 
"  They  are  all  the  same."  Are  they?  Nay,  there  are  thousands  who  would  march 
bravely  to  the  stake  to-morrow,  if  it  were  necessary.  III.  The  true  minister  is 
MisEKABLE  IF  UNENGAGED  IN  HIS  SACRED  CALLING.  To  an  unsclfish  mind  jJcrsonal 
security  is  not  always  perfect  felicity.  The  apostle  stood  on  the  serene  elevation  of 
personal  assurance.  "  I  am  persuaded  that  nothing  can  separate  me  from  the  love 
of  Christ ;  but  oh  !  this  great  heaviness  for  Israel^my  kinsmen !  "  The  man  who 
would  go  to  heaven  alone  shall  never  get  there.  Paul  longed  and  laboured  to  save 
others.  He  thought  on  the  multitudes  that  were  dying  iu  their  sins.  Christ  bled 
for  sinners — shall  I  not  labour  for  them  ?  He  lived  and  died  for  me — shall  I  do 
nothing  for  Him ?  Perish  the  thought !  (W.  Anderson.)  Necessity  is  laid  upon 
me  : — We  need  not  ministers  that  may  or  will,  but  that  must  preach,  and  members 
not  that  mayor  will,  but  that  must  live,  the  gospel.  Consider — I.  The  work: 
WHAT  THEY  DO.  They  preach  tlie  gospel.  The  terms  point  to  the  public  ministry 
of  the  word  ;  but  it  is  as  certainly  applicable  to  every  Christian.  Responsibility  is 
diversified  not  in  kind,  but  only  iu  degree.  By  two  short  links  every  believer  is 
bound  to  minister  for  the  Lord.  "  Let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come."  We  have 
heard  the  word  of  life,  and  therefore  we  should  speak  it.  "  Freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give."  Without  opening  bis  lips  to  teach,  every  one  who  bears 
Christ's  name  may  help  the  gospel — 1.  By  his  spirit  and  his  life.  As  we  thread 
life's  promiscuous  throng  we  are  touching  right  and  left  immortal  beings,  giving 
tliem  a  bias  by  the  contact  to  the  right  or  the  left.  2.  By  word  and  work.  The 
methods  and  opportunities  are  manifold.  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could  "  is  the 
standard  of  measurement.  (1)  The  more  obvious  methods  are — a  Sabbath-school, 
a  mission  or  tract  district.  (2)  Private  doors  are  also  open.  You  might  make 
yourself  useful  in  a  time  of  distress  ;  and  your  word  would  then  go  deeper  than  in 
the  public  assembly.  As  to  work  fur  the  Lord,  the  rule  is  the  same  as  in  getting 
from  the  Lord  :  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  (3)  But  a  sphere  lies  open  to  those 
who  shrink  from  even  the  most  private  walks.  If  you  cannot  make  up  to  other 
people,  you  may  have  your  hands  hlled  with  remunerative  labour  at  home.  If  you 
are  bashful  in  presence  of  others,  you  may  surely  be  bold  in  dealing  with  yourself. 
Here  is  an  opportunity  of  doing  mission-work.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you  : 
go  work  in  tuat  vineyard.  If  that  field  become  ripe,  seed  from  it  will  be  carried 
away  on  the  wings  of  the  wind  to  make  the  desert  fruitful.  II.  The  motive  :  what 
COMPELS  them  to  DO  IT.  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon  me,"  ctc.  The  apostle  confesses 
frankly  he  was  kept  at  his  work  as  a  slave  is  by  tl^e  sound  of  the  whip.  Is  any  one 
startled  at  this  representation?  See  if  it  be  not  God's  way  of  keeping  His  servants 
to  their  work,  and  if  His  way  be  not  very  good?  The  pain  of  a  wound  is  our 
Maker's  messenger  to  send  us  foith  quickly  in  search  of  a  cure;  the  pain  of  thirst, 
His  messenger  to  uend  us  forth  quickly  in  seirch  of  water.  So  it  is  consonant 
with  God's  ways  to  keep  His  creature  busy  with  useful  work  by  pressing  him  with 
pain  if  he  indolently  or  ignorantly  cease.  By  the  secret  line  fixed  in  the  conscience, 
which  God  in  heaven  holds  in  His  own  hand,  many  a  man  is  compelled  to  run 
errands  of  benevolence  who  otherwise  would  sit  at  home  in  indolent  ease.  I  knew 
a  boy  once  who  was  asked  for  an  alms  by  a  passing  beggar.  The  boy  refused;  the 
beggar  passed,  piercing  the  youth  by  a  look  from  a  pale  face  and  a  drooping  eye. 
The  youth  continued  his  work  mechanically,  scarcely  knowing  what  he  did.  Woe, 
woe  was  upon  his  soul,  because  he  had  not  given  the  beggar  a  penny.  This  woe 
increased  and  accumulated  until  it  became  unbearable.  The  boy  threw  his  instru- 
ment on  the  ground,  and  ran  after  the  wearied  beggar,  and  silently  placed  the 
penny  in  the  beg,L;ar's  hand,  and  ran  home  again  to  his  work.  The  woe  lashed 
him  to  duty,  and  then  left  him  light  of  heart  as  the  birds  that  sang  beside  him  on 
the  tree.  Look  to  some  of  the  particular  forces  which  press  a  human  soul  to  dili- 
gence in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  1.  The  constraining  love  of  Christ.  Paul  could 
not  help  going  forward  through  evei'y  difficulty  and  dau^'er,  any  more  than  a  ship 
can  help  going  forward  through  the  billows  when  its  sails  are  full  and  its  helm 
held  aright.  His  affections  rose  from  earth  to  heaven,  because  a  pressure  was  upon 
his  heart,  as  great  as  ihe  pressure  that  compels  the  w'aters  of  the  sea  to  rise  and 
constitute  the  clouds.  2.  The  ne^v  appetite  of  the  new  creature.  The  Lord  Him- 
self was  borne  forward  in  this  manner,  and  owned  it.     "  My  m^at  is  to  do  the  will 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.   COEINTRTAXS.  549 


of  Him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  His  work."  3.  The  need  of  a  sinning,  suffering 
world.  A  brother  ready  to  perish  lies  heavier  than  lead  upon  a  loyal,  loving  heart, 
and  produces  that  haste  to  the  rescue  at  which  the  giddy  world,  ignorant  of  the 
moving  power,  gazes  as  an  inexplicable  phenomenon.  Ah,  if  the  secret  machinery 
of  the  Christian  life  within  us  were  well  oiled  and  free  of  rust,  we  should  move 
quiclily  in  these  days ;  for  the  appropriate  kind  of  power  is  playing  on  us  in  a 
mighty  volume  all  the  day  long.  ( JF.  Arnot,  D.D.)  A  j;r/x.sio/t  /o?-  preachmg  : — 
Dr.  Parker,  in  an  address  to  local  preachers,  City  Tempi*',  June  1, 1885,  said:  "  A 
lady  asked  me  the  other  day,  '  What  is  your  hobby? '  Said  I,  '  Preaching.'  '  But 
apart  from  that?'  said  she.  'There  is  nothing  apart  from  that,' I  replied.  All 
poetry,  all  beauty,  all  nature,  all  love,  all  history,  the  whole  future  are  included  in 
preaching.  The  preacher  should  never  be  awav  from  his  work,  and  never  can  be 
if  his  spirit  is  what  it  ought  to  be.  Unless  you  make  this  preaching  the  very 
crown  of  your  lives  you  will  be  very  poor  preachers."  Constrained  to -preach  : — 
In  lecturing  one  day  to  the  students  of  his  college — by  no  means  the  least  important 
monument  of  his  sanctified  genius,  enterprise,  and  industry — Mr.  Spurgeon  said : 
"  If  any  student  in  this  room  could  be  content  to  be  a  newspaper  editor,  or  a  grocer, 
or  a  farmer,  or  a  doctor,  or  a  lawyer,  or  a  senator,  or  a  king,  in  the  name  of  heaven 
and  earth  let  him  go  his  way."  No  doubt  it  has  always  been  more  or  less  true, 
though  never  more  so  than  in  these  days  of  earnest  faith  and  equally  pertinacious 
scepticism,  that  the  preacher,  or  Christian  worker  of  any  kind,  whose  heart  does 
not  feel  the  lire  of  spiritual  earnestness,  who  has  no  enthusiastic  love  for  his  work, 
mil  soon  succumb,  and  either  leave  the  unavailing  drudgery  or  move  on  in  sullen 
discontent,  burdened  with  a  monotony  as  tiresome  as  that  of  a  blind  horse  on  a  farm- 
yard saw-mill.  Beneath  and  behind  all  high  and  fruitful  exertion  of  the  human 
soul  there  must  be  moral  earnestness.  Horace,  in  his  "  Ars  Poetica,"  tells  the  poet 
that  if  he  wants  the  people  to  vieep  over  his  poetry,  he  must  weep  with  them.  And 
the  coldest,  hardest,  most  self-contained  pleader  at  the  bar  knows  he  must  have  his 
heart  in  his  case  if  he  is  to  convince  the  jury.  One  of  the  greatest  of  actors  laid 
bare  the  whole  secret  of  his  power  in  a  tragic  part  he  was  accustomed  to  play  with 
ineomparahle  success  by  saying  that  through  force  of  imagination  he  did  actually 
tremble  under  the  terror  which  he  excited  in  the  audience.  To  young  versifiers 
who  had  scored  some  success  in  poetry  and  asked  his  opinion  as  to  the  advisability 
of  devoting  their  time  and  energies  to  poetry,  Euskin  was  accustomed  to  say, 
"  Don't  if  you  can  help  it."  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preacli  not  the  gospel. — The 
responsihiltty  of  gospel  preaching  : — 1.  There  are  some  with  whom  an  exclamation 
of  this  kind  is  almost  conventional,  with  whom  it  implies  nothing  more  than 
annoyance.  But  this  is  not  the  case  with  the  deeply  serious  apostle.  The  ex- 
clamation which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  his  writings  has  a  history.  Under  its  cover 
the  prophets  called  down  penal  suffering  upon  opponents  of  God's  will.  And  our 
Lord  invoked  it  upon  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  dx.  The  word  does  not  change  its 
character  when  it  is  invoked  by  a  psalmist,  prophet,  or  apostle,  upon  himself,  St. 
Paul,  then,  is  employing  an  expression  of  acknowledged  solemnity,  which  for  him 
bad  not  lost  its  freshness.  2,  But  is  not  the  apostle  exaggerating  somewhat  ?  It 
was  a  grand  thing  to  preach  the  gospel  as  he  did.  But  supposmg  that  he  had 
settled  down  quietly  as  a  private  Christian,  why  should  he  think  that  any  great 
harm  would  hapiDen  to  him  ?  There  are  multitudes  with  natural  capacity  for  this 
or  that  kind  of  work,  who,  somehow  or  other,  never  come  to  undertake  it.  It  is  a 
raisfortune,  no  doubt,  but  if  we  were  to  hear  a  man  say,  "  Woe  is  me  if  I  do  not 
practise  medicine;  if  I  do  not  plead  at  the  bar,  &c.,  we  should  say  to  him,  "It  is 
a  pity  you  are  not  making  the  best  of  yourself  ;  but  there  are  other  things  besides 
that  on  which  you  have  set  your  heart,  and  it  is  better  to  take  a  quieter  view  of 
your  case,"  Now  why  may  not  something  of  this  kind  be  said  of  St,  Paul  ?  Ah  ! 
why?  Because  St.  Paul  felt  that  if  he  were  not  to  preach  the  gospel  he  would — I. 
Do  A  VIOLENCE  TO  HIS  SENSE  OF  jfSTicE.  The  gospel  was  not  his  in  such  a  sense 
that  he  had  any  right  to  keep  it  to  himself.  1.  The  word  implied  that  man  was  in 
a  bad  case,  and  needed  something  to  reassure  and  to  help  him  ;  that  mankind  waa 
ill  at  ease,  and  was  looking  out  for  a  deliverer.  We  often  know  that  we  are  ill 
without  knowing  precisely  what  is  the  matter  with  us,  and  this  was  the  case  with 
the  pre-Christian  world.  And,  therefore,  God  opened  the  eyes  of  men  to  see  what 
their  case  really  was.  Nature  and  conscience  did  something  in  this  way  for  the 
heathen  nations  ;  the  law  of  Moses  did  a  great  deal  more  for  the  Jews.  But  man's 
misery  was  only  made  more  intense  by  becoming  intelligent.  And  then  came  the 
real  cure.     "  God  so  loved  the  world  "  that  He  gave  His  Son  to  save  it,     2.  Now 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

this  is  the  essence  of  the  gospel,  and  clearly  such  a  gospel  was  not  meant  for  a 
company  of  men,  or  for  a  favoured  nation,  but  for  the  race.  Like  the  natural  sun 
in  the  heavens  the  incarnate  Sun  of  Righteousness  is  the  property  of  all  men.  And 
not  to  preach  the  gospel,  to  treat  it  as  if  it  were  the  luxury  of  a  small  clique,  was 
to  offend  against  the  sense  of  natural  justice  ;  it  was  to  incur  tlie  woe  which,  as 
Nature  herself  whispers,  is  sooner  or  later  inseparable  from  doing  this.  II.  Sin 
AGAINST  THE  LAW  OF  GRATITUDE.  That  which  Strikes  St.  Paul  in  the  redemption, 
and  makes  his  heart  captive,  is  the  extraordinary  generosity  of  the  Divine  Eedeemer. 
What  was  there  in  the  race,  in  the  single  sinner,  in  himself,  to  invite  such  an 
effusion  of  Divme  love  ?  Even  the  heathen  counted  the  obligations  of  gratitude  as 
imperative;  and  the  lower  animals  make  practical  acknowledgment  of  kindnesses 
received  at  the  hand  of  mm.  And  such  a  sentence  as  "  While  we  were  yet  sinners 
Christ  died  for  us"  measures  St.  Paul's  sense  of  his  obligation  to  his  Saviour  ;  and 
if  this  sense  is  to  take  a  practical  form,  it  could  only  be  by  his  extending  among 
men  the  knowledge  and  the  love  of  the  redemption.  III.  Be  FAiiSE  to  the 
liiPEEiuus  COMMANDS  OF  TBUTH.  The  gospel  Came  to  St.  Paul  as  it  comes  to  all  of 
US,  as  a  body  of  truth  which  could  only  be  really  h^ld  on  condition  of  its  being 
propagated.  Not  to  do  something  towards  this  is  already  not  to  believe  it ;  it  is  to 
treat  the  gospel  as  at  best  only  partially  true  ;  and  the  gospel  is  nothing  if  it  is  not 
the  universal  religion.  It  is  different  with  false  religioiis,  with  human  views.  To 
hold  them  is  one  thing,  to  make  efforts  to  disseminate  them  is  quite  another  ;  to 
believe  the  gospel  and  to  do  nothing  for  its  acceptance  among  men  is  a  contra- 
diction in  terms.  Unless  you  can  separate,  in  fact  as  well  as  in  idea,  the  convex 
and  concave  sides  of  a  circular  vase,  you  rijust,  when  you  believe  a  religion  which, 
being  absolutely  true,  is  also,  and  therefore,  the  universal  religion,  do  what  you 
may  to  induce  others  to  believe  it  also.  Conclusion  :  This  surely  is  a  motto  for 
every  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Not  seldom  in  her  history  has  she  been 
tempted  to  proclaim  something  other  or  less  than  the  gospel.  1.  There  were  clever 
and  accomplished  Greeks  at  Corinth,  feeling  much  sympathy  with  many  sides  of 
Christianity,  but  withheld  from  conversion  by  what  seemed  to  them  to  be  the 
strange  and  repulsive  doctrine  of  Chiist  crucified.  And  what  was  St.  Paul's  reply? 
"We  preach  Christ  ciucified,  to  the  Greeks,"  &c.  (chap.  i.  23).  He  could  say 
nothing  else.  Woe  to  him  had  he  preached  not  the  gospel !  And  so  it  w'as  again 
in  the  fourth  century.  Arianism  tempted  the  Church  to  say  something  less  on  the 
subject  of  our  Lord's  adorable  person  thnn  she  had  said  and  had  believed  since 
Pentecost.  And  what  was  her  reply?  It  was  the  famous  sentence  which  we 
repeat  in  the  Nicene  Creed — "  I  believe  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Chtist,"  &c.  She  coukl 
have  said  nothing  else,  nothing  less.  Woe  to  her  had  she  not  preached  the  gospel ! 
2.  And  so  it  was  in  the  fifteenth  century.  The  old  literature  of  Greece  and  Rome 
had  been  just  rediscovered,  and  Christians  actually  professed  themselves  ashamed 
of  the  jargon  of  St.  Paul,  and  unable  to  expre>^s  even  their  religious  ideas  excepting 
in  tlie  phrases  of  Cicero  and  of  Plato.  The  Church  was  bidden  by  the  Renaissance 
to  refashion  herself  upon  the  model  of  Paganism  which,  a  thousand  years  before, 
she  had  conquered  by  suffering.  The  reply  of  Christendom  took  different  forms, 
hut  its  spirit  was  substantially  "  Woe  is  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel."  3.  And 
in  our  own  day  the  old  temptation  presents  itself,  but  in  an  altered  form.  There 
is  much  good  still  in  Christianity — so  we  are  told  ;  but  if  it  is  to  keep  on  good 
terms  with  the  modern  world.  Christians  must  give  up  the  supernatural — they  must 
be  content  with  a  Christ  who  is  perfect,  if  you  will,  but  simply  human,  with  a 
Calvary  that  is  the  scene  of  a  self-sacrifice,  but  not  a  world-redeeming  atonement, 
&c.  And  what  are  we  to  say  to  all  this  ?  Ah  !  what  but  that  which  the  apostle 
said    eighteen   hundred   years  ago?      {Canon   Liddun.)  The  -preacher   and  his 

mission  : — Simple  as  the  words  appear,  the  exact  meaning  of  the  passage  in 
which  our  text  occurs  is  not  easy  to  determine.  One  thing  is  clear,  viz.,  that 
the  idea  of  "glory"  or  "glorying"  which  is  brought  out  in  the  l^th  verse  is 
the  key  with  which  the  jiassage  must  be  opened,  but  even  then  the  manner  of 
nsim^  this  key  remains  to  be  discovered.  What  is  there  that  we  can  conceive  of 
Paul  as  glorying  in  to  such  an  extent  that  he  says  with  impassioned  vehemence  : 
"  It  is  good  for  me  rather  to  die  than  that  any  man  should  make  my  glorying 
void  "  ?  Surely  he  would  not  use  such  language  about  some  little  question  of 
independence  that  lay  on  the  fringe  of  his  life  ;  most  certainly  he  would  not  use  it 
in  opposition  to  the  grand  compelling  power  which  he  was  conscious  of  in  his 
Christ- begotten  life.  Nay,  rather,  it  was  in  this  very  compelling  power,  and  in  this 
alone  that  Paul  felt  the  true  glory  of  his  life  to  consist.      This  was  his  one  glory 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  551 

which  he  would  rather  die  than  lose,  that  God  had  imposed  upon  him  a  sacred 
stewardship.   All  else  must  be  subservient  to  the  fulfilment  of  that.    I.  The  gospel 
OF  THE  TEUE  PREACHER.      In  the  impassioned  assertion :  "  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I 
preach  not  the  gospel,"  the  gospel  is  intimately  and  intensely  related  to  Paul's 
inner  self.     Truth  is  not  an  external  label  to  be  affixed  to  a  glass  case  to  mark  a 
fossil  inside,  but  a  living  movement  in  a  living  man,  God  ever  revealing  Himself  in 
clearer  and  clearer  forms  to  the  soul  that  seeks  Him.    It  will  go  hard  at  any  rate  if 
he  be  not  superior  to  an  embalmed  and  preserved  mummy.    There  is  no  doubt  that 
the  reassertion  of  the  subjectivity  of  truth  has  given  new  freshness,  beauty,  and 
unity  to  the  history  of  the  world,  and  to  the  place  of  revelation  in  that  history.     It 
has  united  the  old  and  new  dispensations  in  a  living  embrace,  it  has  connected  us 
by  closer  links  with  prophet  and  apostle,  and  revealed  that  all  the  world  in  all  ages 
has  been  held  in  the  grasp  of  one  great  Divine  movement.   But  we  must  remember 
that  this  assertion  of  subjectivity  is  also  one-sided,  and,  as  in  all  cases  of  reaction 
there  is  a  danger  of  swinging  back  to  the  other  extreme,  so  there  is  certainly  a 
tendency  in   much   that  is  written  and  spoken  now,  to  advocate  a  doctrine  of 
extreme  subjectivity  which  contains  far  greater  peril  for  the  truth  than  the  most 
dogmatic  applications  of  credal   orthodoxy.      The  gospel  must  be  a  system  of 
objective  truth,  and  my  gospel,  if  it  is  to  be  a  gospel  at  all,  must  not  be  in  ojiposi- 
tion  to  that,  but  must  rather  be  that  very  gospel,  or  a  portion  of  it,  having  passed 
through  the  crucible  of  my  life.     The  Jesus  that  was  revealed  to  Paul  was  revealed 
also   in  him.     II.  The  egotism  of  the  true  preacher.     What  does  the  apostle 
mean  by  saying,  "  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel  "  ?      There  is  one 
answer  that  will  be  ready  on  all  j  our  lips,  and  as  far  as  it  goes  it  is  perfectly  true. 
He  meant  that  there  was  a  Divine  impulse  within  him  that  he  could  not  resist. 
The  fire  that  blazed  within  would  have  burnt  deep  scars  upon  his  heart  if  his 
mouth  had  kept  silence.     The  "  burden  "  of  the  Lord  would  have  grown  too  heavy 
to  be  borne  if  it  had  not  been  imparted  to  the  people.     And  I  believe  that  this  is 
substantially  true  of  all  that  have  really  a  prophetic  mission  for  their  generation. 
But  Paul's  impassioned  words  quiver  with  a  yet  deeper  meaning,  and  it  is  to  this 
that  we  apply  par  excellence  the  phrase,  "  The  egotism  of  the  true  i:)reacher."     To 
Paul's  eye  the  fiery  hieroglyphics  of  God's  moral  government,  of  the  great  over- 
arching heaven  of  eternal  righteousness,  contained  i^rimarily  a  message  for  himself. 
It  was  not  merely  that  he  would  feel  inward  pain  if  he  refused  to  preach  the  guspel, 
but  he  felt  the  universe  to  be  in  battle-array  against  him  if  he  gave  no  voice  to 
his  great  mission.     Herein  lies  the  prophet's  jDower  and  authority  that  he  utters 
the  mandate  of  creation — the  mandate  of  God — that  he  feels    the   full   tides    of 
the  universal  roll  through  his  soul,  and  must  move  with  them  or  perish.     But, 
further,  this  intense  spiritual  consciousness  of  the  true  preacher  not  only  causes 
him  most  emphatically  to  relate  himself  to  the  universal  government  of  God,  but 
also  to  fling  all  his  energies  into  the  heart  of  human  life.     In  this  respect  also 
the  self  of  the  preacher  must  be    large :    it  must  be  profoundly  related  to  uni- 
versal humanity.     He  must  be  a  microcosm — a  miniature  of  the  gi-eat  macrocosm 
of    human    joy  and    sorrow.      He  must  know  himself  a  debtor  to  all  sorts    and 
conditions  of  men,  by  feeling  the  surging  tides  of  the  world's  needs  and  aspirations 
rush   through   his  own  life,  and  by  thus  knowing  that  he  must  find  his  life  by 
giving  it  up  to  the  larger  life  of  the  world.    The  prophet  of  the  age  is  the  man  that 
can  speak  the  thought,  the  passion,  the  aspn-ation  of  the  people,  and  give  them 
their  Divinest  setting.      He  must  have  the  subtle  sympathy  and  the  Pentecostal 
tongue  of  flame  that  can  speak  to  the  people  in  their  native  language— the  language 
of  their  hearts.     Him  will  the  people  hear  ;  for  they  are  part  of  his  life,  and  he  is 
part    of    theirs.      III.    The  deep-seated  faith  of  the  true  preacher.      To  say 
that  "  Woe  is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel"  is  to  recognise  the  gospel  as 
eternally  victorious.      For  nothing  can  be  really  a  woe  to  me  except  my  being  out 
of  harmony  with  those  forces  that  are  to  be  eternally  triumphnnt.     Only  the  truth 
itself  can  revenge  the  insult  which  I  offer  it  by  rejecting  it.     The  qualifications  of 
the  true  preacher  consist,  therefore,  in  a  profound  faith  in  the  Divineness  of  the 
gospel,  in  the  heart-recognition  of  it  as  the  eternal  truth  of  God.   These  two  things, 
then,  are  necessary  to  enable  us  to  enter  into  the  fellowship  of  the  apostle's  words. 
We  must  be  under  the  absolute  sway  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  we  must  identify 
this  rule  with  the  eternal  government  of  God.     (John  Thomas,  31. A.) 

Vers.  17-19.  For  if  I  do  this  thing  willingly  I  have  a  reward. — Purity  of  motive 
required  in  every   Christian    7ninistcr  : — I.    Wherein   it    consists.      1.  A  willing 


552  THE  BIBLTCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

service.  2.  V/ithout  respect  to  fee  or  leward.  3.  He  mav  receive  but  must  not 
bargain  for  it.  II.  Its  importance.  1.  If  pure,  Christ  will  reward  him.  2.  If 
impure,  liis  service  is  merely  professional  and  has  its  reward.  III.  Its  present 
RECOMPENSE.  1.  Freedom  from  all  impntition  of  mercenary  motives.  2.  The  free 
dispensittion  of  the  gospel.  3.  Tlie  c;>usciousness  of  his  own  integrity.  (J.  L%jth, 
D.D.)  AspecU  of  St.  FcmVs  ministry  : — His  preaching  was  no  ground  of  boast- 
ing (ver.  16).  If  he  preached  willingly,  i.e.,  if  it  were  optional  with  him  to  preach 
or  not  to  preach,  then  it  would  be  a  ground  of  boasting  ;  but  if  he  did  it  unwillingly, 
i.e.,  if  it  were  not  optional  with  him  (as  was  in  fact  the  case),  he  was  only  discharg- 
ing an  ofHcial  duty,  and  had  nothing  to  boast  of.  That  Paul  preached  the  gospel 
willingly,  that  he  esteemed  it  his  highe-t  joy  and  glory,  is  abundantly  evident 
(Rom.  i.  5,  xi.  13,  XV.  15-16;  1  Cor.  xv.  9-10 ;  Gal.  i.  15,  16;  Eph.  iii.  8).  The 
difference,  therefore,  here  expressed  between  "  willing  "  and  "  unwillinu,"  is  not 
the  difference  between  cheerfully  and  reluctantly,  but  between  optional  and  obliga- 
tory. He  says  he  had  a  "  dispensation  "  or  stewnrdship  committed  to  him. 
Stewards  were  commonly  slaves.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  what  a  slave 
does  in  obedience  to  a  command,  and  what  a  mau  volunteers  to  do  of  his  own 
accord.  And  this  is  the  difference  to  which  the  apostiC  refers.  So  Paul  was  com- 
manded to  preach  the  gospel,  and  he  did  it  with  his  whole  heart ;  but  he  was  not 
commanded  to  refuse  to  receive  a  support  from  the  churches.  The  former,  there- 
fore, was  not  a  ground  of  boasting,  not  a  thing  for  which  he  could  claim  the  reward 
of  sj^ecial  confidence  ;  the  latter  was.  He  could  appeal  to  it  as  a  proof,  not  only  of 
his  obedience,  but  of  the  purity  of  the  motive  which  prompted  that  obedience.  A 
physici-n  may  attend  the  sick  from  the  highest  motives,  though  he  receives  a 
remuneration  for  his  services.  But  when  he  attends  the  poor  gratuitously,  though 
the  motives  may  be  no  higher,  the  evidence  of  their  purity  is  placed  beyond 
question.  Paul's  ground  of  glorying,  therefore,  was  not  preaching,  for  that 
was  a  matter  of  obligation ;  but  his  preaching  gratuitously,  which  was  alto- 
getlier  opt  onal.  Pie  gained  something  by  it.  He  gained  the  confidence  even 
of  his  enemies.  But  as  preaching  was  not  optional  but  obligatory,  he  did  not 
gain  confidence  by  it.  The  principle  on  which  the  apostle's  argument  is 
founded  is  recognised  by  our  Lord  in  Luke  xvii.  10.  (C.  Hochje,  D.D.) 
Ministers  and  icealth: — Eev.  T.  Hancocks,  of  Chatham,  formerly  a  Pastors' 
College  student,  relates  the  following  reminiscence  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  intro- 
duced by  the  late  president  into  one  of  his  lectures  to  his  students,  and  which 
is  particularly  interesting  in  the  light  of  his  last  will  and  testament:  Men 
sometimes  sav,  "  Spurgeon's  making  a  good  thing  of  it."  To  which  I  reply, 
"You  are  perfectly  light,  for  I  serve  a  Master  who  is  no  niggard,  but  who  rewards 
me  daily  with  both  hands."  But  if  they  mean  that  I  am  saving  money — well,  they 
will  know  when  I'm  gone.  I  give  away  all  I  can  get,  and  could  wisely  use  more. 
For  tliough  I  toe  free  iroin  all  men,  yet  have  I  made  myself  servant  unto  all,  that 
I  niig'ht  gain  the  more. —  Irue  ministerial  i)tdepcndence : — Its  nature.  Freedom — 
1.  As  far  as  possible  from  personal  obligation.  2.  In  the  declaration  of  Divine 
truth.  3.  In  the  conscientious  discharge  of  duty.  II.  Its  use.  In  the  service  of 
all — 1.  By  patient  toil.  2.  By  forbearance.  3.  By  Christian  compliances.  III. 
Its  motive.  1.  Christ's  honour.  2.  In  the  gain  of  souls.  (J.  Lytli,  D.D.) 
The  highest  service  of  man  on  earth  : — The  services  of  men  on  earth  embrace  a  large 
variety.  There  is  the  service  of  the  agriculturist,  the  mechanic,  the  mariner,  the 
merchant,  the  scieniist,  the  legislator,  the  king,  &g.  Men  esteem  these  services  as 
differing  widely  in  respectability  and  honour  ;  but  the  service  referred  to  in  the  text 
stands  infinitely  above  all.  Four  thongh.ts  are  suggested  concerning  this  service.  I. 
It  is  a  service  for  the  c;aixing  of  men.  "  That  I  might  gain  the  more."  The  "  more  " 
■what  ?  Not  the  gaining  the  more  wealth,  fame,  or  pleasure  ;  but  the  gaining  of 
men.  Christ  says,  "  Thou  hast  gained  thy  brother."  There  is  a  way  of  winning 
a  man.  Morally  man  is  lo:-t.  No  work  in  the  universe  is  hisiher  than  this — to  gain 
a  man,  to  recover  him  to  the  tme  spirit  and  mission  of  life.  II.  It  is  a  service 
INDEPENDENT  OF  MEN.  "  Tliough  I  bo  free  from  all  men,  yet  have  I  made  myself 
servant  unto  all."  Oh,  how  this  high  service  has  been  degraded  by  the  crowds  of 
craven  and  mercenary  souls  that  have  pushed  themselves  into  it !  I  am  "  free  from 
all  men,"  says  Paul.  "  I  made  myself  servant."  I  was  not  made  by  human 
authority,  I  was  not  pushed  into  it  by  others,  "  I  made  myself."  A  man  by  God's 
grace  must  make  himself  for  the  work.  III.  It  is  a  service  for  universal  man. 
"  Unto  all."  All  men,  not  to  any  particular  tribe,  sect,  or  nation,  but  to  all,  rich 
and  poor,  high  and  low,  cultured  aud  rude.     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  553 

Vers.  20-22.  Unto  the  Jews  I  became  as  a  Jew,  that  I  might  gain  the  Jews.— 

The  flexibility  of  Cliristinuitij  : — lu  Paul's  hands  the  Christiau  ministry  was  hke 
the  Gift  of  Tongues.  The  gift  was  one  ;  but  it  fell  upon  the  ear  of  the  Eoman  in 
Latin,  upon  the  ear  of  the  Egyptian  in  Coptic.  Not  a  bad  emblem  of  the  manner 
in  which  the  dispensation  should  adapt  itself  to  the  various  forms  of  human  charac- 
ter and  phases  of  human  society.  While  never  sacrificing  truth  or  principle,  yet, 
so  far  as  truth  and  principle  admitted  it,  the  apostle  wore  the  guise  and  spoke  in 
the  accents  of  the  persons  whom  he  addressed.  Eecoguising  circumcision  as  a 
national  mark  of  distinction,  while  utterly  denving  its  necessity  to  salvation,  he 
circumcised  Timothy.  Owing  allegiance  as  a  Jew  to  the  Mosaic  ritual,  so  long  as 
God  suffered  it  to  exist,  he  took  legal  vows,  and  was  scrupulous  in  paying  them. 
Among  Gentiles,  he  drew  illustrations  from  the  Grecian  games,  although  they  were 
heathen  festivals  ;  he  quoted  truths  whicdi  had  been  proclaimed  by  heathen  poets, 
and  founded  his  appeals  on  natural  religion.  How  totally  different  in  its  topics,  as 
■well  as  in  its  form,  is  his  address  on  Mars'  Hill  from  that  in  the  synagogue  at 
Antioch  !  The  genius  of  the  gospel  was  free.  It  was  felt,  from  the  first,  that  its 
fixed  truths  were  capable  of  being  presented  in  aspects  almost  innumerable.  Note 
then : — I.  The  plastic  character  of  Christianity.  This  is  seen  in — 1.  Its 
documents.  (1)  The  history  of  our  Lord  has  been  transmitted  to  us  by  four 
distinct  authors,  who  evidently  write  from  four  points  of  view,  and  address  distinct 
classes  of  readers.  (2)  Peter,  Paul,  James  and  John — men  of  widely  different 
characters  and  circumstances — were  all  employed  in  the  doctrinal  writings  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  thus  Christian  doctrine  conips  to  us  distilled  through  the 
alembics  of  four  human  minds.  If  God  had  desired  to  teach  a  Christian  minister 
that  be  should  study  the  age,  characters,  society,  with  which  he  has  to  deal,  how 
could  He  have  done  it  otherwise  ?  2.  Its  precepts,  how  broadly  they  are  stated,  and 
with  an  obvious  avoidance  of  those  particulars  which  might  limit  their  application. 
Take,  e.g.  "Pray  without  ceasing" — evidently  a  principle  and  not  a  rule,  and, 
because  a  principle  capable  of  application  to  an  infinite  variety  of  circumstances. 
3.  Its  doctrines.  The  Fatherhood  of  God  ;  the  Incarnation,  the  sacrifice  of  the 
Cross,  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  the  brotherhood  of  men  in  Christ's  Church,  and  the 
resurrection  ;  these  are  evidently  doctrines  whose  import  is  as  wide  as  the  race,  and 
which  correspond  to  the  instincts  of  the  human  heart,  under  whatever  garb  it 
beats.  II.  How  this  character  should  determine  the  conduct  of  our  clergy 
IN  SETTING  IT  FORTH.  1.  It  is  in  vain  to  hope  to  revive  any  type  of  Christianity 
which  has  obviously  had  its  day.  (1)  Let  us  not  attempt  to  revive  medievalism; 
all  that  was  true,  deep,  and  touching  in  that  really  survives  still,  only  the  fashion 
of  it  has  passed  away  to  return  no  more.  Let  us  cherish  its  devout  spirit,  and 
endeavour  to  imbue  with  it  our  circle  of  society,  while  we  throw  off  its  superficif.l 
costume,  which,  like  all  mere  costume,  must  in  tbe  nature  of  things  become 
antiquated.  (2)  Let  us  not  seek  to  revive  the  precise  form  of  the  Evangelicalism 
of  seventy  years  ago.  Here  again  there  was  much  which,  because  it  was  the  very 
truth  of  God,  can  never  pass  away.  But  while  we  endeavour  to  inhale  its  spirit,  let 
us  not  entangle  ourselves  in  its  trammels,  which  are  not  adapted  to  the  present  day. 
2.  But  to  pass  to  more  positive  counsels.  Ours  is  an  age— (1)  Of  much  superficial 
knowledge  on  the  subject  of  religion.  For  a  thousand  persons  who  discuss  religion 
freely  in  society  there  is  not  one  who  ever  digested  a  spiritual  truth.  Now  in  deal- 
ing with  this  state  of  mind  you  must  not  content  yourself  with  a  few  Sunday 
platitudes  ;  the  people  will  teU  you  that  they  know  all  that  as  well  as  you.  You 
must  oppose  erudition  to  their  flimsy  knowledge,  and  be  a  man  of  thought  as 
opposed  to  their  superficiality.  (2)  Of  latitudinarianism  which  is  making  the  most 
insidious  inroads  on  the  faith.  Now  an  indignant  repudiation  of  scepiicisiu,  with 
but  a  partial  insight  into  its  real  views  is  little  likely  to  reclaim  the  sceptic.  Let 
us  seek  to  appreciate  his  difficulty,  and  to  draw  forth  from  the  repository  of  Divine 
truth  a  solution  of  it  :  and  in  doing  so  it  may  be  that  we  shall  occasionally  have  to 
retract — not  indeed  one  iota  of  Scriptural  truth — but  our  notions  of  what  the 
Scripture  has  said.  Might  it  not  be  well  too  if  our  clergy  would  acquaint  them- 
selves, not  merely  with  the  general  platform  on  which  intiiielity  is  conducting  its 
attacks,  but  specially  with  those  sciences  whose  progress  is  always  attended  with 
much  danger  in  minds  which  are  not  well  settled  in  the  faith  ?  But  remember  that 
our  Lord  bids  us,  as  scribes,  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  to  bring  forth 
out  of  our  treasury  things  new  and  old — old  in  the  substance,  which  must  always 
abide ;  new  in  the  form,  which  ever  changes  with  time  and  with  the  mrtnners  of 
men.     Mark  the  emphatic  word  "  his  treasury."     It  is  not  from  any  repository  of 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

truth  external  to  ourselves.  No  amount  of  learning  in  a  Christian  minister  can 
for  a  moment  compensate  for  the  ab.-ence  of  an  experimental  religion.  God's 
Word  must  be  brought  forth  from  our  own  treasury,  nut  stolen  from  that  of  our 
neighbours.  Prayer  mast  go  hand  in  h;in(l  with  study.  (Bmn  Goulhurn.) 
Being  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  the  law  to  Christ. — The  Chri^tinn  law  : 
— I.  Its  nature.  1.  Moral.  2.  Given  by  God.  3.  Confirmed  by  Christ.  4. 
Written  by  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  heart.  II.  Its  authority.  1.  Comprehends 
the  whole  law.  2.  Extends  to  the  heart.  ,3.  Is  enforced  by  love.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  mi^ht  by  all  means  save  some. — All 
thiiKja  to  all  men  : — 1.  St.  Paul  was  a  cosmopolitan  in  the  best  sense,  the  world 
was  his  country,  mankind  his  brethren,  truth  his  businpss,  the  church  his  family, 
and  Christ  his  Lord.  His  catholic  impartiality  credited  alike  -Jew  and  Greek  with 
whatever  amount  of  truth  they  severally  held.  2.  Love  is  the  true  expositor  of  the 
text.  It  is  the  sterling  politeness  which  gracefully  bends  itself  into  "  all  things  " 
within  the  perpendicular  of  truth  and  equity,  "  to  all  men  "  in  order  to  their  profit 
and  salvation.  Like  a  tender  mother,  lisping  to  her  babe,  reading  with  her  boys, 
sympathising  with  the  early  trials  of  her  girls,  following  with  her  wistful  prayers 
the  absent  ou'S,  nor  ceasing  a  maternal  interest  in  the  elder  branches  settled  in  life, 
and  so  in  her  motherly  heart  is  all  tilings  to  all  members  of  her  family — so  the 
earnest  Cnristian  has  a  large-hearted  family  power  of  interestedness  in  whatever 
concerns  the  soul  of  every  fellow-beitig.  Being  "  all  things  to  all  men,"  only  to 
gain  them  1o  Christ,  implies  a  sacred  uniformity  of  purpose,  which — I.  Sanctions 
nothing  inconsistent  with  Divine  conformity.  "All  things  to  all  men" — 1. 
Sanctions  no  versatility  which  is  evangelical  with  low  church,  sacramental  with 
high  church,  indefinite  with  broad  church,  nnd  indifferent  with  no  church  ;  though 
it  does  imnly  a  courteous,  loving,  conciliatory  tone  of  address  to  every  church, 
always  with  a  view  to  gaining  them  for  the  Church  of  Christ.  2.  Implies  no  sink- 
ing the  Christian  to  meet  the  worldling.  The  Christian  is  no  chameleon,  taking 
his  hue  from  every  incident  he  feeds  on  ;  but  rather  like  the  sunlight  of  his 
heavenly  Father — the  evil  and  the  good  are  the  better  for  his  sliining.  Apply  the 
rule  to  places  of  amusement.  Can  we  imagine  ourselves  meeting  Christ  tht-re,  as 
Pie  sat  at  the  festival  in  Cma,  etc.  ?  We  can  realise  His  presence  on  occHsions  of 
innocent  festivity  ;  but  there  are  others  at  which,  if  we  could  suppose  His  eye 
falling  upon  us,  as  it  did  on  Peter  in  the  hall  of  his  denial,  we  should  be  ashamed 
to  meet  Him.  I  noticed  in  France  pictures  of  the  Crr.cifis.ion  in  streets  and  public 
galleries,  in  Hotel  de  vijle  and  Palais  de  .Justice,  but  never  one  in  a  Cafe  Chnntant 
or  the  opera.  As  believers,  you  are  Christ's  living  images,  and  would  be  as  much 
out  of  place  in  a  Ca-ino  or  a  playhouse.  There  is  a  riibicon  between  the  carnal 
and  the  spiiitual  man  which  needs  no  Csesar  to  cross  it  from  one  side  (that  is,  from 
the  churcli  to  the  w.ald) ;  but  it  requires  a  Christ  to  ford  it,  from  the  world  to  the 
church.  Att-  mpt  it  alone,  and  like  Peter  on  the  lake,  you  would  sink  in  the  act, 
unless  His  mighty  hand  bear  you  through.  3.  Is  no  text  for  the  pusillanimous 
concessions  implied  in  the  maxim,  "  When  you  are  at  Rome,  do  as  Rome  does." 
Paul  did  nut;  he  was  as  much  "Paul,  tlie  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ"  in  Caesar's 
household  as  in  his  own.  Stdl  he  who  gave  Roman  officers  their  respect,  and 
magistrates  their  titles,  who  gathered  sticks  with  the  barbaiians,  and  received  the 
grateful  courtesies  of  Publius,  taught  us  to  eschew  rudeness  or  eccentricity  in 
circumstantials,  and  to  be  peculiar  only  in  essentials.  In  whatever  shape  you  are 
gratuitously  singular,  you  will  be  unpopular,  and  therefore  the  less  useful.  Hence, 
cultivate  a  conciliating  not  a  litigious  tone — suggest,  rather  than  challenge.  A 
well-oiled  and  tempered  blade  cuts  deeper  than  a  hacked  or  rusty  one.  Be  as 
much  at  home  with  pei^de  as  you  can,  that  they  may  be  at  their  ease  with  you. 
Let  things  indifferent  be  indifferent,  that  none  of  ^  our  earnestness  and  usefulness 
may  be  spent  on  trifles,  but  all  concentrated  on  the  main  thing — saving  souls  and 
glorifying  their  Saviour.  II.  Justifies  anything  becoming  a  manly  Christianity. 
By  this  is  not  meant  a  Christianity  indigenous  to  man ;  but  a  robust,  open-hearted, 
large-minded  view  of  sinners,  and  of  the  means  to  be  employed  for  their  salvation. 
"  All  things  to  all  men."  1.  Means  religious  toleration  having  "  proved  all  things, 
hold  fast  that  wliich  is  good."  Stand  out  for  your  own  convictions.  "Be  strong 
and  quit  you  like  men."  At  the  same  time,  fidelity  to  your  own  opinions  is 
perfectly  compatible  with  the  most  respectful  toleration  of  those  of  others.  You 
believe  in  ehction;  another  man  sees  only  open  universal  salvation.  Be  it  so. 
You  both  believe  in  Christ  and  in  His  Holy  Spirit :  then  work  and  pray  together  on 
those  grounds  in  which  you  agree,  and  you  will  get  nearer  to  God  and  to  each  other 


CHAP.  IX.]  1.   CORINTHIANS.  655 

than  by  incessant  debate  upon  your  points  of  difference.     2.  Implies  the  use  of  all 
lawful  means  of  "  preaching  the  word  in  season  and  out  of  season,"  e.g.,  if  a 
Eomanist  won't  listen  to  our  translation  of  the  Eible,  converse  with  him  out  of  his 
own.     The  Douay  version  obscures  some  tioctrines,  but  it  can't  extinguish  Christ. 
On  the  same  ground  controversy  is  justified.     Let  the  obvious  love  of   souls,  and 
loyally  to  Christ  so  distinguish  the  spirit  in  which  you  wield  contioversial  weapons 
that  men  may  see  "  they  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God,  to  the  pulling 
down  of  strongholds."      3.   Suggests  a  gentle    forbearance  with  men's    tempers, 
infinriities,  and  even  pins.     Much  self-denial  is  needed  for  the  duty  of  reproof,  both 
as  to  the  mode  of    doing  it,  and  the  doing  it  at   all.     "Bearing   one  another's 
burdens,  and  so  fulfilling  the  law  of  Christ"  is  not  the  least  self-denying  form  of 
taking  up  the  cross.     To  bear  with  the  magnanimity  of  Christian  love  the  irritating 
annoyances  and  petty  insults  of  an  ungodly  circle  is  no  easy  trial ;  but  its  effect  upon 
those  around  us,  though  imperceptible,  is  real.     4.  Imports  the  diligent  use  of 
many  means,  notwithstanding   few  results.      There  is  a  noble  contentedness  in 
expending  all  our  means  on  the  prospect  of  only  "  some  "  return.     Conclusion — 1. 
Neither  "  all  things;  to  all  men,"  nor  anything  to  any  man,  is  either  safe  or  possible 
without  God.     You  dare  not  be  "all  things  to"  some  men,  lest,  burning  incense 
with  Korah,  you  be  swallowed  up  with  his  company.      "Evil  communications  cor- 
rupt good  luanners."     Your  life  must  be  your  testimony,  where  direct  association 
would   only  compromise   or  quench  it.      2.  Make  Christ  your  model.     "  Set  the 
Lord  alway  before  you."      Let  your  first  question  be,  "  What  would  He    have 
done  ?  "     He  was  in  the  best  sense,  and  ever  will  be,  "  all  things  to  all  men," 
"  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all."     And  He  would  be  nothing  to  any 
man  except  to  save  him.       (J.  B.   Owen,  M..i.)         Coiiipromii<e'< : — As  a   general 
rule    compromises    of     every    description    are    to    be    regarded    with    distrust. 
Taken  at   the   best   they  are  of   the  nature  of   sacrifices,  as   each  party  is  sup- 
posed  to  give  up  something   which    he    considers    of    more   or  less   importance. 
And   this   is  not   all.     A   plan   or  policy   which  is  the  result  of   a  compromise 
is  not  a  single   plan   or   policy,  but  a  mixture  of  plans,  a  mixture  of   policies. 
Now  the  several  parts,  instead  of  aiding  and  sustaining  each  other,  will  be  very 
likely  to  interfere  with  and  obstruct  each  other.     Accordingly,  if  a  compromise  is 
called  for,  the  first  question  we  should  ask  ourselves  is,  whether  the  occasion  for 
making  it  may  not  be  avoided  altogether.     Many  of  our  associations  are  entirely 
voluntary.     But  all  our  associations  are  not  voluntary  in  the  sense  here  intended. 
The  family,  for  example,  is  not  a  voluntary,  but  a  necef^sary  association  ;  and  so 
likewise,  in  a  certain  sense  and  to  a  certain  extent,  is  the  neighbourhood,  the 
Church,  the  State.     Every  man  must  live  in  society.     I  do  not  say  in  this  or  that 
society,  but  in  some  society.     Concessions,  then,  we  must  make  ;  but  what  con- 
cessions ?     How  far  can  we  carry  the  spirit  of  comj)romise  v\ithout  trenching  at 
the  same  time  on  the  laws  of  Christian  truth  and  lighteousness?     To  this  question 
I  reply,  first,  by  observing  that  we  are  in  no  danger  of  trenching  on  the  laws  of  Chris- 
tian truth  and  righteousness  so  long  as  our  compromises  do  not  involve  anything 
more  than  the  giving  up  of  our  own  tastes,  our  own  convenience,  our  own  innocent 
pleasures,  our  own  interests,  even  our  ow-n  rights,  out  of  regard  to  others,  and  in 
the  spirit  of  Christian  concession  and  self  sacrifice.     To  say  that  we  have  a  right 
to  give  up  our  rights  may  sound  to  some  like  contradiction  ;  but  it  is  a  contradic- 
tion in  sound,  in  appearance,  only.     Indeed,  not  to  give  up  our  rights  is  to  give  up 
nothing;  for  why  talk  about  giving  up  what  we  have  no  right  to  retain  i«f  we 
would  ?     At  the  same  time  it  is  proper  to  add  that  our  right  to  give  up  our  rights 
depends  on  their  being  ours  exclusively.     We  have  no  right  to  give  up  our  neigh- 
bours' rights  without  their  consent,  express  or  implied.     A  parent,  for  example, 
might  be  willing  to  give  up  one  or  more  of  his  own  rights  if  he  were  sure  the  loss 
would   fall  on  him  alone  ;  but  if,    on    the  contrary,  he   knows   that,  directly   or 
indirectly,  it  will  fall  on  the  whole  family,  he  will  feel  that  they  also  have  a  voice 
in  the  matter.     Again,  a  right  may  be  held  in  common,  and  require  to  be  main- 
tained in  common,  and  all  therefoie  may  be  in  some  sense  pledged  to  its  defence  in 
common,  as  in  the  case  of  civil  or  religious  liberty.     Here,  as  before,  no  individual 
can  honestly  act  as  if  he  alone  were  interested  in  the  event.    And  this  brings  me  to 
what  may  be  called  the  pinch  of  the  question.     Have  we  a  right,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances whatever,  to  go  contrary  to  our  duty  for  the  sake  of  peace,  or  to  meet 
those  we  must  act  with  half-way,  or  on  the  plea  that   in  a  choice  of  evils  we 
should  take  the  least,  or  in  the  hope  that  in  the  end  virtue  and  humanity  will  be 
gainers  by  such  a  course?     Thus  stated,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  question  answers 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


itself.  We  have  no  such  right.  But  we  must  not  think  that  the  annunciation  of  a 
moral  truism  like  this  will  go  far  to  clear  up  the  great  practical  difficulty  we  are 
considering.  The  question  disappears  iu  one  form,  it  is  true,  but  only  to  come  up 
in  another.  In  a  sharp  collision  of  opinions  and  interests,  of  rights  and  duties,  of 
reciprocal  benefits  and  mutual  obligations,  may  not  my  duty  itself  become  changed  ? 
Let  me  suppose  a  case.  A  community,  bound  together  by  a  multitude  of  reciprocal 
affections,  interests,  and  obligations,  fall  into  irreconcilable  difference  respecting  a 
single  question,  and  that  a  moral  one.  What  are  they  to  do?  Some  may  think  to 
cut  the  matter  short  by  insisting  that  the  party  which  is  right  ought  not  to  give  up, 
ought  not  to  make  the  smallest  concessions.  And  this  is  true,  supposing  it  to  be 
known  and  conceded  which  party  is  right ;  but  iinhappily  this  is  the  very  point  in  dis- 
pute. The  question  is  not  what  the  paity  shall  do  is  right,  but  what  the  party  shall 
do  which  thinks  itself  right.  And  if  yuu  still  answer,  "  Not  concede  one  jot  nor 
tittle,"  then  you  have  no  ground  of  complaint  against  your  opponents  for  not 
conceding  one  jot  nor  tittle  to  you,  for  they  also  think  themselves  right.  If, 
therefore,  we  persist  in  shutting  our  eyes  on  these  obvious  facts,  that  is  to  say,  pay 
no  regard  to  the  judgment  and  the  consciences  of  others,  but  pioceed  to  act  on  our 
own  as  if  we  were  infallible,  when  we  know  we  are  not,  the  mistake,  if  we  fall  into 
one,  does  not  make  wrong  to  be  right  even  for  us ;  nay,  is  no  excuse  for  the 
wrong.  It  is  not  mistake,  properly  so  called,  but  obstinacy ;  and  obstinacy  is  no 
excuse  for  delinquency  of  any  kind.  Another  ground  sometimes  taken  is.  that  where 
two  parties  are  at  variance,  only  one  can  be  right;  and  consequently  that  a  com- 
promise supposes  a  d^parture  from  the  right  course  on  one  side  or  the  other.  This, 
however,  does  not  follow.  I  admit  that  where  two  parties  are  at  variance,  both 
cannot  be  right ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  either  is  so,  that  is,  wholly  right.  Both 
parties  cannot  be  right,  but  both  parties  may  be  wrong  ;  at  least  more  or  less  so. 
And  if  so,  it  would  seem  that  each  party  has  something  of  wrong  to  give  up,  and 
the  compromise  that  should  consist  of  mutual  concessions  of  this  sort  would 
evidently  result,  not  in  a  departure  from  right  on  either  side,  but  in  an  approxima- 
tion to  right  on  both  sides.  I  have  spoken  of  compromises  in  general,  not  of  any 
jiarticular  compromise.  I  am  aware  that  there  is  often  less  difficulty  in  laying  down 
general  principles  than  in  applying  them  with  the  limitations  and  qualifications 
which  the  circumstances  of  the  case  require.  Still  something  is  gained  by  clearly 
apprehending  the  principles — the  applications  must  be  left  to  the  occasion  as  it 
arises  ;  and  let  ne  add,  that  a  right  application  of  the  principles  in  the  most  per- 
plexing circumstances  will  mainly  depend,  not  on  a  morbid  sensitiveness  to  the 
question  at  issue,  nor  yet  on  casuistical  subtlety,  but  on  downright  honesty  of 
purpose,  a  sound  understanding,  and  a  truly  generous  and  magnanimous  spirit. 
{J.  Walker,  D.D.)  Apostolical  syvipathy :■ — This  is  an  expression  which  might 
easily  be  mistaken,  and  has  been  so  before  now ;  as  though  St.  Paul  recommended, 
by  his  advice  and  example,  a  sort  of  craft  in  reli'-'ious  matters— pretending  to  agree 
with  men  when  you  really  do  not,  humouring  them  in  bad  ways,  concurring  with 
them  to  a  certain  length  in  what  you  know  or  fear  to  be  wrong ;  but  all  the  while 
for  their  benefit,  and  with  a  view  of  doing,  on  the  whole,  more  good  in  the  end.  Are 
not  many  marriages  made  by  this  rule,  or,  at  least,  defended  hy  this  excuse?  and 
how  do  they  commonly  turn  out?  A  mufh  lighter  error,  but  yet  an  error  of  the 
same  kind,  was  that  which  St.  Paul  himself  had  once  to  correct  in  St.  Peter,  when, 
rather  than  give  present  dissatisfaction  to  certain  Jewish  converts  which  were  there, 
he  separated  himself  from  the  Gentile  Christians  (Gal.  ii.  11),  and  so  enuouraged  a 
division  in  the  Church,  and  encouraged  also  the  low  notion  that  believers  were  still 
under  the  law  of  Moses.  But  this  of  St.  Paul  in  the  text  is  very  different ;  it  is  an 
example,  not  a  warning.  And  the  difference  may  be  put  in  one  word  :  it  is  not 
accommodation  which  St.  Paul  encourages,  but  sympathy.  He  does  not  say  that 
he  practised  what  would  please  others,  to  win  them,  but  he  says  that  he  always  had 
an  eye  to  them  ;  he  put  himself  into  their  place.  He  thought  with  himself.  Were  I 
a  heathen,  or  a  Jew,  a  young  man  or  an  old,  an  advanced  or  an  imperfect  Chris- 
tian, a  rich  man  or  a  poor,  a  master  or  a  servant,  what  would  my  thoughts  and 
feelings  and  fancies  be  when  such  and  such  holy  truths  or  Divine  commandments 
weie  made  known  to  me?  And  according  to  what  his  wise  and  charitable  heart, 
guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  told  him,  of  the  needs  and  feelings  of  other  peis^ns,  so 
he  ordered  his  ways  towards  them,  and  his  manner  of  speaking  to  them,  and  deal- 
ing with  them.  To  take  the  instances  whch  the  apostle  himself  had  been 
enumerating  just  before  the  text:  "Unto  the  .lews,"  first,  "I  became,"  says  he, 
"as  a  Jew,  that  I  might  gain  the  Jews."      Hew  was  this?  for  we  know  how 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  557 

earnestly  St.  Paul  opposed  himself  to  the  Jewish  prejudice,  that  circumcision  and 
keeping  the  ceremonies  uf  the  law  were  at  all  necessary  to  salvation.  How,  then, 
did  he  become  as  a  Jew  to  the  Jews  ?  Look  at  that  letter  of  his,  in  which  he  most 
opposes  their  ceremonies;  look  at  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  see  how  he  speaks 
of  them  there.  "  I  also  am  an  Israelite."  "  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continual 
sorrow  in  my  heart."  "I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for 
my  brethren."  Look  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (chap.  xvi.  2  ;  xxviii.  17  ;  xxii.  17) 
and  see  what  trouble  he  took,  how  he  went  out  of  the  way  to  show  them  that  he 
reverenced  the  Jlosaical  ceremonies,  and  did  not  hold  them  wicked,  though  he 
would  not  have  them  reckoned  part  of  the  Christian  law.  As  to  the  Gentiles,  them 
also  he  mentions  just  before  the  text,  saying,  "  To  them  which  are  without  law  I 
became  as  without  law,  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  without  law."  That  is,  he 
put  himself  in  the  place  of  the  Gentiles,  and  said  and  did  what  their  condition 
required;  as  when,  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  he  so  greatly  sliglited  human 
wisdom,  which  he  knew  they  were  inclined  to  think  too  mu^h  of;  also  as  when, 
sijeaking  to  the  Athenians,  he  made  use  of  their  own  poets,  their  own  altars,  their 
own  customs,  and  tlje  like,  whereby  to  bring  them  to  attend  to  the  truth  of  Christ. 
But  towaids  the  people  of  Derbe  and  Lystra,  who  were  in  the  very  act  of  idolising 
himself,  he  spake  with  all  vehemence,  as  the  case  required,  seeing  it  was  the  only 
thing  which  could  hinder  them  from  offering  sacritice  to  him.  In  neither  case  did 
he  flatter  or  beguile,  or  at  all  encourage  them  in  anything  wrong,  no  not  with  a 
\iew  of  greater  good  hereafter,  as  we,  in  our  short-sighted  self-sulKeient  plans,  are 
so  often  tempted  to  do ;  but  he  used  that  gift  which  God  gave  him,  of  entering  into 
their  minds  and  feelings  to  edify  them,  whether  by  soothing  or  contradiction,  as 
might  be  needed.  And  as  it  w.is  with  him  in  respect  to  Jew  or  Gentile,  so  also  in 
respect  of  rich  and  poor,  and  the  other  distinctions  of  life  ;  to  masters  and  servants, 
husbands  and  wives,  in  shorr,  all  sorts  of  people,  he  speaks  as  one  who  had  the 
power,  by  the  Divine  Snirit  which  was  in  hiui,  to  feel  not  only  with  them  but  for 
them — not  only  what  they  would  like,  but  what  their  condition  would  most  require. 
Now  St.  Paul  was  a  representative,  what  we  may  in  some  sense  call  a  type,  of  the 
Church  or  kingdom  of  Christ  in  action  and  warfare.  His  teaching  seems  especially 
recorded  as  the  completest  standard  and  model  of  her  teaching.  May  it  then  be 
truly  said  that  the  Church  is  made  all  things  to  all  men?  Surely  it  may;  the 
mystical  body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  animated  by  His  Spirit,  has  a  word  of 
seasonable  instruction,  and  an  aid  of  seasonable  grnce,  for  every  one,  even  the 
meanest  of  His  members.  Surely  there  is  no  person,  rich  or  poor,  young  or  old,  good 
or  bad,  wise  or  foolish,  for  whom  the  Church,  as  she  speaks  in  our  Prayer  Book, 
has  not  a  word  of  comfort  or  censure,  of  warning  or  encouragement,  in  their 
season.  And  as  this  is  the  temper  of  St.  Paul  himself,  and  of  the  Church  which 
he  served,  so  also  should  it  be  the  temper  of  each  particular  Christian,  among  his 
own  friends  and  acquaintance,  and  all  whom  the  Providence  of  God  puts  in  his  way. 
He  will  account  it  a  part  of  charity  to  become  all  things  to  all  men  ;  to  enter  into 
their  notions  and  feelings,  not  for  any  vain  fancy  of  pleasing  them  and  obtaining 
their  good  word,  but  for  their  profit,  if  hanly  by  God's  mercy  he  may  be  permitted 
to  do  something  towards  the  salvation  cf  a  brother.  And  truly  it  is  a  strange 
power  wliich  God's  Holy  Sph-it  gives  to  faithful,  self-denying  persons,  to  enter  into 
the  thoughts  and  tempers  and  passions  of  those  for  whom  they  are  concerned,  even 
of  those  who  are  most  unlike  themselves  ;  guarding  them  by  a  kind  of  instinct 
against  those  sins  and  temptations  which  would  seem  to  be  furthest  from  their  own 
feeling  and  knowledge;  as  God  and  good  angels  guard  them,  knowing,  and  in  a 
manner  fee  ing  for  the  sinner,  without  any  sort  of  communion  in  the  sin.  Once 
more ;  if  it  be  asked  what  is  the  way  by  which  frail,  imperfect  men  may  be  enabled 
to  understand  the  thoughts  of  the  wicked  so  as  to  perceive  their  tendency,  and  to 
pray  and  strive  against  them,  the  answer  is,  we  must  be  very  single  in  our  aims — 
not  looking,  much  less  turning,  back  after  we  have  once  given  in  our  names  to 
Jesus  Christ  to  be  His  soldiers  and  servants.  (./.  H.  Newnnin,  D.D.)  "  Bij  all 
means  save  some": — I.  Why  is  this  passion  for  saving  others  implanted  in 
THE  breasts  of  THE  SAVED  ?  For  God's  glory.  (1)  It  is  greatly  to  the  glory  of 
God  that  He  should  use  humb'e  instruments  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  grand 
purposes.  When  Quintiu  Matsys  had  executed  a  won  lerful  well-cover  in  iron,  it 
was  tliH  more  notible  because  he  had  little  more  than  his  hammar.  (2)  It  brings 
glory  to  Gol  also  that  Hi  should  take  us  sinful  men  and  make  us  partakers  of  His 
compassionate  and  lovug  nature.  That  an  angel  should  cleave  the  air  to  perform 
his  message  is  simple  enough,  but  that  a  Sau\  an  enemy  of  Clirist,  should  live  and 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

die  for  the  winning  of  souls  to  Jesus,  is  a  memorable  illustration  of  the  grace  of 
God.  (.3)  In  this  way  the  Lord  gets  great  glory  over  the  Arch-enemy,  for  He  cau 
say  to  Satan,  "I  have  defeated  thee,  not  by  the  sword  of  Michael,  but  by  the 
words  and  prayers  of  My  humble  servants."  Then  is  the  enemy  smitten  in  the 
house  of  his  former  friends.  Satan  desired  to  sift  Peter  as  wheat,  but  Peter  sifted 
him  in  return  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  2.  For  the  church's  good.  The  passion  for 
winning  souls — (1)  Exj)ends  the  Church's  energy  in  a  healthy  manner.  There  is  a 
certain  quantity  of  steam  generated  in  the  community,  and  if  we  do  not  let  it  off  in 
the  right  way,  it  will  blow  up  and  do  infinite  mischief.  Talents  unused  are  sure  to 
rust,  and  this  kind  of  rust  is  a  deadly  poison  to  peace,  an  acrid  irritant  which  eats 
into  the  heart  of  the  Church.  (2)  Draws  fortli  the  strength  of  the  Church,  awakens 
her  latent  energies,  and  arouses  her  noblest  faculties.  Many  a  commonplace  man 
has  been  rendered  great  by  being  thoroughly  ab-orbed  by  a  noble  pursuit,  and  what 
can  be  nobler  than  turning  men  to  Christ?  (3)  Knits  us  together.  I  have  been 
blest  of  God  to  the  salvation  of  my  hearer,  but  that  hearer  was  first  brought  here 
by  a  friend,  and  so  we  become  sharers  in  the  joy.  And,  moreover,  when  new  con- 
verts are  brought  into  the  Church,  the  fact  that  they  are  brought  in  by  instrumen- 
lalitv  tends  to  make  their  fusion  with  the  Church  an  easy  matter.  3.  For  the  good 
of  the  individual  possessing  it.  (1)  It  makes  us  Godlike.  (2)  It  j^rovides  a  vent 
for  love  to  God  as  well  as  to  men.  Loving  God  makes  us  sorrow  that  all  men  do 
not  love  Him  too.  (3)  It  revives  our  first  love.  When  I  see  an  inquirer  penitent 
for  sin,  I  recollect  the  birthday  of  my  own  soul.  (4)  It  strengthens  faith.  If  you 
begin  to  doubt  tlie  gospel's  power,  go  to  work  among  the  poor  and  ignorant.  (5)  It 
draws  forth  all  the  faculties  of  a  man.  One  strong  passion  will  frequently  bring 
the  whole  man  into  play,  like  a  skilful  minstrel  whose  hand  brings  music  from 
every  chord.  If  we  love  others,  we  shall  become  wise  to  attract  them,  and  discover 
in  ourselves  talents  which  else  had  been  hidden  in  the  ground.  (6)  It  gives  the 
highest  joys  beneath  the  stars.  II.  How  does  this  passion  exercise  itself  ? 
Differently  in  different  persons,  and  at  different  periods.  1.  By  tender  anxiety. 
The  moment  a  man  is  saved  he  begins  to  be  anxious  about  his  relatives,  and  that 
anxiety  leads  him  at  once  to  pray  for  them.  2.  In  the  intense  joy  exiiibited  when 
news  reaches  us  of  their  conversion.  8.  In  private  efforts,  sacrifices,  prayers,  and 
agonies  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  A  word  may  often  bless  those  whom  a  sermon 
fails  to  reach,  and  a  personal  letter  may  do  far  more  than  a  printed  book.  4.  In 
the  more  public  agencies  of  the  Church.  5.  In  adapting  ourselves  to  the  con'^ition 
and  capacity  of  others  for  their  good.  Paul  became  a  Jew  to  the  Jews.  He  did 
not  preach  against  Judaism,  but  showed  thun  Jesus  as  the  fulfiller  of  its  types. 
When  he  met  with  a  heathen  he  did  not  revile  the  gods,  but  taught  him  the  true 
God.  He  did  not  carry  about  with  him  one  sermon  for  all  places,  but  adapted  his 
speech  to  his  audience.  If  you  have  to  talk  to  chiUiren,  be  children,  and  do  not 
expect  them  to  be  men.  If  you  have  to  comfort  the  aged,  enter  into  their  infirmi- 
ties, and  do  not  speak  to  them  as  if  they  were  still  ni  the  full  vigour  of  life.  Are  you 
called  to  labour  among  the  educated '?  Then  choose  out  excellent  words.  Do  you 
work  among  the  illiterate  ?  Speak  their  mother  tongue.  Are  you  cast  among 
people  with  strange  prejudices'?  Do  not  unnecessarily  jar  witli  them,  but  take 
them  as  you  fi.ud  them.  All  men  are  not  to  be  reached  in  the  same  way,  or  by  the 
same  means.  III.  Why  is  not  this  passion  more  largely  developed  among 
Christians?  Is  it  not  that  we  have  but  very  little  grace  ?  That  is  tire  f  untain  of 
all  the  mischief.  But  to  come  to  particulars.  1.  One-sided  views  of  gospel 
doctrines.  "  God  will  save  His  own."  Yes,  but  His  own  d')  not  talk  in  that 
fashion  ;  they  do  not  say,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?  "  Since  idleness  wants  an 
excuse,  men  dare  to  abuse  this  sacred  trutli  to  stultify  their  conscienc  s.  2.  World- 
liness.  Men  nre  too  foud  of  gain  to  care  for  saving  souls.  3.  Want  of  faith. 
Men  do  not  believe  that  God  will  bless  their  efforts,  and  therefore  they  make  none. 
4.  Want  of  sympathy  with  God.  IV.  How  can  this  passion  be  more  fully 
AROUSED  ?  1.  By  our  obtaining  a  higher  life.  I  do  not  believe  in  a  man's  trying  to 
pump  himself  up  beyond  his  level.  The  man  must  be  up,  and  then  all  that  comes 
out  of  the  man  will  have  risen.  If  love  to  God  glows  in  your  soul,  it  must  show 
itself  in  your  concern  for  others.  2.  By  full  cognisance  of  men's  misery  and 
degradation.  How  differently  one  feels  after  S'  eing  with  one's  own  eyes  the  poverty, 
filth,  and  vice  of  this  city.  Your  fellow-countrymen  are  living  in  neglect  of  your 
Saviour,  and  in  jeopardy  of  their  immortal  souls  ;  if  you  did  but  realise  this  it 
would  quicken  you  by  all  means  to  save  some.  8.  By  a  sense  of  our  own  solenm 
obligations.    If  we  are  what  we  profess  to  be,  we  are  redeemed  by  the  heart'b  blood 


CHAP.  IX.]  1.  CORINTHIANS.  559 

of  the  Son  of  God  ;  do  we  not  owe  something  to  Christ  for  this  ?  {C.  II.  Spurgeon.) 
All  thiiifjs  dared  for  souls : — In  Switzerland,  where  land  is  very  precious  because 
rock  abounds  and  the  rugged  soil  is  cliary  in  its  yieldings,  you  see  the  husbandman 
looking  after  a  little  tuft  of  grass  growing  on  one  of  the  edges  of  a  lofty  cliff. 
From  the  valley  be  had  caught  a  sight  of  it,  and  thought  of  clambering  up  to  where 
it  grew,  but  the  rock  was  all  too  steep.  From  a  ledge  nearer  the  top  of  the  pre- 
cipitous wall  he  looked  down,  but  could  see  no  pathway  to  the  coveted  morsel  of 
green.  That  armful  of  grass  would  feed  his  goat,  or  help  to  fill  the  cottage  loft 
with  winter  fodder  for  the  cow.  Every  armful  is  an  item,  and  he  cannot  forego  that 
tempting  clump.  He  looks,  and  looks,  and  looks  again,  but  looks  in  vain.  I3y  and 
by  he  fetches  his  bold  boy,  who  can  follow  wherever  a  chamois  can  climb,  but  the 
boy  after  a  hard  scramble  comes  bick  with  the  tidings,  "  Father,  it  cannot  be  done." 
Father's  answer  is,  "Boy,  it  must  be  done."  It  is  only  an  armful,  and  would  not 
be  worth  a  farthing  to  us,  but  to  the  jDoor  mountaineer  even  a  farthing  or  a  farthing's 
worth  is  precious.  The  grass  waves  its  flowers  in  the  breeze  and  scorns  the  daring 
climb  -rs  from  below  ;  but  where  there  is  a  will,  there  is  a  way ;  and  what  cannot  be 
reached  from  below  may  be  gained  from  above.  With  a  rope  slung  round  him,  or 
firmly  grasped  in  his  acRustomed  hand,  with  a  stout  stake  or  tree  to  hold  it  up 
above,  the  Switzer  is  let  down  till  he  gets  to  the  jutting  crag;  there  he  stands  with 
his  sickle,  reaps  the  grass,  ties  it  into  a  bundle,  puts  it  under  his  arm,  and  climbing 
back  agaio,  joyfully  leturns  with  his  little  harvest.  Poor  paj',  you  think,  for  such 
dangerous  toil ;  but,  fello^v  worker  for  Jesus,  I  wish  we  were  as  venturesome  for 
souls,  and  as  careful  of  them,  as  these  poor  peasants  are  concerning  miserable 
bundles  of  grass.  I  wish  that  we  sometimes  looked  up  or  down  upon  apparently 
inaccessible  spots,  and  resolved  to  rcHch  immortal  souls  who  are  to  be  found  there, 
and  pined  to  bring  them  to  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Soul  saving  our  one  business  : — It  is 
a  grand  thing  to  see  a  man  thoroughly  possessed  with  one  master-passion.  Lives 
with  many  aims  are  like  water  trickling  through  innumerable  streams,  none  of 
which  is  wide  enough  or  deep  enough  to  float  the  merest  cockleshell ;  but  a  life 
with  one  object  is  like  a  mighty  river  flowing  between  its  banks,  bearing  to  the 
ocean  a  multitude  of  ships,  and  spreading  fertility  on  either  side.  Note — I.  Paul's 
GREAT  OBJFXT  IN  LIFE — "  To  save  souie."  1.  Some  preach  with  the  view  of  amus- 
ing men.  But  Paul  did  not  lay  himself  out  to  please  the  public  and  collect  the 
crowd.  2.  Others  think  that  the  object  of  Christian  effort  should  be  to  educate 
men.  Education  is  an  exceedingly  valuable  thing,  but  if  the  Church  thinks  that  it 
is  sent  into  the  world  merely  to  train  tbe  mental  faculties,  it  has  made  a  very  serious 
mistake.  Christ  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,  and  on  the  same 
errand  has  He  sent  His  Church.  3.  Paul  did  not  try  to  moralise  men.  Dr. 
Chalmers,  in  his  first  parish,  preached  morality,  and  saw  no  good ;  but  as  soon  as 
he  preached  Christ  crucified,  grace  jirevailed.  He  who  wishes  for  perfumes  must 
grow  the  flowers  ;  he  who  desires  to  promote  morality  must  have  men  saved. 
4.  What  did  Paul  mean  by  saying  that  he  desired  to  save  some?  (1)  That  some 
should  be  born  again  ;  for  no  man  is  saved  until  he  is  made  a  new  creature  iu  Christ 
Jesus.  (2)  That  some  might  be  cleansed  from  their  past  iniquity  through  the 
merit  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  No  man  can  be  saved  from  his  sin  except  by  the  atone- 
ment. (3)  That  they  might  also  be  purified  and  made  holy  ;  for  a  man  is  not  saved 
while  he  lives  in  sin.  II.  The  apostle's  keasons  for  electing  such  an  object. 
1.  Tbe  honour  of  God.  Did  you  ever  think  over  the  amount  of  dishonour  that  is 
done  to  the  Lord  in  London  in  any  one  hour  of  the  day?  2.  The  extreme  misery 
of  this  our  human  race.  It  would  be  a  very  dreadful  thing  if  you  could  get  any 
idea  of  the  aggregate  of  the  misery  of  London  at  the  present  moment  in  the 
hospital  and  the  workhouse.  3.  The  terrible  future  of  impenitent  souls.  But  if 
they  be  saved,  observe  the  contrast.  III.  Toe  great  methods  which  the  apostle 
USED.  1.  The  simple  preaching  of  the  gospel.  He  did  not  attempt  to  create  a 
sensation  by  startling  statements,  neither  did  he  preach  erroneous  doctrine  in 
order  to  obtain  the  assent  of  the  multitude.  To  keep  back  any  part  of  the  gospel 
is  not  the  true  method  for  saving  men.  Give  the  people  every  truth  baptised  in 
holy  fire,  aud  each  truth  will  have  its  own  useful  effect  upon  the  mind.  But  the 
great  truth  is  the  Cross,  the  trith  that  "God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.  2.  Much 
prayer.  A  great  painter  said  he  mixed  his  colours  with  brains.  A  preacher  ought 
to  mix  truth  with  pia'  er.  When  a  man  was  breaking  granite  by  the  roadside,  a 
minister  passing  by  said,  "  Ah,  my  friend,  your  work  is  just  like  mine  ;  you  have 
to  break  stones,  and  so  do  I."  "  Yes,"  said  the  man,  "  and  if  you  manage  to  break 
stony  hearts,  you  will  have  to  do  it  as  I  do,  go  down  on  your  knees."     3.  An  intense 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

sympathy  which  made  him  adapt  himself  to  each  case.  He  was  all  things  to  flll 
men,  that  he  might  by  all  means  save  some.  Mr.  Hudson  Taylor  finds  it  helpful 
to  dress  as  a  Chinaman,  and  wear  a  pigtail.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  a  truly  wise 
policy.  To  sink  myself  to  save  others  is  the  idea  of  the  apostle.  Never  may  any 
whini  or  conventionality  of  ours  keep  a  soul  from  considering  the  gospel.  {Ibid.) 
Sacrifice  for  souls  : — All  things  are  easy  which  are  done  for  the  love  of  God  and  of 
the  soulswLich  He  loves.  A  lady  who  had  a  most  sensitive  ear  for  music — so  much 
so,  that  a  note  out  of  tune  caused  her  intense  discomfort — joined  one  of  our 
English  Sisterhoods.  Being  visited  one  day  by  a  friend,  she  was  found  placidly 
seated  in  an  outhouse,  in  the  midst  of  a  most  horrible  din,  raised  by  a  number  of 
lads  whom  she  was  forming  into  a  drum  and  fife  band.  "  How  can  you  possibly 
endure  this  noise  ?  "  asked  her  friend.  "  Oh,"  was  the  sweet  reply,  "  it's  very  good 
for  souls  !  "  Adaptation  essential  to  persuasion  .-—It  is  said  that  Kossuth  had  an 
inimitable  power  of  adaptation  :  a  keen  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things.  So  adroit 
was  his  oratory  that  coming  to  a  new  country  he  would  soon  master  its  language, 
had  forensic  arguments  for  the  bar,  prose  and  poetry  for  women,  statistics  for 
merchants,  and  an  assortment  of  local  allusions  for  the  respective  towns  and 
villages  in  which  he  pleaded  his  cause.  [H.  0.  Machey.)  Adaptation  essentialto 
soul  winning  : — While  Edward  Irving  was  assistant  to  Dr.  Chalmers  he  called  upon 
a  shoemaker,  a  thorough-going  infidel  of  a  most  disagreeable  temper.  All  who  had 
previously  called  upon  him  were  met  by  cold  shoulder  and  a  "  Hump  !  "  Irving, 
knowing  his  man,  took  up  a  piece  of  patent  leather,  and  expatiated  on  it.  This  he 
could  do  admirably,  as  his  father  was  a  tanner,  and  he  knew  the  process  w^ell.  The 
shoemaker  did  not  look  up,  but  said  roughly,  "  What  do  you  ken  about  leather  ?  " 
Irving,  unabashed,  went  on,  and  described  how  shoes  were  being  made  by 
machinery.  Then  the  shoemaker  slackened  up  his  work,  and  looked  up,  and  said, 
"  Od,  you're  a  decent  kind  o'  a  fellow  ;  do  you  preach?  "  Next  Sabbath  the  shoe- 
maker was  at  church.  On  the  Monday  Irving  met  him  in  the  Gallow  Gate,  and 
walked  arm-in-arm  with  him  along  the  street.  He  was  overcome,  and  became  a  friend 
instead  of  a  foe  to  Christianity  ;  and  ever  after,  when  taunted  with  his  change, 
justified  himself  by  saying,  "He's  a  sensible  man,  yon;  he  kens  about  leather." 
{Mrs.   Oliphant.)  Adaptation   in  a  minister: — "   W^e   use  the  language  of   the 

market,"  said  Whitefield,  and  this  was  much  to  his  honour ;  yet  when  he  stood  in 
the  drawing-room  of  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon,  and  his  speech  entranced  the  infidel 
nobleman  whom  she  brought  to  hear  him,  he  adopted  another  style.  His  language 
was  equally  plain  in  each  case,  because  it  was  equally  familiar  to  the  audience  :  he 
did  not  use  the  ipsissima  verba,  or  his  language  would  have  lost  its  plainness  in  the 
one  case  or  the  other,  and  would  either  have  been  slang  to  the  nobility  or  Greek  to 
the  crowd.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  Wisdom  of  adaptation: — He  alone  is  wise  who 
can  accommodate  himself  to  all  the  contingencies  of  hfe ;  but  the  fool  contends, 
aud  is  struggling  like  a  swimmer  against  the  stream.  Wisdom  needed  for  useful- 
ness : — In  order  to  reach  men's  hearts  on  Divine  things  Lord  Haddo  strove  to 
cultivate  the  art  of  conciliating  even  the  careless  and  indifferent,  by  talking  to 
them,  in  the  first  instance,  on  subjects  in  which  they  would  be  interested  ;  and  in 
this  taught  a  precious  lesson,  which  all  who  are  engaged  in  evangelistic  labour 
would  do  well  to  learn  and  exemplify.  When  acting  as  a  regular  district  visitor  in 
Whitechapel,  London,  ha  happened  to  visit  a  currier,  to  whom  he  was  unknown, 
and  his  knowledge  of  the  various  processes  of  tanning  and  the  preparation  of 
leather,  elicited  the  remark,  "Ah,  I  see  you  are  in  the  trade  yourself,  sir."  {A. 
Bvff,  D.D.)  The  laio   of  spiritual  accommodation : — (Text  and  chap.    x.   33). 

Here  is  the  supreme  secret  of  service  to  human  souls;  and  the  two  passages  must 
be  taken  together  to  get  the  beauty  of  the  whole  thought.  It  is  an  accommodation 
— I.  To  ALL  irEN  ;  to  Jew,  to  Gentile;  to  weak,  to  strong— 1.  By  way  of  identifica- 
tion ;  as  though  himself  just  what  they  were.  This  means  an  Englishman  becom- 
ing an  Irishman  to  save  an  Irishman  ;  a  man  of  culture  becoming  an  ignorant  fool 
to  save  a  fool— going  down  to  the  slums  to  save  the  inmates  of  the  slums— becoming 
a  slave  to  save  slaves.  2.  By  way  of  self-denial  and  self-oblivion ;  not  seeking 
one's  own  pleasure  or  even  "  profit,"  that  other  smay  be  saved.  A  renunciation  of 
self -gratification  and  even  self -advancement  and  advantage  for  their  sakes.  II.  In 
ALL  THINGS — whercver  it  implies  no  wrong.  The  question  is,  What  will  remove  a 
stumbhng-block  out  of  others'  way?  What  will  serve  others?  (chap.  ix.  19). 
III.  In  order  to  save  others.  Everybody  may  not  be  benefited.  "Duty  is  ours; 
results  are  God's."  But  what  is  offered  to  Him  is  not  lost,  although  it  may  seem 
to  be  wasted.     We  never  get  to  the  true  platform  of  service  until  ■\\hat  we  do  we  do 


.iiAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  561 


unto  the  Lord,  and  are  not  disturbed  by  its  apparent  unfruitfulness.  He  values  it 
just  as  highly,  without  regard  to  obvious  results.      (Horn.  Moiithhj.)  FduVtt 

versatilitij  : — There  fire  those  to  whom  it  is  painful  to  have  to  accost  a  stranger 
even  on  pressing  business  ;  and  most  men  are  only  quite  at  liome  in  their  own  set — ■ 
among  men  of  the  same  class  or  profession  as  themselves.  But  the  life  he  had 
chosen  brought  Paul  into  contact  with  men  of  every  kind,  and  he  had  constantly 
to  be  introducing  to  strangers  the  business  with  which  he  was  charged.  He  might 
be  addressing  a  king  or  a  consul  the  one  hour  and  a  roomful  of  slaves  or  common 
soldiers  the  next.  One  day  he  had  to  speak  in  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews,  another 
among  a  crowd  of  Athenian  philosophers,  another  to  the  inliiabitants  of  some 
provincial  town  far  from  the  seats  of  culture.  But  he  could  adapt  himself  to  every 
man  and  every  audience.  To  the  Jews  he  spoke  as  a  rabbi  out  of  tlie  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  ;  to  the  Greeks  he  quoted  the  words  of  their  own  poets  ;  and  to  the 
barbarians  he  talked  of  the  God  wdio  giveth  rain  from  lieaven  and  fruitful  seasons, 
filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness.  When  a  weak  or  insincere  man  attempts 
to  be  all  thiugs  to  all  men,  he  ends  by  being  nothing  to  anybody.  But,  living  on 
this  piiueiple,  Paul  found  entrance  for  the  gospel  everywhere,  and  at  the  same  time 
won  for  himself  the  esteem  and  love  of  those  to  whom  he  stooped.  (./.  Stalker, 
D.D.)  Fish  must  be  aiif/led  for  u-it]i  the  right  bait : — Speaking  of  fishing  in 
Persian  rivei  s,  a  recent  traveller  says,  "  The  river  Lar  is  famed  for  its  speckled  trout, 
and  we  encamped  on  its  banks,  well  provided  with  the  best  rods  and  flies  the 
English  market  could  afford.  We  found  the  trout  fickle  enough  as  elsewhere,  and 
could  never  tell  when  or  where  to  find  them.  Some  days  '  coy  and  hard  to  please,' 
and  other  days  abundant.  We  soon  discovered  that  a  trait  peculiar  to  these 
Persian  trout  was  an  indifference,  amounting  to  contempt,  for  the  daintiest  flies  we 
coaxingly  threw  in  their  way.  But  when  we  baited  our  hooks  with  young  grass- 
hoppers or  frogs  we  discovered  the  favourite  weakness  of  these  epicures  of  the  Lar." 
[H.  0.  Mackey.)  floral  identification  witJt,  others — a  qualification  of  the  evangel : — 
This  verse  is  sometimes  taken  as  expressive  of  the  accommodating  spirit  of  the 
apostle.  Hence  he  is  regarded  as  acting  in  a  somewhat  Jesuitical  way,  taking  men 
as  it  were  by  guile.  Such  a  view  is  utterly  untrue.  From  his  very  constitution,  he 
could  not  bend  to  any  temporising  expediency.  All  that  the  apo>tle  means  is,  that 
he  endeavoured  to  put  himself  into  the  place,  or  rather  into  the  views  and  feehngs, 
of  those  whom  he  endeavoured  to  win  to  Christ.  Now  this  is  both  right  and  wise. 
As  a  debater,  whether  in  politics,  philosophy,  or  religion,  he  only  acts  fairly  and 
w-ith  power  who  acts  i^  this  way.  This  power  implies — I.  A  highly  imaginative 
TEMPKRAM75XT.  The  phlegmatic  man,  whose  nature  is  incapable  of  taking  fire,  who 
moves  with  the  creeping  legs  of  logic  rather  than  on  the  wings  of  moral  intuition, 
would  find  it  all  but  impossible  to  realise  another  man's  experiences.  II.  A  know- 
ledge OF  HU5L\N  LIFE.  It  is  iiecessary  that  we  should  make  ourselves  acquainted 
not  merely  with  the  outward  circumstances  of  men,  but  with  their  inner  life — their 
modes  of  thought,  their  strongest  proclivities.  This  requires  study  of  men,  not  as 
they  appear  in  books,  but  as  they  appear  in  their  circle,  and  men,  not  in  the  mass, 
but  in  their  individual  character  and  idiosyncrasies.  III.  A  passionate  love  fob 
SOULS.  Nothing  but  the  constraining  love  of  Christ  can  invest  man  either  with  the 
disposition  or  the  power  for  such  a  work — a  work  requiring  self-sacrifice,  patience, 
tenderness,  invincible  determination,  and  hallowed  devotion.  (D.  Tltomas,  D.D.) 
Power  of  tact : — A  little  management  will  often  avoid  resistance,  which  a  vast  force 
will  strive  in  vain  to  overcome.     (Colton.) 

Yer.  24.  They  which  run  in  a  race,  run  all,  but  one  receivetli  the  prize. — The 

Greek  ntlilelic  festivals  and  tlieir  lessons  : — 1.  Of  these  the  most  famous  was  that 
held  every  fifth  year  at  Olympia  in  the  west  of  Peloponnese.  Very  famous 
and  ancient  also  was  the  Isthmian  festival  held  every  two  years  at  the  Isthmus, 
ab.iut  eight  miles  from,  and  in  full  view  of,  the  city  of  Corinth.  Similar  festivals 
were  held  at  Nemea  and  Delphi.  But  in  tlaese  the  athletic  element  was  less  con- 
spicuous. All  these  were  instituted  before  the  dawn  of  history.  Other  festivals, 
in  imitation  of  them,  were  held  in  Paul's  day  in  many  cities  of  Asia,  e.g.,  at 
Tarsus,  and  notably  at  Antioch  in  Syria.  2.  All  athletes,  i.e.,  competitors  for 
prizes,  had  ten  months'  training,  under  the  direction  of  appninted  teachers  and 
under  various  restrictions  of  diet.  At  the  beginning  of  the  festival  they  were 
requireil  to  prove  to  the  judges  that  they  were  of  pure  Greek  blood,  had  not  for- 
feited by  misconduct  the  right  of  citizenship,  and  had  undergone  the  necessary 
training.  Then  began  the  various  contests,  in  an  appointed  order.  Of  these,  the 
VOL.  I.  '6G 


562  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


oldest  and  most  famous  was  the  footrace.  Others  were  wrestling,  boxing,  chariot 
and  horse  racing.  Tiie  prize  was  a  wreath  (or  crown)  of  olive  at  Olympia,  and  of 
pine  leaves  (at  one  time  of  olive)  at  the  Isthmus.  The  giving  of  the  prizes  was 
followed  by  processions  and  sacrifices,  and  by  a  public  banquet  to  the  conquerors. 
The  whole  festival  at  Olympia  lasted  five  days.  3.  The  importance  of  these  athletic 
festivals  in  the  eyes  of  the  ancient  Greeks  it  is  difficult  to  appreciate  now.  They 
were  the  great  family  gatherings  of  the  nation,  held  under  the  auspices,  and  under 
the  shadow  of  the  temples,  of  their  gods.  The  laws  regulating  them  were  held  as 
binding  by  the  various  independent  states  of  Greece.  The  month  in  which  they 
were  held  was  called  the  sacred  month,  and  was  solemnly  announced.  And  all 
war  between  Greek  states  ceased,  under  pain  of  the  displeasure  of  their  gods, 
while  the  festival  lasted.  The  festivals  were  attended  by  immense  crowds  from 
all  the  Greek  states,  and  from  even  the  most  distant  colonies.  The  various  states 
sent  embassies,  and  vied  with  each  other  in  the  splendour  of  them  and  of  the  gifts 
they  brought.  The  greatest  cities  thought  themselves  honourecJ  by  the  victory  of  a 
citizen.  The  victor  was  received  home  with  a  triumphal  procession,  entered  the 
city  by  a  new  opening  broken  for  him  through  the  walls,  was  taken  in  a  chariot 
lo  the  temjile  of  its  guardian  deity,  and  welcomed  with  songs.  In  some  cases  a 
reward  in  money  was  given,  and  release  from  taxation.  In  honour  ot  the 
siiccesslul  athlete  poems  were  written ;  of  which  we  have  specimens  in  the  p-iems 
cf  Pindar.  A  statue  of  the  victor  was  permitted  to  be  placed,  and  in  many  cases 
was  placed,  by  townsmen  or  friends,  in  the  sacred  grove  of  the  presiding  deity.  An 
avenue  of  these  statues,  shadowed  by  an  avenue  of  pine-trees,  leading  up  to  the 
temple  of  Poseidon,  which  stood  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  racecourse  at 
the  Isthmus  of  Corinth,  is  mentioned  by  Pausanias  (bk.  ii.  1,  7).  Close  by  this 
temple  with  its  avenue  of  statues  Paul  probably  passed  on  his  way  from  Athens  to 
Corinth.  The  Olympic  festival,  which  survived  the  longest,  was  abolished  in  a.d. 
394,  four  years  after  the  public  suppression  of  paganism  in  the  Eoman  Empire. 
The  Greek  athletic  festivals  must  be  larefuUy  distinguished  from  the  bloody  Roman 
gladiatorial  combats.  That  these  athletic  festivals  permeated  and  moulded  the 
thought  both  of  classic  writers  and  of  the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  we  have  abundant 
proof.  Eternal  life  is  to  be  obtained  only  by  contest  and  victory  (Phil.  iii.  14  ; 
1  Tim.  vi.  12 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  5,  iv.  7f  ;  cf.  Luke  'xiii.  24  ;  Heb.  xii.  1  ;  James  i.  12  ; 

1  Pet.  V.  4 ;  Eev.  ii.  10,  iii.  11).  The  Christian  life  is  both  a  preparation  for 
conflict    (ver.   25;   2  Tim.   ii.    5),  a   race    (ver.    24;   Phil.    iii.   12;    Acts  xx.  24; 

2  Tim.  iv.  7) ;  a  boxing  (ver.  27)  ;  and  a  wrestling  (Eph.  vi.  12).  Paul's  converts 
will  be  his  crown  in  the  great  day  (1  Thess.  ii.  19  ;  Phil.  iv.  1).  And,  just  as 
the  athlete,  victorious  but  not  yet  crowned,  lay  down  to  rest  on  the  evening  after 
conflict,  waiting  for  the  glories  of  the  morrow,  so  Paul  (2  Tim.  iv.  7f).  This 
metaphor — I.  Presents  a  needful  complemext  of  Pace's  doctrine  of  justification 
BY  grace  and  through  FAITH.  Tbougli  eternal  life  is  altogether  a  free  gift  of  God, 
it  is  given  only  to  those  who  strive  for  it  with  all  their  powers.  Therefore  we  must 
ever  ask,  not  only  whether  an  action  open  to  us  is  lawful,  but  whether  it  will 
increase  or  lessen  our  spiritual  strength.  Just  so,  an  athlete  would  forego  many 
things  otherwise  harmless,  and  some  not  even  forbidden  by  the  laws  for  athletes, 
simply  because  he  was  striving  for  a  prize.  II.  Receives  in  turn  its  needful 
complement  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Holt  Spirit.  Had  we  to  contend  for  life  in 
our  own  strength,  we  might  be  doubtful  of  the  result,  as  was  many  a  resolute 
athlete  on  the  morning  of  the  contest.  But  in  us  is  the  might  of  God,  crushing 
(Rom.  xvi.  20 ;  1  John  iv.  4)  our  adversary  uuder  our  feet,  and  cariying  us  (1 
Kings  xviii.  46)  forward  to  the  goal.  Therefore,  day  by  day  we  go  down  into  the 
arena,  to  fight  with  foes  infinitely  stronger  than  we,  knowing  that  "we  are  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us."  Conclusion:  That  the  crowded 
Isthmian  festival  was  held  each  alternate  year  at  the  very  gates  of  Corinth  and 
almost  under  the  shadow  of  its  Acropolis,  mixst  have  given  to  the  metaphor  of  ver. 
24  special  force  in  the  minds  of  the  Corinthians.  And,  possibly,  Paul  was  himself 
present  at  a  festival  during  (Acts  xviii.  11)  his  eighteen  months'  sojourn  at  Corinth, 
using  perhaps  the  opportunity  to  summon  the  assembled  strangers  to  a  nobler 
contest.  {Prof.  Beet.)  The  ChrUtian  race  : — In  a  race  geneially  there  are 
multitudes  to  compete,  but  out  of  those  multitudes  how  few  win!  The  same  fact 
in  the  Christian  race  can  be  accounted  for  on  two  grounds  : — I.  The  lack  op 
earnestnkss.  Consider  this  in — 1.  Its  sources.  (1)  Lack  of  knowledge,  or  con- 
fusion of  thought.  Because  of  such  passages  as  Rom.  vi.  23  ;  Titus  iii.  5-7  ;  John 
iii.  16,  &c.,  some  do  not  see  what  there  is  for  the  believer  to  strive  after.    As  though 


CHAP.  IX-.]  I.  COniNTHIANS.  563 


merely  being  a  child  were  enough  ;  as  though  it  were  not  possible  for  a  father  to 
give  his  children  special  marks  of  his  love.  "  How  pleased  father  will  be  wiien  he 
sees  how  much  we  have  done."  Are  not  children,  when  speaking  in  this  waj',  really 
labouring  for  just  the  kind  of  prize  held  out  here  ?  the  expressed  approbation 
(Matt.  XXV.  '21)  of  the  "righteous  judge  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  (2)  Lack  of  appreciation. 
AH  who  see  the  nature  of  this  giacious  reward  do  not  also  see  its  great  value. 
Besides,  how  dim  and  distant !  Like  Esau's  despised  birthright,  how  intangible  the 
whole  promise  !  2.  In  its  results.  Those  who  have  never  succeeded  in  grasping 
this  prize  with  their  hearts,  naturally  never  do  so  with  their  hands.  Such  half- 
hearted competitors  have  lost  the  race  evnn  before  they  begin.  Never  starting,  how 
are  they  to  arrive  ?  In  such  an  undertaking  as  this,  would  it  not  be  more  than  a 
miracle  if  they  did  ?  II.  Lack  of  suitable  training.  Consider — 1.  What  "tiaining" 
signifies.  Living  by  rule.  To  be  "  temperate  "  (vei-.  25)  is  to  rule  oneself.  It  is  to 
"keep  under"  the  body,  tfcc.  (ver.  27).  It  is  to  deny  ourselves  everything  that 
would  in  any  way  impede  us  in  running  our  race  (Heb.  xii.  1).  Hence  we  see — 2. 
What  the  lack  of  it  does.  It  secures  failure.  (1)  On  account  of  the  greatness  of 
the  enterprise.  What  we  are  striving  for  is  notliing  less  than  the  "  mastery."  In 
such  an  enterprise,  if  we  do  not  rule  our  desires,  our  desires  will  rule  us — and  ruin 
us  too.  In  such  a  work  we  not  only  need  uo  self-inflicted  hindrance,  we  need  all 
the  help  we  can  get.  (2)  On  account  of  the  insufficiency  of  our  strength.  Even 
those  who  are  strong,  if  "  out  of  condition,"  are  unequal  to  their  task.  Much 
more  we,  who  are  weali.    Conclusion  :  To  stir  us  up,  consider  in  the  case  of  failure — 

1.  How  much  is  lost.  How  can  we  hope  that  we  are  true  Christians  if  we  do  not 
even  "  study  to  show  ourselves  approved  unto  God  "  ?  Theie  are  those  who  have 
just  enough  religion  to  make  them  miserable.  2.  How  little  is  gained,  viz.,  too 
little  to  be  described.  The  man  who  misses  the  approbation  of  Christ  obtains 
no  other  in  its  stead,  not  even  his  own.  How  many  centuries  have  passed  since  the 
question  of  Matt.  xvi.  26  was  first  asked?  How  much  nearer  are  we,  even  now,  to 
findiuga  reply  ?  (IV.  S.  Lewis,  M.A.)  The  CJiristian  athlete  : — I.  His  exercises. 
The  Christian  life  may  be  compared  to — 1.  A  race.  2.  A  combat.  II.  The  con- 
ditions OF  SUCCESS  IN  THESE  EXERCISES.  1.  Personal  mastery.  2.  Moderation.  3. 
Distinctness  of  aim.  4.  Concentration  of  purpose.  5.  Activity.  6.  Courage.  7. 
Perseverance.  III.  The  reward  of  success.  1.  Its  intrinsic  value.  2.  Its 
permanence.     Application  :  This  reward  should  make  us — 1.  Burn  with  ambition. 

2.  Watchful.     3.  Enduring  and  contented.    [W.  Stevens.)         The  spiritual  rnrer  : — ■ 

I.  The  race.  Christian  life  is  a  race.  It  is  no  haphazard  thing  ;  it  is  marked  off 
and  measured;  it  lias  a  starting-point  and  a  goal.  1.  The  race  begins  at  the  Cross. 
The  Christian,  at  his  conversion,  enters  the  racecourse,  and  his  name  is  recorded  and 
j)ublished.  2.  The  race  ends  at  death.  The  most  hopeful  beginning  may  h:ive  a 
hopeless  ending.  A  good  start  is  of  immense  value;  but  it  is  not  he  that  maketh 
a  fine  start,  but  "  he  that  endureth  unto  the  end,  that  shall  be  saved."  It  does  not 
take  very  long  for  the  racer  to  lose  all  the  advantage  of  a  good  start:  and  a  life, 
though  nobly  run,  if  it  fail  in  the  home  stretches,  will  be  sure  to  miss  the  crown. 

II.  The  racers  are  all  who  have  forsaken  sin,  accepted  Christ,  and  publicly 
entered  the  path  of  obedieuce.  The  Bible  does  not  speak  of  invisible  racers,  but 
of  those  who  are  "  compassed  about  by  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses."  Those  Grecian 
athletes  were  in  training  long  before  the  day  of  conflict  came.  But  the  Christian's 
training  begins  with  the  race.  He  trains  in  the  race,  and  thus  gains  agility  and 
skill  through  the  turmoil  of  the  contest.  The  racers — 1.  Strip  for  the  lace.  " Lay 
aside  every  weight."  Nothing  that  hinders  must  be  left  on.  2.  Make  progress. 
"Eun."  Think  how  ridiculous  a  lounger  would  have  appeared,  hanging  around 
the  ancient  stadium,  professing  to  be  a  racer,  but  never  getting  out  of  sight  of  the 
starting-point.  Dash  into  the  race,  or  leave  the  ground.  3.  Persevere.  "  A 
race."  Not  a  little  jet  of  speed,  because  one  feels  like  it,  or  down  street  for  fun. 
Christianity  demands  not  only  prompt  action,  but  continuity  of  effort.  If  reliiiion 
were  only  a  thing  of  frames  and  feelings,  some  would  soon  fly  to  the  goal,  especially 
if  the  feeling  held  out.  4.  Concentrate  effort.  "  Eun  a  race."  Christianity 
harmonises  all  man's  poweis,  and,  with  a  noble  obliviousness  to  surrounding 
attractions,  hur's  the  whole  man  into  tbe  race.  5.  Are  watchful.  "  So  run  that  ye 
may  obtain."  Christian  activity  is  not  a  blind,  haphazard  thing.  We  are  to  keep 
our  eyes  about  us,  lest  we  stumble.  III.  The  reward.  In  tlie  stadium,  the  prize, 
like  all  enrthly  honours,  was  perishable.  But  the  Christian  prize  is  an  inoorruptibJe 
crown.  Proud  moment,  that,  when  tbe  successful  racer  had  the  chaplet  placed  upon 
his  brow,  amid  the  applause  of  thousands.     Grander  moment  for  the  Christian 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

athlete,  when  amid  the  shouts  of  rejoicing  myriads,  the  pierced  bands  of  Jesus 
place  upon  his  head  the  crown  of  glory,  with  the  blessed  words  of  approval :  "  Well 
done,"  &c.     (T.  Kelly.)         The  fi r eat  race : — I.  The  ddty  exjoixeu — "running." 
The  word  implies — immediate  attention — strong  exertion.     Not  that  easy,  quiet 
religion  which  takes  salvation  as  a  matter  of  course,  and  regards  condemnation  as 
out  of  date.     "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,"  &c.     II.  The  m.vsner 
OF  DiscHAEr;i\G  THIS  DUTY.     1.  Previous   preparatiou.     (1)    Moderation.     (2)  The 
removal  of  every  weight.     (3)  Once  more  :  we  should  take  care  in  what  manner. 
(4)   Being  "shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  Gospel  of  peace."     2.  An   actual 
exercise.     Eunning  implies— (1)  Going  forward.     (2)  In  a  direct  hne.      (3)  Without 
halting.     (4)  Without  looking  back,     (o)  Lawfully  (2  Tim.  ii.  5),  i.e.,  (a)  In  depeu- 
dence  on  Christ— (6)  With  a  view  to  the  glory  of  Christ.     3.  Patient  endurance. 
Blessed  are  they  which  "endure  to  the  end,  for  they  shall  be  sived."     III.  The 
OBJECT  AT  WHICH  WE  ARE  TO  Aiji.     Everlasting  life — to  be  "found  in  Christ" — to 
"know  Christ,"   whom  to  know  is  everlasting  life.       {Bishop  Montagu    Villiers.) 
The  great  race  : — I.  The  prize  competed  for.     An  object  in  life  is  necessary  to 
every  one.     Without  it  our  energies  are  like  the  shafts  and  wheels  of  a  machine, 
when  there  is  no  steam  in  the  boiler.     Put  before  a  man  the  prospect  of  a  fortun-e, 
and  how  cheerfully  will  he  devote  himself  to  his  business.     An  objectless  man  can 
only  be  indolent  and  wretched.     How  these  conditions  remain  when  we  rise  to  the 
higher  ranges  of  life.     There  is  an  object  in  religion.     Nowhere  is  a  higher  incen- 
tive needed  or  furnished.     1.  This  is  not  happiness.     There  are  many  whose  creed 
is — Be  good  that  you  may  be  happy.    But  the  principle  is  wrong.    It  is  not  for  that 
a  good  man  runs.     He  knows  that  happiness  is  like  a  little  bird  which  will  sit  on 
your  shoulder  and  sing  for  you  all  d;iy,  if  you  do  not  turn  to  look  at  it.     But  the 
moment  you  begin  to  look  at  it,  it  takes  its  flight.     Hugo  says  truly — "Being  in 
possession  of  the  false  aim  in  life,  happiness,  we  forget  the  true  aim,  duty!  "     2. 
It  is  not  heaven.     That  is,  undoubt'  dly,  a  home  of  the  soul.     But  Christ  never 
urged  men  to  believe  in  Him  in  order  that  they  might  get  it.     The  assurance  of  it 
is  a  very  different  thing  from  making  it  the  reason  of  a  good  life.     If  the  only 
reason  one  has  f  <v  serving  God  is  that  he  niny  receive  his  pitiful  denarius  at  the 
end  of  the  day,  he  will  find  that  he  has  been  running  a  race  for  a  corruptible,  not 
an  incorru])tible  end.    His  heaven  will  be  no  heaven,  since  his  heart  will  still  be  full 
of  that  self-seeking  in  whose  train  follows  a  hell  of  discontent  and  misery.     Out  of 
the  heart  the  love  of  Christ  must  thrust  the  selfishness  which  makes  not  only 
present  self-good,  but  eternal  self-good,  the  aim  of   religion.      3.  The  thing  for 
which  we  )un  is  a  kingdom  of  heaven  which  is  within  us — a  Christlike  cbaracter. 
The  good  man  runs  the  race  that  he  may  be  "perfect  and  entire"  in  goodness, 
lacking  nothing.     Heaven  will   at   last   fall  to   his  lot,  but  to  get   it  is   not  his 
ambition.     He  aims  at   a   life   made  holy  by  the  pursuit  of  righteousness.     II. 
Certain  conditions  accepted.     1.  The  back  must  resolutely  be  turned  on  wrong- 
doing.    No  one  can  lawfully  enter  on  the  contest  for  holiness  with  any  love  of  sia 
in  the  heart.     The  merchnnt  who  conducts  his  business  upon  dishonest  principles, 
cannot  at  the  same  time  be  a  disciple.    He  is  not  running  lawfully,  and  will  never 
win  the  prise.     2.  A  strong  faith  in  Christ  who  takes  away  the  sin  of  which  we  have 
repented.     Many  hold  that  for  a  good  life  one  has  only  to  recognise  the  voice  of 
conscience,  and  to  follow  its  directions.     But  let  us  not  be  deceived.     History  can 
tell  us  something  of  the  fruits  of  this  so-called  independent  morality.     The  teaching 
of  Socrates  and  Plato  wrought  no  radical  reformation  in  Athenian  morals.     The 
precepts  of  Seneca  could  not  save  his  pupil  Nero  from  the  depths  of  brutality  and 
shame.     The  moral  philosophy  of  Hume  culminated  in  the  French  Eevolution.     It 
is  impossible  to  rise  above  the  low  levels  of  a  sinful  self  without  a  high  faith  in  Him 
who  is  the  power  of  Gi>d  unto  salvation.     Argument  is  not  needed  to  enforce  this. 
It  is  prescribed  by  the  eti  rnal  Judge.     3.   Open  confession  of  our  fidelity  to  Christ. 
We  cannot,  lawfully,  run  the  race  in  secret.     Here  is  the  plain  word  of  the  Master. 
He  requires  us  to  enter  into  open  fellowship  with  His  cause  on  the  earth.     4.  Great 
and  continued  effort.     It  is  not  an  easv  thing  to  do  right.     In  this  contest,  every 
energy  of  the  soul  is  called  into  play.     Amateur  Christianity  may  do  for  show,  but 
it  tells  for  nothing  in  the  great  snm  of  life.     This  is  the  vice  of  our  age.     We  are 
enthusiastic  about  everything  but  religion.     (H.  R.  Harris.)         The  race  of  life  : — 
1.  The  style  of  Paul  is  peculiar  in  its  directn-ss.     We  may  hesitate  to  illustrate 
religious  truth  by  sports  as  n^w  conducted.     The  Greek  games,  however,  were  not 
of  a  mercenary  charai  ti  r.     No  entrance  fee  was  deniRnded.  no  betting,   and  no 
disreputable  people  were  allowed.    2.  Physical  culture  was  more  estet-med  than  now. 


CHAP.  IS.]  I.   COniXTHIAXS.  565 


"We  often  have  well-trained  minds  in  thin,  sapless  bodies.  Our  schoolrooms  rob 
vitalitj'.  In  Greece  the  instruction  was  given  outdoors.  Manly  struggles  ennobled 
the  physical  nature.  3.  Picture  to  yourselves  the  temple  of  Neptune,  the  stadium, 
and  the  circling  seats  where  sat  the  beauty  and  the  wealth  of  Greece,  a  "  great  cloud 
of  witnesses  "  applauding  the  efforts  of  the  racers.  Here  is  the  startiug-post  and 
there  the  goal,  with  a  tripod  holding  a  garland  of  pine.  Now  the  judge  is  seated, 
and  the  herald  cries  out  that  no  unclean,  no  criminal  or  foreigner,  shall  draw  near. 
The  signal  is  given  and  the  race  begins.  4.  We  are  all  runners.  Life  is  earnest. 
It  may  be  a  triumph  or  a  disastrous  failure.  What  is  required  : — I.  Temperance. 
This  word  is  belittled  if  referred  to  mere  abstinence  from  drink.  It  means  self- 
mastery.  The  whole  nature  must  be  under  constraint  and  restraint,  lest  we  slip 
and  fall.  II.  Watchfulness.  Temptations  creep  upon  us  stealthily.  Wealth, 
pleasure,  ambition,  and  cupidity  have  their  golden  apples.  Unless  we  keep  our  eye 
on  the  goal  we  are  lost.  III.  The  laying  aside  ok  every  weight.  The  Pilgrim 
lost  his  load  at  the  Cross.  We  must  drop  there  everything  which  hinders.  Men 
of  this  world  make  every  sacrifice  to  gain  money  or  power.  Politicians  run 
with  zeal.  They  do  it  for  a  corruptible  crown.  (D.  21.  Beeves,  D.D.)  Earnest 
counsels  on  the  race  of  life  : — I.  Trifle  not — the  business  is  earnest.  II. 
Delay  not — the  opportunity  is  short.  III.  Err  not — the  path  is  narrow,  IV. 
Divide  not  your  attention — the  work  is  difficult.  V.  Eelax  not  your  efforts 
— he  only  that  endureth  shall  be  saved.  VI.  Faint  not — the  prize  is  glorious. 
(•J.  Lyth,  D.D.)  The  Christian  race  : — You  are  called,  every  one  of  you,  for 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  but  it  depends  upon  yourself  whether  you  will  work  this 
salvation  out.  Life  is  a  race,  in  which  many  will  run  but  will  not  gain  a  prize. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  simile?  I.  Run  with  all  your  speed.  There  are 
some  who  labour  from  morning  to  night  to  win  Ihe  treasures  of  this  life,  who  are 
slothful  in  the  work  of  saving  their  souls.  And  if  they  could  gain  the  whole  world 
and  lose  their  own  souls,  what  is  the  profit?  Eun  with  all  your  speed,  for  the  way 
is  long  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  wise  men  from  the  East,  when  they  saw  the 
star,  followed  it  through  all  the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  a  long  journey.  The 
attaining  of  eternal  life,  i.e.,  so  to  live  that  eternal  life  may  be  in  us  here,  is  the 
greatest  work  that  we  can  do.  The  prodigal  who  departed  from  his  father's  house 
into  a  far  country,  has  to  go  back  step  by  step  as  far  as  he  departed.  Surely  this 
work  is  not  the  work  of  a  day  but  of  a  life  ;  and  life  is  short  for  so  great  a  work, 
and  life  is  fleeting  and  uncertain.  We  cannot  promise  ourselves  to-morrow;  to- 
morrow is  God's,  to-day  is  ours.  II.  Eun  with  all  your  strength.  If  you  see 
a  man  set  about  doing  a  task,  you  can  see  by  the  way  he  goes  about  it  whether 
his  heart  is  in  it  or  not.  Men  who  decide  to  get  rich  or  to  make  a  name  will  over- 
come every  obstacle.  But  such  men  are  often  cowardly  and  slack  in  the  work  of 
their  salvation.  And  yet  we  are  warned  that  no  man  can  serve  two  masters.  There 
must  be  no  half-heartedness  in  the  work  of  our  salvation,  and  there  can  be  no 
neutrality.  "  He  who  is  not  for  Me  is  against  Me."  III.  With  self-denial  and 
temperance.  Our  Lord  has  said,  "  If  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,"  &c. 
The  thing  most  necessary  to  you,  you  must  cast  off,  if  it  cause  j'ou  to  sin. 
Eemember  that  out  of  the  seven  deadly  sins  four  are  spiritual — pride,  jealousy, 
anger,  and  strife.  Such  sins  you  must  cast  out.  St.  Paul  says,  "  I  keep  under  my 
body,"  &c.  And  if  he  had  need  to  say  that,  how  much  need  we  ?  Venial  sins  are 
still  important  sins,  and  grow  into  great  sins.  And  therefore,  as  St.  Paul  says 
here,  "  Every  man  that  striveth  for  the  mastery  is  temperate  in  all  things."  Men 
who  desire  to  exhibit  great  feats  of  endurance  have  to  mortify  and  control  them- 
selves in  everything  ;  and  we  cannot  live  with  a  little  hardness  for  our  eternal 
reward.  IV.  Eun  with  all  your  hearts.  There  are  two  failures  in  this  race — the 
one  is  to  have  too  much  hope  in  salvation.  Some  are  as  presumptuous  as  if  they 
had  received  a  revelation  that  they  must  be  saved.  The  other  is  in  not  haviug 
confident  hope.  We  must  have  confidence  in  God,  and  in  experience.  St.  Paul 
says,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,"  &e.  If  a  man  is  running  for  his  life,  as 
long  as  he  has  a  hope  of  escape  he  will  continue  running;  but  the  moment  he 
despairs  he  slackens  his  efforts.  A  man  who  is  swimming  for  his  life  will  strike 
out  strongly  if  he  can  hope,  but  the  instant  he  despairs  he  sinks.  So  with  those 
who  lose  their  confidence  in  God,  who  are  overcome  by  servile  fear.  Why  are  we 
to  trust  in  God  ?  Because — 1.  God  is  love.  2.  You  have  His  promises.  He  has 
promised  you  that  if  you  believe  in  Him  He  will  give  you  life  eternal.  What 
more  do  you  need  ?  Conclusion :  1.  Take  care  you  are  in  the  right  way.  St. 
Augustine  said,   "You  are  making  great  strides,  indeed,  but  you  are  out  of  the 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


right  way."  If  we  are  out  of  the  way,  every  step  we  take  we  are  going  from 
the  kingdom.  Our  Lord  says,  "I  am  the  Way,  tlie  Truth  and  the  Life."  2. 
Having  begun  to  run,  do  not  let  your  heart  do  what  Lot's  wife  did.  Do  not 
look  back  on  the  world  which  you  have  given  up.  (Cardinal  Manning.) 
The  Ci,ristian  race  : — I.  Its  natdke — "  So  run."  It  implies — 1.  Piety  towards  God. 
The  love  of  God  must  be  the  all-coustraining  principle,  the  Spirit  of  God  the  Guide, 
and  the  Word  of  God  the  constant  companion  of  every  candidate.  2.  Equity 
towards  all  tlieir  fellow-creatures.  They  will,  by  God's  grace,  endeavour  to  render 
to  all  their  dues,  and  it  will  be  their  daily  habit  "  to  do  unto  others  as  they  would 
others  should  do  unto  them."  3.  Sobriety  as  to  ourselves.  It  is  not  enough  to 
abstain  from  drunkenness,  l^c,  but  the  candidate's  Christian  course  must  be  tem- 
perate in  all  things,  even  in  lawful  matters,  keeping  under  his  body,  and  bringing 
it  into  subjection.  He  is  to  use  this  world  as  not  abusing  it,  and  to  let  his  "  modera- 
tion be  known  unto  all  men,"  because  "  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  II.  The  manner. 
"  So  run."  1.  Lawfully.  2.  With  the  understanding.  We  must,  ere  the  resolution 
be  formed,  "sit  down  and  count  the  cost."  3.  Looking  forward  to  "Jesus  the 
Author  !ind  Finisher  of  faith."  4.  Penitently — i.e.,  godly  sorrow  for  and  hatred  to 
sin.  5.  Prayerfully.  6.  Cheerfully.  7.  Believingiy  (Heb.  xi.  1).  8.  Continually. 
The  Christian, -uulike  the  Olympic  race,  which  was  celebrated  but  once  in  five  years, 
is  to  be  run  every  day  of  our  lives.  9.  Perseveringly.  Nothing  honourable  and 
desirable  is  obtained,  even  in  this  world,  without  this.  III.  The  design.  "  That 
ye  may  obtain."     {T.   Sedgcr,  M.A.)  Tlie  Chrintian  race: — I,  The  Chf.isti.\n 

LIFE  IS  COMPARED  TO  A  RACE.  There  was  a  peculiar  propriety  in  the  selection  of  such 
an  image  when  writing  to  a  people  who  held  the  Isthmian  games  in  such  reverence, 
that  no  national  calamity  was  ever  known  to  hinder  theii'  performance.  The  city 
was  sucked  on  one  occasion,  but  the  games  went  on.  Public  events  were  dated  from 
the  time  of  their  celebration.  The  design  of  the  apostle  was  to  show  that  the 
advantage  was  always  on  the  side  of  him  ^\ho,  instead  of  the  pine  leaves,  was  run- 
ning for  the  crown  of  life.  1.  There  were  points  where  the  comparison  held.  The 
racer  must  keep  to  the  rules  of  the  course,  and  confine  himself  within  the  limits  of 
the  stadium.  Speed  will  staud  him  in  no  stead  without  this  :  and  though  he  may 
reach  the  goul,  he  will  not  receive  the  prize.  And  it  is  so  with  the  Christian  racer. 
He  is  not  at  liberty  to  choose  his  ground,  to  invent  a  short  road,  or  to  seek  an  easy 
road  there  ;  he  must  keep  in  the  way  of  God"s  commandments.  "  The  law  of  the 
Lord  is  perfect,"  and  it  is  equally  dishonoured,  whether  we  multiply  religious  works 
and  let  ttiese  stand  in  lieu  of  the  heart,  or  whether,  under  the  plea  of  cultivating 
ihe  heart,  we  neglect  some  plainly  commanded  duties.  One  man  finds  it  easier  to 
pray  for  an  hour  than  to  control  his  temper  ;  another  to  cultivate  a  highly  emotional 
religion  than  to  part  with  his  money.  The  gospel  crown  must  be  won  in  the  gospel 
way.  2.  There  are  points  in  which  the  parallel  tails.  (1)  In  an  earthly  race,  however 
many  may  start,  only  one  cun  win,  whereas  in  the  Chiistian  race  all  may  win.  He  who 
is  faithful  over  a  little  shall  be  as  certainly  rewarded  as  he  who  is  faithful  over  much  ; 
each  shall  rect-ive  a  crown  as  large  as  he  can  wear.  (2)  In  earthly  competitions 
there  must  be  jealousy  and  strife  ;  the  gain  of  one  competitor  is  the  loss  of  another, 
and  each  one  feels  it  is  his  interest  as  far  as  he  lawfully  may,  to  keep  all  rivals  back. 
But  the  Christian  racer,  instead  of  hindering  a  weak  brother,  would  help  him ;  he 
rejoices  in  the  feeling  that  he  has  so  many  companions,  and  would  carry  all  the 
world  along  with  him  if  he  could.  II.  What  is  ijiplied  in  tke  comparison.  1.  The 
necessity  of  vigour,  singleness  of  heart,  steadiness  of  jDurpose,  and  determination  ; 
the  conceatration  on  that  work  in  which  we  are  engaged,  of  all  effort  and  all  hope. 
Thus  the  text  is  a  protest  against  all  half-hearteduess,  all  matter-of-course  religions, 
all  views  of  salvation  which  make  it  a  thing  to  be  done  by  and  by.  If  you  are 
losers  in  this  race,  you  lose  everything.  2.  Deliberation  ;  carefulness,  frequent 
looking  both  to  ourselves  and  to  our  way,  to  see  that  we  are  running  right.  Many 
have  run  well  who  have  not  run  rightly.  They  took  their  e>e  off  Christ,  and  all 
went  wrong  with  them  ;  they  missed  the  prize  through  having  missed  the  way.  8. 
Habitual  self-denial  (ver.  25).  The  restrictions  are  not  meant  to  be  unnatural,  or 
such  as  to  make  life  a  burden,  but  mere  restraints  upon  what  would  be  a  hurtful 
excess.  We  are  to  be  temperate  in  all  things — in  our  enjoyments,  our  griefs,  our 
worldly  ambitions,  our  most  lawful  and  permitted  affections.  4.  The  absolute 
necessity  of  holding  on  our  way  unwearied  to  the  end.  There  is  no  prize  for  him 
who  stops  half  way.  If  the  disciple  after  taking  up  his  cross  grow  weary  in  well 
doing  ;  if  he  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  look  back,  both  labour  and  crown  are 
lost.     Vigour  and  alacrity  in  youth,  noble  self-sacrifice  in  manhood ;  the  longest 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  567 


and  the  best  running,  all  will  be  unavailing,  if,  like  the  Galatians,  we  suffer  any 
influence  to  drive  us  back  afterwards.     III.  The  encoukagements.     1.  Eemember 
all  eyes  are  upon  you.     The  eyes  of  God  are  upon  you  ;  the  eyes  of  Christ  are  upon 
you,  rejoicing  at  each  onward  and  victorious  step,  and  in  sorrow  rather  than  in 
anger  turning  to  look  upon  you  when  the  voice  of  the  cock-crowing  proclaims  a 
shameful  fall ;  the  eyes  of  the  holy  angels  are  upon  you,  watching  their  oppor- 
tunities to  strengthen  you  with  invisible  aids  ;  and  the  eyes  of  the  malignant  powers 
of  darkness  are  upon  you,  marking  your  steps  to  make  you  fall ;  the  eyes  of  glorified 
spirits  are  upon  you  (Heb.  xii.  1).     2.  Think  of  the  priceless  worth  of  the  prize  for 
which  we  run.     (D.  Moore,  31. A.)         The  Christian  life  a  race  ; — I.  The  Christian 
LIFE  IS  A  E.^CE.     Rapidity,  energy,  &c.,  required  (Luke  xiii.  24  ;  Col.  i.  29;  1  Tim.  vi. 
12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7  ;  see  Gr.,  and  cf.  Luke  xxii.  44).     Eunning  often  used  in  illustra- 
tion of  Christian  course  (Gal.  ii.   2 ;    Phil.   ii.   16,  iii.  3  ;    Heb.  xii.  1 ;    and   see 
Cant.   i.  4,    and    Psa.  cxix.    32).      Some  are  walking,  crawling,  loitering,  &c.  (1 
Cor.  xvi.    13).     Is  not  heaven  worth  running  for?  (.Matt.   xi.    12).      Strive;    for 
many  will  seek  (only)  and  fail  (Luke  xiii.).     II.  The  great  difference  between 
THE  FIGURE  AND  REALITY.    There  One  receives  the  prize  ;  here  all  may,  though  some 
come  much  behind  others.     Happy  those  with  a  finished  course,  a  crown  won ! 
Some  are  lame,  halt,  feeble,  slow,  Ac.  Nevertheless,  if  in  Christ,  who  is  the  way,  they 
will  yet  win,  and  many  first  will  be  last,  and  last  first.     III.  How  ?  make  how  these 
Greeks  were  trained.    1.  What  care,  pains,  self-denial,  self-restraint  in  all  things, 
hours,  food,  rest,  etc.  (Rom.  viii.   13).     Tiie  Corinthians  self-indulgent,  which  St. 
Paul  rebukes  (<;/'.  1  Pet.  ii.  11,  v.  8  ;  and  especially  2  Tim.  ii.  3-5).     2.  They  were 
to  "  strive  lawfully."  So  we  are  "  under  the  law  to  Christ"  (v.  21).  IV.  The  prize. 
Great  disparity  between  the  reality  and  tlie  figure.     Astonishing  what  men  will 
undergo  to  obtain — what?  a  little  fame,  gold,  power,  or  authority.     All  the  prizes 
of  this  world  like  those  in  Greece,  which  were  wreaths,  no  sooner  clutched  than 
gone.     But  the  Christian  prize  how  glorious.     A  crown  of  righteousness  (2  Tim. 
iv.  8) ;  of  life  (Rev.  ii.  10 ;  James  i.  12) ;  of  glory  (1  Pet.  v.  4 ;  cf.  Rev.  iv.  4,  10, 
V.  10,  i.  6,  vii.  9).     "  Hold  fast  that  thou  hast,"  A'c.     What  hast  thou  ? — hast  thoy 
Christ  ?     Hold  Him  fast  and  run.     Soon  the  race  will  be  over  (2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8). 
Conclusion:  Rev.  iii.  21,  ii.  10.     (W.  E.  Lipid,  M.A.)         The  heavenhj  race: — 1. 
There  are  few  things  upon  record  in  which  the  exertion  was  so  violent,  and  yet  so 
short,  as  a  Greek  race.     And  therefore  it  stands  at  least  four  times  in  St.  Paul's 
epistles,  as  the  emblem  of  the  brevity  and  tlie  struggle  of  the  Christian  life.    2.  We 
can  conceive  how  the  believer's  career  will  look  when  he  CHSts  his  eye  back  upon  it 
from  eternity.  First  there  came  a  Divine  influence — then  a  holy  ambition — then  an 
earnest  determination — then  all  the  happy  self-discipline — then  the  race — severe 
even  unto  death :  he  rushed,  passed  by,  and  all  is  over — and  then  the  rest,  and 
the  joy.     3.  In  that  course  all  of  you  are  occupying  now  your  positions.     Your 
stadium  is  the  little  span  of  your  present  existence— the  spectators  are  the  holy 
angels,  the  heralds  are  the  ministers  who  call  you  to  the  contest,  and  animate  you 
by  the  way — the  umpire  is  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  crown  is  life  eternal.     4. 
Already  some  have  run  their  course,  and  are  not  uninterested  in  those  who  are 
filling,  after  them,  the  same  exciting  scene.     Otijers  are  just  offering  themselves; 
while  many  are  midway.     But  alas !  some  have  never  set  out,  and  others  who  did 
"  run  well " — but,  bewitched  with  the  world's  sorcery,  they  have  ceased  to  run. 
We  shall  only  be  fulfilling  our  duty,  as  the  heralds,  if  we  set  before  you — I.  Some 
OF  THE  conditions  OF  THE  COURSE  upon  which  your  admission  and  your  subsequent 
victory  must  depend.     1.  In  those  Isthmian  games  none  could  join  who  were  not 
freemen  of  unspotted  character.     As  soon  as  the  combatants  appeared,  the  crier, 
having  commanded  silence,  laid  his  hand  on  the  head  of  each  in  succession,  demand- 
ing of  all  the  assembly,  "  Is  there  any  one  here  who  can  accuse  this  man  of  being  a 
slave,  or  of  being  guilty  of  any  moral  wrongs  of  life  ?  "     If  any  stain  was  found 
upon  his  charactar,  he  was  excluded  ;  but  if  otherwise,  then  he  was  led  to  the  altar 
of  Jupiter,  there  to  make  solemn  oath  that  he  would  conform  to  all  the  regulations, 
and  so  he  proceeded  to  the  brunt.     2.  And  now  what  if  God  should  make  procla- 
mation that  none  should  be  candidates  for  the  crown  of  life  but  those  who,  free 
from  sin,  are  obedient  to  His  laws  ?      Could  you  pass  the  scrutiny  ?      The  very 
scrutiny  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks  in  ver.  27,  "  castaway  "  meaning  "  not  approved 
in  the  scrutiny."     If  there  be  any  secret  love  of  sin,  men  may  reckon  you  in  the 
number  of  candidates,  but  God  does  not !     II.  But  suppose  that  the  examination 
has  shown  you  one  who,  believing  in  Christ,  is  emancipated  from  sin,  and  obedient 
to  God's  law.     Follow  me  to  the  steipping  room  (Heb.  xii.  1).     There  are  some 


568  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

who  are  sadly  "  weighted  "  with  maoy  things.  Hoarding  money — personal  vanity 
— worldly  amusements — society  where  God  is  not — self-indulgence.  What  are  these 
things  but  clogs  ?  You  cannot  "  run"  with  those  things  on.  Will  you  cumber  your 
energies  when  you  need  to  stretch  them  to  the  uttermost  ?  In  the  natural  course, 
men  are  accurate  to  the  ounce — and  v\ill  you  trifle  with  those  fearful  odds?  You 
may  set  out ;  but  if  your  heart  is  not  in  it,  it  will  only  be  soon  to  creep,  then  to 
crawl,  than  to  stop,  then  to  lie  down,  then  to  go  to  sleep,  and  then  to  die  !  Go  into 
the  stripi^ing-room  at  once,  undress  yourself,  else  do  not  call  yourself  a  runner. 
III.  But  now,  entered  on  the  race,  "  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize."  1. 
"  The  mark  "  was  a  certain  line  drawn  along  the  course,  to  show  the  runners 
exactly  where  they  were  to  run — so  that  if  you  would  run  lawfully,  take  care  not 
only  that  you  are  going  to  the  right  object,  but  that  you  are  pursuing  that  object 
along  the  right  line.  The  Christian's  "  mark,"  in  general  words,  is  the  Scriptural 
method  of  salvation.  This  "  mark  "  stretches  itself  out  all  along.  "  Press  "  to  it. 
Eveiy  day  consult  your  Bible  to  find  your  "  mark."  2.  At  the  time  when  St.  Paul 
was  writing  there  was  a  particular  race  in  which  every  runner  carried  a  torch  ;  and 
he  won  the  race  who  came  in  first,  bringing  with  him  his  torch  still  alight.  Some, 
running  very  fast,  put  out  their  torch  ;  others,  running  slowly,  kept  their  torch- in, 
but  arrived  too  late.  Beware  lest  a  false  excitement  put  out  the  flame  of  love  1  and 
yet  beware,  equally,  lest  over-caution  liinder  too  long  !  but  let  zeal  and  love, 
patience  and  speed,  go  hand  in  hand,  with  equal  pace — for  so  heaven  is  won  !  IV. 
And  now  I  see  you  in  the  midst  of  your  career.  Every  race  quickens  as  it  proceeds; 
and  the  competition  grows  greater.  Yod  must  stretch  to  the  point.  The  secret 
of  every  race,  peihaps,  is  fixedness  of  eye.  Therefore  the  apostle  has  given  us  two 
directions.  1.  "Foiget  the  things  which  are  behind" — counting  our  own  past 
attainment  nothing.  2.  "  Look  unto  Jesus."  (J.  Vanghan,  2LA.)  TIte  heavndy 
race  .-—I.  What  are  we  to  run  for?  1.  Some  think  they  must  be  religious  in  order 
to  be  respectable.  Verily,  if  this  be  what  you  seek  after,  you  shall  get  it;  for  the 
Pharisees  who  sought  the  praise  of  men  "  had  their  reward."  But  is  it  worth  the 
drudgery?  2.  Otriers  go  a  little  farther  and  desire  to  be  considered  saints.  We 
have  a  considerable  admixture  of  persons  in  our  churches  who  only  come  for  the 
meie  sake  of  obtaining  a  religions  status.  "They  Lave  their  reward,"  and  they 
shall  never  have  any  but  what  tlipy  obtain  here.  3.  Another  set  take  up  with 
religious  life  for  what  they  can  get  by  it.  I  have  known  tradespeople  attend  church 
for  the  mere  sake  of  getting  custom.  Loaves  and  fishes  drew  some  of  Christ's  fol- 
lovs'ers,  and  they  are  very  attracting  baits,  even  to  this  day.  They  have  their  reward ; 
but  at  what  a  price  they  buy  it !  4.  Another  class  take  up  with  religion  for  the 
sake  of  quieting  their  conscience ;  and  it  is  astonishing  how  little  of  religion  will 
sometimes  do  that.  I  have  known  a  man  who  was  drunk  in  the  week,  and  who  got 
his  money  dishonestly,  and  yet  he  always  had  an  easy  conscience  by  going  to 
church  on  Sunday.  5.  If  you  run  for  anything  else  than  salvation,  should  yon  win, 
what  you  have  won  is  not  worth  the  running  for.  II.  The  rules  of  the  race.  1. 
Some  never  will  obtain  the  prize,  because  they  are  not  even  entered.  These  will 
tell  you,  "  We  make  no  profession."  It  is  quite  as  well,  perhaps,  that  you  do  not; 
because  it  is  better  to  make  no  profession  at  all  than  to  be  hypocrites.  I'et  it  is 
strange  that  men  should  be  so  ready  to  confess  this.  People  are  not  so  fast  about 
telling  their  faults  :  and  yet  you  hear  people  confess  the  greatest  fault.  God  has 
made  them,  and  yet  they  won't  serve  Him ;  Christ  hath  come  into  the  world  to 
save  them,  and  yet  they  will  not  regard  Him.  2.  There  is  another  class 
whose  names  are  down,  but  they  never  started  right.  A  bad  start  is  a  sad 
thing.  There  are  some  who  on  a  sudden  leap  into  relij^ion.  They  get  it  quickly, 
and  they  keep  it  for  a  time,  and  at  last  they  lose  it  because  they  did  not  get  their 
religiou  the  right  way.  They  have  heard  that  before  a  man  can  be  saved,  it  is 
necessary  to  leel  the  weight  of  sin,  make  a  confession  of  it,  n-nounce  all  hope  in  his 
own  works,  and  look  to  Jesus  alone.  But  they  look  upon  all  these  things  as 
unpleasant  preliminaries  and  therefore,  before  they  have  attended  to  repentance, 
&c.  ,they  make  a  jjrofession  of  religion.  This  is  just  setting  up  in  business  without 
a  stock-in-trade,  and  there  must  be  a  failure.  3.  Some  cannot  win  because  they 
caiTy  too  much  weight.  "  How  hardly  shall  a  rich  man  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
Leaven  !  "  Carry  the  weight  of  this  world's  cares  about  you,  and  it  will  be  as  much 
as  you  can  do  to  stand  upright  under  them,  but  as  to  running  a  race  with  such 
burdens,  it  is  just  impossible.  4.  We  have  known  people  who  stojiped  on  their  way 
to  kick  their  fellows.  Such  things  sometimes  occur  in  a  race.  Tne  horse,  instead 
of  speeding  onwards  to  the  mark,  is  of  an  angry  disposition,  and  sets  about  kicking 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  569 


those  that  are  running  beside  him — there  is  not  much  probabihty  of  his  coming  in 
first.  "  Now  they  that  run  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one  receiveth  the  prize."  There 
is  one,  however,  who  never  pets  it,  and  that  is  the  man  who  always  attends  to  his 
fellow-creatures  instead  of  himself.  It  is  a  mysterious  thing  that  I  never  yet  saw  a 
man  with  a  hoe  on  his  shoulder,  going  to  hoe  his  neighbour's  garden ;  but  every 
day  I  meet  with  persons  who  are  attending  to  other  people's  character.  They  have 
so  few  virtues  of  their  own  that  they  do  not  like  anybody  else  to  have  any.  5. 
Those  will  not  win  the  race  who,  although  they  seem  to  start  very  fair,  very  soon 
loiter.  At  the  first  s-tarting  they  tly  away  as  if  they  had  wings  to  their  heels  ;  but 
a  little  further  on  it  is  with  dilticulty  that  with  whip  and  spur  they  are  to  be  kept 
going  at  all.  6.  Another  class  start  well  too,  and  they  run  very  fast  at  first,  but  at 
last  they  leap  over  the  rails  and  go  quite  out  of  the  course  altogether.  They  are 
like  the  dog  that  returned  to  his  vomit,  and  the  sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallow- 
ing in  the  mire.  "  The  last  end  of  that  man  shall  be  worse  than  the  first."  (C. 
H.  SpuriieiDi.)  Ilunniiuj  in  the  race  : — I.   The  necessity  of   self-denial.      1. 

Difficulty  of  winning  the  crown.  If  he  who  makes  every  exertion  is  the  only  winner, 
what  becomes  of  the  sluggish,  selfish  soul?  All  roads  downward  are  easy ;  all  roads 
upward  dithcult.  2.  Greatness  of  the  loss  of  the  crown.  Some  will  be  saved — so 
as  by  fire  (chap.  iii.).  Scarcely  saved,  but  the  rewai'd  lost.  II.  Its  natube.  1.  All 
sin  must  be  laid  aside.  Prcgress  is  impossible  so  long  as  one  sin  is  deliberately 
indulged  or  one  duty  wilfully  neglected.  2.  All  weights  must  be  laid  aside  (Heb. 
sii.  1-3).  What  is  lawful  in  itself  may  weigh  us  down.  The  true  runner  will 
sacrifice  everything  to  progress.  III.  Its  inducement.  Throughout  the  moral 
universe  there  runs  a  law  of  compensation.  Self-denial  is  but  a  postponement  of 
pleasure  to  the  future.  1.  Sacrifice  is  reward  by  self-mastery.  To  keep  the  body 
under  implies  the  reason  and  conscience  enthroned  and  regnant,  and  the  Spirit  of 
God  ruling  over  all.  That  is  the  ideal  estate  of  man.  2.  Progress  and  coronation. 
To  make  advance  is  reward  enough  to  a  true  disciple  ;  but  to  get  to  the  goal  and  get 
the  prize  too — that  is  heaven.  Conclusion  :  1.  We  must  run  lawfully,  i.e.,  according 
to  the  Scripture  rules  of  the  race.  2.  We  must  be  tempprate  in  all  things.  .3.  We 
must  run  perseveringly  ;  pursuing  even  when  faint.  4.  We  must  run  hopefully.  5. 
We  must  run  purposefully — not  as  a  boxer  who  beats  the  air,  not  as  one  who  runs 
uncertainly — a  definite  goal  and  the  eye  always  on  it.  {Homili'tic  Monthly.) 
Running,  the  true  Christian  attitude : — Cecil  says  that  some  adojit  the  Indian 
maxim,  that  it  is  better  to  walk  than  to  run,  and  better  to  stand  than  to  walk,  and 
better  to  sit  than  to  stand,  and  better  to  lie  than  to  sit-  Such  is  not  the  teaching 
of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  walking  in  the  ways  of  God,  but  it  is  better 
to  be  running — making  real  and  visible  progress,  day  by  day  advancing  in  experi- 
ence and  attainments.  David  likens  the  sun  to  a  strong  man  rejoicing  to  run  a 
race  ;  not  dreading  it  and  shrinking  back  from  it,  but  delighting  in  the  opportuiity 
of  putting  forth  all  his  powers.     Who  so  runs,  runs  well.     {The  Christian.)  Nut 

all  who  run  win : — As  victory  in  the  games  was  the  incentive  which  stimulatpd  the 
youth  of  Greece  to  attain  the  perfection  of  physical  strength  and  beauty,  so  there  is 
laid  before  us  an  incentive  which  is  sufficient  to  carry  us  forward  to  perfect  moral 
attainment.  The  brightest  jewel  in  the  incorruptible  crown  is  the  joy  of  having 
become  all  God  made  us  to  be.  But  there  are  men  who  when  opportunity  is  given 
them  to  win  true  glory  turn  away  to  salaries  and  profits,  to  meat,  drink,  and 
frivolity.  The  incorruptible  crown  is  held  over  their  liead  ;  but  so  intent  are  they 
on  the  muck-rake,  they  do  not  even  see  it.  To  those  who  would  win  it  Piinl  gives 
these  directions  : — I.  Be  tempekate  (ver.  25).  1.  Contentedly  and  without  a 
murmur  the  racer  submits  to  the  ten  months'  training  without  which  he  may  as 
well  not  compete.  The  little  indulgences  of  others  he  must  forego.  His  chances 
are  gone  if  in  any  point  he  relaxes  the  discip'ine.  So  if  the  Christian  indulges  in 
the  pleasures  of  life  as  freely  as  other  men,  he  proves  that  he  has  no  higher  aim 
than  they  and  can  of  course  win  no  higher  prize.  2.  Temperance  is  complete  and 
continuous  self-rule.  No  spasmodic  efl'orts  and  partial  abstinences  will  ever  bring 
a  man  victorious  to  the  goal.  One  day's  debauch  was  enough  to  undo  the  result  of 
weeks  in  the  case  of  the  athlete  ;  and  one  lapse  into  worldliness  undoes  what  years 
of  self-restraint  have  won.  One  indiscretion  on  the  part  of  the  convalescent  will 
undo  what  the  care  of  months  has  slowly  achievtd.  One  fraud  spoils  the  character 
for  honesty  which  years  of  upright  living  have  earned.  II.  Be  decided.  "  I  run," 
says  Paul,  "  not  as  uncertainly,"  not  aS  a  man  who  does  not  know  where  he  is 
going  or  has  not  made  up  his  mind  to  go  there.  We  have  all  some  kind  of  idea 
about  what  God  offers  and  calls  us  to.     But  this  idea  must  be  clear  if  we  are  to 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


make  for  it  straight.  No  man  can  run  straight  to  a  mere  will-o'-the-wisp,  or  who 
first  means  to  go  to  one  station  and  then  changes  his  mind.  Paul  had  made  up  his 
mind  not  to  pursue  conifoit,  learning,  nmney,  &c.,  but  the  kingdom  of  God.  He 
knew  where  he  was  going  and  to  what  a:l  Lis  elforts  tended.  What  then  do  the 
traces  of  our  past  life  sliow  ?  III.  Be  ix  eaenest.  "  So  tight  I,  not  as  one  that 
beateth  the  air,"  not  as  one  amusing  himself  with  idle  flourishes,  but  as  one  who 
has  a  real  enemy  to  encoimter.  1.  How  much  of  mere  parade  and  sham -fighting 
is  there  in  the  Christian  army !  We  seem  to  be  doing  every Lhing  that  a  good 
soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  need  do  save  the  one  thing :  we  slay  no  enemy.  We  are 
well  trai';ed  :  we  could  instruct  others  ;  we  spend  much  time  on  exercises  which 
are  calculated  to  make  an  impression  on  sin  ;  but  where  are  our  slain  foes  ?  2. 
Even  where  there  is  some  reality  in  the  contest  we  may  still  be  beating  the  air. 
Many  pel  sons  who  level  blows  at  their  sins  do  not  after  all  strike  them.  Spiritual 
eneigy  is  put  foith  ;  but  it  is  not  brought  into  cimtctct  with  the  sin  to  be  destroyed. 
Paul's  language  suggests  tbat  the  reason  may  be  that  there  remains  in  the  heart 
some  reluctance  quite  to  kill  and  put  an  end  to  sin.  We  pray  God,  for  example,  to 
preserve  us  from  the  evils  of  praise  or  of  success;  and  yet  we  continue  to  court 
them.  Therefore  our  warfare  against  sin  becomes  unreal.  3.  The  result  is  detri- 
mental. Sin  is  like  something  floating  in  the  air  or  the  water:  the  very  effort  we 
make  to  grasp  and  crush  it  displaces  it,  and  it  flouts  mockingly  before  ns  untouched. 
Or  it  is  like  an  ajzile  am  agonist  who  springs  back  from  our  blow,  so  that  the  force 
we  have  expended  merely  racks  and  strains  our  own  sinews  and  does  him  no  injury. 
So  when  we  spend  much  effort  in  conquering  sin  and  find  it  as  lively  as  ever,  the 
spirit  is  stia  ned  and  huit.  It  is  less  able  than  before  to  resist  sin,  less  believing, 
less  hopeful,  and  scoffs  at  fresh  resolves  and  endeavours.  Finally,  Paul  tells  us 
that  the  eieniy  against  which  he  directed  his  well-planted  blows  washis  own  body. 
Every  man's  body  is  his  enemy  when,  instead  of  being  his  servant,  it  becomes  his 
master.  Whaa  tue  body  mutinies  and  refuses  to  obey  the  will,  it  becomes  our  most 
dangerous  i  nemy.  The  word  Paul  uses  is  the  word  used  of  the  most  damaging 
blow  one  boxer  could  give  another.  It  was  probably  by  sheer  stiength  of  will  and 
by  the  giace  of  Christ  that  Paul  subdued  his  body.  Many  in  all  ages  have  striven 
to  suliciue  it  by  fasting,  &c.,  and  of  these  piactices  we  have  no  right  to  speak  scorn- 
fully uniil  we  can  say  that  by  other  means  we  have  reduced  the  body  to  its  proper 
position  as  the  servant  of  "the  spirit.  There  is  a  fair  and  reasonable  degree  in 
which  a  man  may  and  ou'-;ht  to  cherish  his  own  flesh,  but  there  is  also  needful  a 
disregard  to  many  of  its  claims  and  a  hard-hearted  obduracy  to  its  complaints.  In 
an  age  when  Spartan  simplici  y  of  life  is  almost  unknown,  it  is  very  easy  to  sow  to 
the  flesh  almost  without  knowing  it  until  we  find  ourselves  reaping  corruption. 
(M.  Bods,  D.D.)  How  to  ?c/»  the  crown: — I.  Make  up  iouPv  mixd  to  eun. 
Decision  :  This  must  be  settled  once  for  all :  "  Put  my  name  down,  I  will  run."  St. 
Paul  says,  "  So  have  I ;  I  therefore  so  run."  Have  you  ?  II.  Put  youeself  in 
TRAINING.  Discipline  :"  For  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself."  III.  Strain  every 
NEKVE.  Earnestness  :  See  them,  each  one  alert,  waiting  for  the  signal — then, 
away,  each  one  with  desperate  eagerness  seeking  to  cover  the  course.  "  So  run 
that  ye  may  obtain."  Strenuous  effort  is  needed.  Look  at  rowers  in  a  boat-race, 
or  players  in  a  football  match.  Are  we  to  be  p  it  to  shame  by  these  ?  IV.  Aim  at 
THE  WINNING-POST.  Singlcncss  of  mind  :  Straight  for  the  maik  !  No  step  can  he 
afford  to  take  outside  the  line  which  leads  ri^ht  to  it.  V.  Hit  straight  and  hard  I 
Keality :  It  is  no  sham-fight.  He  cannot  afford  to  hit  wildly,  as  one  beating  the 
air.  Our  own  besetting  sin  must  be  found  out.  W^e  must  learn,  what  the  tempter 
knows  so  well,  where  our  weak  place  is.  There  we  must  meet  the  enemy.  VI. 
Never  give  in.  Persistence:  Keep  at  it  to  the  end.  (/'.  Fmldicnmbe.)  The 
Christian  race  : — I.  How  we  ought  to  conduct  ourselvus  in  the  Christian  life, 
or,  to  preserve  the  metaphor,  how  we  ought  to  run  so  as  to  obtain.  1.  We 
ought  to  make  oui>elves  well  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  Christian  life,  with 
its  duties  and  advantages,  its  ditticulties  and  its  dangers.  This  knowledge  hes  at 
the  foundation  of  all  spiritunl  improvement.  The  history  of  Christianity  abounds 
with  examples  of  the  dangerous  effei'ts  of  partial  and  mistaken  views  of  religion. 
To  this  source  we  may  trace  that  system  of  corruption  and  superstition  which,  after 
the  days  of  the  apostles,  gradually  spread  over  a  great  part  of  the  world.  To  the 
same  source  we  may  trace  the  overwhelming  influence  of  the  papal  power,  the 
thunders  of  excomnumication,  and  the  horrors  of  the  Inquisition,  the  practice  of 
retiring  from  the  world  to  a  life  of  monastic  seclusion,  together  with  many  of  those 
wars,  persecutions,  and  massacres,  which  in  the  Middle  Ages  deluged  with  blood  the 


CHAP,  ix."'  I.  CORINTHIANS.  571 


nations  of  Europe.  A  plan  of  mercy  has  been  devised  and  executed  for  the  salva- 
tion of  man.  Ihis  plan,  together  with  the  means  by  which  we  become  interested 
in  it,  has  been  fully  unfolded  in  the  gospel.  But  if  we  are  ignorant  of  those  means, 
we  cannot  possibly  avail  ourselves  of  them.  Hence  the  necessity  of  being  acquainted 
with  the  Scriptures.  They  contain  a  full  revelation  of  the  Divine  will.  In  them 
the  path  of  duty  is  clearly  pointed  out,  and  they  unfold  the  mystery  which  had  been 
hid  for  ages,  but  which  was  at  last  made  known  by  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Having  become 
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  Christian  life,  we  ought  also  carefully  to  avoid 
everything  that  may  obstruct  or  retard  us  in  our  sj)iritual  course.  Christians  ought 
to  guard  against  the  beginnings  of  sin,  and  shun  every  appearance  of  evil.  They 
ought  to  subdue  every  evil  passion,  and  to  mortify  every  unhallowed  lust.  Without 
doing  this,  it  is  in  vain  to  think  of  making  progress  in  religious  att;iiuments.  Every 
commandment  of  the  law  is  enjoined  by  the  same  authority,  and  therefore  whoever 
habitually  violates  any  oue  of  them,  may  be  justly  reputed  a  transgressor  of  the 
whole.  S.  But  Christians  ought  not  merely  to  abstam  from  sin,  they  ought  to 
discharge  the  duties  of  the  Christian  life  with  patience,  with  ardour,  and  with 
perseverance.  (1)  They  ought  to  discharge  them  with  patience.  "  Let  us  run 
with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us."  Patience  is  opposed  to  a  hasty, 
fretful,  and  discontented  temper,  and  consists  in  a  disposition  to  bear  the  severest 
trials  without  murmuring,  and  to  fulfil  the  part  assigned  to  us,  notwithstanding  all 
the  difficulties  with  which  we  may  have  to  struggle.  (2)  We  ought  to  discharge  the 
duties  of  the  Christian  life  with  ardour.  This  temper  of  mind  is  directly  opposite 
to  that  lukewarmness,  and  difference  about  religion,  which  the  Scriptures  so  much 
condemn.  Why  are  men  so  ready  to  lay  hold  of  every  little  excuse  to  justify  their 
criminal  attachment  to  the  enjoyments  of  the  present  life,  and  their  neglect  of 
future  blessings  ?  It  is  because  they  waut  that  ardour  which  penetrates  the  l.'eart 
of  the  disciples  of  Christ,  and  alone  can  raise  them  above  the  enjoyments  of  the 
worU.     (3)  We  ought  to  persevere  in  well-doing  to  the  end  of  our  days.     II.  Some 

MOTIVl'.S  TO  ENCOUEAGE  YOU  TO  COMPLY  WITH  THE  EXHORTATION  IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  Con- 
sider, first,  that  you  have  many  spectators  of  your  con<luct.  To  be  approved 
of  by  those  whose  approbation  we  esteem ;  to  be  respected  by  those  among  whom 
we  live  ;  to  be  extolled  by  the  wise  and  the  good,  and  to  obtain  a  name  among  such 
as  have  distinguished  themselves  among  men  ;  this  conveys  to  the  mind  a  pleasure, 
to  which  no  man  can  be  insensible.  2.  Consider,  next,  the  example  of  those  who 
have  gone  before  us.  The  duties  to  which  we  are  called  have  already  been 
performed  ;  the  difficulties  with  which  we  have  to  struggle  have  already  been 
surmounted;  and  the  troubles  which  we  feel  have  already  been  borne  by  many  of 
our  brethren.  3.  Consider,  again,  that  the  discharge  of  our  duty  is  itself  attended 
with  pleasure ;  that  the  service  which  God  requires  of  us  is  the  most  conducive  to 
our  present  peace,  as  well  as  to  our  future  happiness.  4.  Consider,  also,  that  a 
crown  of  glory  is  reserved  for  the  faithful  disciple  of  Christ,  It  is  not  a  garland 
made  up  of  flowers  and  leaves,  which  soon  wither  and  decay  ;  it  is  a  crown  which 
will  flourish,  when  the  most  precious  gems  on  earth  are  dissolved,  when  the 
luminaries  of  heaven  are  extinguished,  and  the  moon  and  the  stars  fade  away  in 
their  orbs.  5.  We  have  the  promise  of  Divine  aid  in  every  difficulty  and  in  every 
trial.  God  sendeth  no  man  a  warfare  ou  his  own  charges.  When  He  calls  us  to 
duty,  He  invariably  promises  to  fit  us  for  the  discharge  of  it.    {Jolin  Ramsay,  M.A.) 

I.    To    GIVE    TOU    A    GENERAL   ACCOUNT    OF    THE    RACE    WE     HAVE    TO    RUN.      Ill    general, 

the  race  we  have  to  run  comprehends  the  whole  of  that  duty  we  owe  to  God ; 
namely,  obedience  to  His  laws,  and  submission  to  His  providence;  doing  what  He 
commands,  and  patiently  enduring  whatever  He  is  pleased  to  appoint.     II.  To 

ILLUSTRATE    THE    FITNESS   AND  PROPRIETY    OF    THIS    SIMILITUDE,  AND  TO  SHOW  THAT  THE 

Chris  I  IAN  life  doth  very  much  resejiele  a  race  in  several  important  respects. 
There  is  a  certain  limited  way  in  which  the  Christian  must  run,  emphatically  called 
the  way  of  God's  commandments.  This  we  must  keep  with  the  utmost  precision, 
"  neither  turning  aside  to  the  right  hand,  nor  to  the  left."  I\Iere  activity  will  not 
avail  us :  we  may  be  very  keen  and  busy,  but  if  we  are  not  busy  according  to  rule, 
we  only  lose  our  labour  :  God  can  never  accept  it  as  a  service  done  to  Him.  Again, 
as  running  a  race  is  a  swift  and  constant  progression,  so  ought  the  life  of  a  Christian 
to  be.  There  are  several  important  respects  in  which  the  Christian  race  doth  widely 
differ  from  all  others.  1.  In  other  races,  though  many  may  start,  and  hold  out  to 
the  end,  yet  none  but  the  foremost  receiveth  the  prize :  whereas  it  is  quite  other- 
wise in  the  Christian  race.  There  may  be  a  great  disparity  among  the  candidates, 
but  every  one  who  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved.     2.  They  who  run  in  the 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


Cliiistian  race  have  no  envy,  no  jealousy,  among  themselves;  far  less  do  they  molest 
and  hinder  one  another  :  on  the  contrary,  the  stronger  help  forward  the  weaker,  and 
give  them  all  the  assistance  in  their  power.  3.  The^'  who  run  in  other  races  have 
nothing  but  labour  till  they  obtain  the  prize  ;  but  in  the  Christian  race,  the  exercise 
itself  carries  part  of  the  reward  in  its  bosom  :  "  Wisdom's  ways  are  wayo  of 
pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace."  4.  A  distinguishing  property  of  the 
Christian  race  ;  namely,  the  certainty  of  gaining  the  prize  at  last.     III.  Let  me 

KOW    EXHOKT    YOU    SO    TO    BUN    THAT    TOU  MAY   AT    LENGTH    OBTAIN.        And    for   tllis    end 

let  us  consider — 1.  That  many  eyes  are  upon  us.  2.  That  manj  have  already  run 
this  race  who  are  now  in  possession  of  the  glorious  prize.  3.  The  unspeakable 
worth  of  the  prize  to  be  obtained.     (R.  JValkcr.)         Human  rivalries  : — I.  Kothing 

IS     JIOEE     UNDENIABLY     TRUE     THAN    THAT    RIVALRIES    ARE    AMONG     THE    MOST    FRUITFUL 

SOURCES  OF  EVIL  IN  EVERY  DEPARTMENT  OF  LIFE.  1.  Pcoijle  are  agitated  by  heated 
political  contests  which,  for  a  time,  absorb  every  other  interest.  2.  Commercial 
rivalries.  The  rivalries  of  the  street,  the  shop,  the  drawing-room,  when  and  where 
do  we  not  hear  their  echoes?  II.  How  universal  is  the  training  that  produces 
THESE  RIVALRIES.  It  begins  in  childhood  and  runs  all  through  life.  How  many 
people  are  there  who  covet  a  thing  because  it  is  intrinsically  good,  compared  with 
those  who  covet  it  because  it  is  better  than  somebody  else's.  The  race  of  competi- 
tive display  we  see  on  every  side.     No  place  is  so  sacred  as  to  be  free  from  it.     III. 

Yet  COMPETITION,  A  STRIFE  TO  EXCEL,  NAY,  IF  YOU  CHOOSE,  DOWNRIGHT  RIVALRY,  HAS 
A    JUST    AND    RIGHTFUL    PLACE    IN    THE    PLAN    OF    HUMAN    LIFE.       1.    It    is    the    equitable 

thing  that  the  best  man  should  win.  2.  But  the  rivalries  of  our  daily  life  must  be 
exercised  under  manly  and  Christian  sanctions.  3.  But  having  said  this,  let  us  see 
to  it  that  no  eagerness  for  victory  persuades  us  for  one  moment  to  forget  that 
greater  than  any  other  triumph  is  the  triumph  of  inflexible  principle.  4.  It  is  just 
here  that  we  touch  what  may  be  called  the  heroic  side  of  human  rivalries.  5.  In 
the  eagerness  of  business  competition,  in  the  race  for  a  prize,  whether  it  be  social, 
or  commercial,  or  political,  wliat  a  rare  field  for  that  magnanimity  which  will  not 
take  an  undue  advamape  of  another.  6.  And  even  so,  nay,  still  more,  when  there 
comes  that  harder  strain  upon  the  nobility  of  our  nature  which  comes  with  our 
successes.  How  hard  to  bear  meekly  and  generously  the  intoxication  of  success. 
(H.  C.  Potter,  D.D.)  Try  a  run: — On  one  occasion  I  had  taken  my  bovs 
with  me  to  the  top  of  a  mountain  2,500  feet  high.  The  youngest  of  them  got 
very  tired  on  the  way  back ;  I  thought  he  woi  1 1  fairly  give  in,  and  that  I  would 
have  to  carry  him.  As  we  were  crossing  the  valley  we  came  within  sight  of  home, 
a  mile  and  a  half  off.  I  said,  "  Shall  we  run  and  see  who  will  be  home  first?  " 
He  put  his  hand  in  mine,  and  we  started  off  with  this  idea  :  "  We  will  be  home 
before  the  boys."  On  we  went,  leaping  over  streams,  jumping  over  every  boulder, 
on  and  on  across  the  fields.  Disheartened  worker,  if  you  get  tired  and  weary  in 
God's  service,  try  arun,  holding  your  Father's  hand.  (J.  Camtairs.)  Paraholicuse 
of  the  occupations  of  life : — Learn — I.  That  the  lower  occupations  of  our  life  serve 
AS  A  PARABLE  OF  THE  HIGHEST.  Probably,  few  parables  of  Christian  life  could  have 
been  more  clearly  understood  and  keenly  appreciated  than  these  national  pastimes. 
Pastimes  become  parables  of  Christian  life.  Yes,  and  if  pastimes,  why  not  all  the 
engagements  of  life  ?  Assuredly  Scripture  warrants  us  letting  commerce  become 
sucli  a  parable.  "  Buy  the  truth,"  etc.  Do  not  agriculture,  travel,  art,  music,  &c., 
stand  out  to  though  if  ul  eyes  as  indications  of  the  true  merchandise,  exploration, 
painting,  harmony,  of  which  all  that  concern  merely  the  material  are  but  shadows. 
"  The  things  that  are  seen  are  temporal,"  cfec.     II.  That  the  highest  occupations 

OF    LIFE    CHALLENGE    AND    EMPLOY    ALL    THE     BEST     QUALITIES     OF    MANHOOD    THAT   ARE 

EJiPLOYED  IN  THE  LOWER.  St.  Paul  clearly  recognised  certain  moral  elements  of 
great  worth  in  those  ancient  games.  There  was  the  perseverance  of  the  runner, 
the  self-mastery  of  the  wrestler  ;  and  such  perseverance  and  self-mastery  were  to 
be  imitated  by  men  in  the  hi.chest  region  of  human  experiences.  So  it  is  in  the 
whole  realm  of  occupation.  The  industry,  persistence,  frugality,  heroism,  &c.,  we 
may  see  in  any  course  of  human  affairs  are  to  be  imitated  by  us  in  our  concern  for, 
and  contact  with,  the  sublimest  spiritual  realities.  Wby?  This  leads  us  to  notice 
— III.  That  there  is  urgent  need  for  the  exercise  of  these  qualities,  because 
IN  the  highest  concerns  of  life  the  difficulties  are  greater,  the  rewards  richer, 
AND  THE  failure  jiore  TERRIBLE  THAN  IN  THE  LOWER.  1.  The  racc  to  be  run  by  the 
soul  who  would  reach  the  true  goal  is  longer,  has  more  obstacles,  requires  more 
strength  than  that  old  racs.  2.  The  rewards  are  higher  for  they  are  incorruptible, 
perfecily  pure  and  unfading.     3.  The  failure  is  more  deplorable.     To  miss  the  goal 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  573 

is  nothinp;  in  comparison  with  becoming  a  moral  castaway.  (U.  R.  TJiomas.) 
Jacob'g  ladder,  or  the  wuij  to  liuacen  : — 1.  The  apostle  saith  that  you  must  run.  It 
is  not  an  easy  nor  a  short  journey,  which  a  dreamer,  a  suail,  or  any  careless  man 
may  perform  and  take  his  ease.  A  man  must  always  run,  from  the  first  day  he 
setteth  forth  till  he  come  to  his  journey's  end.  2.  Christ  saith,  "I  am  the  way," 
and  therefore  He  bids  us  to  follow  Him.  He  began  betime,  for  at  twelve  years  of 
age  He  was  about  His  Father's  business  (Luke  ii.  49).  He  made  speed;  for  "  He 
spake  and  did  more  good  things  "  in  tlu-ee  and  thirty  years,  "  than  could  be 
written  "  (John  xxi.  25).  He  ke^jt  tlie  right  way ;  for  none  could  accuse  Him  of 
sin,  thougli  they  watched  Him  for  that  purpose.  He  continued  well;  for  He  died 
like  a  lamb,  and  prayed  to  His  Father,  and  forgave  His  enemies.  Tiierefore  do 
you — I.  Begin  betime.  God  requiiing  the  firstborn  for  His  offering,  and  the 
first-fruits  for  His  service,  requireth  the  first  labours  of  His  servants,  because  the 
best  season  to  seek  God  is  to  stek  Him  early.  And  therefore  Wisdom  saith,  "They 
which  seek  n)e  early  shall  find  me  "  ;  but  to  them  which  defer,  she  saith,  "  Ye 
shall  seek  me,  but  ye  shall  not  find  me."  Therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  crieth  so 
often,  "This  is  the  acceptable  time  ;  this  is  tbe  day  of  salvation;  to-day  hear  His 
voice."  Who  is  so  young  that  has  not  i-eceived  some  talent  or  other?  Therefore 
the  fathers  were  charged  to  teadi  th^-ir  children  the  same  law  which  they  had  them- 
selves (Deut.  vi.  7),  and  Christ  rebuked  thn  disciples  which  forbade  the  little 
children  to  be  brought  to  Him  (Matt.  xix.  14),  for,  should  children  honour  their 
father,  and  not  honour  God '?  Manna  was  gathered  in  the  morning,  because  when 
the  sun  arose  it  did  melt  away;  so  virtue  must  be  gathered  betime,  for  if  we  stay 
till  business  and  pleasures  come  upon  us,  they  will  melt  it  faster  than  we  can  gather 
it.  Yea,  doth  not  God  require  morning  as  well  as  evening  sacrifice  ?  It  is  an  old 
saying,  repentance  is  never  too  late  ;  but  it  is  a  true  saying,  repentance  is  never  too 
soon  ;  for  so  soon  as  ever  we  sin,  we  had  need  to  ask  forgiveness.  Therefore  linger 
not  with  Lot ;  for  if  the  angel  had  not  snatched  him  away,  he  had  perished  with 
Sodom  for  his  delay.  They  were  but  fo>.lish  virgins,  which  sought  not  for  oil  before 
the  bridegroom  came.  Samuel  began  to  serve  God  in  his  minority  (1  Sam.  ii.  IH). 
Timothy  read  the  Scripture  in  his  childhood  (2  Tim.  iii.  15)  ;  John  grew  in  spirit 
as  he  ripened  in  years  (Luke  i.  80).  II.  Keep  the  way.  As  God  tauglit  Israel  the 
way  to  Canaan,  sending  a  fiery  pillar  before  them,  which  they  followed  wheresoever 
it  went ;  so  when  He  ordamed  a  heaven  for  men.  He  appointed  a  way  to  come  unto 
it,  which  way  he  that  misseth  shall  never  come  to  the  end.  There  be  many  wrong 
ways,  as  there  be  many  errors ;  there  is  but  one  right  way,  as  there  is  but  one  truth. 
And,  therefore,  Jacob  did  not  see  many,  but  one  ladder,  which  reached  to  heaven. 
It  is  not  enough  to  run,  but  we  must  know  how  we  run.  Therefore,  if  ye  ask,  like 
the  scribe,  how  ye  shall  come  to  heaven,  the  right  way  to  heaven  is  the  Word,  which 
came  from  heaven,  and  the  way  by  which  the  Word  doth  set  thee  into  heaven  is,  to 
do  to  others  as  thou  wouldst  have  others  do  to  thee ;  to  exercise  good  works,  and 
yet  believe  tliat  Christ's  works  shall  save  thee  ;  to  pray  without  doubting,  and  yet 
be  content  that  thy  prayer  be  not  granted ;  to  keep  within  thy  calling,  and  do 
nothing  by  contention ;  to  bring  thy  will  unto  God's  will,  and  suffer  fur  Christ, 
because  He  hath  suffered  for  thee ;  to  apply  all  things  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  of 
everytiiing  to  make  some  use.  Thus  the  Word  goeth  before  us  like  the  fiery  j)illar, 
and  shows  us  when  we  are  in,  and  when  we  are  out.  III.  Make  haste.  For  this 
cause  Paul  saith,  "Run,"  which  is  the  swiftest  pace  of  man  ;  as  though  he  should 
go  faster  to  heaven  than  to  any  place  else  in  the  world.  His  meaning  is  this,  that 
as  a  m  in  doth  watch,  and  run,  and  labour,  to  be  rich  quickly,  so  he  should  hear, 
and  pray,  and  study,  and  use  all  means,  to  be  wise  quickly.  Therefore  St.  James 
says,  "Be  swift  to  hear  "  (James  i.  19).  We  must  be  swift  to  praj',  to  obey,  to  do 
good  ;  for  he  is  not  cursed  only  which  doeth  not  the  Lord's  business,  but  he  which 
"  doeth  it  negligently"  (Jer.  xlviii.  10).  The  hound,  which  runs  but  for  the  hare, 
runs  as  fast  as  possibly  he  can  ;  the  hawk,  which  flieth  but  for  the  partridge,  fiieth 
as  fast  as  po-sibly  she  can  ;  and  shall  he  which  runs  for  heaven  Cieep  more  slowly 
than  the  dial?  IV.  Persevere  to  tue  em).  For  if  you  begin  betimes,  and  go 
aright,  and  make  haste,  and  cmitinue  not  to  the  end,  your  reward  is  with  them  of 
whom  Peter  saith,  "  Their  end  is  worse  than  their  beginning  "  (2  Peter  ii.  20). 
Therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  cries  so  often,  "Be  faithful  even  unto  death,"  "Be 
not  WL^ary  of  wcll-dointr,"  "Take  heed  lest  ye  fall."  For  when  thou  art  weary  of 
thy  godl  ness,  Gud  dofh  not  count  thee  "ood,  but  weary  of  goodness.  Therefore 
Piiul  saith, '  Pray  continually,"  as  though  prayer  were  nothing  without  continuance. 
Some  came  into  the  vineyard  in  the  morning,  and  some  at  noon  ;  but  none  received 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix, 

any  reward  but  they  which  stayed  till  night.  To  have  the  ark  but  a  while  doeth 
more  hurt  to  the  Philistines  than  benefit  them  ;  so  to  serve  God  but  a  while  doth 
more  damage  us  than  help  us.  Let  the  dog  turn  to  the  vomit,  and  the  swine  to 
the  wallow  ;  but  thou,  like  Abraham,  hold  on  thy  sacrifice  until  evening,  even  the 
evening  of  thy  life,  and  a  full  measure  shall  be  measured  unto  thee.  When  one 
told  Socrates,  that  he  would  very  fain  go  to  Olympus,  but  he  feared  that  he  should 
not  be  able  to  endure  the  pains  ;  Socrates  answered  him,  "I  know  that  thou  usest  to 
walk  every  day  between  thy  meals,  which  walk  continue  forward  in  thy  way  to 
Olympus,  and  within  five  or  six  days  thou  shalt  come  thither."  How  easy  was  this, 
and  yet  he  saw  it  not.  So  is  the  way  to  heaven.  If  men  did  bend  themselves  as 
much  to  do  good  as  they  beat  their  brains  to  do  evil,  they  might  go  to  heaven 
with  less  trouble  than  they  go  to  hell.     {H.  Smith.) 

Ver.  25.  Every  man  that  striveth  for  the  mastery  is  temperate  in  all  things. 
— Lawful  striving  : — I.  The  fact  that  the  Cheistiav  life  is  a  stiuving  after 
AN  END.  This  text  is  out  of  joint  with  much  of  the  language  of  the  present  day. 
Such  as  "the  rest  of  faith  "—as  if  Christian  life  were  inaction.  This  is  not  an 
exceptional  experience,  or  merely  true  of  bibes  in  Christ.  The  language  appears 
again  and  again  as  the  constant  state  of  the  apostle.  II.  The  manner  of  the 
STRIFE.  1.  Lawfully.  It  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  rule,  not  with  our 
own  impulses.  2.  Certainly.  Lawfulness  secures  certainty.  Men  guided  by 
Christ  are  not  in  doubt  as  to  what  they  ought  to  do,  or  as  to  the  result.  HI.  The 
OBJECT  OF  OUR  STRIVING.  "I  keep  uuder  my  body."  We  think  there  was  little 
need  of  Paul  to  do  this.  His  body  was  indeed  subject ;  he  had  gone  through  peril, 
trial,  persecution.  He  never  indulged  it.  IV.  The  motives.  1.  Not  to  be  a 
castaway.     2.  To  gain  a  crown,     (ir.   Landell,  D.D.)  Temperance  helpful  to 

resolution : — It  is  weak  to  be  scared  at  difficulties,  seeing  that  they  generally 
diminish  as  they  are  approached,  and  oftentimes  even  entirely  vanish.  No  man 
can  tell  what  he  can  do  till  he  tries.  It  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  extent  of 
human  powers  ;  it  can  only  be  ascertained  by  experiment.  What  has  been  accom- 
plished by  parties  and  by  solitary  individuals  in  the  torrid  and  frozen  regions, 
under  circumstances  the  most  difficult  and  appalling,  should  teach  us  that  when 
we  ought  to  attempt  we  should  never  despair.  The  reason  why  men  ofteuer 
succeed  in  overcoming  uncommon  difficulties  than  ordinary  ones  is,  that  in  the 
first  case  they  call  into  action  the  whole  of  their  resources,  and  that  in  the  last 
they  act  upon  calculation,  and  generally  undercalculate.  Confidence  of  success  is 
almost  success  ;  and  obstacles  cften  fall  of  themselves  before  a  determination  to 
overcome  them.  There  is  something  in  resolution  which  has  an  influence  beyond 
itself,  and  it  marches  on  like  a  mighty  lord  among  its  slaves;  all  is  prostration 
where  it  appears.  When  bent  on  good,  it  is  almost  the  noblest  attribute  of  man  ; 
when  on  evil,  the  most  dangerous.  It  is  by  habitual  resolution  tbat  men  succeed 
to  any  great  extent ;  impulses  are  not  sufficient.  What  is  done  at  one  moment  is 
undone  the  next ;  and  a  step  forward  is  nothing  gained  unless  it  is  followed  np. 
Resolution  depends  mainly  on  the  state  of  the  digestion,  which  St.  Paul  remarkably 
illustrates  when  he  says,  "  Every  man  that  striveth  for  the  mastery  is  temperate  in 
all  things."  Temperance  : — I.  As  an  element  of  Christian  character.  There 
are  many  elements  that  constitute  this  ;  but  there  can  be  no  full-rounded  Christian 
life  without  temperance.  1.  Observe  the  frequent  references  made  to  it  in  Scrip- 
ture. It  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  Sj^irit  (Gal.  v.),  and  one  step  in  the  ladder  of 
Christian  graces  (2  Pet.  i.).  In  h's  address  to  Felix,  Paul  reasoned  of  it.  2.  The 
word  literally  means  the  power  of  regulating  one's  self;  hence  it  is  s\nonymous 
with  self-control ;  and  as  self-control  is  needed  cnly  when  there  is  temptation  to 
sinful  indulgence,  there  is  contained  in  it  the  further  idea  of  self-sacrifice.  So  it 
lies  at  the  founriation  of  the  noblest  of  all  lives.  This  is  the  principle  that  made 
the  martyrs.  3.  Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  it  was  unknown  prior  to  the  Christian 
era.  It  was  practised,  as  we  see,  by  the  athletes  ;  so  that  Christianity  sim  Jy  took 
hold  of  an  existing  principle  and  applied  it  to  a  new  case.  Lut  fom  eny  its  end 
was  selfish  and  sernilar  ;  now  it  is  exercised  for  a  worthier  end.  4.  Self-denial,  then, 
occupies  no  secondary  place.  He  who  is  not  Jtble  to  practise  it  is  noi  worthy  to  be  a 
follower  of  Christ.  But  how  can  this  be  unless  we  possess  something  of  His  spirit? 
The  highest  type  of  mnn  is  he  who  is  liktst  to  Christ  in  consecration  and  self- 
denying  service.  This  is  what  we  should  aim  at ;  it  is  the  perfection  of  character. 
"  ShaU  Jesus  boar  the  Cross  alone,  and  all  the  world  go  free  ?  "  &c.  ''I.  As  a  con- 
DiTioN  OF  MORAL  CONQUEST.     1.  No  One  ever  yet  did  anything  gre.  i  wi  hcut  making 


cnAP.  IX.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  575 


a  sacrifice.  The  pi-ize- wrestler  deemed  it  indispensable  to  success.  He  had  to 
forego  everythins;  that  did  not  coutribnte  to  the  end  in  view.  It  is  the  same  all 
thronph  life.  Whatever  be  one's  abilities,  there  is  no  royal  road  to  proficiency  ; 
and  of  all  thines,  the  most  difficult  to  master  is  one's  self.  If  the  prizefigliter, 
the  soldier,  the  student,  the  merchant,  can  be  self-denying  to  gain  their  ends,  why 
cannot  the  Christian  deny  himself  to  gain  his  end  ?  Think  of  the  self-denial  of 
Moses,  Daniel,  the  three  Hebrew  children.  Let  their  manly  example  impress  on 
us  the  duty  of  total  abstinence,  when  the  alternative  is  sin.  2.  Herein  lies  the 
guarantee  of  conquest.  Let  self  be  put  down  and  Christ  lifted  up,  and  then  not 
only  will  tlie  life  be  itself  a  success,  but  it  will  be  a  power  for  the  moral  conquest 
of  the  world,  for  we  can  influence  others  only  in  proportion  as  we  live  under  the 
power  of  the  truth  ourselves.  The  world  will  not  readily  be  impressed  with  that 
spirit  wiiieh  makes  self-interest  its  end,  nor  be  struck  with  the  excellence  of  that 
religion  which  makes  no  sacrifice.  III.  As  a  dcty  of  universal  obligation.  1. 
We  owe  it  to  Christ.  We  owe  our  salvation  to  the  practice  of  this  principle  on 
His  part.  Think  what  He  gave  up  for  us.  2.  We  owe  it  to  ourselves.  How  many 
are  there  who,  from  protracted  pandering  to  the  cravings  of  their  lower  nature, 
liave  lost  the  power  of  self-control!  3.  We  owe  it  to  our  fellow-men.  If  Christ 
denied  Himself  for  us.  should  we  not  also  deny  ourselves  for  the  brethren,  and,  like 
the  noble  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  become  all  things  to  all  men  ?  (D.  2Ierson,  M.A.) 
Self-control  possible  to  all : —  1.  Paul,  instructed  in  all  the  narrowness  of  his 
people,  escaped  entirely  from  it,  and  became  as  unconventional  as  you  can  well 
imagine  a  man  to  be.  If  he  went  past  a  heathen  temple,  he  used  that  as  an  illus- 
tration of  Divine  truth.  2.  The  illustration  of  our  text  is  one  drawn  from  the 
conflicts  where  wrestlers  or  racers  contended  for  the  wreath.  He  declares  that 
men  who  strove  for  these  thin'js  were  "temperate."  Now  temperance  means 
self-control,  and  self-control,  se  f-denial.  This  was  much  to  say  in  Corinth.  I. 
Self-contkol   is   the    common    experience   of   men,   and    Christianity    appeals 

TO   AN    active    possibility,    FOR    A    PURPOSE    FAR    HIGHER   THAN   THAT    FOR    WHICH    MEN 

USUALLY  EMPLOY  SELF- CONTROL.  1.  If  there  is  a  class  who  are  more  than  any  other 
given  up  to  the  force  of  animal  desires,  it  is  the  athletic  class.  And  yet  for  the  (to 
them)  highest  pleasure  they  persuade  themselves  to  practise  extra  ordinary  self- 
control.  If  I  were  to  preach  to  them  a  temperate  life,  for  the  sake  of  spiritual 
dignity,  they  would  reply,  "  That  will  do  very  well  for  parsons,  but  it  is  impossible 
for  men  like  us."  And  yet  they  practise  far  more  than  what  would  be  necessary  to 
make  them  eminent  Christians.  Did  you  ever  read  the  history  of  the  training  of  men 
for  prize-fights?  The  system  of  exercises,  if  exerted  in  industry,  would  obtain  for 
them  a  living  during  the  whole  year.  2.  If  there  be  anything  in  this  world  that 
men  dislike,  it  is  the  unintermitted  endurance  of  discomforts  and  disciplines  ;  and 
yet  how  cheerfully  do  soldiers  endnre  these  things  under  the  stimulus  of  various 
motives  of  ambition,  patriotism,  and  espi-it  de  corj)"!.  W^ell,  if  these  men  can  do  it, 
anybody  can.  The  only  question  is.  Will  you  ?  3.  There  is  no  class  that  submit 
to  so  much  inconvenience  and  self-denial  as  commerciMl  men.  The  most  dis  'gree- 
able  things  are  done  by  men,  and  men  of  sensitive  nerve,  if  there  be  money  in  them. 
How  patiently  will  they  work  in  the  tallow-chandler's  shop,  or  a  fish-shop,  or  in  a 
mine,  &c.  ;  nay,  cheerfully  go  to  the  tropics,  and  burn  in  Cuba.  Ah  !  how  sublime 
the  life  would  be  of  an  all-world-disturbing  merchant,  if  only  it  were  for  a  moral 
end.  4.  Consider  how  patient  men  are  with  their  fellow-men.  The  hardest  thing 
to  bear  is  men.  A  man  that  can  bear  cheerfully  his  fellow-men  has  little  to  learn. 
When  men  have  no  motive,  how  cross  and  uncharitable  they  are.  But  the 
moment  they  have  an  interest  in  others,  see  what  perfecc  Christums  they  are — in  a 
■way !  If  a  man  owes  you  a  debt,  and  you  think  you  can  get  it  by  crushing  him  as 
a  cluster  is  crushed,  you  will  do  it.  But  sometimes  there  is  no  cluster  to  crush, 
and  then  you  tend  this  man,  and  take  care  of  him.  You  do  a  world  of  work  for 
the  sake  of  helping  him  to  b^ar  clusters  that  by  and  by  shall  be  pressed  into  your 
cup.  Why,  if  you  should  take  a  man  on  Christian  principles,  and  do  as  much  as 
that  for  him,  you  would  be  canonised  as  a  saiut.  And  then,  for  the  same  reasons, 
see  how  men  bear  with  disagreeable  men.  You  have  your  wares  for  sale,  and 
anybody  that  buys  is  welcome  to  your  shnp.  And  if  the  price  is  that  you  shall  be 
"  hail  fellow  well  met  "  with  him,  you  swallow  down  any  reluctance,  and  say, "  We 
must  not  do  anything  to  offend  him."  During  the  davs  when  colour  was  a  virtue, 
in  a  famous  church  in  New  York  a  distinguished  iix^rchant  had  a  coloured  man  in 
his  pew,  whose  presence  in  the  congregation  h^d  the  same  effect  that  a  lump  of 
salt  would  have  in  a  cup  of  tea.    And  as  they  went  out  of  the  church,  they  gathered 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


about  the  merchant,  and  said,  "  What  possessed  you  to  bring  that  nigger  into  your 
pew?"  He  whispered,  "  He  is  a  great  planter,  a  millionjiire."  And  then  they 
said,  "Introduce  us  to  him."  Then  where  was  their  tine  taste  ?  When  mammon 
said,  "Let  it  go,"  it  was  all  right.  But  when  Jesus  said,  "Let  it  go,"  that  was 
detestable.  5.  Nay,  more.  We  see  how  willingly  and  cheerfully  gi-eat  men,  great 
natures,  for  the  sake  of  an  ignoble  ambition,  that  is  not  very  liiKH,  after  all,  will 
sacrifice  their  lives,  their  multiform  faculties  and  enjoyments.  There  are  those 
living  that  are  to  be  revered  for  many  excellences,  who,  adopting  the  apostle's 
form  of  expression,  could  say,  "I  count  all  things  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  the 
Presidency."      II.    Now  the  Lokd  Jesus,  c.^ling  ds  to  honour  and  glory  and 

IMMORTALITY,  SAYS  ONLY  WHAT  THE  WORLD  SAYS  OF  ITS  POOR,  GROVELLING,  AND  MISER- 
ABLE THINGS — "Take  up  your  cross  and  follow  me."  Lust  says  so :  why  should 
not  love  say  so?  Earthly  glory  that  fades  like  the  laurel  wreath  says  so:  why 
should  not  that  crown  of  gold  that  never  grows  dim  say  so?  When  we  ur^e  such 
considerations  upon  the  young,  and  young  men  are  fired  thereby ;  when  truly  noble 
natures  hear  the  call,  and  accept  it,  and  yield  themselves  to  it,  and  enter  upon  a 
religious  life  with  fervour,  and  deny  themselves  in  all  things  in  furtherance  of  its 
commands,  how  strangely  the  world  fails  to  recognise  its  own  redeeming  qualities  ! 
And  how  are  these  men  called  enthusiasts  !  Now,  enthusiasm  in  religion  is  the 
only  good  sense.  There  is  not  a  father  who  does  not  say  to  his  child,  going  out 
into  life,  "  If  you  are  to  succeed  as  a  lawyer,  my  son,  you  must  give  yourself  to  it." 
And  I  say  to  every  man  that  is  going  out  as  a  Christian,  "  It  you  are  going  to 
succeed  as  a  Christian,  you  must  give  yourself  to  it."     (H.  TT.  Beecher.)  Now 

they  do  it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown;  but  we  an  incorruptible. — Contrasted 
aims  and  parallel  methods  : — Here  we  get,  in  a  picturesque  fashion — I.  The  world's 
SAD  folly  in  its  ORDINARY  AIMS.  The  Wreath  was,  of  course,  not  wbat  the  racer 
ran  for.  It  was  only  a  symbol,  and  its  entirely  valueless  character  made  it  all  the 
more  valuable.  It  expressed  simply  honour  and  the  joy  of  success.  In  front  of 
the  temple  that  presided  over  the  games  was  a  long  avenue,  on  either  side  of  which 
stood  ranged  the  statues  of  the  victors  ;  and  the  hope  that  flushed  many  a  man's 
face  was  that  his  image,  with  his  name  on  its  pedestal,  should  stand  there.  And 
where  are  they  all?  Their  names  forgotten,  the  marble  likenesses  buried  beneath 
the  greensward,  over  which  the  shepherd  to-day  pastures  his  quiet  flocks.  And  all 
our  pursuits,  unless  they  be  linked  with  eternity  and  God,  are  as  evanescent  and 
disproportioned  as  was  the  wreath  for  which  months  of  discipline,  and  moments  of 
almost  superhuman  effort,  were  considered  but  a  small  price  to  pay.  Business, 
providing  for  a  family,  &c.,  necessarily  demand  attention.  You  may  so  use  them 
as  to  secure  the  remoter  aims  of  growing  like  your  Master  and  fit  for  the  inherit- 
ance, or  to  construct  out  of  them  a  barrier  between  you  and  your  eternal  wealth. 
In  the  one  case  you  are  wise,  in  the  other  case  your  epitaph  will  be  "  Thou  fool !  " 
A  i)oet  has  put  in  homely  words  the  lesson  for  us:  "What  good  came  of  it  at  last  ?" 
asks  the  little  child,  when  the  old  man  is  telling  him  of  the  great  victory.  "  They 
do  it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  crown" — -two  pennyworth  of  parsley.  It  is  a  symbol 
of  what  some  of  you  are  living  for.  II.  The  Christian's  wisdom  in  his  aim. 
"But  we  an  incorruptible."  1.  The  emblem  stands  for  a  symbol  of  dominion,  of 
victory,  and  of  festivity.  It  is  the  crown  of  the  king,  or  the  wreath  of  the  victor, 
or  the  garlands  on  the  guests  at  the  feast.  It  is  a  "crown  of  life."  The  true  life 
of  the  spirit  which  partakes  of  the  immortal  life  of  Jesus  is  the  crown.  It  is  a 
"  crovai  of  glory" — the  radiant  lustre  of  a  manifestly  God-glorified  spirit.  The 
garland  that  adorns  those  who  sit  at  the  feast  is  no  mere  external  adornment,  but 
the  lustre  of  a  perfect  character  which  is  the  outcome  of  a  Christ-given  life.  It  is 
the  "  crown  of  righteousness."  Only  pure  brows  can  wear  it.  It  would  bui'n  like 
a  circlet  of  fire  if  it  were  placed  on  other  heads.  Kighteousness  is  the  condition  of 
obtaining  it.  2.  This,  then,  is  the  aim  which  the  apostle  asserts  to  be  the  aim  of 
every  person  that  has  the  right  to  call  himself  a  Christian.  There  is  a  sharp  test 
for  you.  Do  you  live  to  win  it  ?  Does  it  gleam  before  you  with  a  brightness  that 
makes  all  other  and  nearer  objects  insignificant  and  pale  ?  If  you  can  answer 
them  in  the  affirmative  you  are  a  happy  man.  3.  And  more  than  that,  all  these 
nearer  objects  will  become  even  more  blessed,  and  your  whole  life  nobler  than  it 
otherwise  would  be.  The  green  of  the  lower  slopes  of  the  Alps  never  looks  so  vivid, 
their  ilowers  never  so  lovely  or  so  bright  as  when  the  eye  rises  from  them  to  the 
glaciers.  And  so  all  the  lower  levels  of  life  look  fairer,  because  our  eyes  pass 
beyond  them  and  fix  on  the  great  white  throne  that  towers  above  them  all.  III. 
The  world's  noble  wisdom  in  the  choice  of  its  means.     1.  This  poor  racer  had 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  COEINTHIANS.  577 

ten  months  of  hard  abstinence  and  exercise  before  there  was  even  a  chance  for  him 
to  succeed.  And  then  tliere  was  a  short  spurt  of  trt-niendous  elioi  t  before  he  came 
in  at  tiie  p;oal.  Tliese  things  are  conditions  of  success  in  the  world,  and  no  matter 
for  what  tlie  man  is  doing  it,  it  is  better  lor  liim  to  be  braced  into  st-lf-control,  and 
stirred  into  energetic  aeti\ity,  than  to  be  rotting  hke  a  fat  weed  in  the  pestilential 
marshes  of  self-indulgence,  and  losing  all  pith  and  manhood  in  the  languid  disso- 
lution of  indolence.  2.  And  so  one  cannot  but  looic  with  admiration  at  a  great  deal 
of  the  toil  and  effort  that  the  world  puts  forth,  even  for  its  own  shabby  ends. 
Why,  a  man  will  ir.i3end  twenty  times  as  long  in  making  himself  a  good  conjurer, 
•who  can  balance  feathers  and  twirl  plates  upon  a  table,  as  some  of  us  ever  sj^ent  : 
in  trying  to  make  ourselves  good  Christians.  IV.  Tun  tolly  of  so  many  pro- 
fessing Chkistiaxs  in  THi:iii  WAY  OF  PURSUING  THEIR  AIMS.  1.  A  languid  ruHuer 
had  no  chance,  and  he  knew  it.  The  phiase  was  almost  a  contiadiction  in  terms. 
What  about  a  languid  Christian?  Is  that  a  more  consistent  idi-a?  If  I  let  my 
desire  and  affections  go  flowing  vagrantly  over  the  whole  low  plain  of  material 
things,  they  will  be  like  a  river  that  is  lost  in  the  swamp.  If  I  set  out  on  the  race 
without  having  girt  up  my  loins  by  resolute  self-denial,  what  can  I  expect  but  that 
before  I  have  run  half-a-dozen  yards  my  ungirt  robes  will  trip  me  up  or  get  caught 
in  the  thorns  and  keep  me  back?  No  Clu'istian  progress  is  possible  to-day,  or  ever  , 
was,  or  will  be,  except  on  the  condition — "  Take  up  your  cioss,  and  deny  yourself,  | 
and  then  come  after  Me."  Learn  from  the  world  this  lesson,  tlntt  if  a  man  wants  i 
to  succeed  in  any  course  he  nuist  shut  out  other,  even  legitimate  ones.  2.  And 
then  the  runner  that  did  not  put  all  his  powers  into  the  live  minutes  of  his  race 
had  no  chance  of  coming  in  at  the  goal.  And  there  is  no  different  law  in  regard 
to  Christian  people.  Conclusion  :  God  be  thanked!  We  are  crowned  not  because 
we  are  good,  but  because  Christ  died.  But  the  teacbiug  of  my  text,  that  a  Chr.stian 
man  ujust  labour  to  win  the  prize,  is  by  no  means  contradictory  to,  but  comple- 
mentary and  confirmatory  of  the  earlier  truth.  The  laws  of  the  race  are — "Belie\e 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  "  ;  and  the  second  is,  "  Work 
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  {A.  Moclaren,  D.I).)  Heaven 
— an  incentive  to  dilifience  : — Julius  Caesar  coming  towards  Rome  with  his  army, 
and  hearing  that  the  senate  and  people  had  fled  from  it,  said,  "  Th'-y  that  will  not 
fight  for  this  city,  what  city  will  they  tight  for?  "  If  we  will  not  take  pains  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  what  kiuL'xlom  will  we  take  piius  for?  (C.  //.  S]i:iv(icun.) 
"  Concerning  tlie  crown  "  ; — I.  The  crown.  Ivecall  the  other  places  where  the  same 
metaphor  is  employed.  It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  till  tliese  instances  of  the 
occurrence  of  the  emblem  carry  with  them  reference,  such  as  that  in  my  text,  to  the 
prize  at  the  athletic  festivals.  For  Pc-ter  and  James,  intense  Jews  as  they  were,  had 
probably  never  seen,  and  possibly  never  h^ard  of,  tiie  struggles  at  the  Isthmus  and 
at  Olympus  and  elsewhere.  The  book  of  the  Revelation  draws  its  metaiihors  almost 
exclusively  from  the  circle  of  Jewish  practices  and  things.  So  that  we  ha\eto  look 
in  other  directions  than  the  arena  or  the  racecourse  to  explain  these  other  uses  of 
the  image.  It  is  also  extremely  unlikely  that  iu  these  other  passages  the  reference 
is  to  a  crown  as  the  emblem  of  sovereignty,  for  that  idea  is  expressed,  as  a  rule,  by 
another  word  in  Scripture,  which  we  have  Anglicised  as  "  dadem."  The  "  crown  " 
in  all  these  passages  is  a  garland  twisted  out  of  some  growth  of  the  field.  The 
"crown  "  which  is  the  Christian's  aim  is  a  state  of  triumphant  repose  and  of  festal 
enjoyment.  There  are  other  aspects  of  that  great  ai;d  dim  future  which  correspond 
to  other  necessities  of  our  nature.  That  lutuie  is  other  and  more  thau  a  festival ; 
it  is  other  and  more  than  repose.  Thoe  are  larger  fields  tiiere  for  the  operation  of 
powers  that  have  been  trained  and  evolved  here.  The  faitlifulness  of  the  steward 
is  exchanged,  according  to  Christ's  great  words,  for  the  authority  of  the  ruler  over 
many  cities.  But  still,  do  we  not  all  know  enough  of  ihe  worry  and  turbulence  and 
strain"  d  effi>rt  of  the  conflict  here  below,  to  feel  that  to  some  of  our  deepest  and  not 
ignoble  needs  and  desires  that  image  appeals?  So  the  satisfaction  of  all  desires, 
tlie  accompaniments  of  a  feast  in  abundance,  rejoicing  and  companionship,  and 
conclusive  concjuest  over  all  foes,  are  premised  us  in  this  great  symbol.  The  crown 
is  described  in  three  ways.  It  is  the  crown  of  "  life,"  of  "  glory,"  and  of  "  righteous- 
ness." And  I  venture  to  think  that  the'-e  three  epithets  descril  e  the  material,  so  to 
speak,  of  which  the  wreath  is  composed.  The  everlasting  flower  of  life,  the  radiant 
blossoms  of  glory,  the  white  tiower  of  righteousness;  thete  are  its  components. 
Here  we  have  tlie  promise  of  life,  that  fuller  life  whicli  men  want.  Here  we  live 
a  living  death  ;  there  we  shall  live  indeed  ;  and  that  will  be  the  crown,  not  only  in 
regard  of  physical,  but  in  regard  of  spiritual,  powers  and  consciousness.  But 
VOL.   I.  37 


578  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix. 


remember  that  all  this  full  tide  of  life  is  Christ's  gift.  All  being,  from  the  lowest 
creature  up  to  the  loftiest  created  spirit,  exists  by  one  law,  the  continual  impartation 
of  life  from  the  fountain  of  life,  to  it,  according  to  its  capacities.  "  I  will  givehira 
a  crown  of  life."  It  is  a  crown  of  "  glory,"  and  that  means  a  lustrousness  of  character 
imparted  by  radiation  and  reflection  from  the  central  light  of  the  glory  of  God. 
"  Then  shall  the  righteous  blaze  out  like  the  sun,  in  the  kingdom  of  My,  Father." 
We  all  shall  be  changed  into  the  "  likeness  of  the  body  of  His  glory."  It  is  a  crown 
of  "  righteousness."  Though  that  phrase  may  mean  the  wreath  that  rewards 
righteousness,  it  seems  more  in  accordance  with  the  other  sirailnr  expressions  to 
which  I  have  referred  to  regard  it,  too,  as  the  material  of  which  the  crown  is  com- 
posed. It  is  not  enough  that  there  should  be  festal  gladness,  not  enough  that  there 
should  be  calm  repose,  not  enough  that  there  should  be  tiasliing  glory,  not  enough 
that  there  should  be  fulness  of  life.  To  accord  with  the  intense  moral  earnestness 
of  the  Christian  system  there  must  be,  emphatically,  in  the  Christian  hope  cessation 
of  all  sin  and  investiture  with  all  purity.  "  Thy  jDeople  shall  be  all  righteous." 
"  They  shall  walk  with  Me  in  white."  And  it  sets  the  very  climax  and  culmination 
on  the  other  hopes.  These,  then,  are  the  elements,  and  on  them  all  is  stamped  the 
signature  of  perpetuity.  The  crown  of  life  is  incorruptible.  II.  Now  look,  gecondlj-, 
AT  THE  DISCIPLINE  BY  WHICH  THE  CKowN  IS  WON.  Obseive,  first  of  all,  that  in  more 
than  one  of  the  passages  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  great  emphasis  is  laid 
upon  Christ  as  giving  the  crown.  That  is  to  say,  that  blessed  future  is  not  won 
by  effort,  but  is  bestowed  as  a  free  gift.  It  is  given  from  the  hands  which  have 
procured  it,  and,  as  I  may  say,  twined  it  for  us.  Jesus  provides  the  sole  means,  by 
His  work,  by  which  any  man  can  enter  into  that  inheritance.  It  remains  for  ever 
the  gift  of  His  love.  Whilst,  then,  this  must  be  laid  as  the  basis  of  all,  there  must 
also,  with  equal  earnestness,  be  set  forth  the  other  thought  that  Christ's  gift  has 
conditions,  which  conditions  these  passages  plainly  set  forth.  In  the  one  which  I 
have  read  as  a  text  we  have  these  conditions  declared  as  being  twofold,  protracted 
discipline  and  continuous  effort.  James  declares  that  it  is  given  to  the  man  who 
endures  temptation.  Peter  asserts  that  it  is  the  reward  of  self-denying  discharge 
of  duty.  And  the  Lord  from  heaven  lays  down  the  condition  of  faithfulness  unto 
death  as  the  necessary  pre-requisite  of  His  gift  of  the  crown  of  life.  Eternal  life  is 
the  gift  of  God,  on  condition  of  our  diligence  and  earnestness.  It  is  not  all  the 
same  whether  you  are  a  lazy  Christian  or  not.  III.  And  now,  lastly,  note  the  power 
OF  THE  EEWARD  AS  MOTIVE  FOR  LIFE.  Paul  says  roundlv  in  our  text,  that  the  desire 
to  obtain  the  incorruptible  crown  is  a  legitimate  spring  of  Christian  action.  Now, 
I  do  not  need  to  waste  your  time  and  my  own  in  defending  Christian  morality  from 
the  fantastic  objection  that  it  is  low  and  selfish,  because  it  encourages  itself  to  efforts 
by  the  prospect  of  the  crown.  If  there  are  any  men  who  are  Christians  only 
because  of  what  they  hope  to  gain  thereby  in  another  world,  they  will  not  eet  what 
they  hope  for;  and  they  would  not  like  it  if  tbey  did.  I  do  not  believe  that  there 
are  any  such  people ;  and  sure  I  am,  if  there  are,  that  it  is  not  Christianity  that 
has  made  them  so.  But  a  thing  that  we  must  not  set  as  the  supreme  motive,  we 
may  rightly  accept  as  a  subsidiary  encouragement.  We  are  not  Christians  unless 
the  dominant  motive  of  our  lives  be  the  love  of  the  Lot  d  Jesus  Christ ;  and  unless 
"we  feel  a  necessity,  because  of  loving  Him,  to  aim  to  be  like  Him.  But,  that  being 
so,  who  shall  hinder  me  from  quickening  my  flagging  energies,  and  stimulating  my 
torpid  faith,  and  encouraging  my  cowardice,  by  the  thought  that  yonder  there 
remain  rest,  victory,  the  fulness  of  life,  the  flashing  of  glory,  and  the  purity  of 
perfect  righteousness  ?  Now  it  seems  to  me  that  this  spring  of  action  is  not  as 
strong  in  the  Christians  of  this  day  as  it  used  to  be,  and  as  it  should  be.  You  do 
not  hear  much  about  heaven  in  ordinary  preaching.  And  I  bflieve,  for  my  part, 
that  we  suffer  terribly  by  the  comparative  neglect  into  which  this  side  of  Christian 
truth  has  fallen.  Do  you  not  think  that  it  would  make  a  dili'erence  to  you  if  you 
really  believed,  and  carried  alwajs  with  you  in  your  thoughts,  the  thrilling  con- 
sciousness that  every  act  of  the  present  was  registered,  and  would  tell  on  the  far 
side  yonder?     (.-1.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  I  therefore  so  run,  not  as  uncertainly. — Not  as  iincertaiiih/  : — In  the 
Grecian  games  the  uncertainties  of  every  earthly  race  are  symbolised.  This 
uncertainty  is  one  of  the  saddest  aspects  of  experience.  There  are  laurels  for  a 
few  winners,  but  many  are  the  losers.  Some  nearly  win  the  race,  and  miss  by  a 
hair's-breadth  ;  and  many  more  never  glimpse  the  goal,  and  yet  bravely  plod  on 
in  their  weary  disappointed  way.      I.  Men  must  run.      Multitudes  can  say.  not 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  579 


•'  So  run  I,"  but,  "  So  look  I  on."  They  are  interested  in  the  Christian  story  ;  but 
this  is  not  enough.  "  Ahnost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Cliristian."  "Ahnost!" 
is  one  of  the  saddest  words  in  human  experience.  II.  Men  admit  the  dncehtainty 
OF  THE  EARTHLY  KACE,  and  SO  they  run  with  tliis  di-ead  consciousness  at  their 
heaits.  Who  can  tell  whether  health  may  not  fail,  just  as  honours  hard-won  are 
heralding  reward  ?  What  impediments  may  come  in  the  earthly  path  from  the 
falsity, greed,  or  frivolity  of  others?  If  you  seek  apart  from  God,  all  is  uncertainty! 
How  dilferent  is  the  Christian  struggle.  Here  all  who  run  may  obtain  the  prize. 
Men  of  culture  and  no  culture  ;  vigorous  or  of  feeble  health — for  Christ  has  promised 
His  own  Divine  aid  to  all  who,  laying  hold  on  His  strength,  press  toward  the  mark. 
III.  Men  slirht  distant  rewards.  The  goal !  Let  it  be  now,  men  say.  The 
world  of  sense  seems  at  first  to  have  the  best  of  it ;  but  soon  there  comes  the 
experience,  common  to  all,  that  worldly  reward  is  transient  at  the  best.  Earthly 
honours  fade  and  wane.  Even  fame  lives  in  few  lives.  One  of  the  most  renowned 
commanders  of  men,  when  the  hour  of  triumph  came,  and  the  whole  world  seemed 
mavshalled  before  him,  was  asked  what  the  spectacle  wanted?  and  he  answered, 
"  Permanence  !  "  \^')iat  a  satire  on  human  glory.  "  All  flesh  is  grass,"  etc.  But 
so  firm  is  the  apostle's  faith,  that  with  the  heavens  opened  above  him  he  calls  the 
sons  of  men  to  seek  the  same  incorruptible  crown.  The  things  we  seek  are  all, 
like  their  Divine  author,  eternal  in  the  heavens  !  As  the  voices  of  the  redeemed 
fall  from  the  celestial  heights,  they  cry,  "  Not  as  uncertainly."  IV.  Men  wait  to 
BEGIN.  There  are  some  who  have  long  been  close  beside  the  course,  who  are 
hesitating  and  halting  still.  Much  depends,  in  life's  crucial  moments,  upon  habits 
of  decision  of  character.  So  wait  I !  too  many  say.  But  what  for  ?  When  will 
opportunity  be  more  golden  ?  When  will  heaven's  gates  be  thrown  more  widely 
open?  Test  the  things  that  are  this  day  more  pleasant  than  God's  salvation,  and 
see  if  they  are  worthy  to  be  weiglied  with  the  soul's  imnmrtal  weal.  Death  may 
be  nearer  to  us  tlisn  we  think.  V.  Men  stay  in  thkir  course.  Some  did  run 
Wf-11,  but  they  are  hindered.  Heroism  cools  ;  ardour  faints.  If  religion  were  one 
sharp  conflict,  one  martyr  sacrifice,  then  how  many  would  join  the  ranks?  But 
ever  in  this  sublunary  sphere  the  rewards  of  earth  and  time  are  to  the  persevering. 
.iEsop  was  but  a  slave,  and  Homer  but  a  poor  man,  and  Columbus  but  a  weaver, 
and  they  all,  keeping  their  eyes  on  the  earthly  goal  and  pressing  toward  it,  gained 
the  prize.  So  in  the  immortal  sphere — the  feeble  may  liecome  strong,  and  the  last 
be  first,  through  earnest  faith.  (W.  M.  Stat/iayn.)  Tlie  hear enly  race  : — I.  You 
MUST  ENTER  THE  LISTS.  1.  You  must  be  a  Cliristian.  An  infidel,  a  pagan,  cannot 
run  this  race,  nor  can  a  mere  nominal  piofessor.  A  sound  faith  must  be  united 
with  an  exemplary  life.  2.  Preparation  is  needed.  The  racer  is  careful  in  his 
diet.  The  Christian  is  to  show  sobriety,  to  be  master  of  himself,  subduing  every 
passion.  The  athletes  oiled  themselves,  both  to  give  suppleness  in  motion,  and  to 
render  it  difficult  for  their  antagonists  to  grapple  them.  The  grace  of  Christ,  the 
anointing  of  the  Holy  One,  is  indispensable  to  the  believer.  With  the  aid  of  Christ 
we  can  do  all  things.  3.  Tlie  racer  was  presented  in  the  circus.  The  Chiistian 
must  free  himself  from  everything  that  may  hinder  his  progress.  II.  l''oc  must 
ETN  CERTAINLY.  1.  Men  fail  who  have  no  aim  in  life.  One  thing  is  needful. 
"  Beware  of  the  man  of  one  book,"  it  has  been  said.  You  cannot  stand  in  discus- 
sion with  him.  Others  are  readers  of  many  books,  but  forget  their  contents. 
Some  are  distracted  with  business,  politics,  and  pleasure,  and  so  lose  the  reward. 
Of  course,  if  God  gives  you  varied  gifts,  you  are  not  to  neglect  them,  but  to 
subordinate  all  to  one  aim.  2.  Having  chosen  that  aim,  be  conscientious.  It  is 
your  conscience,  not  that  of  others,  which  is  to  guide.  Do  not  falter  and  be  turned 
aside,  as  were  David  and  Peter.  Don't  beat  the  air,  as  a  gladiator  who,  through 
fear  or  lack  of  skill,  swung  clear  of  his  foe,  giving  the  air  the  blow  instead  of  his 
adversary.  3.  Be  candid.  Look  to  yourself.  We  all  live  in  glass  hou-es,  and 
should  not  throw  stones.  Do  not  listen  to  a  sermon  for  another,  and  think  how 
well  the  reproof  fits  another,  and  say,  "Bravo  for  the  preacher  who  has  nothing 
for  us."  III.  Keep  your  eye  on  the  goal  till  you  reach  it.  We  are  to  be 
"  looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  faith,"  for  looking  at  Him  will 
keep  us  from  turning  aside.  We  are  all  running  a  race,  willingly  or  unwillingly. 
Is  it  a  heavenly  one  ?  [A.  Gavnzzi.)  The  Christian's  race  and  battle  : — St.  Paul 
proposes  himself  as  an  example  of  the  life  of  a  converted  man.  No  conversion 
more  unmistakable  than  his.  If  we  would  estimate  conversion  aright,  let  us  view 
it  as  exemplified  in  St.  Paul.  I.  Position  of  conversion.  The  starting-point,  not 
the  goal — the  enlisting  of  the  soldier,  not  his  victory.     It  places  us  on  the  ground. 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ix. 

and  bids  us  run.  Enlists  us  in  an  army,  and  bids  us  fight  (1.  Tim.  vi.  12;  Eph.  vi, 
10-17).  Looli  at  St.  Paul.  1.  Christ  had  arrested  him  as  ha  was  rushing  to  ruin 
(Phil.  iii.  1-2).  Why  ?  Not  that  he  might  stand  still— sit  down  with  folded  hands, 
and  wait  for  promised  crown ;  but  that  he  should  run  like  racer  in  games,  with  no 
eye  but  for  the  goal — no  thought  but  for  tlie  crown — all  his  powers  concentrated  on 
the  one  object,  "  to  obtain  "  (Psiil.  iii.  1'2-14).  2.  (Christ  had  delivered  him  "  from 
the  power  of  darkness,"  c^c.  (Col.  i.  13).  He  was  sure  of  victory  (1  Cor.  xv.  57  ; 
Eom.  viii.  37,  xvi.  2Dj  ;  but  only  through  conflict.  II.  A  converted  man  must 
HAVE  A  DEFINITE  ALM.  St.  Paul  had  "  SO  ruii,  not  as  uncertainly,"  vaguely,  hither 
and  thither,  wasting  ti.ne  and  strength.  Not  enough  to  run  fast,  perseveringly, 
energetically,  we  mu-t  ran  for  the  goal  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14).  1.  Our  goal  is  likeness 
to  Christ.  So  to  win  C'irist,  to  put  on  Christ,  to  be  found  in  Christ,  that  "we  may 
be  one  with  Christ.  2.  Christ  also  our  crown.  He  is  our  "exceeding  great  reward.'' 
The  rewards  of  conquering  in  Eev.  ii.  3  are  Christ  un'ler  dilTerent  symbols.    III.  A 

CONVERTED    MAN    MUST    REALISE    A    DEFINITE    ENEMY.        "  So    fight    I,    not    aS    One   that 

beateth  the  air  "  ;  my  blows  well  aimed,  and  they  tell.  1.  Discover  your  besetting 
sin,  or  sins,  bj'  self-exainination,  and  set  yourself  to  fight  therein.  To  fight  against 
sin  in  the  ab>tiact  is  to  beat  the  air.  2.  Train  for  the  tight.  "  I  keep  under  my 
body,"  &c.  Salf-indulgence  fatal  to  victory.  We  must  be  masters,  not  slaves  of 
the  body  and  its  desires.  3.  Fight  in  Christ's  strength — with  your  eye  on  Him 
who  has  fought  and  overcome,  leaving  us  promise  of  victory.  As  He  did,  take 
"  sword  of  Spirit" — the  threefold  "  it  is  written" — whole  armour.  "Who  is  he 
that  overcometh,"  &c.  (1  John  v.  5).  IV.  A  changed  man  not  necessarily  a 
SAVED  MAN  (vcr.  27).  St.  Paul's  words,  "  lest  that  by  any  means  ...  a  castaway," 
show  us  the  pveci'.riousness  of  Cliri;  tian  life.  So,  too,  the  "  stony-ground  "  hearers, 
"  backsliders,"  d'c.  The  Christian's  safety  depends  on  uuion  with  Christ.  He 
must  watch  lest  bosom  sins  cause  him  to  relax  his  hold  ;  lest  unholiness  clog  the 
channels  of  the  life-giving  sap  (John  xv.  4-6).  No  danger  so  great  as  to  shut  one's 
eyes  against  dang.'r.  Application — trust  not  to  past  experiences.  Self-confidence 
is  fatal  to  Ciiri-tian  life.  It  is  true  Christ's  sheep  can  "never  perish,"  &c.  (John 
X.  28,  29).  But  who  are  His  sheep  ?  They  that  "  hear  His  voice  and  follow  Him." 
(CaiiGii    J'enahles.)  Personal  holiness  : — I.  The  subject  treated    of — eminent 

personal  holiness.  1.  Its  spring.  The  Di\iue  influence  on  the  soul  of  man. 
2.  Its  marks.  (1)  A  constant  keeping  of  the  great  end  in  view.  The  attaining  a 
crown  (ver.  25).  (2)  A.  hal)itual  cuntiict  with  all  difficulties.  "  So  fight  I,  not  as 
one  that  beateth  the  air."  Paul  felt  that  lie  liad  not  to  skirmish  shadows.  (3)  The 
prevailing  dominion  of  the  Spirit  over  the  flesh.  "  I  keep  under  my  body,"  &e. 
II.  Its  importance  to  the  Christian  minister.  1.  It  is  essential.  (1)  To  his 
freedom.  He  is  a  soldier;  the  various  indulgences  which  would  enslave  are  not 
for  him  ;  the  softnesses  whicii  would  prevent  his  warfare  are  not  for  him.  But 
that  he  may  be  thus  free,  he  must  be  eminent  in  holiness  (2  Cor.  vi.  4-7).  (2)  To 
his  happiness.  T  'e  unhappiness  of  many  ministers  arises  from  the  consciousness 
that  they  are  not  whnt  they  ought  to  be.  (3)  To  a  well-grounded  assurance  of  the 
Divine  favour   and    approbation.      {H.  Marcli.)  Tlie  necessity   of  progressive 

religion : — That  was  a  fine  eulcgium  which  was  made  on  Caesar,  that  he  thought 
there  was  nothing  done  while  there  remained  anything  to  do.  Whoever  arrives  at 
worldly  lieroism  arrives  at  it  in  this  way,  and  there  is  no  other  way  of  obtaining 
salvation.  Behold  in  Paul  a  man  who  accounted  all  he  had  done  nothing  while  there 
remained  anything  more  to  do.     We  ground  the  necessity  of  progressive  religion — 

I.  The  great  end  of  Christianity — to  transform  man  into  the  Divine  nature. 
This  being  the  case,  we  ought  never  to  cease  endeavouring  till  we  are  as  perfect  as 
our  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect.  Moreover,  as  we  shall  never  in  this  life 
carry  onv  virtue  to  so  high  a  degree  as  tliat,  it  follows  that  in  no  period  of  our 
life   will   our   duty  be   finished,   consequently  we  must   make  continual  progress. 

II.  The  fatal  consequp:nces  of  a  suspension  of  our  religious  endeavours.  A 
man  employed  in  a  mechanical  art  sets  about  his  woik  and  carries  it  on  to  a  certain 
degree.  He  suspends  his  labour  for  a  wh'le  ;  his  work  doth  not  advance  indeed, 
bnt  when  he  returns  he  finds  his  work  in  the  same  forwardness  in  which  he  left  it. 
Heavenly  exercises  are  not  of  this  kind.  P- st  labour  is  often  lost  for  want  of 
perseverance,  and  it  is  a  certain  maxim  in  religion  that  not  to  proceed  is  to  draw 
bad:.  III.  The  advvnces  themsiclves  in  the  path  of  holiness.  The  science  of 
salvation  in  this  respect  lesembles  human  sciences.  In  human  sciences  a  man  of 
great  and  real  learning  is  humble ;  he  always  speaks  with  caution,  aud  his  answers 
to  difficult  questions  are  not  unfrequently  confessions  of  his  ignorance.     On  the 


CHAP,  rx.]  I.  CORINTHIAXS.  581 

contrary,  a  pedant  knows  everything,  and  undertakes  to  elucidate  and  determine 
everytliing.  So  in  the  science  of  salvation,  a  man  of  little  religion  soon  flatters 
himself  that  he  hath  done  all  his  duty.  A  man  of  lively  and  vigorous  religion  finds 
his  own  virtues  so  few,  so  limited,  so  obstructed,  that  he  easily  comes  into  a  well, 
grounded  judgment  that  all  he  hath  attained  is  nothing  to  what  lies  before  him. 
Accordingly  we  find  the  greatest  saints  the  most  eminent  for  humility  (Gen.  xviii. 
27;  Job  is.  15;  Psa.  cxxx.  3  ;  Phil.  iii.  12).  IV.  The  end  which  God  peoposed 
IN  PLACING  us  IN  THIS  WOULD.  This  world  is  a  place  of  exercise,  this  life  is  a  time 
of  trial,  which  is  given  us  that  we  may  choose  either  eternal  happiness  or  endless 
misery.  {J.  Saiiriii.)  So  fight  I,  not  as  one  that  beatetli  the  air.— Bealing 
the  air: — The  expression  imjjlies — I.  Want  of  skill.  The  boxer  who  strikes 
about  wildly  has  never  learned  his  art.  This  has  to  be  studied — 1.  Patiently.  Day 
after  day  must  the  labour  be  repeated.  2.  Practically.  No  theory  will  teach  the 
various  cuts  and  defences  without  actual  trial.  And  yet  there  are  persons  who 
think  that  they  can  enter  upon  the  spiritual  contest  without  either.  II.  Want  of 
CONCENTRATION.  The  fighter  who  fights  wiklly  loses  his  head  and  is  lost,  for  his 
cool  opponent  seizes  every  opportunity,  and  cahnly  avails  himself  of  every  occasion 
of  advantage.  Does  not  our  Christianity  need  a  cool  head,  a  concentration  of 
purpose?  Surely;  and  yet  men  suppose  that  any  slipshod  method,  any  wool- 
gathering frame  of  mind,  will  satisfy  the  reiiuirements  of  that  awful  contest  which 
is  to  win  or  lose  eternal  life.  Should  we  not  sit  down  sometimes  amid  the  rush  of 
life,  and  calmly  inquire  as  to  our  positiou,  dilUculties,  dangers,  and  progress?  A 
merchant  who  acted  aimlessly  would  soon  come  to  grief;  a  ship's  captain  would 
soon  wreck  his  vessel ;  a  tradesman  quickly  come  to  the  workhouse.  And  the 
Christian  in  the  same  way  would  soon  fall  a  prey  to  the  wiles  of  the  devil. 
III.  Want  of  preparation.  The  athlete  lays  aside  every  weight.  Even  his 
clothes  are  cast  off.  Alas !  how  often  Cliristians  are  handicapped  with  weights ! 
One  has  a  heavy  golden  chain  about  his  neck.  Another  has  a  load  of  worldly 
affections  round  his  heart  and  almost  stopping  its  pulsations.  A  third  has  rings 
on  his  fingers  which  ^jrevent  his  grasp.  A  fourth  hus  his  thoughts,  his  time  choked 
with  business.  Or  again  another  is  absorbed  with  the  sweet  voices  of  pleasure. 
It  is  impossible  to  win  with  these  "  weights,"  and  he  who  attempts  to  do  so  will  be 
like  one  "  beating  the  air."  IV.  Want  of  energy.  Activity  is  the  soul  of  earthly 
business.  How  much  more  important  is  it  in  a  contest  such  as  a  race  or  a  fight ! 
And  in  spiritual  matters  energy  is  quite  as  essential.  (J.  J.  S.  Bird.)  Fight 
icisehj : — 1.  To  figlit  wisely  is  not  to  fight  at  a  venture,  but  with  a  definite  aim. 
Ahab,  indeed,  was  shot  by  an  arrow  sent  at  a  venture  ;  but  this  is  told  us  to 
magnify  the  Providence  of  God,  who,  in  His  designs,  can  direct  the  aimless  shaft 
whithersoever  it  pleases  Him ;  not  to  teach  us  that  aimless  shafts  are  likely  on 
common  occasions  to  be  successful.  Yet  what  is  the  warfare  of  many  Christians 
hut  the  sending  of  shafts  at  a  venture?  2.  Tlie  first  work  of  the  politic  spiritual 
warrior  will  be  to  discover  his  besetting  sin,  and  having  discovered  it,  to  concentrate 
all  his  disposable  force  before  this  fortress.  Just  as  each  individual  has  a  certain 
personal  configuration,  distinguishing  him  from  all  other  men,  so  there  is  some 
sin  or  sins  which  more  than  others  is  conformable  to  his  temperiiment,  and  there- 
fore more  easily  developed  by  his  circumstances — which  expresses  tar  more  of  his 
character  than  others.  This  bosom  sin  is  eminently  deceitful.  Its  especial  property 
is  to  lurk.  (1)  The  besetting  sin  of  many  is  vanity.  Who  knows  not  how  it  apes 
humility,  so  as  really  to  impress  its  possessor  with  the  notion  that  he  is  humble? 
Intensely  self-satisfied  in  his  heart  of  hearts,  he  depreciates  himself  in  conversa- 
tion. What  follows?  Men  say  to  him,  as  in  the  parable,  "  Go  up  higher."  He 
has  been  fishing  for  compliments,  and  compliments  have  risen  to  the  hook.  Is  it 
not  so  ?  For  would  he  not  have  bitterly  resented  it  had  any  of  the  company  taken 
him  at  his  word?  (2)  Some  men  cannot  bear  to  be  second.  Whatever  they  do 
must  be  done  so  as  to  throw  into  the  shade  all  competitors.  The  world  dignifies 
this  with  the  name  of  honourable  emulation,  and  accepts  it  as  a  token  of  fine 
character.  But,  judged  by  the  mind  of  Christ,  how  does  the  sentiment  sound, 
"  Because  I  cannot  outshine  all  rivals,  therefore  I  will  be  nothing  "  ?  It  jars 
strangely  with  those  words,  ''  The  kings  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  lordship  over 
them,"  &e.  "  Let  nothing  be  done  throu^;h  strife  or  vainglory,"  &c.  (3)  A  bosom 
sin,  that  it  iruiy  the  more  easily  escape  detection,  will  wear  the  mask  of  another  sin. 
Indolence,  e.g.,  is,  a  sin  which  carries  with  it  omissions  of  duty.  Prayer  or  Scripture 
reading  is  omitted  or  thrust  away  into  a  corner,  because  we  have  not  risen  sufficiently 
early.     Things  go  cro^s  during  the  day  in  consequence,  and  we  trace  it  all  up  to  the 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 


omission  of  prayer.  But  tlie  fault  lies  deeper.  It  was  indolence  whicli  really  caused 
the  uji>cliief.  One  of  the  first  properties,  then,  of  the  bosom  sin  with  whicli  it  be- 
hoves us  to  be  well  acquainted,  as  the  first  step  in  the  mana:-'ement  of  our  spiritual 
warfare,  is  its  property  of  concealing  itself.  In  consequence  of  this,  it  often 
happens  tliat  a  man,  when  touched  upon  his  weak  point,  answers  that  whatever 
otlier  faults  he  may  have,  this  fault  at  least  is  no  part  of  his  character.  It  is  to 
aid  ia  bringing  to  light  these  secret  sins  that  we  make  the  following  suggestions— 
I.  Praying  heartily  tor  the  light  of  God's  Spirit  to  know  thine  own  heart,  observe 
AND  KKASuN  UHOx  THE  RESULTS  OF  sj;LF-EXAMixATi(;N.  When  tliis  most  Salutary 
exercise  has  b^en  pursued  for  a  certain  time,  you  will  observe  that  the  same  failures 
are  constantly  reuurriug.  The  conchision  is  almost  inevitable  that  there  is  some- 
thing serious  beneath  these  constantly  recurring  failures.  What  is  it? — selfishness, 
indolence,  vanity,  ansiet;,,  &c.  Kemember  always,  that  in  the  symptom,  and  on 
the  surface,  it  may  look  like  none  of  these,  and  yet  be  really  and  fundamentally 
one  of  them.  II.  Let  us  have  our  eye  upon  the  occurrences  which  specially 
GIVE  ITS  PAIN  or  pleasure.  They  will  of: en  be  the  veriest  trifles;  but  yet,  be  it 
what  it  may,  the  probabilities  are  that,  by  tracing  it  to  its  source,  we  shall  get  to 
the  quick  of  our  character,  to  that  sen&itive  quarter  of  it  where  the  bosom-adder 
lies  coiled  up.  III.  When  the  discovery  is  made,  the  path  of  the  spiritual 
combatant  BiiCOMES  CLEAR,  HOWEVER  ARDUOUS.  Your  fighting  is  to  be  no  longer  a 
flourishing  of  the  arms  in  the  air  ;  it  is  to  assume  a  definite  form,  it  is  to  be  a 
combat  with  the  bosom  sin.  Appropriate  mortifications  must  be  adopted,  such  as 
common  sense  will  sug-^est.  If  in.lolence  be  the  besetting  sin,  we  must  watch 
against  slovenHne^^s  in  little  things  ;  if  selfishness,  we  must  lay  ourselves  out  to 
consider  the  wishes  of  otheis;  if  discontent,  we  must  review  the  many  bright 
p  >ints  of  our  position,  and  seek  our  happiness  in  our  work.  But  the  great  matter 
to  be  attended  to  in  each  case  is;  that  the  whole  forces  of  the  will  sh"uld  be  con- 
centrated for  a  time  in  that  one  part  of  the  field,  in  which  the  besetting  sin  has 
entrenched  itself.     Thus  point  and  derjniteuess  will  be  given  to  Christian  effort. 

IV.    For    EACH    one    of    us,    no   business    can    be    of    more    URGENT    IMPORTANCE    THAN 

iHis  DiscovFKY  OF  OUR  BESETTING  SIN.  In  conclusion,  he  who  prays,  "  Showme 
myself.  Lord,"  should  take  good  care  to  add,  lest  self-knowledge  plunge  him  into 
despair,  "  Show  me  also  Thyself."  The  course  recommended  will  probably  lead  us 
to  the  conclusion  that  our  heart,  which  showed  so  fair  without,  is  an  Augean  stable, 
which  it  requires  a  moral  Hercules  to  cleanse ;  but  the  love  of  Christ  and  grace  of 
Christ  are  stronger  than  our  corruptions.  (Dean  Goulhiirn.)  Christian  conflict  :— 
The  prominent  idea  of  spiritual  life  given  in  the  New  Testament  is  that  of  conflict. 
There  is  hardly  one  of  the  epistles  of  Paul  in  which  the  thought  is  not  presented 
in  some  form.  The  same  feature  is  found  in  the  Epiotles  to  the  churches  of  Asia. 
I.  Some  characteristics  of  the  Christian  strife.  1.  Its  individuality.  It  is 
the  personal  struggle  of  each  man  against  tlie  enemies  of  his  salvation.  Of  the 
ultimate  issue  of  the  great  strife  of  all  time  there  is  no  doubt.  In  other  warfares 
each  soldier  receives  a  certain  amount  of  glory  from  the  success  of  the  host — but 
not  so  here.  Each  man  for  himself  must  fight  the  good  tight,  and  by  God's  grace 
lay  hold  on  everlasting  life.  2.  Its  reality.  There  was  a  time  when  the  Christians 
were  "eveiy where  spokt-n  against" — when  Paul  knew  that  in  every  city  bonds 
and  imprisonment  awaited  him  ;  and  in  the  altered  state  of  the  times,  and  the 
change  in  feelings  of  men  towards  the  gospel.  Now  the  flesh  is  not  less  carnal, 
the  world  less  alluring,  the  devil  less  Satanic.  3.  Its  variety.  It  is  manifold  in 
))Ower  but  one  in  puipose.  So  is  it— (1)  With  the  outward  and  visible  conflict. 
Sometimes  it  is  a  mere  strife  of  opinion,  or  it  is  a  struggle  for  the  assertion  of  the 
rights  of  conscience,  or  it  is  the  resistance  of  virtue  to  some  form  of  iniquity,  or 
tlie  manly  effort  in  the  cause  of  right  to  break  the  chains  of  tyranny.  (2)  With 
the  inner  conflict  of  individuals.  Some  have  to  contend  only  against  intellectual 
difficulties— in  others  it  is  the  insidious  growth  of  the  world-spirit  which  they  have 
to  watch  and  resist.  Others,  again,  have  to  contend  against  the  self-righteous 
temper,  or  the  mean,  envious  spirit,  or  the  fierce  passion.  But,  whatever  pliase  the 
contiict  assumes,  we  are  contending  against  an  enemy,  who  adapts  his  attacks  to 
meet  our  individual  cases,  and  the  issue  at  stake  is  exactly  the  same.  4.  Its  bitter- 
ness. (1)  There  is  an  intensity  in  the  opposition  directed  against  the  gospel,  which 
at  first  is  not  easy  to  explain,  'if  the  Bible  be  not  true,  our  faith  inflicts  no  injury  to 
others.  It  is  true  that  Christianity  pronounces  a  certain  doom  on  unbelief,  but  if 
it  be,  as  infidels  would  have  us  think,  a  human  invention,  these  threatenings  need 
awaken  no  anxiety,  and  provoke  no  opposition.     Yet  there  is  no  weapon  that  can 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.   CORINTHIANS.  583 


be  employed  against  the  gospel  that  is  not  put  in  requisition.  (2)  So  with  regard 
to  Christian  practice.  If  Christians  are  striving  after  too  hl^h  an  ideal,  they  are 
the  sufferers.  Why  employ  against  tlum  the  weapons  of  riiiicule  and  calumny — 
why  not  treat  them  as  weak  enthusiasts  to  be  pitied  rather  than  seriously  opposed? 
Yet  it  has  never  been  so.  Tlie  light  will  ever  be  hateful  to  those  who  love  the 
darkness.  (3)  As  in  the  world,  so  in  the  Christian's  heart.  Here  is  a  battle  of 
life  and  for  life,  where  no  quarter  will  be  given,  and  no  compromise  can  be  attempted. 
This  is,  of  all  kinds  of  contests,  the  most  fearful.  It  is  not  one  of  those  mock 
encounters  of  tlie  tourneys  of  chivalry,  where  knights  sought  to  prove  their  prowess, 
without  receiving  or  inflicting  deadly  injury.  Eut  it  is  a  deadly  wrestle  with  the 
foe  in  which  we  must  conquer  or  die.  J  I.  Some  qualities  of  the  Christian 
SOLDIER.  1.  Perfect  consecration.  A  whole-hearted  service  is  what  the  "  Captain 
of  our  salvation  "  expects  from  all  who  follow  Him.  This  warfare  must  be  the  one 
business  of  his  life  who  would  "  fight  a  good  light,  and  lay  hold  on  everlasting 
life."  2.  Simple  faith.  This  is  emphatically  the  "  good  fight  of  faith."  It  is  the 
struggle  between  the  love  of  "  the  thin^rs  that  are  !-een  and  temporal  and  the  things 
which  are  unseen  and  eternal,"  and  only  through  faith  can  the  spiritual  principle 
be  victorious.  Faith  in  the  leader,  not  in  the  excellence  of  the  cause — in  a  person, 
not  in  a  principle — in  Christ  Himself  and  not  in  any  creed,  will  give  us  the  victory. 
Even  in  earthly  conflicts  nothing  seems  to  breathe  such  spirit  into  a  host  as  the 
presence  of  a  favourite  captain.  Have  faith  in  Christ,  and  ueilher  earth  nor  hell 
can  prevail  ngainst  you.  8.  Undoubting  assurance  hs  to  the  issue.  This  is  the 
grand  distinction  between  this  and  all  earthly  toils.  There  a  man  may  be  faithful 
and  diligent  and  yet  fail.  But  here  we  "run  not  as  uncertainly,  we  fi.ht  not 
as  one  that  bcateth  the  air."  "  He  who  h.ith  begun  a  good  work  in  us  will  per- 
form the  same  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  Conclusion  :  This  is  a  confliet  in 
which  no  man  can  be  a  mere  spectator.  We  are  all  lighting  under  the  banners  of 
the  King  of  kings  or  of  the  Prince  of  darkness  ;  to  which  host  do  you  belong  ? 
The  question  is  surely  not  to  be  lightly  dismissed,  since  on  it  hang  the  issues 
of  life  and  death.     (J.  Guiiiness  liogers,  B.A.) 

Ver.  27.  I  keep  under  my  body  .  .  .  le;t  ...  I  myself  should  be  a  castaT7ay. — 
Keeping  under  the  hwhj  : — The  body  is  a  bad  master  though  it  may  be  a  t:ood 
servant.  St.  Paul  does  not  wish  to  be  rid  of  it,  but  he  desires  to  put  it  in  its  proper 
place.  I.  It  is  quite  esse>;tial  to  a  high  morality  to  have  a  respectfcl  sense 
OF  THE  niGNiTY  OF  THE  BODY.  What  our  Lord  Himself  was  pleased  to  wear,  and 
wears  now,  must,  on  that  very  account,  be  honourable,  and  His  teaching  and  His 
wonder-works  were  addressed  as  much  to  the  body  as  to  the  soul.  Theie  are  times 
when  it  is  as  right  to  attend  to  the  body  as  to  the  poul.  Are  they  not  equally  the 
subjects  of  God's  creation  and  redemption,  of  the  Fatln'r's  care  and  love?'  Never 
look  upon  it  as  a  pious  thing  to  depreciate  the  body.  We  are  not  depreciating  the 
body  when  we  say,  "  I  keep  under  the  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection."  The 
very  connection  di>es  away  with  that  thought.  For  does  the  racer,  the  wrestler,  the 
boxer,  despise  his  body  ?  Is  not  it  rather  his  glory  ?  Is  not  it  because  he  values  it 
very  highly  that  he  so  treats  it?  II.  With  this  cautio.v,  we  may  now  observe 
what  place  the  body  occupies  in  connection  with  the  spirit.  Originally  the 
whole  man  was  made  in  the  image  and  after  the  likeness  of  God.  Then  came  the 
fall.  It  was  equally  through  the  body  as  through  the  mind.  In  due  time,  Christ 
came,  and  equally  redeemed  both.  But  now  here  comes  in  the  important  distinc- 
tion which  determines  everything.  In  the  renewed  man  a  change  immediately 
takes  place  in  his  soul,  but  his  body  is  not  clianged.  That  will  take  place  at  the 
resurrection.  We  all  of  us  have  felt  the  trouble  of  our  bodies.  One  moment  they 
incite  us  by  their  too  much  strength  to  pride  and  self-indulgence,  and  the  next  they 
drag  us  down  to  the  dust.  They  are  always  carrying  us  too  far,  or  preventing  us 
from  going  far  enough.  To  every  ijhy.-ical  tempei  anient  there  is  its  own  special 
dangtr — one  to  yontij,  another  to  age — one  to  health,  another  to  sickness — to  each 
according  to  his  circumstances  and  constitution ;  but  to  all  it  is  little  better  than 
"  the  bod.y  of  this  death."  But,  remember,  there  is  not  a  member  or  a  nerve  in 
the  body  but  it  is  capable  of  being  a  great  sin  or  a  high  virtue.  Every  part  admits 
of  sanctification.  All  are  given  for  a  purpose,  and  that  puipose  is  to  glorify  God. 
What  we  have  to  do  is  not  to  destroy  anythirg,  but  to  guide  it — not  to  despise,  but 
to  elevate — not  to  cast  off  as  an  enemy,  but  to  employ  as  a  servant.  Let  me  take 
an  instance  or  two.  1.  There  is  the  love  of  dress.  It  is  a  natural  instinct,  and  is 
in  itself  a  perfectly  innocent  tbing.     And  seme  attention  as  to  personal  appearance 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ixi 


is  inseparable  from  everj-  rightly-constitntefl  mind.  Yet  every  one  knows  that  the 
love  of  dress  is  one  of  the  greatest  tem;>talions  of  the  age — to  selfishness,  vanity, 
extravagance,  and  siu.  Wliatshall we  do,  then,  with  it?  Crush  it?  No.  Employ 
it,  control  it,  subject  it.  Always  act  upon  a  principle,  and  lay  down  for  yourselves 
certain  rules  which  your  own  judgment  and  conscience  approve.  Settle  with  your- 
self how  much  your  dress  ought  to  cost  in  the  year,  and  be  faithful  to  your  estimate. 
Dress  in  the  way  th:it  will  please  those  whom  you  most  ought  to  please,  and  not  to 
please  yourself.  Make  it  a  school  of  refinement  and  thought.  So  you  \<\\\  turn  a 
dangerous  thing  into  a  good  discii)line,  and  a  positive  grace.  2.  In  like  manner,  as 
to  food.  Guide  your  conscience  in  this  matter  by  the  Bible  ;  then  live  by  your  con- 
science. Take  care  that  you  live  unseltisbly.  Kemember  whom  you  follow  ;  and 
amoDs^  vrhom,  in  this  world  of  want  and  suffering,  you  are  living.  3.  The  same 
consideration  will  apply  to  all  worldly  pleasures  and  amusements,  and  all  corporeal 
gratifications.  What  is  meant  for  pure  and  holy  uses,  keep  for  pure  and  holy  uses. 
(J.    Vaughan,    M.A.)  Fhysical   conditions: — This   language   suggests — I.   The 

MANY-siDEDXEss  OF  ScEiPTUKE,  OK,  ITS  I'OLAr.iTY.  1.  One  eud  of  a  bar  of  magnetised 
iron  will  attract  what  the  other  repels.  Now  break  the  bar  in  the  middle  ;  and  of 
either  half  the  same  will  be  true.  And  so  you  may  keep  on  breaking,  imtil  you 
come  to  an  atom,  and  even  in  it  the  two  poles  will  be  found  to  exist.  2.  As  wonder- 
ful is  the  polarity  of  truth.  Take  this,  "  Hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  clay," 
(fee,  and  i)lace  it  alongside  of  the  text.  Bring  the  latter  near  to  a  Calvinist,  and  it 
repels  and  is  repelled.  Bring  it  near  to  an  Arminian,  and  it  attracts  and  is  itself 
attracted.  And  so,  rice  versa,  of  the  former  text.  But  as  in  the  magnet  there  is 
but  one  force  manifesting  itself  in  duality,  so  with  God's  sovereignty  and  man's 
responsibility.  God  cannot  be  disappointed ;  yet  man  is  free.  3.  Let  the  theo- 
logian, then,  follow  the  example  of  the  philosopher  who  does  not  say,  as  he  looks 
upon  the  needle,  "  There  must  be  some  mistake  in  the  matter  ";  but  "  This  is  a 
great  mystery :  yet  there  are  the  two  poles,  and  one  is  as  deserving  of  my  attention 
as  the  other."  II.  EESPONsiBifjiTY  for  the  lower  or  physical  conditions  of 
SPIRITUAL  life.  As  a  plant  has  its  enemies  which  crawl  upon  the  ground,  and 
others  which  fly  in  the  air,  so  the  spiritual  life  has  its  antagonists  who  meet  it  on 
every  level.  There  is  the  danger  from  intcUectualism,  imagination,  and  the  affec- 
tions. Then  also,  on  the  lowest  and  widest  level,  in  the  physical  region,  there  is 
often  the  marshalling  of  forces  to  oppose  all  growth  in  grace.  And  these  are  what 
the  apostle  alludes  to.  There  is — 1.  The  excessive  development  of  physical  appetite 
and  passion.  That  this  has  ;hi  fearlul  power  implied  in  the  text  is  veiy  evident. 
Its  first  and  most  patent  effect  is  upon  the  religious  life.  Take  the  professor  who 
is  given  to  intemperance.  Before  you  can  trace  it  upon  the  countenance,  or  in 
the  domestic  sphere,  you  will  be  able  to  note  its  influence  upon  the  pulse  of  the 
man's  religion.  The  man  dies  like  some  trees,  from  the  heart  outward.  First  and 
foremost  dies  that  within  him  which  is  the  very  core  of  his  manhood — his  spiritual 
sense.  There  is  much  with  which  the  indulged  vice  may  make  some  sort  of  terms 
for  a  time,  love  of  family,  desire  for  a  good  name,  many  of  the  higher  tastes,  ambi- 
tions, and  activities.  But  vice  and  spiritual  life  cannot  exist  together.  The  life  of 
the  one  is  the  death  of  the  other.  2.  Too  great  absorption  in  the  cares  of  this 
world.  The  Bible  tells  us  to  be  "Not  slothful  in  business."  But  there  must  be 
subordination  of  the  temporal  interests  to  the  eternal.  A  man  is  like  a  vessel.  He 
can  hold  so  much,  and  no  more.  The  cares  of  this  world  may  be  poured  into  his 
soul  in  such  quantity  as  to  leave  room  for  nothing  else.  Many  a  man  has  no  taste, 
capacity,  strength,  time,  for  anything  but  business.  How  can  the  spiritual  hold  its 
own  in  such  ?  'Where  will  you  find  place  for  religion  ?  The  good  seed  is  choked. 
And  the  result  is  the  same  if  honour  instead  of  wealth  fills  the  man.  The  condition 
of  danger  is,  that  a  man  be  filled  with  the  cares  of  this  world.  And  these  may  be 
generated  by  poverty  as  by  affluence.  How  can  a  man  grow  in  Christian  life  who 
cannot  forget  his  worldly  cares  lon^  enough  to  say  the  Lord's  Prayer  ?  And  but 
one  result  is  possible  ;  the  religious  life  must  die  of  starvation,  and  the  man  bpcome 
a  castaway.  3.  Tlie  atmosphere  of  seltish  indolence.  Work  is  ordained  of  God  as 
the  one  condition  of  healthful  development.  "  Satan  finds  some  mischief  still  for 
idle  hands  to  do."  It  is  the  very  ruin  of  thousands  that  they  have  nothing  to  do. 
And  that  which  was  made  the  condition  of  human  development  at  first  Chiist  has 
lifted  up  and  sanctified  to  the  end  of  Christian  growth  and  safety.  "  Son,  go  work 
in  My  vineyard."  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross,"  &c. 
4.  The  predominance  of  irreligious  association,  or,  what  is  the  same  tbing,  living  in 
a  bad  moral  atmosphere.     Good  air,  God's  sunshine — these  are  more  to  the  body 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CORINTHIANS.  585 

than  a'l  else.  Let  a  man  breathe  in  noxious  gases  day  by  day,  and  it  makes  no 
difference  what  otlier  special  precautious  he  may  take,  his  health  will  be  gradually 
undermined.  So  is  it  of  moral  and  spiritual  health.  "  Evil  commuuicationa 
corrupt  good  manners."  Hence  the  importance  which  is  laid  upon  the  separation 
of  Christians  from  the  world,  and  upon  the  Christian  communion  which  has  been 
prepared  for  them.  No  man  is  strong  enough  to  stand  by  himself.  And  it  was 
never  intended  that  the  greater  part  of  any  Christian  life  should  be  spent  outside  of 
all  reUgious  association.  Conclusion :  In  view  of  all  that  has  been  said  it  follows — 
1.  That  Christian  cultivation  covers  a  much  wider  sphere  than  many  seem  to  think. 
First  iu  order,  as  a  means  of  grace,  stands  the  Church.  And  then,  secondly,  out- 
side of  the  means  of  grace,  there  are  others  none  the  less  needful,  and  whose  places 
cannot  be  supplied  by  tlie  Church  and  her  ordinances.  What  matters  it  how  much 
a  man  prays,  if  he  is  living  in  intemperance  or  impurity  ?  What  good  will  the 
communion  do  her  who  has  sunken  down  into  the  deptbs  of  a  perfectly  selfish  and 
indolent  life  ?  And  take  the  man  whose  heart  is  eaten  up  with  the  cares  of  this 
world.  Can  the  Word  of  (Jod  dwell  richly  in  such  a  one  ?  2.  That  there  is  no 
point  in  the  Christian's  progress  at  which  he  can  aflord  to  relax  in  vigilant  watch 
and  care  of  the  physical  surroundings  of  his  life.  3.  That  there  is  a  very  wide 
sphere  in  which  human  activity  may  co-operate  with  the  saving  power  of  God. 
Many  Christian  hands  are  idle  because  they  do  not  know  what  to  do.  To  such  I 
say,  look  at  Paul.  Hear  his  words,  "  I  keep  under  my  body  and  bring  it  into  sub- 
jection." (.S'.  <S'.  Mitchell,  D.D.)  Sell-iiianteri/ : — 1.  The  simple  etymological 
sense  of  the  term  is  "  I  strike  under  the  eye. "  The  figure  is  that  of  a  pugilistic 
encounter.  Paul  imagines  to  himself  his  body  as  rising  up  against  his  higher 
nature ;  and  against  this  foe  he  directs  his  well-aimed  blows  ;  not  to  destroy  or  even 
mutilate  it,  but  to  render  it  what  it  always  ought  to  be — the  obedient  slave  of  the 
inner  nature.  2.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  does  the  apostle  teach  us  that  the  body  is 
the  source  of  all  inward  evil  ?  On  the  contrary,  no  man  exalts  the  human  body 
more.  He  represents  it  as  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Members  of  Christ." 
He  prays  that  our  body,  as  well  as  our  spirit  and  soul,  may  be  preserved  faultless. 
How,  then,  are  we  to  understand  the  phrase  ? — whence  tliis  mysterious  collision  ? 
3.  St.  Paul  is  here  speaking  of  his  life's  work,  in  pursuing  which  he  makes  a  dis- 
covery which  all  of  us  have  to  make  sooner  or  later — that  he  who  would  conquer  a 
world  must  be  ready  to  conquer  himself.  In  vers.  4-6  St.  Paul  indicates  three 
special  respects  in  which  he  had  turned  aside  from  the  reasonable  demands  of  nature 
for  his  work's  sake.  "  Have  we  not  power  to  eat  and  to  driuk  ?  " — that  is  to  say, 
he  might  have  secured  for  himself  a  comfortable  competence.  "  Have  we  not  power 
to  lead  about  a  sister?  "  itc.  He  might  have  surrounded  himself  with  all  the  plea- 
sures of  domestic  life.  "  Have  not  Barnabas  and  I  power  to  forbear  working?  "  It 
certainly  did  seem  reasonable  that  one  who  worked  so  hard  for  souls  should  be  saved 
from  the  weariness  of  physical  toil.  And  what  had  he  to  say  to  these  natural  and 
reasonable  demands?  Nothing  but  his  work,  and  the  will  of  God  in  that  work. 
And  when  he  found  nature  urging,  as  nature  will,  her  demands  for  some  degree  of 
consideration,  just  as  our  Lord  discovered  Satan  in  the  person  of  the  disciple  who 
dissuaded  Him  from  the  Cross  ;  so  the  apostle  discovered  a  foe  in  his  own  flesh,  when 
that  flesh  shrank  from  the  path  of  self-denial,  and,  smiting  his  antagonist  down,  he 
consigned  it  to  its  own  proper  place  ;  from  henceforth  thou  art  to  dictate  thy  terms 
no  longer;  thou  art  slave,  and  not  master!  4.  And  now  for  our  practical  lesson. 
We,  too,  are  striving  for  the  mastery  in  a  world  which  has  been  devastated  by  evil. 
Do  we  not  also  find  that  our  bodies  rise  up  and  resist  the  claims  made  on  them  by 
the  work  which  has  to  be  done?  (1)  It  maybe  perhaps,  with  us,  rather  in  little 
things  that  the  conflict  has  to  be  waged.  You  know  that  there  are  sick  and  poor  to 
be  visited.  Love  for  souls,  and  for  God,  would  prompt  you  to  set  forth  ;  but  it  is  a  cold 
wintry  day.  How  the  bodv  pleads.  Sit  still;  another  day  will  do  as  well.  Or 
perhaps  it  is  so  small  a  matter  as  rising  from  your  bed  in  the  morning  sufficiently 
early  to  give  yourself  time  for  prayer  and  the  study  of  God's  Word  ;  or  it  is  your 
time  for  prayer  in  the  evening,  after  the  busy  day  of  toil ;  or  it  is  that  you  have  a 
call  to  visit  the  haunts  of  wretchedness  and  misery,  where  everything  is  repulsive. 
These  are  occasions  on  which  we  too  have  to  arm  our  right  hand  with  spiritual 
power,  aiid  to  smite  our  body  down,  forcibly  reminding  it  of  its  true  position.  (2) 
Or  perhaps  the  body  asserts  itself  not  so  much  in  forbidding  the  painful  as  sug- 
gesting the  pleasant — now  appealing  to  our  lower  appetites  with  suggestions  of 
indulgences.  The  mind  that  is  taken  up  in  any  degree  with  the  thought.  What 
shall  we  eat  ?  or.  What  shall  we  drink  ?  &c.,  is  making  provision  for  the  flesh,  and 

VOL.  I,  38 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

in  doing  so  is  unconsciously  resigning  its  true  supremacy.  The  same  thing  is  true 
of  those  higher  forms  of  gratification  which  none  the  less  have  the  body  as  their 
subject.  There  is  no  harm  in  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  the  eye,  or  of  the  ear,  but 
as  soon  as  we  give  ourselves  over  to  it,  it  becomes  guilty.  If  God  throws  an  innocent 
pleasure  in  our  way,  we  are  not  called  upon  to  suspect  the  gift ;  but  when  we  go  out 
of  our  way  to  pursue  the  pleasurable,  the  higher  part  of  our  nature  is  yielding  itself 
as  the  slave  of  the  lower,  o.  How  did  St.  Paul  smite  his  body  down,  and  reduce  it 
into  the  condition  of  a  slave  ?  This  much  surely  is  obvious — a  man  is -no  match  for 
himself !  He  lets  us  into  the  secret  by  giving  us  a  practical  direction  :  "  If  ye,"  he 
says,  "  through  the  Spirit,  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  live."  All 
turns  upon  this.  "  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh." 
(IF.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Self-mastery  : — Look  at  the  chariot-drivers.     Do  you 

not  see  how  exceedingly  careful  and  strict  they  are  with  themselves  in  their  training- 
jjractice,  their  labours,  their  diet,  and  all  the  rest,  that  they  may  not  be  thrown  down 
from  their  chariots,  and  be  dra<.'ged  along  by  the  reins  ?  See  what  a  thing  art  is  ! 
Often  even  a  strong  man  cannot  master  a  single  horse ;  but  a  mere  boy,  who  has 
learnt  the  art,  shall  often  take  the  pair  in  hand,  and  with  ease  lead  them  and  drive 
them  where  he  will.  Nay,  in  India,  it  is  said  that  a  huge  monster  of  an'  elephant 
will  yield  to  a  stripling  of  fifteen,  who  manages  him  with  the  utmost  ease.  To  what 
purpose  have  I  said  all  this  ?  To  show  that,  if  by  dint  of  study  and  practice  we  can 
ti*aiu  into  submission  even  elephants  and  wild  horses,  mucii  more  the  passions 
within  us.  (CItrysostom.)  Self-government: — A  friend  once  asked  an  aged  man 
what  caused  him  so  often  to  complain  of  pain  and  weariness  in  the  evening. 
"  Alas  !  "  said  he,  "  I  have  every  day  so  much  to  do  ;  for  I  have  two  falcons  to  tame, 
two  hares  to  keep  from  running  away,  two  hawks  to  manage,  a  serpent  to  confine,  a 
lion  to  chain,  and  a  sick  man  to  tend  and  wait  upon."  "  Why,  you  must  be  joking," 
said  his  friend  ;  *'  surely  no  man  can  have  all  these  things  to  do  at  once."  "  Indeed, 
I  am  not  joking,"  said  the  old  man;  "  but  what  I  have  told  }0\x  is  the  sad  and 
sober  truth;  for  the  two  falcons  are  my  two  eyes,  which  I  must  diligently  guard, 
lest  something  should  please  them  which  may  be  hurtful  to  my  salvation;  the  two 
hares  are  my  feet,  which  I  must  hold  back  lest  they  should  run  after  evil  objects, 
and  walk  in  the  ways  of  sin ;  the  two  hawks  are  my  two  hands,  which  I  must  train 
and  keep  to  work  in  order  that  I  may  be  able  to  provide  for  myself  and  for 
my  brethren  who  are  in  need ;  the  serpent  is  my  tongue,  which  I  must  always 
keep  m  with  a  bridle,  lest  it  should  speak  anything  unseemly;  the  lion  is  my  heart, 
with  which  I  have  to  maintain  a  continual  fight  in  order  that  vanity  and  pride  may 
not  fill  it,  but  that  the  grace  of  God  may  dwell  and  work  there  ;  the  sick  man  is  my 
whole  body,  which  is  always  needing  my  watchfulness  and  care.  All  this  daily 
wears  out  my  strength."  {Preacher's Promptuary.)  Spiritual  caution: — Observe 
this  was  penned  towards  the  close  of  the  apostle's  career.  Full  of  years,  and  laden 
with  trophies,  he  still  thinks  it  necessary  to  keej^  war  with  the  flesh.  View  him — I, 
As  AN  AGED  MAN.  There  is  no  i^eriod  in  which  the  spiritual  warrior  may  relax  his 
training.  Each  season  of  life  has  its  aiDpropriate  and  dominant  passion.  II.  As  an 
ADVANCED  CHRISTIAN.  Men  mav  make  great  advances  in  religious  knowledge,  but 
be  imperfect.  Consider  Paul's  attainments  in  theology — yet  still  he  struggles ;  he 
is  still  imperfect.  III.  As  an  experienced  minister.  A  minister  may  eloquently 
preach,  and  people  be  delighted  to  listen — to  real  blessings  to  which  both  he  and 
they  be  strangers.  Again,  people  may  be  converted,  and  yet  their  minister  be  a 
castaway.  So  parents,  masters,  teachers,  may  help  others  to  Christ,  yet  never  find 
Him  themselves.  Personal  religion,  including  persevering  conflict,  essential  to  final 
salvation.     (Homili-t.)  Lest  I  he  a  ca.-tau-ay  :—l.  What  is  it  to  be  A  "cast- 

away "  ?  One  who  had  been  pronounced  by  the  judges  to  be  disqualified  for  the 
Greek  games,  or  one  who,  having  been  permitted  to  enter  into  the  contest,  fails.  Or  the 
expression  may  have  reference  to  metals,  which,  when  the  mass  has  beeir  "  proved  " 
to  be  dross,  is  rejected.  Thus  we  read  of  "reprobate  silver."  The  theological 
idea  of  reprobation  does  not  belong  to  this  word,  it  is  simply  intrinsic  worthlessness, 
brought  to  light  by  the  scrutiny  of  God's  eye,  the  searching  efficacy  of  His  Word, 
or  a  providential  dispensation.  1.  From  whom  may  we  be  castaway.  (1)  God. 
God  "  drove  out  the  njan  "  Adam;  and  Cain  "went  out  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  "  ;  and  David  says,  "  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy  presence,"  &c.  (2)  Christ, 
who  said,  "Him  that  cometh  unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Yet  He  drove 
the  buyers  and  sellers  out  of  the  Temple  ;  ejected  demons  ;  denounced  the  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  and  foretold  to  them  their  doom.  (3)  The  Snirit  of  God,  who  "will 
not  always  strive  with  men."     •'  Ye  do  always  resist  the  Hcly  Ghost,"  said  Stephen 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.   COIUNTHIAXS.  587 

to  the  Jewish  nation  ;  and  at  length  the  Jewish  nation  was  cast  away.  A  man  may 
sin  till  the  Spirit  of  God  will  let  him  alone,  (-i)  Good  men  ;  rejected  of  the  Church, 
excommunicated.  The  salt  having  lost  its  savour  is  good  for  nothing  but  to  be  cast 
away.  (.5)  Certain  societies.  You  are  blackballed,  and  your  rejection  may  involve 
shame  and  infamy.  (C)  The  angels  of  God.  Did  they  not  turn  their  backs  upon 
Sodom  ?  Did  they  not  smite  Egypt  ?  (7)  Yourselves  ;  and  this  in  the  case  of  au 
apostate  is  not  that  salutary  self-loathing  which  is  associated  with  hope  and  pardon, 
but  that  of  darkness  and  despair.  2.  When '?  In  jjart  now  ;  as  when  a  man  is 
excluded  from  the  fellowship  of  the  wise  and  good.  Yet  very  often  this  may  not  be 
carried  into  effect;  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  tares,  Christ  told  His  disciples  to  let 
them  grow  together  until  harvest.  The  time  of  final  discrimination,  then,  is  the 
end  of  the  man's  earthly  probation.  When  he  departs  from  this  world,  he  is  rejected 
of  heaven.  We  read  of  those  who  were  "  without,"  of  the  virgins  who  weie  cast 
away  ;  of  those  to  whom  Christ  will  say,  "  Depart  from  Me,  I  never  knew  you,  ye 
workers  of  iniquity."  The  most  affecting  thing  in  the  universe  is  to  be  "  a  cast- 
away," finally  and  for  ever  rejected.  II.  The  means  which  the  apostle  took  to 
PREVENT  this.  The  text  is  only  one  among  many.  1.  He  abjured  confidence  in 
himself,  and  his  own  virtue  and  excellence  (Phil.  iii.).  He  grounds  his  hope  of 
eternal  life  on  the  atonement  of  Christ,  and  resting  as  he  did  in  Christ,  it  was  im- 
possible for  him  to  be  "  a  castaway."  2.  He  lived,  and  loved,  and  laboured  by  faith 
(Gal.  ii.  20).  It  is  when  the  love  of  Christ  is  not  present  in  a  man's  heart  and 
mind,  that  he  is  in  danger  of  being  a  castaway.  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema  maranatha."  3.  He  kept  near  to  God  in  prayer. 
If  you  cast  off'  prayer,  you  will  be  in  peril ;  if  you  continue  in  prayer  and  supplica- 
tion, you  will  not.  4.  Taking  these  points  antecedently  to  the  one  suggested  in  the 
text,  our  course  becomes  clear.  "  But  I  keep  under  my  body,"  &c.  Now  the  apostle 
does  not  mean  anything  ascetical;  but  that  the  body  was  subjected  to  the  reason  ; 
and  if  any  one  of  you  has  acquired  a  mastery  over  the  animal  appetites  and 
instincts,  he  is  on  his  way  not  to  be  a  castaway,  but  to  be  approved  aud  glorified  of 
God.  5.  What  comes  after  this  is  sweet  and  sacred  resignation  to  the  Divine  will. 
"  I  am  ready,  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus."  6.  The  final  thing  is  that  Paul  laid  aside  every  weight.  "  This 
one  thing  I  do,''  &c.  III.  The  tkicjiphant  issue.  I  know  not  anyone  name  which 
surpasses  that  of  Paul.  He  is  no  cast  iway  as  respects  the  honour  done  to  his  name 
in  the  Church.  And  then  in  the  world  how  has  his  character  been  appreciated  even 
by  those  who  have  rejected  his  doctrine  !  What  an  immense  effect  have  his  writings 
had  on  the  condition  of  society  and  on  human  affairs!  Then  as  resj)ects  his  admission 
to  heaven,  one  moment  there  is  the  axe  of  Nero,  the  next  he  bears,  "  Well  done,  good 
and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."     (•/.  Straiten.)  A 

Castaway  : — Observe— 1.  How  earnestly  Paul  sought  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (ver. 
26).  It  was  long  after  his  conversion  that  Paul  writes  in  this  manner.  2.  One 
particular  in  which  he  was  very  earnest.  "  I  keep  under  my  body,"  etc.  (ver.  25). 
3.  His  reason  for  all  this  earnestness — "Lestwhen,"  &c.  What  is  it  to  be  cast  away  ? 
Wicked  men  shall  be  cast  away — I.  Fr.oJi  God  (Matt.  xxv.  41 ;  2  Thess.  i.  9).  From — 

1.  The  fruition  of  God.  2.  The  favour  of  God—"  In  Thy  favour  is  life."  8.  The 
blessing  of  God.  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  blessing.  Separate  a  man  from  God 
finally,  and  no  creature  can  give  him  joy.  II.  From  the  Holt  Spirit.  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  now  dealing  and  striving  with  natural  men.  When  the  day  of  grace  is 
done  the  Spirit  will  strive  no  more — 1.  Through  ordinances.  There  will  be  no 
family  worship  in  hell — no  Bible,  no  Sabbath,  no  preached  gospel.  2.  Through 
providences.  There  will  be  no  more  poverty  or  riches — no  more  sickness  or 
bereavements.  3.  Through  conscience  it  will  condemn,  but  it  will  not  restrain. 
III.  From  ALL  creatures.     1.  The  angels  will  no  longer  take  any  interest  in  you. 

2.  The  redeemed  will  no  longer  pray  for  you,  nor  shed  another  tear  for  you.  3. 
Ministers  will  no  more  desire  your  salvation.  It  will  no  more  be  their  work.  4. 
Even  devils  will  cast  you  off.  As  long  as  you  remain  on  earth,  the  devil  keeps  you 
in  his  train  ;  then  you  will  be  a  part  of  his  torment,  and  he  will  hate  you  and  torment 
you,  becau'^e  you  deceived  him,  and  he  deceived  you.  IV.  From  themselves.  1.  The 
understanding  will  be  clear  and  full  to  apprehend  the  real  nature  of  j'our  misery. 
2.  The  will  in  you  will  be  all  contrary  to  God's  will.  3.  Your  conscience,  God's 
viceregent,  will  accuse  you  of  all  your  sins.  4.  Your  memory  will  be  very  clear.  5. 
Your  anticipations — everlasting  despair.  Conclusion  :  Let  believers  learn  Paul's 
earnest  diligence.  A  wicked  life  will  end  in  being  a  castaway.  These  two  are  linked 
together,  and  no  man  can  sunder  them.     [II.  M.  McCheyne,  M.A.)  Wrecked  for 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

two  worlds  : — Ministers  of  religion  may  finally  be  lost.     The  apostle  indicates  that 
possibility.     Cardinal  Wolsey,  after  Laving  been  petted  by  kings,  died  in  darkness. 
There  have  been  cases  of  shipwreck  -where  all  on  board  escaped  excepting  the  cap- 
tain.     You  all  understand   the   figure.     There  are  men  who,  by  their  sins  and 
temptations,  are  thrown  helpless !     Driven  before  the  gale,  wrecked,  cast  away. 
Among  the  causes  of  this  calamity  are — I.  False  lights  on  the  beach.     This  waa 
often  so  in  olden  times.     There  are  all  kinds  of  lanterns  swung  on  the  beach — • 
philosophical,  educational,  humanitarian.     Men  look  at  them,  and  are  deceived, 
when  there  is  nothing  but  the  lighthouse  of  the  gospel  that  can  keep  them  from 
becoming  castaways.     Once,  on  Wolf  Crag  lighthouse,  they  tried  to  build  a  copper 
figure  of  a  wolf  with  its  mouth  open,  so  that  the  storms  beating  into  it  the  wolf 
would  howl.     Of  course  it  was  a  failure.     And  so  all  new  inventions  for  the  saving 
of  a  man's  soul  are  unavailing.    You  might  better  destroy  all  the  great  lighthouses 
on  the  dangerous  coasts  than  to  put  out  God's  great  ocean-lamp — the  gospel.     II. 
The  sudden  swoop  of  a  tempest.     A  vessel  is  sailing  along  in  the  East  Indies; 
suddenly  the  breeze  freshens ;  but  before  they  can  square  the  booms  the  vessel  is 
in  the  grip  of  a  tornado,  and  falls  over  into  the  trough  of  the  sea,  and 'broadside 
rolls  on  to  the  beach  and  keels  over,  leaving  the  crew  to  struggle  in  the  merciless 
surf.     And  so  there  are  thousands  destroyed  through  the  sudden  swoop  of  tempta- 
tions.   Some  great  inducement  to  worldliness,  or  temper,  or  dissipation  comes  upon 
them.     If  they  had  time  to  deliberate,  they  could  stand  it ;  but  the  temptation 
came  so  suddenly,  and  they  perish.     It  is  the  first  step  that  costs ;  the  second  is 
easier ;  and  the  third  ;  and  on  to  the  last.     Once  having  broken  loose  from  the 
anchor,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  tie  the  parted  strands.     III.  Sheer  recklessness.     The 
average  of  human  life  on  the  sea  is  less  than  twelve  years.     This  comes  from  the 
fact  that  men  by  familiaii'y  with  danger  become  reckless,  and  in  nine  out  of  ten 
shipwrecks  it  is  found  out  that  some  one  was  awfully  to  blame.     So  men  lose  their 
souls.     There  are  thousands  who  do  not  care  where  they  are  in  spiritual  things. 
Drifting  in  their  tlreology,  in  their  habits,  in  regard  to  all  the  future ;  but  all  the 
time  coming  nearer  and  nearer  to  a  dangerous  coast.     They  do  not  deliberately 
choose  to  be  ruined  ;  neither  did  the  French  frigate  Medusa  aim  for  the  Arguin 
Banks,  but  there  it  went  to  pieces.     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)        Hell  after 
preaching : — These    terrible    words    teach — I.     That     deliverance     from    hell 
DESERVES   THE    MOST   EARNEST   SELF-DISCIPLINE.      "I   keep   Under  my   body"      I. 
strike  under  the  eye  so  as  to  make  it  black  and  blue,  a  boxing  phrase,  indicative  of 
strenuous  efforts   at   mortification,  as  who  should  say,  "  I  subdue  the  flesh  by 
violent   and    reiterated    blows."     "And    bring    it   into    subjection";    "I    lead    it 
along  as  a  slave,"  having  subjugated  it,  I  treat  it  as  a  bondsman,  as  boxers  in  the 
Pala3stra  used  to  dras;  off  their  conquered   opponents.     And  the  reason  for  this 
mortification  of  the  liesh  is,  "  lest  I  should  be  a  castaway."     Self-discipline  con- 
sist? of  two  things.     1.  The  entire  subjugation  of  the  body  to  the  mind.     The  body 
was  intended  to  be  the  organ,  servant,  and  instrument  of  the  mind,  but  it  has 
become  the  master.     The  supremacy  of  the  body  is  the  curse  of  the  world  and  the 
ruin  of  man.     2.  The  sulijugation  of  the  mind  to  the  spirit  of  Christ.     Though  the 
mind  govern  the  body,  if  the  mind  is  false,  selfish,  unloyal  to  Christ,  there  is  no 
discipline.     The  mind  must  be  the  servant  of  Christ  in  order  to  be  the  legitimate 
sovereign   of  the  body.     II.  That  the  necessity  op  this  self-discipline  cannot 
BE  SUPERSEDED  BY  THE  MOST  SUCCESSFUL  PREACHING.     Paul  had  preached  as  no  one 
else  had  ever  preached  ;  yet  his  preaching,  he  felt,  did  not  do  the  work  of  self-dis- 
cij^line.     Indeed,  there  is  much  in  the  work  of  preaching  that  has  a  tendency  to 
operate    against   personal   spiritual   culture.       1.  Familiarity    with    sacred   truths 
destroys  for  us  their   charm  of  freshness.     2.  A  professional  handling  of  God's 
Word  interfsres  with  its  personal  application.      3.  The   opinions  of   audiences, 
favourable  or  otherwise,  exert  an  influence  unfavourable  to  the  life  of  the  soul.     4. 
Satan  is  especially  active  in  opposing  the  growth  of  spiritual  piety  in  the  preacher's 
soul.     So  that  there  is  a  terrible  danger  that  whilst  the  preacher  is  cultivating  the 
vineyards  of  others  he  is  neglecting  his  own.     III.  The  most  successful  preaching 
may  BE  FOLLOWED  BY  ULTIMATE  RUIN.      A   "  castaway  "  !      Wlio  shall  fathom  the 
meaning  of  this  word  ?    A  successful  preacher  "a  castaway  "  !    The  Tophet  of  him 
who  has  offered  mercy  to  others  which  he  has  despised,  urged  truths  on  the  credence 
of  others  that  he  has  disbelieved,  enforced  laws  on  others  which  he  has  trans- 
gressed, will  burn  with  severer  fires  and   peal  with  more  awful  thunders.     (Z). 
Thomas,  D.D.) 


7''- 


^•*- 


Theological  Semmary-Spef 


1    1012  01086  7093 


