CORNELL    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARY


3  1924  101  104  978


iRiwiPcnj


;l-..li-


VM  -t.


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104978


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED    BY   THE

•       VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ;
AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

■

INTRODUCTIONS

BY  THE


VBN.  AECHDEACON  F.  W.  FAEEAR,  D.D.,  F.E.S.— EIGHT  EEV.  II.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  P.E.S.E
—VERY  EEV.  PEINCIPAl  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A.
—EEV.  A.  PLUMMHK,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  akd  Toronto.


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER;
AND    BY   THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

MATTHEW.

By  EEV.   a.  LUKYN  WILLIAMS,  M.A.,

PRINCIPAL  OF  THE  HEBREW  MISSIONARY  COLLEGE  OF  THE  LONDON   SOCIETY  FOR
PROMOTING  CHRISTIANITY    AMONGST  THE  JEWS  ;   AND

REV.  W.   J.   DEANE,   M.A.,

RECTOR  OF  ASHEN.

igomilctics :
By  rev.  B.  C.   CAFFIN,  M.A.,

VICAR  OF  NORTHALLERTON,    AND  RURAL  DEAN  ;
LATE   FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  WORCESTER  COLLEGE,    OXFORD.

f  omilies  bj}  tlarious  '^utljore  :

REV.  PROF.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.       REV.  PROF.  MARCUS  DODS,  D.J
REV.  P.  C.  BARKER,  M.A.,  LL.B.        REV.  J.  A.  MACDONALD
REV.  R.  TUCK,  B.A.

VOL.  II.


THE


GOSPEL  ACCOEDIN&  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIII.


A  few  remarkB  by  way  of  introduction  to
the  characteristic  portion  of  this  chapter
(vers.  1—52).

(1)  We  have  here  a  collection  of  the  Lord's
parables,  all  spoken,  as  it  would  appear,  at
fin  early  period  in  his  ministry,  descriptive
of  the  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven
as  they  make  themselves  felt  in  history,  and
of  the  way  in  which  those  who  are  brought
into  contact  with  the  kingdom  ought  to  act.
As  the  chapter  stands,  it  consists  of  three
chief  parts,  which  probably  roughly  corre-
spond to  three  stages  of  development  In  its
composition.

(o)  Vers.  1 — 23,  also  in  Mark  and  Luke,
exoppt  some  characteristic  enlargements  in
vers.  10—17.  The  si  etion  contains  the
parable  of  ths  sower  and  its  interpretation,
together  with  a  statement  of  our  Lord's
reasons  for  teaching  by  parables.  This  is  so
nearly  akin  to  the  fundamental  Usaou  of  the
first  parable,  that  we  cannot  be  surprised
that  the  two  should  be  n  corded  together.
They  seem,  indeed,  to  have  formed  the
nucleus  of  the  whole  collection.

(b)  Vers.  24—3.'),  of  which  vers.  31,  82
■alone  are  found  both  in  IVIirk  and  Lu];e.
Vers.  34,  35  also  are  rtpresented  in  Mark,
besides  some  expressions  occurring  in  vers.  24
— 30.  This  part  contains  the  parables  of  the
tares,  the  mustard  seed,  and  the  leaven,  and  a
statement  that  our  Lord  spoke  in  parables  to
the  multitudes,  together  with  a  passage  from
the  Old  Testament  illustrating  his  doing  so.
MATTHEW — II.


(o)  Vers.  86 — 52.  A  series  wholly  peculiar
to  our  Gospel,  containing  matter  addressed
to  the  disciples  alone  (the  explanation  of  the
parable  of  the  tares,  and  the  three  parables
of  the  treasure,  the  pearl,  and  the  drag-net),
ending  with  a  special  promise  to  disciples  as
such.

(2)  But  although  this  chapter  is  apparently
the  result  of  growth  and  development,  this
does  not  exclude  the  probability  that  it  is  no
chance  collection  of  fragmentary  parables,
but  rather  a  mosaic  of  which  the  several
parts  stand  in  artistic  relation  to  each  other
and  are  intended  to  form  one  whole.  Accord-
ing to  Bengel,  ami  his  opinion  has  been  es-
sentially adopted  by  many  writers,  the  seven
parables  form  a  prophecy  of  seven  ages  of
the  Church :  the  first  and  second  parables
describing  the  apostolic  and  sub-apostolic
periods;  the  third  and  fourth,  the  spread
of  the  kingdom  among  princes  and  amongst
the  whole  human  race  (referring  more
especially  to  the  fourth  and  the  ninth  cen-
turies) ;  the  fifth,  the  more  hidden  condition
of  the  Cliurch  ("  the  reign  of  tlie  beast,  and
the  Reformation  ") ;  the  sixth,  the  time  when
the  kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be  valued  above
all  else,  and  Satan  be  bound ;  the  seventh,
the  last  confusion.  But  this  is  singularly  im-
aginative, and  at  the  veiy  most  can  only  be
so  far  true  that  the  tendencies  described
tinder  each  parable  may  possibly,  one  can-
not say  more,  be  stronger  at  the  several
times  referred  to  than  at  otliers.

It  is  far  more  natural  to  see  in  the  parables
a  summary  by  our  Lord  of  certain  principles

B


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xin.  1—58.


which  are  always  at  work,  i.e.  "  the  ideas
and  laws,  not  the  actual  facta,  of  the  Church's
history  "  (Trench, '  Parablas,'  p.  142).  Thus
we  have  the  leading  thoughts  of  the  dis-
semination and  reception  of  the  kingdom  of
God  (the  BOwer),  the  obstacles  to  its  success
that  exist  even  within  its  borders  (the  tares),
its  external  and  internal  influence  (the
mustard  seed  and  the  leaven),  the  need  for
making  it  a  personal  possfssion,  cost  what  it
may,  especially  as  it  is  worth  all  else  (the
treasure  and  the  pearl),  and  the  necessity  of
personal  holiness  if  the  benefit  of  being
within  it  is  not  to  be  lost.

(3)  It  will  have  been  noticed  that  our
Lord  did  not  use  parables  in  the  earlier  part
of  his  ministry  (even  ch.  vii.  24,  sqq.,  is  hardly
more  than  an  illustration),  and  that  when  he
began  to  use  them  it  was  a  matter  of  surprise
to  his  disciples,  who  asked  him  his  reason
for  doing  so  (ver.  10).  This  was,  as  appears
from  ver.  12,  because  of  the  value  of  parables
as  a  means  of  Kpliris.  Just  as  his  coming  was
in  itself  to  test  man's  hearts,  and  to  act
upon  them  according  to  their  moral  state
(John  ix.  39 ;  cf.  iii.  19 ;  Luke  ii.  35),  so  in
measure  were  all  his  sayings.  But  if  "  the
primary  end  [of  a  parable]  everywhere  is  to
place  the  doctrine,  as  yet  unknown  to  the
hearers,  so  directly  before  their  eyes  that
tliey  shall  intuiiively  recognize  its  truth "
(Goebel, '  Parables,'  p.  15),  it  is  evident  that
a  parable  was  especially  ealeulated  to  form  a
test  of  the  moral  state  of  those  to  whom  it
was  spoken.  If  they  did  not  really  care  for
spiritual  things,  they  would,  either  from
sheer  moral  inability  or  from  a  lazy  unwil-
lingness to  apply  their  attention  or  make
further  inquiries,  fail  to  catch  the  lesson
which  the  parable  was  intended  to  convey ;
while  if  they  were  in  a  favourable  state  for
its  reception,  they  would  learn  fresh  truth
f*om  it.  But  if  parables  were  so  valuable
why  did  not  our  Lord  employ  them  from  the
beginning  of  his  ministry  ?  Just  because
they  were  so  decisive  in  their  effects.  He
wished  at  first  to  be  as  plain-spoken  as  pos-
sible, but  wlieu  he  saw  that  in  the  majority
of  his  hearers  his  words  produced  no  spiritual
result,  he  then  employed  a  method  of  teach-
ing which  should  bring  out  their  characters
more  clearly  (of.  further  vers.  10 — 17,  and
notes).

Vers.    1 — 9  — Tlie  parable  of  the  sower


Parallel  passages:   Mark  iv.  1 — 9."   Luka
viii.  4—8.

Ver.  1. — The  same  day;  on  fJut  day  (Re-
vised Version).  Although  day  is  sometimes
used  in  a  metaphorical  sense,  so  as  to  include
what  is,  in  fact,  a  long  period  of  time  (e.g.
Luke  vi.  23 ;  Mark  ii.  20 ;  cf.  also  John  xiv.
20 ;  xvi.  23,  26;  and  possibly  eren  Acts  viii.
1),  yet  we  are  not  justified  in  assigning  this
sense  to  it  unless  the  context  clearly  requires
U3  to  do  BO..  This  is  not  the  case  here,  so
that  we  must  assume  that  a  literal  day  is
intended.  But  which  day?  Naturally,  the
day  that  has  just  before  been  mentioned,
either  in  the  original  source  from  which  our
narrative  is  taken  or  in  the  narrative  as  it
now  stands.  Since,  however,  ch.  xii.  46 — 50
and  our  vers.  1 — 23  appear  to  have  been
already  connected  in  the  framework  (as  is
seen  from  their  being  in  tlie  same  relative
position  in  Mark),  these  supposed  alterna-
tives really  represent  tlie  same  thing,  the
phrase  probably  referring  to  the  day  on
which  our  Lord's  mother  and  brethren
sought  to  speak  to  him  (ch.  xii.  46).  Went
Jesus  out  of  the  house.  Where  he  had  been
when  his  mother  came  (ch.  xii.  46,  note),  and
presumably  the  one  to  which  he  returned
in  ver.  86.  Possibly  it  was  St.  Peter's  house
at  Capernaum  (ch.  viii.  14).  And  sat  (ch.
V.  1,  note).  By  the  sea-side.  Until  the
crowds  compelled  him  to  enter  the  boat.

Ver.  2. — And  great  multitudes  vsrera
gathered  together  unto  him,  so  that  he  went
into  a  ship.  The  article  wrongly  inserted
in  the  Received  Text  (jh  uXoiov)  suggests
that  it  was  the  boat  which,  as  some  think,
waited  upon  him.  (For  another  occasion
when  he  taught  from  a  boat,  of.  Luke  v.  3.)
And  sat ;  and  the  whole  multitude  stood ;
was  standing.  The  position  of  iVr^Kei  at
the  end  of  the  sentence  in  the  Greek  em-
phasizes their  attitude.  Their  numbers
compelled  it,  and  they  disreg.trded  the
fatigue.  Further,  the  tense  (pluperf.,equiva/-
leut  to  imperf.)  pictures  them  as  patiently
standing  there.  On  the  shore ;  beach  (Revised
Version) ;  iirl  Thv  aiyiaXov :  t.e.  this  part  at
least  of  the  shore  was  covered  with  sand  or
pebbles.  Possibly  we  have  signs  of  an  eye-
witness, both  in  the  exact  description  of  the
spot,  and  in  the  vividness  of  the  iVt7Jk6i
(comp.  John  i.  35,  al. ;  and  Bishop  Westcott'a
remarks  in  Expositor,  III.  v.  248 ;  of.,  too,
Intro,  luction,  p.  xii.).

Ver.  3.— And  he  spake  many  things.  Of
which  but  a  few  are  here  recorded  (cf.  vers.
.S4,  51).  Unto  them  in  parables.  Taking
the  expression  in  the  widest  sense,  "  speak-
ing in  parables  "  began  in  the  very  earliest
ages,  when  natural  or  spiritual  truths  were
described  under  figures  taken  from  every-
day life,  and  continues  until   the  present


CH.  xm.  1— 58.J    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


time,  more  especially  among  Eastern  nations.
Interesting  examples  of  such  a  method  of
instruction  are  to  be  seen  in  the  Haggadoth
(which  are  frequently  parabolic  narratives)
of  the  Talmuds  and  other  Jewish  works.
But  both  myth  (cf.  Alford)  and  parabolic
Haggada  share  the  common  danger  of  being
misunderstood  as  narratives  which  are  in-
tended to  be  taken  literally,  while  in  the
parable,  in  the.narrower  sense  of  the  word,
such  a  confusion  is  hardly  possible.  For
the  narrative  then  suggests,  either  by  its
introduction  or  its  structure,  that  it  is  only
the  mirror  by  which  a  truth  can  be  seen,  and
is  not  the  truth  itself.  Such  parables
also,  though  seldom  even  approaching  in
beauty  to  our  Lord's,  are  very  frequent  in
Jewish  writings,  though  they  come  but
seldom  in  the  Old  Testament  (Isa.  xxviii.
23—29;  2  Sam.  xii.  1-6;  xiv.  6—11;  1
Kings  XX.  35 — 40  ;  comp.  also  Isa.  v.  1 — 7
and  Ezek.  xvii.  1 — 10,  which  are  rather
allegories ;  and  Judg.  ii.  7 — 15  and  2  Kings
xir.  9,  which  are  fables).  (On  the  distinc-
tion of  parable  in  the  narrower  sense  from
fable,  myth,  proverb,  allegory,  see  Alford
and  Trunch.)  Weiss  ('Life,'  ii.  115) thinks
that  the  most  profound  reason  of  all  which
the  Lord  had  for  employing  parables  was
that  he  wished  to  show  that  the  same  regu-
lations which  hold  good  for  the  world  round
us  and  ourselves  in  relation  to  the  world
and  each  other,  hold  good  also  in  the  higher
ethical  and  religious  life.  But  at  the  most
this  can  have  been  a  very  subsidiary  motive
with  him.  Saying,  Sehold,  a  sower.  Observe
that  our  Lord  enters  upon  his  parable  at
once  (contrast  ver.  24).  He  will  «ttract
attention.  Mark's  "  Hear  ye "  would  have
forwarded  this.  A  sower;  literally,  <Ae  soicer,
as  the  Revised  Version ;  i.e.  the  sower  of
whom  I  am  about  to  speak  (cf.  Driver  on  1
Sara.  xix.  13 ;  also  ch.  i.  23 ;  xii.  43).  Went
forth.  In  the  Greek  this  verb  comes  first,
as  though  our  Lord  wished  to  call  attention,
not  so  much  to  the  sow.er  himself  as  to  his
action.  To  sow.  (For  the  minute  adherence
to  actual  life  throughout  the  whole  of  this
parable,  see  by  all  means  Thomson's  '  Land
and  the  Book,'  p.  82,  edit.  1887 ;  Stanley's
'Sinai  and  Palestine,'  pp.  425,  sqq.,  edit.
1868.)

Ver.  4. — And  when  (as,  Ervised  Version)
he  sowed,  some  seeds  (ft  fieV).  Here  (cf.  vers.
5,  7,  8)  the  seeds  are,  so  to  speak,  each
singled  out.  But  in  the  parallel  passages
they  are  viewed  as  one  whole  (4  /teV).  FeU
ty  the  wayside.  Along  the  road  (vapi.  tV
SSov),  which  evidently  was  at  no  mere  corner
of  the  field,  but  ran  for  some  distance  by  or
through  it.  And  the  fowls  (birds,  Revised
Version,  as  in  modern  English)  came  and
devoured  them  up.

Ver.  5. — Some  (and  other;  Revised  Ver-


sion) fell  upon  stony  places ;  the  roclty  placet
(Revised  Version).  Where  the  underlyin!^
rock  was  hardly,  if  at  all,  covered  by  soil!
Such  spots  would  be  common  in  the  fields
of  Palestine,  as  in  those  of  all  mountainous
countries.  Where  they  had  not  much  earth :
and  forthwith  they  sprang  up  (eJai'eTeiAev).
They  shot  up  quicker  tliau  the  thorns  in
ver.  7  (ki/i^riaaii).  Because  they  had  no
deepness  cf  earth.

Ver.  6. — And  when  the  sun  was  up
(otote/a.ovtos).  It  can  hardly  be  accidental
that  the  Greek  suggests  the  contrast  between
the  springing  up  of  the  seeds  and  of  the
sun's  rays.  They  were  scorched;  and
because  tliey  had  not  root,  they  withered
away  (cf.  John  xv.  6).

Ver.  7. — And  some  fell  among  thorns;
upon  the  thorns  (Revised  Version);  which
were  sure  to  be  close  by  (cf.  Jer.  iv.  3).
And  the  thorns  sprang  up  (grew  up.  Re-
vised Version,  ive^T)aav),  and  choked  them.
Whether  brambles  or  merely  spinous  weeds
(on  their  abundance,  see  Tristram,  'Nat.
Hist,  of  Bible,'  p.  423,  edit.  1889)  are  here
referred  to  is  not  certain.  Even  the  former
niight  be  comparatively  low  in  sowing-
time,  and  only  as  they  "  grew  up  "  cause
serious  injury  to  the  wheat.

Ver.  8. — But  other  fell  into  (upon  the.  Re-
vised Version)  good  ground,  and  brought
forth  (yielded.  Revised  Version,  eSiSov);  for
eiffiirt  is  not  implied.  Contrast  eVoiTjirei' in
Luke  and  ch.  vii.  18,  note.  Fruit,  some  an
hundredfold,  some  sixty  fold,  some  thirty  fold.
In  Mark  the  numbers  increase.  Is  this  due
to  a  desire  to  avoid  even  the  semblance  of  a
contradiction  to  av^mSiMeva,  that  there  pre-
cedes ?  In  Luke  "  hundredfold "  alone
comes,  the  difference  that  e.\ists  even  in
the  good  ground  not  being  mentioned.  (For
hundredfold,  coinp.  Gen.  xxvi.  12.  Compare
also  the  note  on  Luke  viii.  8  in  this  Com-
mentary for  instances  of  still  greater  pro-
duction, and  for  the  beautiful  parabolic
saying  recorded  by  Papias'  Elders  (Iren.,
V.  33.  3).)

Ver.  9. — Who  hath  ears  to  hear  (Re-
vised Version  omits  to  hear'),  let  him  hear.
So  in  all  tho  accounts.  Observe  that  it  is
not  only  a  call  to  understand  the  parable,
but  is  in  itself  a  summary  of  the  chief  lesson
of  the  parable.  (On  the  phrase,  see  ch.  xi.
15,  note.)

Vers.  10 — 17. — Tlie  reason  why  Chri$t
spolce  to  tile  multitudes  in  parables.

The  question  of  the  disciples  (ver.  10).

Christ's  antithesis — You  are  the  recipients
of  God's  gift ;  they  are  not  (ver.  11).

This  is  not  arbitrary,  but  in  accordance
with  a  universal  law  (ver.  12).

They  have  not  been  using  their  faculties,


THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDTNO  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xra.  1—68


and  tTierefore'  tlMy  we  thas  Judged,  in
accorilance  with  the  wordi  of  Isaiah  (rer*.
13—15).

The  pririlege  of  the  disoiplM  farther
insisted  upon  (yers.  16,  17).

Ver.  lO.^Matthew  alone  in  thit  form.
In  Luke  the  disciples  asked  our  Lord  what
tlie  parable  waa ;  in  Mark,  more  generally,
they  "  asked  of  him  the  parables."  Whether
the  question  as  given  by  St.  Matthew  waa
actually  ipoken  by  the  disciples  or  not,  the
Lord's  answer,  the  suhstance  of  which  is
the  same  in  all  throe  accounts,  suggests  that
it  at  least  reprcBents  their  thoughts.  St.
Blatthew  probably  wiubes  to  bring  out  with
special  clearness,  by  his  version  of  their
words,  the  point  of  our  Lord's  reply.  And
the  disoipleg,  Including  more  than  the
twelve  i  BO  Mark,  "  They  that  were  about
him  with  the  twelve "  (cf  ch.  v.  1,  note)
Came.  Presumably  some  little  time  after-
wards, for  he  must  have  left  the  boat  (ver.
2).  And  said  unto  him,  Why  speakest  thou
nnto  them  in  parables  1  Them;  i.e.  those
outside  the  circle  of  Christ's  followers  (oi
Ifcu,  Mark).  For  the  general  meaning  of
our  Lord's  reply  to  this  question,  see  the
remarks  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.
Other  questions  about  our  Lord's  reiieons
for  what  he  did  are  to  bo  found  in  ch.  ix.
11,  14;  XV.  2;  xvii.  19;  xxvi.  8  (cf.  also
ch.  xii.  2  with  Luke  vi.  2).

Ver.  11. — He  answered  and  said  unto
them,  Becanse.  Omit  because,  witli  thp  Re-
vised Version.  The  Sn  U  merely  recitative.
In  this  verse  our  Lonl  does  not  directly
reply  to  their  question,  but  only  states  God's
ways  of  dealing  with  the  two  different  classes
of  people  (cf.  ch,  xi.  25,  note).  It  is  given
unto  you  (unto  you  ii  it  given.  Revised  Ver-
sion); which  better  represents  the  sharpness
of  the  antithesis  in  the  Grec  k.  It  i$  given;
already  (ScSotoi),  i.e.  in  the  counsel  of  God,
though  now  given  in  possession,  so  far  as
regards  this  parable,  by  the  explanation
that  I  will  add.  To  know  the  mysteries  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  secrets  about
the  establishment  and  duvc!ui)ment  of  God's
realm,  which  cannot  be  discovered  by  human
reason,  but  which  are  made  known  to  the
initiated.  Under  the  term  "mystery,"  St.
Paul  refers  to  sucli  revealed  secrets  as  the
preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles
(Eph.  iii.  8,  4,  9 ;  Col.  i.  26),  the  oonversion
of  the  Jews  (Bom.  xi.  25),  the  relation  of
Christ  to  the  Church  being  like  that  of
husband  and  wife  (K.pli.  v.  82),  and  the
general  resurrection  ( I  Cor.  xv.  51).  (Of.  ch.
xi.  25,  note,  "  revcnluil  ; "  and  infra,  ver.  35,
note,  and  especially  liishop  Lightfoot  on
tho  passage  in  CoUwiiinns.)  But  to  them  it  is
not  given.  Pnifessor  Marshall  suggests  that
the  variation  "  the  rest  "  (LnkeX  points  to  a


■light  difference  tn  one  word  of  the  original
Aramaic  text,  the  phrase  in  Mark  ("  them
that  are  without ")  combining  both  reeidings
(boo  Expniitor  IV.  iv.  446>  The  sugges-
tion is  ingenious,  butBeems  hardly  necessary

Ver.  12. — Matthew  only  in  this  context,
but  found  in  the  parallel  passages  shortly
after  the  explanation  of  this  parable — Mark
iv.  25;  Luke  viii.  18.  The  same  saying  is
found  in  ch.  xxv.  29  (the  talents)  and  Luke
xix.  26  (the  pounds).  For.  The  reason  o(
God's  action  spoken  of  in  tho  preceding
verso.  It  is  based  on  the  following  principle.
Whosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  be  given,  and
he  shall  have  more  abundance.  The  last
phrase  (Matthew  only)  is  probably  due  to  a
reminiscence  of  the  form  in  which  the  saying
was  uttered  at  b  much  later  period  in  our
liOrd's  ministry,  where  it  arises  naturally
out  of  the  parable  (oh.  xxv.  29).  Bat
whoGoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken
away  even  that  he  hath.  A  paradox.  What
he  already  possesses,  if  it  is  sn  small  as  to
be  not  worth  speaking  of,  shall  bo  lost  to
him.  Luke's  « thinketh  he  hath"  calls
attention  to  the  superficial  character  of  the
man's  mind.  The  unfit  ground  loses  the
seed  it  reciives  (cf  the  remarks  at  the  be-
ginning ol  this  chapter).

Ver.  13. — Therefore  (Sii  Toi;To).  To  carry
out  tlie  principle  of  the  whole  preceding
verso,  but  with  speciil  reference  to  the
second  half  of  it.  Because,  in  this  case,
they  "  have  not,"  there/ore  I  speak  to  them
thus.  Speak  I  to  them  in  parables:
because.  In  the  par:i11cl  passages  Christ
says  that  he  speaks  in  parables  "in  order
that  seeing,"  etc.;  but  here,  "because  see-
ing," etc.  The  difference  of  the  thought,
wtiich  is  more  formal  than  real,  is  that
(1)  in  the  parallel  passages  their  moral
blindness  and  deafness  are  represented  as
the  effect  of  what  he  says,  parables  being  used
to  bring  about  the  punishment  for  what  was
presumably  earlier  sloth  (thus  laying  stress
on  the  idea  of  "  shall  bo  taken  away  "  in  our
ver.  12 ;  of.  "  that  tliey  which  see  not  may  be
made  blind,"  John  ix  39  ;  and  Bishop  West-
cott's  note).  (2)  In  Matthew  their  present
moral  blindness  and  deafness  are  represented
as  tlie  reason  for  the  use  of  parables.  Pa-
rables lire  thimselvcs  the  punishment;  the
people  are  fit  for  nothing  else  (thus  laying
st  i-ess  on  the  "  has  not "  of  ver.  12) ;  therefore
Christ  speaks  to  them  in  parables.  They
seeing  see  not  (seeing  they  tee  not.  Revised
Version,  keeping  the  order  of  the  Greek,  as
even  tho  Authorized  Version  in  the  next
oliiuBc) ;  and  hearing  they  hear  not,  neither
do  they  understand.  The  participles  "  see-
ing," "heiiring,"  in  Matthew  and  Luke,
probatily  do  not  represent  the  Hebrew  in-
finitive m  its  common  usage  of  giving  inten-
sity or  continuance  to  the  idea  of  the  finite


OH.  xin.  1— 58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


rerb  to  Trhioli  it  it  joined  (so  in  the  original
passage  of  Isaiah,  and  perhaps  in  Mark;
compare  ftUo  "  seeing  "  in  the  next  verse),
but  are  to  be  taken  separately, ».«. "  Though
they  have  powers  of  seeing  and  of  hearing,
they  nevertheless  do  not  so  use  these  powers
as  to  see  and  hear  "  (for  the  thought,  cf.  Jer.
T.  21 ;  Ezek.xii.  2).  Thusin  meaning, though
not  in  form,  as  compared  with  the  next  verse,
teeing  is  equivalent  to  "seeing  ye  shall
see ;  they  tee  not,  to  "  and  shall  in  no  wise
perceive;  hea/ring,  to  "hearing  ye  shall
hear;"  they  hear  not,  to  "and  shall  in  no
wise  understand,"

Yer.  14. — And  in  them ;  and  unto  them
(Revised  Version);  <.e;  with  reference  to
them  (of.  Jade  14),  Is  fulfilled.  Oompletoly
(drairA.7;poCToi ;  of.  1  Thess,  ii.  16).  The
present,  because  the  process  is  still  going
on.  The  prophecy  of  Esaias;  which  saith
(Isa.  vi.  9, 10).  Not  quoted  in  this  form  in
the  parallel  passages;  for  Mark  ir.  12
and  Luke  viii.  10  are  really  nearer  our
ver.  13,  The  quotation  is  taken  verbally
from  the  XiXS,.,  and  so  in  Acts  xxviii.  26,
27.  But  John  xii.  40,  on  tlie  contrary,  is
nearer  the  Hebrew.  By  hearing  ye  shall
hear  (okot?  ctKoiio-eTt).  A  too  literal  transla-
tion of  tlie  Oreek  attempt  to  reproduce  the
Hebrew  idiom,  which  is  riithor  "hear  ye
indeed"  as  a  continued  aclion  (piDts  ij;d»).
And  shall  not  understand  (ch.  xi.  25,  note) ;
and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  shall  not  per-
ceive. You  may  gaze  at  the  object,  but  you
shall  not  really  see  it.  So  with  the  bodily
eye,  an  image  may  be  formed  in  the  retina,
yet  no  impression  conveyed  to  the  brain.

Ver.  15.— For  this  people's  heart  is  waxed
gross.  There  are  two  ways  of  understanding
this  verse  as  it  comes  here.  (I)  It  states
the  reason  why  G}od  pronounced  the  judg-
ment of  ver.  14-  Tlie  people's  heart  had
already  become  fat,  lest  {fiii  irort  will  then
express  the  effect  from  the  Divine  point  of
view)  they  should  see,  etu.  (2)  It  merely
enlarges  the  statement  of  ver,  14,  expanding
its  meaning  (for  this  force  of  yAp,  cf.  Mark  ii.
15 ;  Luke  xviii.  32)  :  their  heart  is  waxed
fat  (by  God's  judgment  for  preceding  sins),
lest  they  should  see,  etc.  This  second  ex-
planation is  preferable,  for  it  alone  suits  the
imperative  found  in  the  Hebrew  (cf.  the
transitive  verbs  in  Joiin  xii.  40),  and  is
strictly  parallel  to  the  introductory  vers.
11 — 13,  which  do  not  dwell  npon  the  causes
of  God's  judgment.  And  their  ears  are  dull
of  hearing,  and  theii  eyes  have  they  closed ;
lest  at  any  time  (ch.  iv.  6,  note)  they
should  see ;  perceive  (Revised  Version)— to
recall  the  same  word  in  ver.  14.  With  their
eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  should
understand  with  their  heart.  Bongel  calls
attention  to  the  order ;  first  onme  heart,
ears,  eyes ;  here,  eyes,  ears,  heart.  "  A  corde


corruptio  manat  in  aures  et  oculoi :  per
ooulos  et  aures  sanitas  pervenit  ad  cor."
And  should  be  converted ;  and  should  turn
again  (Revised  Version,  iTna-rptjpaiai) ;  for
"  to  be  converted  "  has  acquired  too  technical
a  meaning.  And  I  should  heal  them  (xa!
ii(ro;iai  avrois).  The  verb  is  still  dependent
on  the  lest  (of.  ch.  v.  25 ;  vii.  S),  but  the
future  brings  out  the  certainty  of  God's
healing  them  on  their  turning,  etc.

Vers,  16,  17, — Parallel  passage  :  Luke  x,
23,  24,  after  the  return  of  the  seventy,  and
immediately  following  our  ch.  xi.  25,  27.
The  veries  stand  there,  that  is  to  say,  in
close  connexion  with  the  other  great
utterance  contrasting  God's  revelation  of
spiritual  things  to  some  and  his  hiding
them  from  others.  Possibly  he  spoke  the
verses  only  once  (of.  the  repetitions  in  the
Prophets),  but,  in  view  of  the  frequency
with  which  Christ's  utterances  are  placed
out  of  their  original  connexion,  the  assump-
tion should  he  the  other  way.  If  he  leally
only  spoke  them  once,  we  cannot  be  sure
which  the  occasion  was,  but  the  possibility
that  they  do  not  properly  belong  here  is
increased  by  the  dcjubt  whether  also  ver.  12
was  originally  spoken  now,

Ver.  16. — But  blessed  (oh.  v.  3,  note)  are
your  eyes.  Gluist  now  returns  to  emphasize
ver.  11a.  For  they  see  (Sn  fixinovaiv).
This  may  refer  to  the  disciples  being  able
to  see  spiritual  truths  before  God's  special
grace  given  them  by  way  of  reward  to  this
effect,  but  this  hardly  suits  the  context
from  the  phrase,  "it  is  given"  (ver.  12).
It  is,  therefore,  better  to  undoistand  the
verse  to  refer  to  their  seeing  and  hearing
things  by  virtue  of  grace  given  in  reward  for
earlier  faithfulness.  Edersheim  ('  Life,'  i.
594)  gives  a  striking  illustration  of  the
thought  of  this  verse  from  the  'Pesiqta'
(edit.  Buber,  p.  149),

Ver.  17. — For  verily  (oh.  v.  18,  note).
Not  in  tlie  parallel  passage;  it  is  much
more  common  in  Matthew  than  Luke.  Our
Lord  contrasts  liis  disciples' "blessedness"
not  only  with  the  state  of  their  contem-
poraries, but  with  that  of  their  predecessors
in  faith.  I  say  unto  you.  That  many  prophets
and  righteous  men.  Those  who  were  spe-
cially favoured  with  insight  into  God's
methods,  and  those  who  .ipproiiclied  most
closely  to  his  staiidard  of  rii^hteousness.
Iti(jhteou»  men ;  "  kings "  in  Luke.  St.
Luke's  readers  would  probably  not  appre-
ciate the  force  of  the  term,  "  righteous  men,"
to  the  sume  degree  that  St.  Mntthew's  would.
Have  desired  {fiteelifiiiiaav).  By  reading
ivfSiiJiT\<ra^  this  saying  has  been  attributed


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xin.  1—58.


to  Christ  (see  Bishop  Westcott,  ' '  Inf rnd.,'
App.  0. ;  Resch, '  Agrapha,'  p.  397).  To  see
those  thiiif>;s  which  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen
them ;  and  to  hear  those  things  which  ye
hear,  and  have  not  heard  them  (of.  Heb.  xi.
13 ;  1  Pet.  i.  10—12).

Vers.  18 — 23. — The  explanation  of  the
parable  of  the  sower.  Parallel  passages  ;
Mark  iv.  13—20 ;  Luke  viii.  11—15.  Ob-
serve that  after  the  preceding  verses  St.
Matthew's  readers  would  the  more  easily
catch  the  lesson  of  the  parable.

Ver.  18. — Matthew  only.  Hear  ye  there-
fore ;  Revised  Version,  hear  ye  then,  whioli
leaves  more  room  for  the_  rightful  emphasis
on  ye  (ujneis)  than  the  Authorized  Veroiuii,
but  hardly  gives  the  full  force  of  oSy  (iherf-
fore),  i.e.  in  accordance  with  the  privileges
that  have  been  given  you.  The  parable  of
the  sower.

Ver.  19. — When  any  one  heareth  the
word  of  the  kingdom,  and  nnderstandeth  it
not.  Vnderstandeih.  The  form  of  tlie
explanation  here  is  influenced  by  the
language  of  vers.  14,  15.  Then  (not  in
the  Greek)  cometh  the  wicked  one ;  the  evil
one  (Revised  Version);  ch.  vi.  13,  note.
And  catcheth  (snatcheth,  Revised  Version;
away — seizeth  for  himself  {opitiQ^t,  ch.  xi.
12,  note)— that  which  was  sown  in  his  heart.
This  is  he  which  received  seed.  That  was
town  (Revised  Version,  d  airapels).  And  so
throughout.  The  masculine  is  not  merely
concise,  but  also  expresses  the  fact  that,  as
even  with  land,  the  man  who  receives  the
seed  does  not  put  forth  in  turn  merely  the
seed  as  something  alien,  but  rather  himself
so  far  as  he  is  influenced  -by  the  seed ;  or
(regarding  the  subject  from  another  point
of  view)  he  puts  forth  the  new  life  and
energy  of  the  seed  iis  conditioned  by  that
which  makes  up  himself.

Ver.  20. — And  anon;  and  straightway
(Revised  Version,  xal  sbevs).

Ver.  21. — But  dureth  for  a  while  (cjA\ck
irp6aKaip6s  ianv).  Luke's  ol  irpis  Kaiphv
iriffTeiovaiv  is  an  evidently  later  form.  (For
the  thought,  of.  John  v.  35.)  By  and  by ;
straightway  (Revised  Version,  eufliis).  He
is  offended  (ch.  v.  29,  note).

Ver.  22. — And  the  care  (ji  n4piiji.va);  ch.
vi.  25,  note.  Of  this  world  (of  the  world.
Revised  Version,  tov  alanos,  omitting  the
Toirov  of  the  Received  Text).  (For  ai^v
["age,"  Revised  Version  maigin],  of.  ch.
xii.  32,  note.)  Choke  the  word.  Which  is
no  unchanging  thing,  bnt  is  always  affinteJ
for  good  or  evil,  however  great  progress  it
has  made.

Ver.  23.— Which  also;  who  verily  (Re-
vised Version,  %s  Sij),  the  parHcle  giving
ezaotnes'  to  the  relative  (see  Dr.  Moulton's


note  at  the  end  of  Winer,  §  liii.).  Some ;
t  fiev  (Westcott  and  Hort).  Neuter,  and  so
the  Vulgate.  Nominative,  the  thought
refers  to  the  seed  as  such  (of.  ver.  8).  An
hundred  fold,  some  sixty,  some  thirty.  "  100
longing  absunt  a  60,  quam  60  a  30.  Habenti
dabitur  "  ( Bengel).  The  reabon  of  tlie  dif-
ference in  the  produce  of  the  good  ground
is  not  stated,  but,  according  to  the  tenor
of  the  whole  passage  since  ver.  3,  this  lay
in  a  diSerence  already  existing  within  this
good  ground.  Into  the  question  of  the
ultimate  cause  of  some  men  being  in  a  better
state  of  preparedness  to  receive  Divine  truths
than  others,  our  Lord  does  not  enter.  Pre-
venient  grace  is  not  always  to  be  insisted
upon  in  practical  exhortation.

Vers.  24 — 30  — The  parahle  of  the  tares.
Matthew  only.  The  parable  of  the  sower
dealt  with  the  first  reception  of  the  gospel ;
this  deals  with  the  after-development.

The  aim  of  this  parable  is  to  prevent  over-
sanguine  expectations  as  to  the  purity  of
the  society  of  believers,  and  to  hinder  rash
attempts  to  purify  it  by  merely  external
processes.  Archbishop  Benson  ('  Diet,  of
Christian  Biogr.,'  i.  745)  calls  attention  to
the  fact  that  the  first  extant  exposition  of  this
parable  is  in  Cyprian's  successful  appeal  to
the  Novatianists  not  to  separate  from  th«
Churoli  (Bp.  liv.).

The  aim  of  the  somewhat  similar  parable
in  Mark  iv.  26—29  is  to  show  the  slowness
and  gradualness  of  the  growth  of  the  king-
dom of  heaven,  and  also  the  certainty  of
its  con.sumra.ition.  So  many  words  and
plirasea  in  the  two  parables  are  identical,
tliat  the  possibility  of  one  being  derived
from  the  other,  either  by  omission  or  ad-
dition, must  be  acknowledged,  but  the
definiteness  of  the  aim  in  each  points  rather
to  their  being  originally  two  distinct
parables.
The  divisions  of  the  parable  are —

(1)  The  fact  of  tares  being  present  as  wtll
as  good  seed,  audits  cause  (vers.  24— 28a).

(2)  Although  there  is  the  natural  desire
to  gather  out  the  tares  at  once,  yet,  on
account  of  the  impossibility  of  doing  so
without  destroying  some  of  the  good  seed,
tliis  must  not  be  attempted.  At  the  proper
time  full  separation  shnjl  be  made  by  the
proper  agents  (vers.  286 — 30).

Ver.  24. — Another  parable  put  he  forth
unto_  them;  set  he  before  them  (Revised
Version,  irafeSTiKev  oiTois);  so  also  ver.  31


on.  xiii.  1-58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTflEW.


(cf.  also  Exod.  xix.  7;  Acts  xvii.  3).  Else-
where it  is  often  used  of  setting  food  before
any  one;  e.g.  Mark  vi.  41  ;  viii.  6;  Luke  xi.  6;
Acts  xvi.  84.  Them.  The  people  (vers,
3,  10, 34).  Saying,  The  kingdom  of  heaven.
The  principles  of  its  establishment  and  full
development.  Is  likened  unto  {loiiouiBri).
The  aorist  regards  the  moment  in  our  Lord's
mind  in  which  he  made  the  comparison.
Observe  that  the  verb  is  transitional  ;  in
ver.  3  our  Lord  began  his  parable  without
any  introduction,  so  tliat  he  might  attract
attention ;  here  he  says  that  lie  gives  an
illustration  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but
in  the  later  parables  of  this  discourse  (vers.
31,  3.S,  44,  45,  47;  cf.  52)  lie  is  able
merely  to  say  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is,
in  its  principles,  etc.,  absolutely  like  (dfj.oia
ieriv).  A  man  which  sowed.  Explnined  as
"  the  Son  of  man  "  in  ver.  37.  Good  seed ;
"  the  sons  of  the  kingdom "  (ver.  38) ;  i.e.
the  seed  represents,  not  good  or  bad  doctrine
as  such,  but  persons.  In  his  field;  "the
world  "  (ver.  37).  Not  exactly  the  Oliurch,
i.e.  the  Church  upon  earth,  but  the  world
so  far  as  it  is  the  sphere  of  the  Cliurch's
missionary  activity,  even  the  physical  world
so  fur  as  it  becomes  the  scene  of  Divine
sowing  of  the  gospel.

Ver.  25. — But  while  men  slept.  Not  in
the  explanation.  If  more  than  merely  a  part
of  the  necessary  framework  of  the  itory,  it
points  to  the  secrecy  with  which  the  devil
works.  His  enemy  came,  Tliis  form  of
malice  is  still  well  known  in  the  East  (cf.
Exell's  '  Biblical  lUustratoi-,'  in  toe).  And
sowed.  Sowed  over  or  in  (^ireWeipey).
Tares ;  i.e.  bearded  darnel,  Lolium  temulen-
tum,"a  kind  of  rye  grass,  and  the  only
species  of  the  grass  family  the  seeds  of  which
are  poisonous.  The  derivation  of  zaicdn
[_CiC^via]  is  from  zdn, '  vomiting,'  the  effect
of  eating  darnel  being  to  produce  violent
nausea,  convulsions,  and  diarrhoea,  which
frequently  ends  in  death  "  (Tristram,  '  Nat.
Hist,  of  Bible,'  p.  487,  edit.  1889).  Among
the  wheat,  and  went  his  way;  went  away
(Eeviaed  Version,  ojnjAeec).

Ver.  26. — But  when  the  blade  was  sprung
up  (e'/SAtia-TTjo-ej'  6  x^P'^"^  '■  "^^  Mark  iv.  27),
and  brought  forth  fruit.  Observe  that  there
is  no  thought  of  tlie  tares  injuring  the
wheat  (contrast  vers.  7,  22).  Then  appeared
the  tares  also.

Ver.  27.  —  So;  and  (Revised  Version,
Se')-  Tlie  servants  of  the  householder  came.
Tlie  explanation  (ver.  38)  does  not  say  who
are  represented  by  these;  they  must  be
really  identical  with  some  of  the  wheat,
yet  since  they  are  spoken  of  as  though  Ihey
are  also  the  agents  of  the  Sowei-,  they  must
represent  the  more  active,  and  especially  tlie
ministerial,  members  of  the  kingdom.  Is  it
a  mere  coincidence   that  historically  the


clergy  have  shown  tliemselves  always  the
most  eager  advocates  of  the  policy  of  rooting
up  the  tares  ?  And  said  unto  him,  Sir,  didst
not  thou  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field  ?  from
whence  then  hath  it  tares  ?  Thy.  For  the
knowledge  that  the  world  belongs  to  God.
and  is  nnder  his  governance  and  care,  makes
the  question  so  much  the  more  serious  to  the
servants.

Ver.  28. — He  said  unto  them.  An  enemy
hath  done  this.  An  enemy  (ix^pos  &v0pavos).
Not  "  my  enemy,"  referring  to  some  one
person,  for  in  real  life  a  man  can  seldom  be
at  once  sure,  without  inquiry,  who  it  is  that
has  injured  him  secretly.  There  are  so
many  coincidences  in  this  verse  and  ver.  39
(^e^Opos  &vdpcoiroSt  tovto  eiroiTicrev,  ['Ajuav]  6
irouTiphs  [ouTOj],  6  Sia^oAos)  with  the  LXX.
of  Esth.  vii.  4 — 6,  that  it  would  almost  seem
as  tliough  the  evangelist  remembered  that
passage.  The  servants  said  nnto  him.  Wilt
thou  then  that  we  go  and  gather  them  up  ?
Omit  up  ((TuAAeJoi/iei') ;  the  servants,  io  their
zeal  to  separate  the  tares  from  the  wheat,
forget  the  difSculty  connected  with  pulling
them  up.

Ver.  29. — But  he  said.  Nay;  lest  while
ye  gather  up  the  tares,  ye  root  up  also  the
wheat  with  them.  Wetstein,  on  ver.  39,
quotes  an  interesting  parallel  spoken  by  K.
Joshua  ben  Koroha  (Talm.  Bab.,  '  Baba
Metzia,'  836).

Ver.  30. — To  the  reapers.  Not  all  my
servants,  but  they  to  whom  such  work  be-
longs (cf.  Goebel);  i.e.  the  angels  (ver.  39).
Gather  ye  together;  gather  up  (Eevised
Version),  because  the  same  word  (iruAA^yei!;)
is  employed  as  in  ver.  '28.  This  commaml
belongs  to  the  time  after  the  field  is  reaped.
First  the  tares.  The  tares  are  to  be  sepa-
rated and  gathered  together  before  the  wheat
is  garnered.  And  hind  them  in  bundles  to
burn  them:  hut  gather  (o-urayere).  This
word  regards  rather  the  destination,  <rv\-
KfjeLv  the  operation.  The  wheat  into  my
barn  (ch.  iii.  12,  notes).

Vers.  31,  32. — The  parable  of  the  mustard
seed.  Parallel  pas?ages  :  Mark  iv.  30 — 32  ;
Luke  xiii.  18,  19.  The  central  thought  of
the  parable  is  the  growth  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven  considered  externally.  Although  it
has  small  beginnings,  it  is  to  have  a  mar-
vellous expansion,  so  that  even  those  who
naturally  are  outside  it  are  glad  to  avail
themselves  of  its  protection.  Observe  that
we  have  no  right  to  limit  its  growth  either
to  the  reputation  of  its  principles  alone  or
to  the  power  of  its  organization ;  both  are
included.

Eegarded  as  a  prophecy,  the  parable  is
partially  fulfilled  every  time  that  a  heathen


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiti.  1-68.


nation  places  itself  nnder  the  protection  of  a
ChriBtian  Dation,  and  muie  tmly  fnlfllled
'wheneTer  a  nation  accepts  Christianity  as
its  own  religion.  It  is  parodied  when  a  na-
tion or  a  collection  of  nations  submits  its
political  freedom  to  the  dictates  of  claimants
to  spiritual  superiority,  whether  these  claim
to  have  received  such  superiority  as  an  in-
heritance from  the  past,  or  to  have  acquired
it  in  the  present.

Yer,  81. — Another  parable  put  he  forth
unto  them  (ver.  24,  note),  saying,  The  king-
dom of  heaven  is  like  unto  (ver.  24,  note ;
also  cli.  xi.  16,  note)  a  grain  of  mustard
seed.  "  The  Comnjon  Mustard  of  Palestine
is  Sinapis  nigra,  of  the  order  Cruciferas,
the  Black  Mustard,  which  is  found  abun-
dantly in  a  wild  state,  and  is  also  cultivated
in  the  gardens  for  its  seed.  It  is  the  same
as  our  own  Mustard,  but  grows  especially
in  the  richer  soils  of  the  Jordan  vaUey  to
a  much  greater  size  than  in  this  country.
We  noticed  its  great  hnight  on  the  banks  of
the  Jordan,  as  have  several  other  travellers;
and  Dr.  Thomson  remarks  that  in  the  Plain
of  Acre  he  lias  seen  it  as  tall  as  a  horse  and
its  rider "  (Tristram,  '  Nat.  Hist,  of  Bible,'
p.  472,  elit.  1889).  Which  a  man  took.
The  insertion  of  T^afiiv  is  probably  to  ex-
clude the  idea  of  a  chance  sowing.  True
tliat  the  seed  might,  under  certain  circum-
stances, then  grow  as  well,  but  the  reality
which  is  being  described  was  the  result  of
long  and  deliberate  purpose  (Titus  i.  3;
1  Pet.  i.  20).  And  sowed  in  his  field.  "  His
garden  "  (Luke)  suggests  a  piece  of  ground
that  was  at  once  smaller  and  more  cared  for.
Ver.  32. — Which  indeed  is  the  least  of  {is
Uk  than,  Eevised  Version)  all  seeds;  i.e.
all  those  ordinnrily  sown  in  Palestine  then.
Instances  of  the  proverbial  use  in  the
Talmuds  of  the  size  of  a  grain  of  mustard
to  express  something  very  small,  may  be
seen  in  Levy,  t.v,  bTT\.  But  when  it  is
grown,  it  is  the  greatest  among  herbs ;  it  is
greater  tlian  the  herbs  (Eevised  Version);
i.e.  than  those  which  are  usually  called
xix"""-  And  becometh  a  tree,  so  that  the
birds  of  the  air.  Tliere  is  not  necessarily
any  connotation  of  evil  about  these  (cf.
vers.  4,  19);  the  thought  is  simply  that
those  who  are  naturally  outsiders  are  glad
to  come  under  cover  of  this  tree.  Compare,
for  both  thought  and  language,  Daniel's
description  of  the  empire  of  Babylon  (Dan.
iv.  12,  21),  and  Bzekiel's  prophecy  of  the
kingdom  of  Judali  (Ezok.  xvii  23).  Come
and  lodge  in  the  branches  thereof.  Lodge
(KaratrKTivo'li/');  ch.  viii.  20,  nofo.  In  Pales-
tine the  goldfinches  and  lionets  settle  on
the  mustard  in  flocks  (Tristram,  'Nat.  Hist,
of  Bible,'  p.  473,  edit.  1889).


Ver.  83.  —  The  parable  of  the  leaven.
Parallel  passage:  Luke  xiii,  20,  21._  The
growth  of  the  kingdom  regarded  in  its
quiet  and  secret  influence.  This  is  to  be
ultimately  complete  and  universal.  The
prophecy  is  partially  fulfilled  with  every
fresh  recognition  of  Christian  principles  in
public  opinion,  or  customs,  or  laws.  For
"every  thought"  shall  bo  brought  "captive
unto  the  obedience  of  Christ "  (2  Cor.  x.  5).
Another  parable  spake  he  unto  them;  The
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  leaven.
This  is  the  only  passage  where  leaven  is
spoken  of  with  refercnc^e  to  its  permeating
qualities  alone,  without  any  trace  of  the
notion  of  defilement,  which  the  Paschal  and
other  regulations  (Exod.  xii.  15,  18 ;  xxiii.
15,  18;  Lev.  ii.  11)  so  readily  suggested.
Even  in  1  Cor.  v.  6  and  Gal.  v.  9  this  conno-
tation of  evil  is  not  altogether  absent.  In
Talm.  Bab.,  '  Beraoli.,'  17i.  it^  is  used  as  a
figure  of  the  "evil  impulse'"  within  us.
Hence  some  have  interpreted  it  in  a  similar
sense  here,  and  have  understood  our  Lord
to  be  referring  to  the  spread  of  worldliness
in  the  Church  (especially  after  the  conver-
sioii  of  Con 4an tine);  but  (1)  this  is  opposed
to  the  prirrin  facie  meaning;  (2)  it  is  un-
reasonable to  insist  that  a  symbol  must
always  have  the  same  connotation ;  (3)  it
is  opposed  to  the  idea  of  delibeia  te  purpose
underlying  the  action  of  the  woman;  (4)
the  closing  words  would  cast  too  awful  a
shadow — they  would  mean  that  Christianity
fails.  Which  a  woman  took  (ver.  31,  note),
and  hid.  The  woman  probably  belongs
entirely  to  the  framework  of  the  parable
(of.  Luke  XV.  4,  8).  For  the  work  described
is  always,  in  normal  societies,  performed
by  women.  Of  other  interpretations  that
which  sees  in  her  the  Cliuroh  as  the  agent
by  whom  the  kingdom  of  God  is  wrought
into  the  world  is  the  best.  In  three  mea-
sures of  meal ;  i.e.  an  ephah.  This  appears
to  have  been  a  convenient  quantity  (about
a  peek)  for  kneading  at  one  time  (Gen.
xviii.  6;  Judg,  vi.  19).  Until  the  whole
was  leavened;  literally,  uiiiil  it  wat  leavened,
evi-n  the  %ohnle  of  it  (eops  o§  i^ufjiiBri  i\ov).
While  our  Lord  thus  promises  that  the
permeating  influence  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven  sliall  at  last  be  entirely  successful,
it  is  unfair  to  so  press  the  parable  as  to
deduce  from  it  that  the  world  as  such  will
continue  to  be  gradually  and  continuously
improved  up  to  the  Lord's  return.  It  may
be  so  (contrast,  however,  Luke  xviii.  S),
hut  even  direct  prophecy,  and  still  more
parable,  frequently  regards  the  ultimate  re-
sult,  and    passes    over   the    intermediate


Vers.  84,  35.— The  parallel  passage  in
Mark  iv.  33,  84  i«  as  follows:  "And  with


CH.  xiu.  1— 5b,J    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.


many  snob  parables  epake  he  the  word  uato
them,  as  thoy  were  able  to  bear  it;  and
without  a  parable  spake  he  not  unto  them :
but  privately  to  his  own  disciples  he  ex-
pounded all  things."  The  same  general
idea  underlies  our  present  verses,  hxsi  al-
tliough  each  evangelist  appears  to  have  used
the  same  words  as  a  basis,  he  has  worked
them  out  in  his  own  chariioteristio  way.
For  while  both  writers  contrast  our  Lord's
treatment  of  the  multitudes  and  his  treat-
ment of  the  disciples  in  the  matter  of
parables,  St.  Mark  barely  alludes  to  his
using  them  as  a  judicial  punishment  upon
the  people,  and  St.  Matthew  merely  hints
liere  at  the  faot  that  Christ  explained  them
to  his  disciples  (see  further,  ver.  356,  note).

It  will  be  noticed  that  our  verses  have
much  in  common  with  the  thought  of  ver.
10,  eqq.  It  seems  just  possible  tliat  both
paragraphs  had  one  common  nucleus  from
which  they  were  each  developed.  But
according  to  existing  evidence,  ver.  10,  iqq.,
and  the  parallel  passages  in  Mark  and  Luke
serve  to  introduce  explanatory  matter  to  the
disciples,  and  our  present  versed  with  the
parallel  in  Mark  to  close  a  series  of  parables.

Ver.  34. — ^AU  these  things  (toCto  irivra).
All  seems  tu  imply  that  the  four  preceding
parables  are  but  a  few  typical  ones  taken
from  a  larger  collection  (of.  Mark,  "  with
many  such  parables;"  also  vers.  3,  51).
Spake  Jesus  unto  the  multitude  in  parables ;
in  pardblei  unto  the  multitudes  (Revised
Verision);  for  the  order  of  tlie  Greek  is  the
same  as  in  tlie  next  clause.  Observe  the
"  parallelism "  of  the  two  clauses  (conti'ast
Mark).  Is  it  due  to  the  influence  of  Hebrew
Christians?  And  without  a  parable  spake
he  not  (nothing,  Eevised  Versiou,  oiS4v)  unto
them.  As  happens  often  in  Semitie  writers
(of.  St.  Johu's  Gospul),  the  thougijt  of  the
preceding  clause  is  now  expressed  negatively,
and  yet  a  fresh  thought  is  added,  namely,
that  he  spake  in  parables  alone.  Nothing
(Revised  Version) ;  i.e.  under  these  circum-
stances, when  large  crowds  of  Galileaans
were  listening  to  him.  Spake  (iKdhn. :  con-
trast i\aKrtaev  before);  i.e.  during  this
period.

Ver.  35.— That  it  might  be  fulfiUed  (oh.  i.
22,  note)  which  was  spoken  by  (through,
Bevised  Version ;  ch.  i.  22,  note)  the
prophet ;  rather,  Isaiah  (he  prophet,  accord-
ing to  the  margin  of  Westcott  and  Hort,  on
the  evidence  of  the  original  hand  of  the
Sinaitic  and  a  few  cursive  manuscripts,  the
Bushworth  Latin  Gospels,  a  manuscript
of  the  .Sthiopio  Version,  the  Clementine


Homilies,  Porphyry  as  quoted  by  Jerome,
and  remarks  by  Eusebius.  Dr.  Hort  ('  Ap-
pendix') writes,  "It  is  difficult  not  to  think
'H<ra(ov  genuine.  There  was  a  strong  temp-
tation to  omit  it  (of.  xxvii.  9;  Mc.  i.  2);
and,  thouglr  its  insertion  might  be  ac-
counted for  by  an  impulse  to  supply  the
name  of  the  best  knovm  prophet,  the
evidence  of  the  actual  Operation  of  such  an
impulse  is  much  more  trifling  than  might
have  been  anticipated.  .  .  .  The  erroneous
introduction  of  Isaiah's  name  is  limited  to
two  passages,  and  in  each  case  to  a  single
Latin  manuscript."  If  it  be  genuine,  it  is  a
parallel  case  to  the  reading  "  Jeremiah  "  in-
stead of  "Zechariah"  in  ch.  xxvii.  9,  for
which  no  satisfactory  explanation  has  yet
been  suggested.  A  simple  error  of  memory
(of.  Alford)  on  the  part  of  one  who  shows  him-
self BO  well  acquainted  with  Hebrew  cus-
toms and  modes  of  thought  as  our  evangelist
does,  is  perhaps  the  most  improbable  of  all
solutions.  Possibly,  just  as  there  were
summaries  of  legal  maxims  current  in  our
Lord's  time  (of.  oh.  v.  21,  note),  so  there
were  in  Hebrew-Christian  circles  well-known
sets  of  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,
which  were  not  expressly  divided  one  from
another  (of.  Bom.  iii.  10^ — 18),  and  which
were  referred  to  under  the  name  of  the  author
of  the  best  known  passage.  (Observe  that
this  would  distinguibb  these  summaries  from
liturgical  quotations.)  Thus  Zechariah's
mention  of  the  potter  (xi.  13)  was  placed
in  connexion  with  Jeremiah's  visit  to  the
potter's  house,  and  with  his  warning  of  the
possible  rejection  of  Israel  (Jer.  xviii.  1 — 6 ;
of.  xix.  1 — 11);  of.  further  Pusey's  remarks
on  tbe  passage  in  Zechariah,  and  Ps.  Ixxviii.
2  (or  perljaps  1  -3),  where  Israel  is  bid
listen  to  the  le^jsons  derived  from  their
ancestors'  behaviour,  with  the  warning  in
Isa.  vi.  9,  10  (of.  our  vers.  Bi,  35  with  ver.
14).  We  have  an  example  of  a  similar
connexion  of  passages  in  Mark  i.  2,  3,  where
Mai.  iii.  1  is  closely  joined  to  Isa.  xl.  3.
Observe  that  if  St.  Mark  had  copied  his
source  (ex  hypothesi)  to  the  end  of  the
quotation  from  Malachi,  and  for  some  reason
omittod  tlie  next  quotation,  he  might  very
easily  have  still  retained  the  name  "Isaiah"
with  which  be  introduces  his  double  quota-
tion. Had  he  done  so,  we  should  have  had
another  parallel  to  our  present  verse  and
oh.  xxvii.  9.  The  prophet.  If  "Isaiah  "be
not  genuine,  tliis  refers  to  "Asaph  the
seer"  (2  Chron.  xxix.  30),  who  was  the
recognized  author  of  the  psalm.  So  David
is  called  "a  prophet"  in  Acts  ii.  30.
Saying,  I  will  open  my  month  (oh.  v.  2,
note)  in  parables ;  I  will  utter  things  which
have  been  kept  secret  from  the  foundation
of  the  world.  From  Ps.  Ixxviii.  1,  2.  Th«
first  clause  of  the  quotation  is  verbally  the


10


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch,  xni.  1—58.


eame  as  the  LXX.,  and  fairly  represents  the
meaning  of  the  original  ('s  Waa  nnnes).
The  second  clause  ia  different  from  the
LXX.,  the  first  verb  being  a  literal  transla-
tion from  the  Hebrew,  and-  the  rest  a  para-
phrase. I  mil  utter  (^peu'Jo/iai :  nyON);  so
the  LXX.  in  Ps.  xix.  2 ;  and  cf.  Ps.  cxix.
171 ;  cilv.  7.  Things  which  have  been  ke^t
secret  (KeKpviifiem) ;  but  the  Hebrew  is
niTn,  i.e.  "enigmatical  sayings."  From
the  foundation  of  the  world.  'Aivh  KaTaPo\rjs,
for  xSafiov  of  the  Eeoeived  Text  must  be
omitted.  But  the  Hebrew  mp  "m  {i.e.
"from  of  old")  hardly,  in  the  context  of
the  psalm,  refers  further  back  than  the  be-
ginning of  the  national  history  of  Israel,
when  the  Israelites  oiime  out  of  Egypt.
"  Asaph  .  .  .  here  recounts  to  the  people
their  history  from  that  Bgyptseo-Sinaitio  age
of  yore  to  which  Israel's  national  indepen-
dence and  specific  position  in  relation  to  tiie
rest  of  the  world  goes  back.  ...  He  will
set  forth  the  history  of  the  fathers  after  the
manner  of  a  parable  and  riddle,  so  that  it
may  become  as  a  parable,  i.e.  a  didactic
history,  and  its  events  as  marks  of  interro-
gation and  nota-benes  to  the  present  age"
(Dclitzsch).  What,  however,  is  the  exact
connexion  of  thought  in  the  gospel  between
the  passage  as  it  stands,  and  its  context?
The  first  clause  evidently  corresponds  in
meaning  to  ver.  3-t ;  Christ  fulfils  in  a  fresh
sense  the  expression  of  the  psalmist  by
speaking  in  parables  (vide  infra).  But  the
second  clause  brings  in  a  different  thought,
not  found,  save  very  indirectly,  in  ver.  34,
namely,  that  Christ  utters  things  that  be-
fore were  always  liidden.  Wliat  does  the
evangelist  mean  by  this  second  clause?
(1 )  Truths  never  before  revealed  have  now
been  revealed  by  Christ's  parables,  especially
by  those  two  which  have  just  been  related.
For  in  these  it  has  been  affirmed  that  out-
siders, i.e.  those  belonging  to  other  nations
than  the  Jewish  nation,  shall  seek  the  pro-
tection of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  also
that  the  whole  world,  including,  therefore,
these  Gentile  nations,  shall  become  per-
meated with  its  ])rinciple3.  It  may  well
he  thought  that  the  clause  refers  to  the
aniiounoeiiient  of  thr-se  great  truths.  (2)
This  interprotatioL,  however,  if  taken  ulone,
is  not  enough.  For  the  evangelist  is  not
speaking  of  Christ  revealing  truths  to  men
generally.  On  the  contrary,  he  says  that
Christ  does  not  reveal  them  to  the  multi-
tudes, but  to  his  disciples  (cf.  ver.  10,  eqq.)—
a  contrast  which  the  em  phalic  language  of
ver.  34  (tois  ix^ois,  aSrois)  would  probably
suggest,  even  though  it  is  not  expressly
mentioned.  It  is,  therefore,  likely  that  it
was  tliis  latter  fact  to  which  the  evangelist
specially  wished  to  refer  by  his  quotation
of  the  second  clause.    Hence,  to  make  his


meaning  clearer,  he  has  modified  it«
language.  As  he  quotes  it,  not  merely
"  enigmatical  payings,"  but "  things  hidden  "
(and  that  from  the  foundation  of  the  world)
are  uttered  .by  Christ ;  but  these  are  now
no  longer  "  hidden  "  to  those  to  whom  he
speaks  them.  This  complete  meaning  of
the  clause — revelation  to  his  disciples  of
truths  before  hidden — corresponds  to  the
■  idea  of  nvffTTipiov  in  ver.  1 1  (where  see  note)
and  in  St.  Paul  (of.  especially  Horn.  xvi.  25),
and  is  merely  another  side  of  St.  'Mark's
phrase,  "  Privately  to  his  own  disciples  he
expounded  all  things  "  (cf.  mpra,  vers.  16,
17).  It  is  also  possible  that  KeKpu/i/iiva,
which  is  not  merely  negative,  so  as  to  mean
"  unrevealed,"  but  implies  a  positive  con-
cealment, includes  a  reference  to  the  thought
of  iKpvtjias  in  ch.  xi.  25,  that  God  purposely
hid  these  truths  from  those  who  were
morally  unfit  to  receive  them.  These,
indeed,  belonged  in  general  to  the  times
before  Christ  came,  but  also  "the  multi-
tudes "  came  under  this  category.  If  it  be
asked — What  is  the  relation  of  the  quotation
in  its  context  here  to  the  verso  in  its
original  context?  the  easiest  answer  is  that
it  is  only  superficial,  that  the  "accidental  "
employment  by  the  psalmist  of  the  word
"  parable "  was  the  only  reason  why  the
evangelist  made  the  quotation.  Yet  it  may
not  be  quite  so;  for  there  was  a  real
similarity  between  the  psalmist  teaching
his  contemporarieB  by  history  and  Cljrist
teaching  his  contemporaries  by  truthi
couched  in  narrative  form.  May  we  not
go  even  further,  and  say  that  in  both  cases
the  message  was,  generally  speaking,  re-
fused, though  in  both  a  remnant  of  those
who  heard  it  were  saved  (cf  also  Isa.  vi.
9 — 13 ;  vide  supra)  ?

Vers.  36 — 52. — Gbrist  alone  with  his
disciples.  He  explains  to  them  at  their
request  the  parable  of  the  tares  (vers.  36 —
43),  and  adds  three  parables— the  treasure,
the  pearl,  the  drag-net — the  first  two  calcu-
lated to  urge  them  to  full  renunciation  of
everything  for  Christ,  the  third  to  save  them
from  presumption  (vers.  44 — 50).  Upon  their
acknowledging  progress  in  spu'itual  under-
standing, he  shows  them  further  possibilities
(vers.  51,  52).

Vers.  36—43. — Hie  explanation  rf  the
parable  of  the  tares  of  the  field.

Ver.  36.— Then  Jesus  sent  the  multitude
away ;  then  he  left  the  mullitudee  (Eevised
Version,  a(pels) ;  of.  ch.  ixvi,  44.  And  wont
into  the.house  (ver.  1,  note) :  and  his  diBciples
eame  unto  him,  saying,  Declare;  explain
(Eevised  Version,  Siaa(i<j>ri(rov) ;  e.e.  make  it
thoroughly  clear.    The  verb  is  found  else-


OH.  XIII.  1—58.]    THE   GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


11


where  in  tlie  New  Tertament  only  in  oh.
iviii.  31,  where  the  thought  is  that  the
man's  fellow-servants  brought  his  behaviour
fully  before  their  lord's  knowledge  (cf.  also
2  Maco.  i,  18).  As  compared  with  (ppiaov
(Eeceived  Text,  and  ch.  xv.  15),  it  leaves
loom  for  the  disciples  having  alieady  par-
tially understood  it.  Unto  us  the  parable
of  the  tares  of  the  field.  The  addition,  «  of
the  field,"  indicates  the  point  of  the  parable,
considered  even  aa  ii  mere  story,  that  the
tares  grew  in  no  chance  place,  but  in  a  piece
of  cultivated  ground  already  allotted  to  other
produce.

Ver.  37. — He  answered  and  said  unto  them.
In  the  following  reply  of  our  Lord  (vers.
37 — 43)  observe  the  change  of  style  at  ver.
40.  Until  then  we  have  pitliy,  concise
sentences  all  joined  by  the  simple  copula
Se,  which  can  hardly  be  anything  else  than
literal  translations  of  the  Lord's  own  plirases.
But  vers.  40 — 43  are  in  the  usual  style  of
this  Gospel  The  Sou  of  man  (ch.  viii.  20,
note).

Ver.  38. — The  children  of  the  kingdom;
<Ae  sons,  etc.  (Kevised  Version);  ch.  v.  9,
note.  The  tares  are  the  children  of  the
wicked  one;  of  the  evil  one  (Kevised  Ver-
sion) ;  of.  ch.  vi.  13,  note.  (On  the  bearing
that  the  evidence  of  the  Old  Syriac  %nd  the
Old  Latin  versions  here  lias  on  the  mascu-
line interpretation  there,  see  Chase, '  Lord's
Prayer,'  etc.,  pp.  155,  159,  sqq.)

Ver.  89.— The  enemy  that  sowed  them
(^  ffiriipas) ;  contrast  ver.  37  (i  a-irdptei'  rh
Ka\hv  ffwepiia).  Ver.  37  states  what  is  ever
true;  ver.  39  merely  refers  back  to  the
enemy  spoken  of  in  the  parable.  Is  the
devil  (oil.  iv.  1,  note).  (For  the  thought  of
this  and  the  preceding  clause,  sue  Juhn  viii.
44;  1  Johniii.  8,10.)  The  harvest  is  the  end
of  the  world ;  literally,  as  the  margin  of  ttie
Eevised  Version,  the  4sonaummation  of  the  age
(awTiKita  alSipos) ;  when  the  present  age
shall  have  received  its  completion,  and  the
more  glorious  one  be  ushered  in  (cf.  ch.  xii.
32,  UDte).  And  the  reapers  are  the  angels;
are  angels  (Euvised  Version).  But  it  is
exactly  parallel  to  the  preceding  predicate,
and  if  the  insertion  of  our  English  idiomatic
"the"  fails  to  lay  the  stress  which  the
Greek  has  on  the  fact  that  the  reapers  are
such  beings  as  angels  (as  contrasted  with
human  workers,  ch.  ix.  37,  38),  its  omission
adds  a  thought  which  the  Greek  was  pro-
bably not  intended  to  convey — that  the
reapers  would  be  only  some  among  the  angels.

Ver.  40. — As  therefore.  Observe  that  in
vers.  40—43  our  Lord  dwells  at  much  greater
lengtli  on  the  details  of  the  reapers'  work
than  on  the  preceding  stages  of  the  parable.
He  wishes  to  draw  special  attention  to  the
fact  that  the  tares  will,  without  any  doubt,
be  one  day  separated,  and  the  wheat  appear


in  full  splendour.  The  tares  are  gathered
and  burned  in  the  fire— turned  with  fire  (Re-
vised  Version) ;  of.  ch.  iii.  10,  note — so  shall
it  be  in  the  end  of  this  world  (ver.  39,  note).

:  Ver.  41. — The  Son  of  man.  Observe  how
expressly  Christ  identifies  the  Sower  with
the  Loril  of  the  angels.  Shall  send  forth
(airoo-TeXei) — as  his  representatives  (ch.  x.
2,  note) — ^his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather
out  of  his  kingdom — thou;<h  they  are  now
there — all  things  that  offend,  and  thent
which  do  inli^ulty  {viivTa  ra  aKdvSaAa  Ka\
Tovs  iroiovyras  t^v  avo^iidv) ;  all  things  tliai
offend  (that  cause  stumbling,  Bevised  Ver-
sion) ;  ch.  v.  29,  note.  In  itself  it  would
naturally  be  understood  of  persons,  in
accordance  with  the  meaning  of  "tares."
But  what  is  its  relation  to  the  following
clause,  for  tliis  latter  cannot  be  merely  tau-
tological ?  There  are  two  answers :  (a)  The
two  phrases  bring  out  different  aspects
under  which  the  persons  are  regarded.
They,  as  "  sons  of  the  evil  one,"  are  both
stumbling-blocks  to  others  ("  the  eons  of  the
kingdom  "),  and  also  active  workers  of  law-
lessness (videinfra).  They  sin  against  men
(cf.  ch.  xxiv.  246)  and  against  God.  (6)
The  first  term  regards  not  go  muih  tliem
as  their  actions  —  their  scandalous  acts
(Goebel);  the  second,  the  persons  them-
selves. The  former  of  the  two  answers
seems  preferable,  as  keeping  closer  to  the
parable.  It  also  agrees  with  the  personal
use  of  (ricdySa\oi>  in  ch.  xvi.  2B,  and  the
use  of  abroit  alone  in  the  next  clause.
With  respect  to  the  whole  plirase,  observe  :

(1)  It  ia  taken  partly  Irom  Zeph.  i.  3
(Hebrew),  "I  will  consume  [the  vurb  ^D^
would  readily  lend  itself  to  the  interpreta-
tion '  gather ']  .  .  .  the  stumbling-blocks  with
tiie  wicked  (D'j)Biin-n«  ni'?B'3an  .  .  .  c]d»«)."

(2)  Yet,  as  it  stands,  it  is  taken  parlily
also  from  Ps.  xxxvii.  1,  for  the  Greek  of
tliem  that  do  iniquity  is  tlie  same  as  in  the
LXX.  there.  Besides,  the  context  (comp.
Kirkpatrick)  is  not  dissimilar;  it  is  that
the  righteous  should  not  be  envious  at  the
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  for  it  is  only  tran-
sitory, "  They  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like
the   Kra.ss,  and  wither  as  the  green  herb."

(3)  The  phrase,  them  which  do  iniquity
(ratlier,  lawlessness;  ch.  vii.  23,  note),  looks  as
though  St.  Paul's  teaching  of  "  the  man  of
sin  "  (i  &v6paiiTos  rrjs  avo/ilas :  Westcott  and
Hort,  in  2  Thess.  ii.  3;  cf.  7,  8)  might  have
some  basis  in  the  direct  teaoliing  of  the
Lord  (cf.  ver.  43,  note ;  and  on  this  question
generally.  Chase,  '  Tlie  Lord's  Prayer,'  etc.,
p.  19).  (4)  Epliraem  Syrus,  evidently
quoting  this  passage,  but  in  the  form  in
which,  presumably,  it  existed  in  the  '  Diates-
saron,'  deduces  from  it  that  the  earth  will  be
the  abode  of  the  glorified  saints  :   "  Quod


12


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xin.  1—68.


aatem  dioit :  Munddbit  domum  regni  lui
nb  omni  ieandalo,  intellige  de  terra  et  rebus
ureatis,  quas  renovabit,  ibiqiie  juntos  saos
eollocabit"  (Reeoh, '  Agrapha,'  p.  295).

Yer.  42. — And  shall  oast  them  into  a  (the,
Bevised  Version)  fomaoe  of  fire:  there
shall  be  (the,  Bevised  Version)  wailing  and
gnashing  of  teeth.  Judging  by  the  analogy
of  Ter.  50,  even  the  first  clause  is  not  ueces-
sarily  due  to  the  image  of  the  tares.  The
furnace  of  fire  was  no  unknown  expresBion
for  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  (cf.  also
ch.  viii.  12,  note).

Ver.  43. — Then  shall  the  righteous.  For
with  these  also  their  character  ia  seen  in
their  lives  (ch.  v.  45,  note).  Shine  forth
as  the  sun.  An  undoubted  reference  to
the  substance  of  Dan.  xii.  3.  Observe  that
according  to  the  thought  of  the  parable,
it  is  suggebted  that  the  likeness  consists
not  only  in  the  brightness  of  the  sun  in
itself,  but  also  in  its  being  alone  in  the
sky,  with  nothing  round  it  to  prevent  its
full  glory  being  seen.  Then,  The  chief
lesson  of  the  parable ;  not  before,  but  at,
that  time.  In  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.
In  ver.  38  they  were  spoken  of  as  "  the  sons
of  the  kingdom  j "  here  their  Father  is  ex-
pressly mentioned,  not  "the  Sou  of  man"
(vers.  37,  41).  The  same  reference  to  his
Father  ratlier  than  to  himself  is  found  in
ch.  xxvi.  29.  Did  our  Lord  wish  already  to
hint  that  "  then  cometh  the  end,  when  he
shall  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even
the  Father"  (1  Cor.  xv.  24)?  Had  St.
Paul's  teaching  also  here  a  direct  connexion
with  that  of  our  Lord  (ver.  41,  note)?  Who
hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  (ver.- 9,  note),

Ver.  44. — The  parable  of  the  hidden  trea-
ture  found.  Matthew  only.  It  seems  pro-
bable, fmrn  ver.  51,  that  this  and  the  next
two  parables  were  spoken  to  the  disciples  in
private.  They  alone  would  appreciate  the
value  of  what  they  bad  found;  to  them
alone  could  the  warning  be  as  yet  given,  that
it  is  not  sufficient  to  have  been  gathered
within  the  gospel  net.  Observe  in  this
parable  that  the  treasure  was  found  by
chance,  and  it  was  near  to  the  man  without
his  knowing  it.  Again.  To  be  omitted,
with  the  Eeviaeil  Version  and  Westcott  and
Hort.  Its  absence  (contrast  vers.  45,  47)
suggests  that  tliis  parable  is  the  first  of  a
group,  marked  as  such  either  by  our  Lord
beginning  with  it  after  he  had  made  a
pause,  or  by  merely  coming  first  in  one  of
the  sources  that  the  evangelist  used.  The
kingdom  of  heavon  (ver.  24,  note)  is  like
unto  treasure  hid  in  a  field  (of.  FroT.  ii.  4).
Hid  (hidden,  Revised  Version,  kckou^/iei/^).
It  was  not  there  by  accident ;  it  had  been
pui'posely'plabed  there, "hid  by  its  former
possessor  for  safety  (oh.  xxv.  18,  25).
Observe  that,  doubtless  unintentionally  on


the  part  of  the  evangelist,  the  parable  forms
in  this  respect  the  complement  to  ver.  856.
In  a  field  (iv  ry  ityp^) !  in  the  field  (Revised
Version);  of  ch.  I  23,  not».  ThO  which
when  a  man  hath  found,  he  hideth ;  tehieh  a
man  found,  and  hid  (Bevised  Version).  For
fear  some  one  else  should  take  it.  Prema-
ture assertion  would  lose  the  man  the
treasure.  (For  a  similar  truth  in  spiritual
things,  cf.  Gal.  i.  17.)  And  for  joy  thereof.
So  also  the  margin  of  the  Revised  Version ;
but  and  in  his  Joy  (Bevised  Version)  is
better  (leal  kwi  rfls  x"?"*  abrov),  Goeth  and
selleth  all  that  he  hath,  and  bnyeth  that
field.  Ooeth  .  .  .  telleth  .  .  .  buyeth.  All
in  the  present  tense.  Oilr  Lord  in  this
parable  (contrast  ver.  46)  brings  the  man
vividly  before  us  in  each  separate  stage  of
his  action.  For  the  self-denial  that  is  a
necessary  of  acquiring  gospel  privileges,
oomp.  oh.  xix.  21  (where  oontoast  the  young
man's  grief  with  the  joy  spoken  of  here).
Field.  Observe  that,  though  the  figure  is
the  same  as  in  ver.  24,  the  thing  signified  is
very  diflferent.  Here  field  represents  merely
that  which  contains  the  treasure,  perhaps
the  outward  profession  of  Ohristianity,  All.
Westcott  and  Hort  omit,  chiefly  on  the
authority  of  the  Vatirain  manuscript  (of.  ver.
46,  note).  And  buyeth  that  field.  Into  the
morality  of  the  action  our  Lord  3bes  not
enter;  he  omyiUl'strales  his  teaching  by  an
incident  that  must  have  happened  not  nn-
frequently  in  a  country  like  Palestine,
which  had  already  been  the  scene  of  so
many  wars.  But  the ,  transaction  "  was,  at
least,  in  entire  accordance  with  Jewish  law..
If  a  man  had  found  a  treasure  in  loose  coius
among  the  com,  it  would  certainly  be  his,  if
he  bought  the  com.  If  lie  had  found  it  on
the  ground,  or  in  the  soil,  it  would  equally
certainly  belong  to  him,  if  he  could  claim
ownership  of  the  soil,  and  even  if  the  field
were  not  his  own,  nnless  others  could  prove
their  right  to  it.  The  law  went  so  far  as  to
adjudge  to  the  purchaser  of  fruits  anything
found  among  these  fruits"  (Bdersheim.
'Life,' L  595).

Vers.  45,  46.— n*  parable  of  the  pearl-
merchant.  Matthew  only.  Observe  in  this
parable  that  the  merchant  is  accustomed  to
deal  in  pearls,  and  is  searching  for  good
ones,  when  he  meets  with  one  worth  more
than  the  others  he  possesses  all  put  together
If  the  former  parable  described  one  who
finds  the  gospel  as  it  were  by  chance  (e.g.
the  woman  of  Samaria),  this  speaks  of  one
who  has  long  been  searching  for  truth  (e.g.
Andrew  and  John,  the  Ethiopian  eunuch).

Ver.  45.— Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven
is  like  unto  a  merchant  man.      Evidently


OH.  XIII.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.


13


no  poor  man,  but  a  rich  wholesale  dealer
(^lUiropos:  cf.  Rev.  xviii.  23;  not  KAm)\os,  "a
retailer;"  of.  2  Cor.  ii.  17).  Seeking.  Ao-
coidlng  to  the  usual  manner  of  his  life.
Goodly  pearls.  'He  oared  nothing  about
the  inferior  kinds  or  specimens.  The  man
aimed  high ;  he  got  more  than  he  can  have
thought  possible  (ih.  vii.  7,  8).  Origen
(Commentary,  in  loo.;  Huet,  i.  p.  210)  has
much  curious  matter  about  the  different
kinds  of  pearls.

Ver.  46. — Who,  when  he  had  found  (and
having  found.  Revised  Version,  eupij'  5^)
one  pearl  of  great  price  (Job  xxviii.  18,
Revised  Version  margin,  one);  hardly  the
indefinite  article  (cf.  ch.  viii.  19,note).  Ohry-
sostom's  comment  is,  Mia  ydp  ia-riv  r\  ihiiStta
Ka\  oh  TToKva'xt^'fjS'  Went  (aireKOiiv') ',  i.e.
some  distance,  for  he  might  well  have  to  go
much  further  than  the  man  in  the  preceding
parable  (iiriyct).  Went  (aorist)  .  .  .  told
(perfect)  .  .  .  bought  (aorist).  He  starts
without  delay ;  he  sells  irrevocably ;  he  pur-
chases at  once  (of.  ver.  41).  And  sold  all
that  he  had,  and  bought  it.  All.  Genuine
here.  It  may  have  been  a  great  deal  as
worldly  wealth  is  reckoned.  Thus  Saul  of
Tarsus  acted  (Phil.  iii.  7,  8),  and  Moses
(Heb.  xi.  26).

Vers.  47 — 50. — The  parable  of  the  drag-
net. This  parable  at  once  reoalls  that  of
tlie  tares,  but  it  will  be  noticed  that  there
our  Lord's  aim  is  to  inculcate  patience  and
hopefulness  on  the  part  of  his  servants  when
they  realize  th6  close  proximity  of  the  un-
godly even  in  districts  won  over  to  the  faith,
while  here  his  aim  is  rather  to  warn.  To
be  in  the  kingdom  is  not  enough  ;  some  of
those  now  within  it  may  nevertheless  be
cast  out.  It  thus  greatly  resembles  the
parable  of  the  ten  virgins ;  save  that  in  that
parable  greater  stress  is  laid  on  personal
preparation  and  continued  watchfulness;  in
this,  on  personal  worth.

Ver.  47. — Again,  the  kingdom  of  heaven
is  like  unto  a  net  (aay^vri :  oh.  iv.  18,  note),
that  was  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathered  of
every  kind.  (For  tlie  thought,  of.  ch.  xxii.
10;  and  for  the  word,  a-wdyem,  ver.  30,
note.)

Ver.  48.— Which,  when  it  was  full;  filled
(Revised  Version,  iirKTip^iSj}};  i.e.  not  as  a
matter  of  course,  but  by  those  that  came  or
were  brought  in.  They  drew  to  shore.  The
Revised  Version  reproduces  the  local  touch,
they  drew  up  on  the  beach  (ver.  2,  note).  In
the  parable  those  who  cast  the  net  also
separate  the  fish,  but  this  identification  of
two  distinct  sots  of  persons  (vers.  24,  30,  37,
41)  is  merely  part  of  the  machinery  of  the


story  (of.  ver.  25).  And  sat  down.  How
true  to  life.  Perhaps  it  "intimates  the
thoughtful  care  with  which  the  work  of
separation  is  performed"  (Goebel).  And
gathered  (<rvv4\e^ai/);  ver.  30,  note.  The
good.  Corresponding  to  their  proper  nature
also  in  appearance  (t^  Ka\ii :  of  ch.  vii.  17,
note).  Into  vessels,  bnt  cast  the  bad  (ra  Si
a-aTrpd);  ch.  vii.  17,  18,  notes;  ch.  xii.  33.
Not  to  be  pressed  to  mean  "corrupt,  dead
fish,  in  a  state  of  rottenness  "  (Goebel),  for
surely  fishermen  seldom  get  many  of  these,
but  simply  the  worthless,  the  unfit  for  use.
Tiiis  would  include  the  legally  unclean.
Tristram  writes, "  The  greater  number  of  the
species  taken  on  the  lake  are  rejected  by
the  fishermen,  and  I  have  sat  with  them  on
the  gunwale  while  they  went  through  their
net,  and  threw  out  into  the  sea  those  that
were  too  small  for  the  market  or  were  con-
sidered unclean "  ('  Nat.  Hist,  of  Bible,'
p.  291,  edit.  1889).  Away  (?{»  ^0aKoy).
Compare,  for  both  language  and  tbonght,
the  treatment  of  the  salt  that  has  lost  its
savour  (ch.  v.  13).

Ver.  49. — So  shall  it  be  at  (in.  Revised
Version)  the  end  of  the  world  (cf.  vers.  39, 40,
notes) :  the  angels  shall  come  forth  (ver.  41),
and  sever,  Taking  them  completely  away
(iupopiovo'iv).  The  wicked  (robs  irovripoisy',
oh.  vii.  18  and  vi.  13,  notes.  As  compared
with  traTrp6s  (ver.  48),  it  refers  more  directly
to  the  moral  character.  Our  Lord  has  here
left  the  imagery  of  the  parable.  Trom  among
the  just;  the  righteou$  (Revised  Version);
ver.  43,  note.

Ver.  50. — And  shall  oast  them,  etc.  The
verse  is  word  for  word  the  same  as  ver.  42.

Vers.  51,  52.  —  The  Promise,  under  ths
limiU  of  the  houteholder.    Matthew  only.

Ver.  51. — Jesus  saith  unto  them.  Omitted
by  the  Revised  Version  as  a  manifest  gloss,
perhaps  originally  due  to  a  lectionary.
Have  ye  nuderstood.  Our  Lord  wishes  them
to  realize  the  progress  that  they  have  already
made,  that  he  may  give  them  a  fresh  pro-
mise, and  thus  summon  them  to  fresh  energy.
All  these  things  t  Probably  the  imme-
diately preceding  parables  and  others  spoken
at  the  same  time  (cf  ver.  34,  note).  They
say  unto  him.  Tea,  Lord.  Lord  is  rightl;
omitted  by  the  Revised  Version.  It  dis-
tracts the  attention  from  the  quiet  affir-
mative.

Ver.  52. — Then  said  he  unto  them.  There-
fore (Sid  TouTo) ;  i.e.  because  you  understand,
I  add  this.  Every  scribe  (vas  ypafiiiarevs).
The  interpretation  of  the  following  clause,
naturally  suggested  by  this  woi-d  in  itsclt;
is  that  our  Lord  meant  to  indicate  the  pos-
sibilities that  lay  before  a  Jewish  scribe  if
he  were  only  converted ;  but  for  such  a
reference  by  our  Lord  to  Jewish  scribea


u


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xm.  1—58.


ttiere  appears  no  leason  in  the  context.
The  word  must  therefore  be  understood  of
Oliristian  teachers,  who  by  their  study  of
the  Gospel  should  hold  a  position  in  the
Oliristian  Church  parallel  to  that  of(  scribes
among  the  Jews.  It  is  possible  that  our
Lord  cliose  the  term  in  order  to  accustom
his  disciples  to  the  idea  of  carrying  ou  the
study  of  Divine  things  which  tlie  scribes
were  accustomed  to  make.  Even  if  the
disciples  were  not  to  follow  their  methods,
they  might  well  Imitate  their  devotion.
Dean  Plumptre  has  an  iutereeting  note  on
our  Lord's  comparison  of  his  own  work  and
that  of  the  apostles  after  him,  to  the  work
of  the  scribes  of  the  Jewish  schools.  In
ch.  xxiii.  34  is  found  a  wider  application  of
the  term  than  usual,  hardly  refemng,  how-
eyer,  to  Christians,  but  rather  to  the  Jewish
scribes  in  their  ideal  character.  Which  is
instructed ;  who  hath  been  made  a  disciple
(Eevised  Version,  naBriTiuBeis).  Though  the
correction  is  right  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  19),  the
word,  nevertheless,  implies  much  more  than
mure  admission  to  the  circle  of  disciples ;
it  includes  also  the  thought  of  instruction
having  been  really  received.  Unto  (to,  Be-
vised  Version)  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
(t^  ^aaiK^ia  tuu  ovpavwv,  dative  of  refer-
ence; cf.  Winer,  §  xxxi.  4).  The  kingdom
is  not  regarded  as  the  teacher,  but  as  the
school,  with  reference  to  which  discipleship
is  entered  upon.  Is  like.  In  the  preceding
parables  the  general  principles,  etc.,  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven  have  been  compared;
here,  only  certain  individuals  belonging  to
it.  Unto  a  man  that  is  an  householder,
wMeh  briugeth  forth  oat  of  his  treasure
(cf.  oh.  ii.  11,  note).  The  thing  signified  is
his  experience  and  spiritual  understanding.
Ch.  xii.  as  lias  a  similar  thought,  but  the
treasure  tliere  is  rather  his  personality  as
afiecting  his  life ;  here,  as  affecting  his  intel-
lect. It  is  curious  that  the  thought  of
ch.  xii.  33,  34  should  also  resemble  our
vers.  47 — 50.  Things  new  and  old.  The
thought  of  the  saying  is  that  as  a  house-
holder brings  out  from  his  stores  food  recently
and  long  ago  acquired  (cf.  Cant.  vii.  13),  so
a  Christian  "  scribe"  brings  out  (primarily,
if  not  solely,  for  the  use  of  others)  the  new
truths  that  he  learns,  and  also  old  ones
that  he  has  long  since  known.  It  is  thus
a  promise  that  the  disciples  shall  (if  they
use  their  opportunities  rightly)  be  able  to
do  more  than  understand  Christ's  teaching
(as  they  have  just  claimed  to  have  done) ;
for  they  shall  be  able  to  teach  (not  merely
to  learn),  and  that  not  only  new  truths,  but
also  old  ones  ;  they  shall  be  able,  that  is  to
say,  to  understand  the  relation  of  the  old  to
the  new,  and  to  bring  out  even  the  old  in  its
true  moaning.  Hence  old  is  mentioned
after  new,  for  it  implies  greater  knowledge


and  skill.  It  will  be  observed  that  Irenseus'
interpretation  (IV.  ix.  1)  of  new  and  old
as  the  New  and  Old  Testaments  is  only
partially  right.  With  the  disciples,  it  is
true,  the  old  would  naturally  be,  in  the  first
place.  Old  Testament  truths,  and  the  new,
such  truths  as  they  learned  from  Christ ;
but  these  also  would,  after  a  few  weeks  or
months,  in  tlieir  turn  become  old  to  them,
and  tlie  fresh  truths  taught  them  as  tlieir
life  went  on  would  be  ever  the  new  ones.
The  thought  of  1  John  ii.  7,  8  is  very
similar.  Weiss'  interpretation  is  different
and  even  less  right.  According  to  him,
new  represents  the  truths  about  the  kingdom
of  God,  and  old  the  long-known  arrange-
ments of  nature  and  human  life,  which,  aa
the  parables  show,  are  drawn  up  on  the
same  lines.  Origen  gives  a  beautiful  appli-
cation of  Lev.  xxvi.  10,  11a.

Ver.  53. — And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when
Jesus  had  finished  these  parables,  he  de-
parted thence.  The  formula  marks  the  end
of  an  excerpt  from  the  discourses  (cf.  ch.
xi.  1,  note,  and  Introduction,  p.  UL).  It  is,
however,  to  be  noticed  that  the  first  and
last  words,  Kal  .  .  .  iKe~iBey,  come  in  Mark
vi.  1,  introducing  the  parallel  passage  to  our
following  verses.  But  in  the  case  of  such
common  words  this  coincidence  is,  perhaps,
to  be  considered  as  accidental.  Be  departed
(jieTrjpen).  Klsewhere  in  the  New  Testa-
ment only  in  ch.  xix.  1,  where  it  comes  in
the  same  connexion  as  here.

Vers.  54 — 58. — Unbelief  manifested  in
Jesus'  own  country,  i.e.  Nazareth.  Parallel
passage:  Mark  vL  1 — 6.  In  Luke iv.  16 — 30
we  have  also  an  account  of  a  scene  at
Nazareth;  but  the  occasion  was  almost
certainly  a  diff'erent  one  from  that  described
here.  His  account,  however,  seems  to  have
been  modified  in  form  from  the  better
known  narrative  found  in  the  Framework,
and  used  in  Matthew  and  Mark.

Ver.  54. — And  when  he  was  oome  into  his
own  country  (eJi  r^y  varplSa  airoS) ;  i.e.
Nazareth  (ch.  ii.  23).  In  Luke  iv.  23  the
phrase  is  used  with  express  contrast  to
Capernaum.  In  John  iv.  44  it  is,  as  it
seems,  used  in  a  special  sense  of  Judsea,
even  though  it  comes  in  a  saying  tliat  is
almost  identical  with  our  ver.  57  (seeBisliop
Westcott).  He  taught  them  in  their  syna-
gogue. His  teaching  appears  to  have
spread  over  at  least  a  few  days  (^StSao-icev).
Insomuch  that  they  were  astonished  (ch,  vii.
28,  29),  and  said,  Whence  (ir<(eei/).  And  so
again  in  ver.  56.  The  sentence  might  in
itself  express  an  earnest  desire  to  know  the
origin  of  our  Lord.  But  the  fact  that  they
were  "  offended  in  him  "  (ver.  57)  shows  that


OH.  xni.  1— 58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.


15


their  language  was  due,  not  bo  much  to
inquiry  as  to  astonishment,  which  may  in
some  cases  be  the  flrat  stage  of  inquiry  (ch.
ix.  33 ;  xii.  23),  or  may,  as  here,  be  oliecked
from  further  development.  Knowing  his
family,  and  despising  it,  they  treated  him
merely  as  a  curiosity,  and  never  thouglit  of
submitting  themselves  to  bim.  Hath  this
Man  this  wisdom  Which  theyhadjustheaid.
And  these  mighty  works  ?  These  is  not  ex.-
pressed  in  the  Greek,  uor  necessarily  im-
plied. Perhaps  he  had  already  performed
some  of  the  few  miracles  that  he  wrought
there  (ver.  58),  or  possibly  his  townsfolk  re-
ferred to  what  they  had  heard  of  his  miracles
elsewhere.

Yi^r.  55. — Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son  1
In  Mark,  "the  carpeuter,  the  sou  of  Mary,"
which  may  possibly  be  a  doctrinal  correction,
made  to  avoid  representing  our  Lord  as  the
son  of  Joseph,  Tbut  is  more  probably  the
earlier  form  of  the  narrative  (due  to  im-
mediate and,  perhaps,  local  knowledge),
which  St.  Matthew,  or  one  of  those  who
transmitted  the  source  he  used,  avoided  out
of  a  feeling  of  reverence.  In  the  Apocryphal
Gospels  our  Lord  is  not  represented  as  a
carpenter  himself,  but  as  helping  Joseph  by
miraculously  lengthening  a  piece  of  wood
which  Joseph  had  cut  too  short  (e.g.  'Pseudo-
Matthew,'  §  37;  'Gospel  of  Thomas,'  first
Greek  form,  §  13;  contrast  Justin  Martyr,
'  Dial,  with  Trypho,'  §  88).  Is  not  his  mother
oalled  Kary  1  and  his  brethren  (ch.  xii.  16).
Probably  sons  of  Joseph  by  a  former  wife
(see  Bishop  Ligbtfoot's  classical  dissertation
in'Galatians').  James.  Afterwards  "bishop"
of  Jerusalem  (Gal.  i.  19  ;  Acta  xv.  13),  and
the  author  of  the  Epistle.  And  Joses ;
sfoseph  (Eevised  Version),  which  is  also  pro-
bably right  in  ch.  xxvii.  56.  Josea  is  the
Grseeised  form  (see  Westcott  and  Hort,
'  Append.').  And  Simon,  and  Jadas.  Prob-
ably the  author  of  the  Epistle.

Ver.  56. — And  his  sisters.  Mentioned  only
hore  and  in  the  parallel  passage  in  Mark  (cf.


also  "  Western  "  authorities  in  Murk  iii.  32,
where  see  Westcott  and  Hort,  'Append.').
Thuir  names  are  quite  unknown.  Are
they  not  all.  There  were  several,  at  any
rate  not  less  than  three.  Matthew  alone
has  all.  With  us  1  Mark  expressly  adds
"here;"  i.e.  in  Nazareth.  Whence  then
hath  this  Man  all  these  things?  (ver.  54,
note).

Ver.  57. — And  they  were  offended  in  him
(oh.  V.  29,  note).  Their  knowledge  of  the
earthly  conditions  of  his  youth  proved  a
stumbling-block  to  their  faith.  Bat  Jesus
said  unto  them.  He  accepts  the  fact,  but
reminds  tliem  that  they  were  under  a  special
temptation  thus  to  reject  I  dm.  Even  in  his
reproof  he  will  call  them  to  rise  above  their
position.  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour.
There  will  ever  be  some  to  honour  him.
He  who  speaks  forth  the  mind  of  God  shall
not  totally  fail  in  any  place  gave  one.  An
encouragement  and  a  warning.  Save  in  his
own  country  (eV  Tif  irarplSt).  Better  omit
own,  for  avTov  is  not  genuine  here  (contrast
Mark),  and  the  insertion  of  iSi<f  before
irarptSi  is  not  supported  by  enough  authoiity.
Mark  adds,  "  and  among  his  own  kin."  And
in  his  own  house.  Possibly  Jeremiah's  ex-
perience (Jer.  xi.  21 ;  xii.  6)  gave  rise  to
this  proveib.  (On  John  iv.  44,  cf.  ver.  54,
note.)

Yer.  58. — And  he  did  not  many  mighty
works  there  because  of  their  unbelief.  Our
account  is  abbreviated  from  Mark's.  Notice
there, "  He  could  not  do  .  .  .  and  he  mar-
velled because  of  their  unbelief."  Our  Lord
was  hindered,  not  by  lack  of  power,  but  by
lack  of  those  moral  conditions  which  would
aloue  have  made  his  miracles  really  tend  to
the  spiritual  advantage  of  the  inhabitants  of
Nazareth  (cf.  ch.  xii.  38).  Because  of  their
unbelief ;  i.e.  complete  (a,Trt(TT(a);  but  in  the
case  of  the  failure  of  the  disciples  to  perforin
a  miracle,  only  comparative  {oKiyoxtarla,  ch
ivii.  20).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.! — 23. — The  parable  of  the  sower.  1.  The  circumstances.  1.  The  time.  It
was  the  day,  St.  Matthew  says  (the  order  in  St.  Luke  is  different),  on  which  our  Lord
had  cast  the  devil  out  of  the  blind  and  dumb  man ;  the  day  on  which  the  Pharisees
had  so  iieroely  accused  him  of  intercourse  with  Satan;  when  his  own  mother  and
brethren  had  feared  for  his  safety,  and  sought  to  guide  and  regulate  his  work ;  when,
as  appears  from  St.  Luke  (xi.  37),  a  Pharisee  had-invited  him  in  no  friendly  spirit  to
hi.s  house,  and  there  the  disagreement  had  been  so  great,  the  antagonism  so  marked
and  intense,  that  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  in  their  bitter  anger,  pressed  vehemently
upon  him,  catechizing  him  with  wrathful  and  ensnaring  questions,  to  find,  if  possible,
ail  opportunity  for  accusing  him.  "  The  same  day  went  Jesus  out  of  the  house,  and
[■at  by  the  sea-side."  After  all  that  fury  of  opposition  he  was  quiet  and  collected.  In
the  holy  calm  of  his  soul  he  was  able  to  thinli  of  others,  able  to  teach  tlem  on  that
very  day  of  strife.     It  il  ft  blessed  thing  to  be  enabled  by  the  grace  of  God  to  turn


18  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xni.  1— 5a

from  the  cares  and  conflicts  of  life  to  holy  meditation,  and  to  find  rest  for  our  troubled
soul  in  communion  with  God.  2.  The  audience.  Multitudes  followed  him,  excited
probably  by  the  startling  events  of  the  day.  They  longed  to  hear  again  the  great
Teacher  who  had  held  his  ground  against  those  famous  rabbis,  and  had  convicted  them
of  hypocrisy  and  envy  and  falsehood.  Many,  doubtless,  came  from  curiosity,  some
from  better  reasons.  The  Lord  would  lose  no  oppoitunity  of  saving  souls.  Wearied
as  he  must  have  been,  he  went  into  a  boat  and  sat  down  to  preach  to  them,  the  whole
multitude  standing  on  the  beach  of  fine  white  sand  that  borders  the  lake.  3.  His
mode  of  teaching.  He  spake  in  parables ;  now,  it  seems,  for  the  first  time.  The  parable
was  a  bright,  lively  way  of  presenting  truth,  best  suited  for  the  dull  understanding  of
the  listeners.  It  would  excite  their  interest;  it  would  rivet  their  attention;  it  would
stimulate  them  to  think.  The  parables  of  Christ  have  sunk  deep  into  the  very  heart
of  the  Church.  Perhaps  they  have  been  especially  blessed  to  the  simple  and  the
unlearned ;  but  they  have  been  a  rich  store  of  spiritual  teaching  for  all  Christian  people,
the  most  educated  as  well  as  the  ignorant ;  they  have  given  us  many  precious  sayings,
current  now  in  daily  life;  they  have  coloured  our  language.  Another  advantage  in
the  use  of  pariibles  at  that  time  was  that  the  parable  would  give  the  Lord's  enemies
no  opportunity  for  their  malicious  accusations.  They  might  perceive  (as  in  ch.  xxi.
45)  that  he  spake  of  them,  or  with  reference  to  their  doctrine;  but  they  could  find  no
ground  for  a  charge  of  heresy.  We  shall  meet  with  another  reason  for  the  introduction
of  this  mode  of  teaching  in  vers.  13 — 15.

II.  The  stoby.  1.  The  call  for  attention.  "Behold,"  the  Lord  said;  in  St.  Maik
there  is  the  further  preface,  "Hearken."  It  is  the  Lord  \\ho  speaks.  We  must  listen  ;
we  must  give  him  the  attention  which  he  claims.  His  words  are  simple,  but  they  are
full  of  spiritual  instruction.  Meditate  on  them;  pray  over  them.  They  will  throw  a
light  on  the  dark  mysteries  of  human  life ;  they  will  guide  us  on  our  way  to  God.  2.
The  incidents.  They  were  taken  from  the  commonest  details  of  daily  life.  The  Lord's
hearers  might  see  them  any  day  at  sowing-time.  Perhaps  they  were  to  be  seen  at  that
very  moment.  It  may  well  be  that  the  Lord,  sitting  on  the  raised  prow  of  the  boat,
could  see  the  corn-land  descending,  as  we  are  told  it  does,  to  the  water's  edge.  He
saw,  it  may  be,  the  sower  as  he  went  forth  to  sow.  He  could  see  the  hard-trodden
pathway  running  through  the  midst,  with  no  fence  to  prevent  the  seed  from  falling  on
it.  He  could  see  (he  countless  birds  hovering  over  the  rich  Plain  of  Gennesaret.  He
could  see  the  rocky  ground  of  the  hillside  protruding  here  and  there  through  the  corn-
field. He  could  see  the  large  bushes  of  thorns  springing  up,  as  they  do  now,  in  the
midst  of  the  wheat.  "He  could  see  the  good  rich  soil,  which  distinguishes  the  wholf'
of  that  plain  anil  its  neighbourhood  from  the  bare  hills  elsewhere  de^cending  into  tht*
lake,  and  which,  wliere  there  is  no  interruption,  produces  one  vast  mass  of  corn"
(Stanley, 'Sinai  and  Palestine,'  pp.  426,  427).  And  he  saw  in  these  common  sights
a  happy  illustration  of  the  varied  efiects  of  that  Word  of  everlasting  life  which  he  came
to  preach.  Happy  are  those  who  see  in  earthly  things  the  shadows  of  heavenly
realities,  who  walk  by  faith,  aot  by  sight.  3.  The  enforcement.  "Who  hath  ears  to
hear,  let  him  heai."  The  Lord  had  bespoken  attention  at  the  beginning ;  he  enforce.s
Ihat  requirement  "gain.  He  had  shadowed  forth  solemn  truths  in  those  simple  words-
he  would  have  men  ponder  them  in  their  hearts.  But  not  all  would  do  go,  he  knew!
All  had  listened  with  the  outward  ear;  but  to  many  it  was  simply  a  story,  a  story  and
nothing  more.  They  would  not  penetrate  into  its  real  meaning  ;  they  had  not  ears  to
hear.  But  "  who  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  Let  him  whose  heart  God  hath
opened  weigh  well  these  holy  words,  for  they  relate  to  the  most  momentous  issues  in
our  earthly  life.

III.  The  conversation  with  the  disciples.  1.  Their  question.  It  wa^  the  first
lime,  it  seems,  that  the  Lord  had  taught  by  parables.  His  disciples  were  struck  by
the  change  in  his  mode  of  teaching.  When  the  multitude  had  departed  and  they
were  alone  (Mark  iv.  10),  they  asked  him,  "  Why  speakest  thou  unto  them  in
parables?"  Men  who  are  in  earnest  will  be  inquirers  after  truth.  2.  The  Lord's
answer.  (1)  His  immediate  di^cijiles  were  more  advanced  in  religious  knowledge  than
the  multitude;  they  had  had  the  inestimable  advantage  of  his  teaching  and  example.

It  was  given  unto  thein  lo  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God those  secrets

vvl  ich  are  revealed  to  faith  and  love.     Those  secrets  are  mysteries,  unintelligible  and


CH.  xin.  1— 58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  17

incredible  to  the  worldly  and  the  unconverted ;  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent  of
the  world,  but  revealed  to  the  babes  in  Christ.  That  knowledge  is  a  gift ;  it  is  not
gained  by  thought  and  study.  It  is  given  in  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  to
those  who  come  to  Christ  in  faith.  It  is  not  given  to  all,  for  not  all  have  the  will  to
come.  It  is  a  law  in  spiritual  as  in  natural  things,  that  "whosoever  hath,  to  him
shall  be  given."  It  is  so  in  all  the  various  aspects  of  life — in  the  pursuit  of  wealth,
honour,  learning.  Wealth  leads  to  wealth  ;  one  step  in  rank  to  another ;  the  learning
already  gained  is  the  means  for  acquiring  more.  There  must  be  energy,  ability,
industry.  So  in  things  spiritual  there  must  be  a  receptivity,  an  honest  and  good  heart
ready  to  receive  the  holy  seed ;  even  that  is  God's  gift.  Every  measure  of  grace  given
is  a  means  of  gaining  more.  There  is  a  continued  progress  from  strength  to  strength,
nearer  and  nearer  to  God,  "  But  whosoever  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  tmken  away
even  that  he  hath  ; "  or,  as  it  is  in  Luke  viii.  18,  "  that  which  he  seemeth  to  have."  The
one  talent  must  be  taken  from  him  who  doth  not  use  it.  He  seemed  to  have-,  but  it
was  only  seeming.  That  is  not  really  ours  which  is  hidden  in  the  earth,  which  is  not
used.  The  means  of  grace,  the  opportunities  of  improvement,  what  seems  to  he
natural  goodness,  the  very  receptivity  of  grace, — all  this  must  at  last  be  taken  away
from  him  who  hath  not  (Heb.  vi.  4 — 6 ;  x.  26 — ^29).  (2)  The  fulfilment  of  prophecy.
The  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  fulfilled  first  in  the  prophet's  own  experience,  was  fulfilled
again  in  its  ultimate  meaning  in  the  result  of  the  preaching  of  Christ.  The  multitude
heard  his  words,  and  yet  they  heard  not,  for  they  did  not  understand  them  with  the
understanding  of  faith.  They  saw  him,  and  yet  they  saw  not ;  for  they  saw  only  his
outward  form,  and  failed  to  perceive  his  Divine  character.  Their  heart  was  gross  and
their  ears  dull,  and  they  had  closed  their  eyes,  lest  they  should  isee  and  hear  and
understand,  and  should  turn  unto  Christ.  It  is  instructive  to  notice  that  in  the
prophecy  the  gross  heart  and  the  dull  ears  and  the  closed  eyes  are  attributed  to  the
will  of  God.  The  blindne^  is  a  judicial  infliction,  a  penal  visitation.  But  here  our
Lord  himself  seems  to  give  a  somewhat  different  turn  to  the  prophet's  words.  The
blindness  is  self-caused.  "Their  eyes  they  have  closed."  Then  these  two  statements,
contradictory  as  they  may  seem,  must  really  express  only  two  sides  of  the  same  truth.
Both  are  true ;  we  cannot  wholly  reconcile  them ;  we  incline  sometimes  towards  the
one,  sometimes  towards  the  other.  We  cannot  yet  unite  them  in  one  point  of  view.
We  must  be  content  with  our  imperfect  vision  now ;  we  shall  see  plainly  hereafter.
In  some  sense,  then,  the  use  of  paiables  was  penal.  That  mode  of  teaching  would
conceal  the  truth  from  the  profane  and  hard-hearted,  from  those  who  had  wilfully  closed
their  eyes  and  judged  themselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life  (Acts  xiii.  46).  The
paiables  were  ifmvavTa  irwEToiiri.  They  conveyed  precious  lessons  of  spiritual  wisdom
to  the  thoughtful;  to  caieless  hearers  they  were  mere  ordinary  stories.  God,  In  his
awful  justice,  hides  the  truth  at  last  from  those  who  will  not  see  it.  It  is  a  law  of  his
moral  government  that  perseverance  in  sin  should  result  in  hardness  of  heart  and
insensibility  to  the  truth.  That  law  is  the  ordinance  of  God,  the  expression  of  his
holy  will.  The  sinner  by  his  obstinacy  in  sin  brings  himself  under  its  operation.
Hence  it  is  that  Holy  Scripture  tells  us  sometimes  that  God  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart,
sometimes  that  Pharaoh  hardened  it  himself.  (3)  The  blessedness  of  the  disciples.
Their  eyes  were  blessed,  for  they  saw  the  Christ  of  God;  they  saw  him  not  only  with
the  outward  eye,  as  others  saw,  but  with  the  vision  of  faith.  Their  ears  were  blessed,
for  they  heard  his  holy  words.  They  heard  them  not  only  with  the  outward  ear,  as
scribes  and  Pharisees  heard ;  but  they  heard  them  with  the  spiritual  understanding,
with  the  attentive  ear  of  obedience.  Many  prophets  and  righteous  men  had  longed  to
see  and  hear  the  Christ.  Abraham  had  seen  his  day  by  faith,  Isaiah  had  seen  his  life
in  the  prophetic  vision.  But  they  had  seen  only  glimpses.  They  had  seen  the
promises  afar  off,  and  were  persuaded  of  them,  and  embraced  them.  Now  the  Christ
was  come ;  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  in  the  world.  Blessed  are  those  who  see  by
faith  the  Lord  Christ,  and  hear  his  voice  speaking  to  them  in  their  hearts,  guiding,
teaching,  conaforting.

IV.  The  inteepkbtation.  1.  The  teed.  It  is  the  Woid  of  God.  Even  the
weightier  words  of  men  are  seeds  germinant  with  a  living  power;  they  strike  root
in  the  heart,  and  produce,  sometimes  noxious  weeds  and  poisonous  fruit,  sometimes
good  and  fruitful  growths.     How  much  more  is  this  true  of  the  living  Word  of  Godl

MATTHEW II.  0


18  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOaDlNQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.     Lou.  xiu.  1—58.


The  Lord  Jesus  himself  was  the  Sower.  Others,  in  their  measure,  have  been  sQWcrs —
Mb  apostles,  evangelists,  and  pastors — but,  in  the  iirst  and  highest  sense,  the  Lord
himself.  He  had  been  sowing  now  for  many  months.  His  holy  words  had  taken  root
in  some  faithfvi  hearts;  many  had  heard  listlessly  without  serious  thought;  some,  like
the  Pharisees,  had  rejected  the  Word  with  scorn  and  anger.  He  is  tlie  Sower,  and  in
a  true  and  deep  sense  he  himself  is  the  Seed.  He  soweth  the  Word,  and  he  is  the
Word.  The  spoken  word  will  not  live  in  the  hearts  of  the  hearers  without  his  grace,
his  presence.  Christians  are  born  again  of  incorruptible  seed — "  by  the  Word  of  God,
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever"  (1  P«t.  i.  23;  comp.  also  1  John  iii.  9).  That
incorruptible  seed  is  the  grace  of  Christ,  Christ's  presence,  Christ  himself  abiding  in
the  heart  by  his  Spirit.  His  grace  lives  in  the  soul,  growing,  spreading  through  the
heart,  filling  it  with  a  new  life,  transforming  him  in  whom  the  seed  abideth  into  the
measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  The  Word  soweth  the  Word.  He  i«
both  Sower  and  Seed,  as  he  is  both  Priest  and  Sacrifice.  2.  The  wayside.  Some  hear,
but  do  not  heed;  they  do  n^t  send  their  thoughts  forth  to  meet  ti)e  Word.  It  fall"
upon  their  ears;  it  does  not  excite  their  attention;  it  does  not  reach  their  hearts
And  that  for  two  reasons.  (1)  Their  heart  is  hard,  like  the  path  tlirouih  the  corn-
fields. The  path,  trodden  by  many  feet,  was  hard  and  dry ;  the  seed  could  only  lie  or
the  surface ;  it  could  not  sink  into  the  earth.  Such  is  the  soil  oflfered  by  many  heareri
to  the  holy  Word  of  God.  The  Lord  sowed  all  the  field  over ;  his  followers  must  do
the  same.  They  must  not  choose  one  part  which  seems  likely  to  be  fruitful  and  negleci
another  which  seems  unpromising;  they  must  try  to  reach  all  who  are  within  the
sphere  of  their  influence.  But  there  are,  alas  1  many  hearts  worn  hard  by  worldlines)
and  selfishness,  trodden  into  the  hardness  of  stone  by  the  constant  passage  of  worldlj
thoughts  and  worldly  cares.  Such  cannot  receive  the  Word.  It  lies  outside ;  it  cannof
enter.  All  that  is  high  and  holy,  all  that  speaks  of  Christ  and  heaven,  and  of  the  life
of  faith  and  love,  is  unintelligible  to  such  men.  "  The  natural  man  receiyeth  not  the
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God;  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him."  (2)  The  fowls  cams
and  devoured  it.  The  Word  was  not  leceived  into  the  heart ;  the  wicked  one  cometh
and  taketh  it  immedia,tely  away.  Such  men  have  exposed  themselves  to  his  devices;
for  the  hard-trodden  path  was  good  ground  once.  The  bard  heart  was  once  tender,
receptive  of  the  truth.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,"  said  the  psalmist,  "  harden
not  your  hearts."  They  who  will  not  listen  to  the  solemn  warning  expose  themselves
to  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  His  evil  spirits,  countless  like  the  fowls  of  the  air,  carry  off
the  good  seed.  They  fill  the  cold,  unheeding  heart  with  idle  thoughts,  with  selfish
and  wicked  imaginations;  and  the  good  seed  is  lost.  "Take  heedliow  ye  hear."  The
good  seed  is  precious  exceedingly.  Lose  it  not ;  to  lose  the  good  seed  is  to  lose  the
very  life.  3.  The  stony  places.  Here  and  there  in  the  field  the  rock  rose  to  the
surface ;  there  was  a  thin  covering  of  earth  lying  on  a  sheet  of  rock.  The  seed  could
not  sink  in ;  it  sprang  up  quickly  because  it  had  no  deepness  of  earth.  But  when  the
sun  was  up  it  was  scorched;  it  had  no  moisture,  no  root,  and  it  withered  away.  The
heart  was  as  hard  as  in  the  first  case ;  it  was  utterly  selfish,  it  had  no  capacity  of  real
self-denial.  But  it  had  an  appearance  of  softness.  There  was  an  outside  of  feeling,  or
what  seemed  like  feeling ;  there  was  quickness  of  apprehension,  a  lively  interest  in
novelties,  a  liking  for  excitement.  But  there  was  no  depth,  no  real  conviction,  no
truth  of  love.  Underneath  that  outside  of  seeming  life  there  lay  the  heart  unchanged,
unconverted,  hard  and  cold  as  rock.  Such  persons  are  easily  excited  ;  they  receive  the
Word  with  joy.  But  it  is  only  the  external  beauty  of  religion,  its  attractiveness,  its
poetry,  that  charms  them ;  they  like  religious  excitement  just  as  they  like  ether  forms
of  excitement.  But  they  have  not  counted  the  cost;  they  have  looked  only  on  tlia
fair  side  of  religion,  not  on  its  severer  aspi  ct.  They  have  never  thought  deeply  of  the
sharpness  of  the  cross,  of  their  own  danger,  of  the  sacrifices  which  the  cross  demnmls.
That  premature  joy  is  often  a  bad  sign;  it  often  means  that  there  is  no  sense  of  sin,  no
genuine  sorrow  and  contrition  for  the  past.  Such  a  one  has  no  perseverance-'  he
dureth  for  a  while,  but  only  for  a  while.  The  novelty  wears  off;  perhaps  trouble
comes,  or  sickness  and  pain.  The  sun  kindles  into  more  vigorous  life  the  deeply
rooted  plants ;  it  scorches  those  that  have  no  depth.  So  it  is  with  affliction  •  it  refines
and  strengthens  the  true  disciple  who  is  root(  d  in  Christ ;  it  offends  the  superficial
Christian.     The  religion  of  exciiemeut  and  outward  form  wiil  not  help  us  in  sickness


CH.  XIII.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  19

and  in  the  hour  of  death ;  we  want  something  deeper.  The  root  of  the  plant  is  not
seen;  it  is  hidden  in  the  earth.  So  is  the  true  life  of  the  Christian.  It  is  rooted  in
Christ,  hidden  with  Christ  in  God.  Such  a  man  doth  not  iall  away  in  time  of  tempta-
tion ;  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.  He  does  not  need  novelty  and  excite-
ment. The  old  story  of  the  love  of  Christ  is  ever  new  to  him.  Nothing  can  separate
him  from  the  love  of  Christ,  neither  tribulation  nor  distress;  for  he  dwelleth  in  Christ,
and  Christ  in  him.  4.  The  thorns.  In  this  case  the  soil  is  good ;  the  seed  sinks  deep ;
all  promises  well.  But  there  were  thorn-roots  left  in  the  ground.  The  thoin-bushes
had  been  burnt  or  cut  off,  but  the  roots  remained.  And  so  the  thorns  sprang  up  with
the  wheat  and  absorbed  its  nourishment,  and  grew  above  it,  taking  away  its  light  and
heat.  It  did  not  wither,  it  still  grew ;  there  were  stalk  and  leaves  and  ear ;  but  the
ear  was  empty ;  there  was  no  fruit.  The  Lord  is  thinking  of  men,  not  superficial  and
thoughtless  like  those  described  last,  but  men  of  character,  men  of  depth  and  thought
and  power,  men  of  earnestness  and  stability.  But,  alas  1  there  are  thorn-roots.  Such
a  man  might  have  been  a  great  saint ;  he  becomes  only  a  great  merchant,  or  a  great
writer,  or  a  great  statesman.  He  never  casts  aside  his  profession  of  religion.  He  is
upright,  moral,  attentive  to  the  outward  ordinances  of  worship.  But  he  brings  no  fruit
to  perfection;  and  that  because  of  the  thorn-roots.  He  had  not  by  diligent  self-
examination  and  anxious  prayer  weeded  out  the  tendencies  to  worldliness  which  lie  in
every  heart.  They  grew  up,  and  acquired  daily  more  height  and  strength.  The  soil
was  good,  the  thorns  grew  thick  and  strong  and  high.  He  met  with  great  successes ;  he
prospered  in  his  undertakings;  his  engagements  became  more  and  more  numerous.
His  cares  increased.  The  cares  of  this  world  little  by  little  filled  his  heart,  leaving  him
no  time,  he  supposed,  for  thought  and  self-examination  and  prayer.  He  grows  rich ;
his  riches  become  a  snare ;  they  draw  him  further  from  Christ.  The  love  of  money,
the  root  of  all  evil,  becomes  a  tyrant  passion ;  it  rules  his  heart.  Or,  it  may  be,  the
pleasures  of  this  life  allure  him  with  their  deceitful  glitter ;  and  Be  fritters  away  in
frivolous  gaieties  the'talents  that  might  have  raised  him  high  in  the  service  of  Christ.
All  the  time  he  keeps  up  the  respectabilities  of  a  religious  profession  ;  his  life  is  decent
and  fair  to  look  upon.  There  are  leaves,  but  no  fruit.  The  thorns  have  choked  the
wheat.  The  cares  and  pleasures  of  life  have  filled  the  heart  that  should  have  been
given  ta  Christ.  He  has  no  time,  no  thought,  no  real  love,  for  the  things  that  belong
to  his  peace.  He  beareth  no  fruit.  The  fruit  of  holy  thoughts,  holy  words,  and  holy
deeds ;  the  blessed  fruit  of  the  Spirit — love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  gentleness,  good-
ness, faith,  meekness,  temperance ; — he  hath  none  of  these  things.  He  might  have  been
a  saint  of  God ;  but,  alas !  he  hath  gained  the  world,  he  hath  lost  his  soul.  6.  Th»
good  ground.  The  honest  and  true  heart  is  the  good  ground.  Such  a  heart  offers  no
hindrance  to  the  growth  of  the  Divine  seed,  to  the  gracious  inworking  of  the  Holy
Spirit  of  God.  The  soil  is  deep;  there  are  no  thorn-roots;  or  rather  they  have  been
extirpated  by  diligent  care.  The  heart  is  thoughtful  and  serious ;  evil  passions  and
covetous  desires  have  been  subdued  by  the  grace  of  God.  Such  men  bring  forth  frtiit
with  patience.  They  go  on  from  strength  to  strength  in  patient  continuance  of  well-
doing. They  differ  from  one  another  in  their  natural  gifts,  in  their  opportunities;  also
in  the  degree  of  their  devotion,  their  self-denial.  But  all  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  holy
living,  "some  an  hundredfold,  some  sixty,  some  thirty,"  "One  star  differeth  from
another  star  in  glory ; "  but  all  are  bright,  shining  with  the  reflected  glory  of  the  Sun  of
Righteousness.  6.  General  reflections.  (1)  The  honest  and  good  heart  is  good  only
because  God  hath  made  it  so.  "There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  The  living
seed  of  the  Word  hath  a  power  which  earthly  seed  hath  not.  Not  only  hath  it  life  in
itself,  but  it  fertilizes  the  soil  on  which  it  falls ;  it  gives  richness  and  depth  to  the
ground  that  once  was  barren.  "  By  the  firace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am."  It  is  his
grace  that  makes  the  heart  good  and  honest.  That  grace  is  offered  to  all.  He  "  giveth
to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not."  The  Sower  sowed  the  precious  seed  all  the
field  over.  The  seed  has  the  same  life-giving  power  wherever  it  falls.  The  hard  heart,
the  shallow  heart,  the  heart  filled  full  with  cares  or  given  up  to  pleasures,  need  not
always  remain  what  now  they  are.  The  holy  seed,  if  received  and  cherished,  will  give
richness  and  depth  and  freedom.  The  distinctions  figured  in  the  parable  are  not  fixed
and  immutable.  Thank  God,  the  wicked  man  may  turn  from  his  wickedness  which
he  hath  committed;  he  may  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right;  he  may  save  his  sou]


20  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiii.  1— 58


alive.  The  conditions  of  the  soil  may  change.  Yet  there  are  differences,  the  principles
of  which  lie  hidden  in  deepest  mystery.  Some  hearts  have  a  receptivity  for  God's
grace;  some  have  not.  Some  men  come  to  the  light,  hating  their  own  darkness,  feel-
ing their  sinfulness,  drawn  to  the  light  by  its  attractive  power ;  others — strange  and
awful  infatuation  1 — love  darkness  rather  than  light,  and  will  not  come  to  the  Light
which  shineth  in  the  world.  But  we  must  not  despair ;  we  know  not  what  wonders
the  grace  of  God  may  work.  The  Sower  soweth  tlie  Word  ;  he  sows  it  everywhere.
His  servants  must  do  the  like,  sowing  in  all  soils,  even  the  hardest  and  most  unpro-
mising, in  humble  faith  and  hope.  (2)  We  may  notice  a  progress  in  the  three  classes
of  hearers  figured  in  the  parable  (see  Alford,  in  loc).  In  tlie  first  case  the  seed  does
not  spring  up  at  all;  in  the  second,  it  springs  up,  but  is  withered  almost  immediately;
in  the  third  it  is  checked,  but  not  withered  ;  it  yields  stalk  aud  leaves  and  empty  ears,
but  brings  no  fruit  to  perfection.  The  first  understand  not ;  the  second  receive  the
Word  with  joy ;  the  third  do  something  more — they  "  go  forth,"  they  enter  on  the  way
that  leadeth  unto  life ;  but  while  they  are  on  the  way  (iropeuif^o'oi)  the  Word  is  choked
with  cares  and  riches  and  pleasures  of  this  life.  "It  has  been  noticed,"  says  Dean
Alford,  "that  the  first  is  more  the  fault  of  careless,  inattentive  childhood ;  the  second,
of  ardent,  shallow  youth ;  the  third,  of  worldly,  self-seeking  age."  All  three  cases  are
sad ;  the  last  is  the  saddest,  "  for  it  had  been  better  for  them  not  to  have  known  the
way  of  righteousness,  than,  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  command-
ment delivered  unto  them"  (2  Pet.  ii.  21).

Lessons.  1.  Hearken  I  it  is  the  Lord's  voice.  His  disciples  must  listen  with  solemn
attention.  2.  Blessed  are  they  who  hear  the  Saviour's  voice.  The  saints  of  the  Old
Testament  had  not  our  privileges;  let  us  value  them.  3.  Pray  for  an  honest  and  good
heart.  God  can  soften  the  hard-hearted;  he  can  make  the  frivolous  thoughtful ;  ho
can  turn  men  frgm  the  cares  of  the  world  to  the  holy  love  of  Christ.  Fray  always ;
despair  not.

Vers.  24 — 43. —  The  tares;  the  mustard  seed;  the  leaven.  I.  The  btoby  of  the
TABES.  1.  Besemblance  to  the  first  parable.  Again  we  have  the  field,  the  suwer,  and
the  seed.  Again  the  seed  is  good.  "  God  saw  everything  that  he  had  made,  and,
behold,  it  was  very  good."  Again  the  Sower  sowed  the  good  seed  all  over  the  field.
No  part  was  neglected.  2.  The  differences.  (1)  In  this  case  there  is  an  enemy;  he
came  by  night  and  sowed  tares  among  the  wheat.  It  was  an  act  of  pure  malice;  it
could  do  him  no  good.  But  such  things  are  sometimes  done,  we  are  told,  in  Eastern
countries  now ;  and,  alas !  actions  of  equal  malice  are  done  nearer  home.  In  the  blade
the  tares  were  like  the  wheat ;  the  mischief  was  not  discovered  till  the  ears  began  to
form.  (2)  There  are  servants  also.  They  tell  their  lord ;  they  suggest  the  plucking
up  of  the  tares.  It  is  a  tiling  often  done  (comp.  '  Sinai  and  Palestine,'  p.  426);  if  the
tares  had  been  few  and  scattered,  it  would  have  seemed  the  best  course.  But  the
enemy  had  done  his  work  too  thoroughly;  the  tares  were  sown  thickly  all  over  the
field ;  their  roots  were  intertwined  with  the  wheat-roots.  The  lord  bade  his  servants
wait  till  the  harvest ;  then  the  field  should  be  reaped  as  it  was ;  the  tares  should  be
burned,  the  wheat  gathered  into  the  garner.

II.  The_  GRAIN  OP  MUSTARD  SEi!D.  1.  The  parable.  The  mustard  seed  is  small
It  is  sown  in  the  field ;  it  becomes  greater  than  the  herbs,  a  tree ;  the  birds  of  the  air
lodge  in  its  branches.  2.  Its  meaning.  Such  was  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  was
small  in  its  beginning ;  only  a  little  Child  was  born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judsea.  At  first
its  growth  seemed  very  slow.  The  King  was  a  Man  of  sorrows ;  he  died  the  cruel
death  of  the  cross.  Twelve  men  were  sent  forth  to  fight  the  battle  of  the  kingdom,  to
confront  the  whole  power  of  heathendom ;  they  were  few ;  they  were,  for  the  most  part,
of  no  reputation,  unknown  and  unregarded.  But  as  the  little  seed  had  a  vital  power
inherent  in  it,  so  was  it  with  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  spread  itself  with  a  strange
expansive  force,  till  it  filled  all  the  greatest  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  men  flocked
from  all  sides  to  take  refuge  in  its  sheltir.  3.  Its  encouraijement.  It  may  be,  as
Chrysostom  ihinks,  that  this  and  the  following  parable  were  intended  to  encourage
the  disciples.  There  was  something  very  .maddening  in  the  lessons  of  the  first  two
parables.  Three  ]  arts  of  the  good  seed  were  lost;  the  remainder  was  mingled  with
tares.    It    seemed   a   melancholy   prospect.     But  now   there  is  a  word  of  comfort.


OH,  XIII.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL    ICCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  21


The  seed  will  grow ;  it  will  beconw  a  tree,  spreading  its  branches  far ;  it  will  offer
refuge  to  the  wandering  and  the  homeless.  Let  us  take  courage.  The  Church  hath  a
vital  expansive  force,  so  long  as  it  abides  in  Christ  who  is  the  Life.  It  will  live  on ;
it  will  spread.  The  wandering  children  ivill  return;  the  restless,  who  have  been
driven  about  by  every  blast  of  vain  doctriue,  will  And  a  home  at  last  in  the  Church  of
Christ.

III.  The  leaven.  1.  The  difference  between  this  parable  and  the  last.  The  seed  has
a  principle  of  life  in  it.  Plant  it,  and  under  favourable  circumstances  it  will  grow.
You  cannot  watch  ihe  actual  process  of  growth  from  minute  to  minute ;  but  day  after
day  you  see  the  results.  The  plant  springs  up,  rises  into  the  air,  expands  on  all  sides.
So  doth  thu  Church  of  Christ.  The  leaven  works  secretly,  silently,  invisibly ;  it  is
hidden  in  the  meal;  little  by  little  it  spreads  its  assimilating  influence  through  the
wljole  mass.  It  figures  the  silent,  unseen  spreading  of  tiie  gospel.  2.  The  silent  growth
of  Christianity.  The  gospel  was  hidden  in  the  world,  in  its  three  ancient  divisions,
among  the  descendants  of  the  three  sons  of  Noah.  Its  growth  at  first  was  silent;  few
marked  it,  as  by  slow  degrees  it  spread  its  iufluence  through  tiie  masses  of  heathenism.
Heathen  contemporary  writers  seem  for  the  most  part  iguorant  of  its  existence ;  but  in
silence  and  in  secret  it  worked  on,  softening,  refining,  purifying.  3.  The  unseen  growth
of  personal  religion.  But  the  three  measures  of  meal  may  well  be  understood  of  the
three  constituent  parts  of  our  human  nature — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  The  leaven  which
is  to  regenerate  society  must  first  regenerate  its  individual  elements.  The  germ  of
spiritual  life  is  hidden  in  the  soul ;  it  is  unseen,  hid  with  Chiist  in  God.  But  it  is
quick  and  powerful.  It  works  under  the  surface  with  a  strange  penetrating  energy.
It  diffuses  its  iufluence  through  the  heart,  which  without  it  would  be  dull  and  heavy,
indifferent  to  religion.  Little  by  little  it  expels  the  counteracting  agencies  of  the
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  It  spreads  itself  more  and  more  through  the  whole  life,
assimilating  with  its  secret  influence  every  form  o'f  human  activity.  It  works,  and  will
work,  till  every  thought  is  brought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ;  till  we
have  learned,  whatever  we  do,  to  do  all  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.

IV.  Remarks  of  the  evangelist.  1.  The  Lord's  method.  On  that  occasion  he
taught  the  multitude  only  by  parables.  He  spoke  to  tlie  people  as  they  were  able  to
hear  it  (Mark  iv.  33).  He  reserved  the  explanation  for  his  disciples.  Religious  teaching
should  be  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  the  hearers.  Simple  teaching  is  best  suited
for  simple  minds.  The  teacher  should  imitate  the  Lord's  example,  and  teach  in  single-
ness of  heart,  seeking  only  the  good  of  souls.  2.  The  reason :  the  fulfilment  of
prophecy.  There  were  other  reasons,  mentioned  already,  for  the  adoption  of  this  mode
of  teaching.  But  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  always  underlay  all  the  Lord's  acts  and
words.  I'he  whole  Scriptures  of  the  ancient  covenant  spake  of  him  and  the  new  cove-
nant which  he  was  to  inaugurate.  Thus  the  seventy-eiglith  psalm  prefigured  his  use  of
parables.  That  psalm  represents  the  history  of  God's  ancient  people  as  a  parable  Ci
spiritual  things.  There  vvas  a  spiritual  meaning  in  all  its  details.  "  These  things  wert
our  examples  (riwoi)"  (1  Cor.  x.  6, 11);  they  were  types  of  the  vicissitudes  of  the
spiritual  life,  written  for  our  admonition;  a  parable  of  God's  dealings  with  the  indi-
vidual t)ul.  Let  us  learn  to  look  on  the  Old  TcBtamen*  in  this  light,  to  understand  its
religions  use.

V.  Explanation  of  the  parable  of  the  tares.  1.  The  petition  of  the  disciples.
The  multitude  had  departed ;  the  Lord  and  his  disciples  had  returned  to  the  house ;
they  were  alone.  The  disciples  sought  further  instmction.  So  it  is  now.  The  nmltitude
depart ;  the  true  disciples  follow  the  Lord  whithersoever  he  goeth.  They  are  near  him
in  the  crowded  church,  sometimes  even  nearer  in  the  silent  hour  of  solitary  prayer.
Then  they  sit  at  his  feet  like  Mary,  seeking  to  learn  ever  deeper  lessons  of  faith  and
love.  He  hears  their  prayer;  he  answers  in  his  grace  and  mercy.  2.  The  answer.  The
Lord  explained  the  parable  to  his  disciples,  as  he  will  explain  to  us  the  meaning  of  our
trials  and  perplexiiies,  if  we  come  to  him  in  faith  and  prayer.  (1)  The  Sower  is  the
Son  of  man.  God  the  Son,  come  in  the  flesh,  and  henceforth  Son  of  man  as  well  as
Son  of  God.  (2)  The  Held  is  the  woild.  But  it  is  a  parable  of  the  kingdom  of  God
(vers.  24,  41).  The  field  is  God's.  He  sowed  the  good  seed  in  it.  Tlie  world,  so  far
as  it  is  sown  over  with  ihe  good  seed,  becomes  the  Ohurcli.  "The  earth  shall  be  full
of  thfe  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.''     (3)  The  seed.     In  the


22  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiii.  1—58.

par<able  of  the  sower,  the  seed  is  the  Word  of  God ;  here  it  is  the  children  of  the
kingdom.  But  the  seed  is  identical  with  the  plant.  The  living  seed  pervades  and
takes  into  itself  the  whole  human  nature.  The  principle  of  spiritual  life  which  was
sown  by  the  Divine  Sower  becomes  the  full-grown  plant,  the  Christian  living  in  the
faith  of  the  Son  of  God.  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  This  identification  is  seen
even  in  the  parable  of  the  sower.  In  vers.  20,  22,  23  the  true  translation  is  not  "he
that  received  seed,"  but  "he  that  was  sown."  (4)  'I'he  enemy.  "  God  saw  everything
that  he  had  made,  and,  behold,  it  was  very  good."  It  was  not  he  who  sowed  the  tares;
it  was  the  devil.  This  parable  brings  out  into  clear  light  the  personality  of  Satan,  his
malice,  his  intense  hostility  to  Christ.  Dark,  perplexing  questions  rise  in  our  minds.
Our  very  children  ask  us — ^Why  did  not  God  destroy  the  devil  ?  Wk  know  that  there
is  "eternal  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  He  shall  be  cast  into  (he
bottomless  pit,  and  deceive  men  no  more.  But  in  the  mean  time  it  seems  to  be
necessary,  for  deep  inscrutable  reasons,  that  his  malice  should  be  counteracted,  not  by
a  direct  act  of  almighty  power,  but  by  moral  and  spiritual  forces.  Such  forces  radiate
into  the  Church  from  the  cradle  of  Bethlehem,  from  the  cross  of  Calvary.  "For  this
purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested,  that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."
Tlie  enemy  sowed  the  tares;  they  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  one.  The  evil  seed
has,  through  their  own  sinful  compliance,  so  spread  through  their  nature  that  it  has
made  them  like  their  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of  their  father  they  do.  It  is  an
awful  thought;  but  we  know  that  though,  in  the  natural  world,  tares  can  never
become  wheat,  yet,  in  the  spiritual  world,  they  who  were  once  under  the  power  of
darkness  may  by  the  grace  of  God  be  translated  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son.  A
parable  cannot,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  correspond  in  all  its  minute  details  with
the  eternal  verities  which  it  is  intended  to  shadow  forth.  (5)  The  taies  are  to  remain
till  the  end  of  the  world.  The  servants  were  impatient.  Christians  have  been  so
often.  "  Whence  then  hath  it  tares-?  "  is  a  question  which  has  been  asked  in  eveiy
age  of  the  Church — which  we  often  ask  ourselves.  The  servants  would  have  antici-
pated the  ofBce  of  the  heavenly  reapers ;  but  the  Lord  forbade.  The  time  was  not  come.
They  had  not  the  knowledge.  They  would  do  more  harm  than  good,  wheat  and  tares
were  so  iuextricably  mingled.  Christians  must  wait  for  the  Lord  in  patience.  In  the
visible  Church  the  evil  will  be  ever  mingled  with  the  good.  Earthly  power  must  not
be  used  to  exterminate  religious  errors.  The  tares  must  grow  with  the  wheat,  for
such  is  the  Lord's  command.  It  is  a  saddening  thought  that  the  Church,  the  bride  of
Christ,  which  ought  to  be  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such
thing,"  should  be  so  rent  asunder  by  schism  and  heresies,  so  disfigured  with  the  evil
lives  of  many  baptized  men.  But  the  Lord  warned  us  that  it  would  be  so.  We  must,
live  in  patient  hope,  purifying  ourselves  even  as  he  is  pure,  and  seeking  by  his  gracious
help  to  influence  for  good  all  who  come  within  our  reach.  (6)  For  the  harvest  cometh.
It  is  the  end  of  the  world.  "  The  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  angels."  He  seemed
a  man  among  men,  as  he  said  the  words ;  but  he  was  in  truth  the  high  Son  of  God.
None  other  could  dare  to  describe  the  angels  of  judgment  as  hia  messengers.  The
reapers  are  the  angels ;  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and
them  that  do  iniquity.  They  were  in  the  outward  kingdom,  the  visible  Church.;  they
have  no  part  in  the  kingdom  of  gloiy.  The  Lord  hath  prepared  no  place  there  Ijr
them.  There  remaineth  only  the  furnace  of  fire,  the  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.
Most  awful  words  1  (7)  The  glory  of  the  blessed.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."  They  were  in  his  earthly  kingdom ;
they  had  called  him  "  Our  Father."  Now  they  are  with  him  for  ever  in  the  everlasting
glory.  They  shall  shine  forth.  The  glory  which  they  had  before,  which  Christ  had
given  them  (John  xvii.  22),  but  which  had  been  hidden  in  that  inner  life  of  holiness
which  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  shall  be  manifested  then.  They  shall  shine  as  the
sun.  As  the  raiment  of  the  Lord  shone  on  the  Mount  of  the  Transfiguration,  so  shall
•bine  the  glorified  bodies  of  the  blessed  in  the  day  when  he  shall  change  the  body  of  our
humiliation,  that  it  may  be  like  unto  the  body  of  his  glory.  Listen,  the  Lord  says  j  hia
words  are  of  momentous  importance.     "  Who  hath  oars  to  hear,  let  him  hetr."

Lbssons.  1.  The  malice  of  the  devil  is  hellish.  You  have  renounced  him  and  all
his  works ;  hate  him  and  them  with  energetic  hatred.  2.  The  nmstard  seed  will  grow ;
the  leaven  will  diffuse  its  influence.     He  who  hath  begun  ths  good  work  will  fulfil  it


JK.  xm.  1—68.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  23

Be  of  good  cheer ;  only  believe.    8.  Think  of  the  great  harvest.    "  Set  your  affection  on
things  above."

Ters,  44 — 53. — The  parables  addressed  to  the  disciples.  I.  The  hidden  trbabpbb.
1.  'ITit  siory.  Treasures  were  often  hidden  in  fact,  still  more  often  in  fiction.  A  man
walked  through  the  field ;  he  lighted  suddenly  on  the  treasure.  He  hid  it  again.  It
was  his,  pral)ably,  by  right  of  finding.  But  in  this  parable,  as  in  others,  not  every  detail
is  to  be  piasjed.  Earthly  stories  cannot  exactly  express  every  feature  of  spiritual  truth.
One  pamblfc  supplies  the  omissions  of  another ;  taken  together,  they  fill  up  the  picture.
Hij  joy  was  grea^.  He  sold  all  that  he  had  to  buy  the  field,  that  the  treasure  might  be
cle  irly  his  boyood  doubt  and  question.  2.  The  meaning.  The  field  may  be  the  visible
Church.  It  may  be  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  finder  was  in  the  Church.  He  knew
bin  Bible  well,  bit  he  had  not  yet  found  Christ.  The  ordinances  of  the  Church  were
but  forms  to  Mm  ;  the  Bible  was  like  other  books.  Suddenly,  by  the  grace  of  God,
hke  St.  Paul  or  S^  Augustine,  he  lights  upon  the  hidden  treasure.  He  recognizes  its
sui  passing  value.  A  great  joy  fills  his  heart,  a  joy  deep  and  entrancing,  a  glimpse  of
tho  gladness  of  ho&vt\i.  But  there  is  something  awful  in  that  joy,  something  too  sucred
for  words.  At  firrt  lo  dares  not  speak  of  it ;  not  through  jealousy  of  others — God
forbid ! — but  through  fsar  lest  he  should  lose  it.  Loud  talk,  boasting,  spiritual  pride,
might  rob  him  of  the  tieasure.  In  deep  humility  he  hides  it  in  his  heart.  But  ho  sells
all  tliat  he  has.  He  luys  the  field.  Now  the  Church  is  to  him  the  Church  of  the
liviii;;  God,  the  pillar  ana  ground  of  the  truth;  now  the  Bible  is  prfcious  exceedingly;
for  the  treasure  in  it  ia  now  his.  Like  St.  Paul,  he  has  counted  all  things  else  as
dross,  as  very  dung,  that  h«  might  find  Christ.  He  has  found  him,  and  in  him  he  has
found  a  treasure  precious,  beyond  what  words  can  tell ;  a  hidden  treasure,  which  none
can  know  sai^e  those  whc,  \  ke  the  happy  finder,  part  with  all  other  treasures  to  make
that  one  holiest  treasure  th  s?rs  for  ever.

II.  Thbpbabl  OF  OBKAT  JBIOE.  1.  The  merchant.  He  was  an  earnest  seeker.  His
life  was  not  aimless.  He  kiit;v  that  there  is  a  meaning  and  a  purpose  in  this  our  earthly
life.  It  is  not  to  be  waited  ;  it  must  be  used  in  real  work.  He  was  not  content  to
live  on  from  day  to  day  enjoj  ing  the  passing  hour  without  thought  of  the  future.  He  was
no  listless  loiterer,  but  a  seeker,  iiceking  ever  with  steadfast  perseverance  after  the  true
end  of  human  life.  He  was  thovghtful,  earnest,  single-hearted ;  such  a  seeker  sooner  or
later  findeth.  2.  Thepearl.  There  were  many.  But  the  merchant  sought  only  for  goodly
pearls.  He  was  a  man  of  high  aims  from  the  beginning.  Pleasure  was  not  the  pearl,
nor  earthly  rank  or  wealth.  But  wisdom  perhaps  attracted  him,  or  the  desire  of  doing
good,  or  the  love  of  wife  or  child.  These  were  goodly  in  their  degree ;  but  at  last,  in
his  search,  he  found  one  pearl,  in  comparison  of  which  all  that  had  seemed  most  lovely
became  pale  and  poor.  At  once  he  went,  and  with  calm  resolve  sold  all  that  he  had  to
make  that  pearl  his  own.  That  pearl  is  the  Lord  Christ  himself,  the  one  thing  needful,
the  good  part  which  Mary  chose,  while  Martha  was  careful  and  troubled  about  many
things.  That  pearl  is  beyond  comparison  of  all  things  goodly  the  goodliest  and  the
best.  He  who  would  buy  that  pearl  must  sell  all  that  he  has.  He  must  learn  to  love
the  Lord  his  God  with  all  his  heart,  and  to  subordinate  all  other  loves  to  that  one
holiest  love.  He  must  hush  into  calm  the  tumult  of  earthly  desires,  that  the  one  strong
desire  of  Christ,  the  Desire  of  all  nations,  may  fill  his  heart.  To  such  earnest  seekers
the  pearl  of  great  price  is  given.  Again  the  parable  is  not  exact  in  its  details ;  no
earthly  story  can  be.  Eternal  life,  which  is  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  is  the  gift  of  God.
It  is  a  reward  altogether  overpassing  and  throwing  into  shade  our  utmost  efforts.  Poor
and  helpless  as  we  are,  we  could  not  buy  it,  were  it  not  that  he  giveth  the  unspeakahli!
Gift,  the  gift  of  Christ,  without  money  and  without  price,  to  those  who  seek  in  perse-
vering prayer  and  earnest  faith.  But  he  is  pleased,  in  his  Divine  condescension,  to  speak
of  us  as  b\iying  the  pearl.  He  accepts  our  poor  unworthy  love,  and  gives  us  in  return
that  priceless  Gift  to  be  our  own.

III.  The  net.  1.  Oast  into  the  sea.  It  was  a  draw-net,  large  and  long.  It  gathereil
of  every  kind  till  it  was  full.  The  sea  is  the  world ;  the  net  is  the  Church.  The  net
is  drawn  through  the  sea  till  it  is  filled  with  fishes.  The  Church  spreads  throu^^h  the
world  till  the  number  of  the  elect  is  aocompiislied.  Till  that  time  the  net  is  in  the  sea,
the  Church  is  in  the  world.     There  are  many  not  yet  gathered  into  the  net.     The  sea


24  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiii.  1—58.


is  wide  and  large ;  the  net  lias  not  yet  swept  through  it.  The  gospel  has  not  yet  been
preached  over  all  the  earth.  There  are  many  dark  places  where  the  fishers  of  men  hava
not  yet  drawn  the  net.  All  waters  must  be  tried.  The  glad  tidin:j:s  of  the  kingdom
of  heaven  must  be  carried  everywhere  throughout  the  world.  Then  shall  the  end  come.
The  net  gathered  of  every  kind.  1q  the  Church  are  good  and  bad.  Men  like  Judas,  oi
Demas,  or  Hymenasus,  or  Diotrephes,  as  well  as  men  like  St.  Peter,  or  St.  John,  or  St
Paul.  Men,  too,  of  all  nations,  of  all  conditions  of  life,  manifold  in  character  and  cir-
^umstances.  2.  Dravm  to  the  shore.  They  sit  down,  they  gather  the  good  into  vesgeK
out  oast  the  bad  away.  It  is  a  figure  of  the  judgment.  Again  we  hear  of  the  angels,
the  ministers  of  God's'  most  awful  justice ;  again  we  hear  of  the  furnace  of  fire,  of  the
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth — words  which  contain  a  meaning  most  fearful,  most
tremendous.

IV.  The  tbeasubes  of  the  housbholdeb.  1.  The  Lord's  question.  He  was
teaching  his  disciples  now  in  private.  He  asks  them,  "  Have  ye  understood  all  these
.hings  ?  "  They  who  are  to  teach  must  learn  themselves.  The  true  teaching  comes
only  fiom  Christ.  The  deepest  spiritual  truths  can  be  lenrued  only  by  direct  intercourse
with  the  Lord.  It  is  well  if  we  can  answer,  "Yea,  Lord."  He  accepts  our  imperfect
knowle(ige  ;  imperfect  it  must  be.  If  only  it  is  real,  as  far  as  it  goes,  it  will  be  the  begin-
ning of  deeper,  holier  wisdom.  2.  The  comparison.  The  careful  householder  brings  out
of  his  store  thincs  new  and  old ;  so  doth  the  instructed  scribe.  The  teacher  must  be  a
disciple ;  he  must  have  been  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  |
he  must  himself  be  in  the  kingdom;  he  must  have  the  kingdom  in  his  own  heart.
Then  he  will  possess  a  rich  store  of  true  wisdom  ;  and  out  of  that  store  he  will  bring
things  new  and  old  ;  the  old  truths,  unchanging,  ever  the  same,  but  in  the  new  light
of  living,  personal  experience  ;  old  and  yet  always  new ;  the  truths  that  drew  the  first
disciples  to  the  Lord ;  the  truths  that  flash  with  a  new  light  into  the  heart  of  each
awakened  Christian  now  when  first  he  turns  from  darkness  unto  light,  from  Satau
unto  God.

V.  The  seven  paeables.  1.  "Jesus  had  finished  these  parables."  The  words  of
the  evangelist  seem  to  regard  the  seven  parables  as  a  whole,  a  cycle  of  parabolic  teachins.
The  number  seven  is  the  number  of  perfection.  The  parables  fill  up  and  supplement
jtie  another.  No  one  human  illustration  can  give  an  adequate  view  of  the  mysteries
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  seven  taken  together  give  a  complete  picture.  In  the
5rst  we  see  the  various  characters  of  men,  receptive  or  unreceptive  of  the  truth.  In
^he  second,  the  agency  of  the  tempter.  In  the  third,  the  gradual  spreading  of  the
kingdom  through  the  world.  In  the  fourth,  its  inner  working  in  the  individual  heart.
In  the  fifth  it  is  found  by  one  who  sought  not  for  it,  in  the  sixth  after  diligent  inquiry
and  anxions  search ;  in  both  we  see  its  exceeding  preciousness,  a  preciousness  which
makes  the  Christian  willing  to  sacrifice  all  for  the  kingdom's  sake.  In  the  seventh  we
see  the  consummation  of  all  things,  the  final  separation,  the  condemnation  of  the  wicked,
the  glory  of  the  righteous.  2.  The  historical  explanation.  We  may  see  a  brief  Church
nistory  in  these  seven  parables.  We  begin  with  the  first  sowing  of  the  Word  by  the
great  Sower;  then  comes  the  growth  of  heresy  and  sin  within  the  Church;  then
the  gradual  progress  of  the  Church,  spreading  itself  on  every  side,  silently  leavening  tbe
4amework  of  society ;  then  we  read  the  history  of  this  or  that  great  saint  of  God,  one
lighting  suddenly  on  the  hid  treasure,  another  seeking  and  finding ;  and  at  last  the
judgment.  Let  us  learn  of  the  great  Teacher  how  to  read  the  history  cf  the  world,
looking  back  to  the  first  sowing,  lookin.;  onwards  to  the  coming  judgment,  diligently
seeking  for  the  hid  treasure,  the  pearl  of  great  price.

Lessons.  1.  The  treasure  i-i  hidden;  oh  that  we  may  find  it!  The  pearl  is  of  great
price ;  let  us  count  the  cost  and  buy  it.  2.  The  Lord  is  at  hand ;  prepare  to  meet
aim.    3.  The  true  disciple  ever  learns,  lor  Christ  his  Teacher  is  ever  with  him.

Vers.  54—58.—  The  Lord's preachiin/  at  Nazareth.  I.  His  visit.  1.  It  was  his  own
rmmtri/.  He  had  lived  there  nearly  thirty  years,  from  infancy  to  manhood.  It  was  but
»  small  place;  everyone  knew  him;  soma  bad  been  his  schoolfellows,  some  frieuds
of  the  lamily,  some  had  bought  their  ploughs  and  yokes  at  the  carpenter's  shop.  He
had  been  absent  a  long  time.  During  thnt  abseiice  the  unknown  village  carpenter  had
become  the  most  conspicuous  figure  in  the  Holy  Land.     The  Nazarenes  had  wondered


OH.  sm.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST    MATTHEW.  26


na  they  heard  of  his  mighty  works  and  the  strange  ii;fluence  of  his  teaching.  They  must
have  felt  some  natural  piide  in  the  eminence  of  their  countryman.  But  their  admiration
was  mingled  with  unworthy  feelings — jealousy,  envy.  Holiness  is  not  always  popular.
Ungodly  men  leel  it  as  a  rebuke  to  themselves ;  they  hate  it.  2.  IIu  teaching  there.
Ue  wont  to  the  synagogue,  as  he  was  wont.  The  Lordalways  attended  public  worship.
In  this,  as  in  all  things,  he  is  our  Example.  It  was  known  that  he  would  be  there
The  Nazarenes  flocked  to  hear  him.  Their  motives  were  different,  bnt  all  were  drawn
by  eager  desire  to  listen  to  the  great  Preacher.  We  cannot  tell  for  certain  whether  this
visit,  recorded  also  in  St.  Mark,  is  to  be  regarded  as  identical  with  that  described  in
Luke  iv.  16 — 30.  We  only  know  that  the  congregation  was  filled  with  astonishment
iiow,  as  they  were  ou  that  occasion.  The  Lord's  words  were  words  of  deep  and  holy
wisdom.  "  Never  man  spake  as  this  Man."  They  had  been  told  of  his  wisdom;  now
they  heard  it  themselves,  and  they  wondered  greatly.

II.  The  feelings  of  the  Nazabbnes.  1.  Their  talk.  They  whispered  together
about  the  Lord's  humble  origin.  (1)  He  was  the  Son,  they  thought,  of  the  ciirpenter
Joseiih,  whom  they  remembered  so  well — the  good  man  now  gone  to  his  reward ;  the
son  cif  David,  bnt  yet  the  village  carpenter.  The  Nazarenes  forgot  his  royal  descent;
thoy  forgot  the  higher  nubility  of  goodness  which  had  distinguished  him ;  they  thought
only  of  his  humble  occupation.  He  was  a  carpenter,  they  said,  only  a  carpenter ;  and  this
Preacher  who  spoke  with  such  authority  was,  they  supposed,  the  carpenter's  Son.  Mary
was  his  mother.  They  knew  her  well ;  she  lived  Ions;  among  them.  (2)  There  were
brothers,  too,  and  sisters ;  children,  probably,  of  Joseph  by  a  former  marriage,  brought
up  with  the  Lord,  older  than  he — which,  perhaps,  may  serve  to  explain  their  assumption
of  authority  (ch.  xii.  46;  Mark  iii.  21,  31 ;  John  vii.  3,  4).  It  is  a  thought  of  deep
interest  that  the  blessed  Lord  had  lived  with  brotliers  and  sisters  in  family  life.  He
felt  its  joys  and  its  troubles;  the  sweetness  of  affection,  and  at  times,  perhaps,  the
vexations  of  jarring  wills;  for  brothers  and  sisters  were  not,  as  he  was,  sinless  and
without  .spot.  Hia  brethren,  wo  know,  did  not  yet  believe  in  him.  We  wonder  how  the
sisters  regarded  his  exalted  holiness,  his  perfect  purity,  his  tender  love.  Holy  Scripture
has  hidden  frcm  us  the  details  of  our  Lord's  domestic  life;  but  it  is  sweet  to  think
that  he  lived  as  we  have  lived,  and  to  regard  him  as  our  Example  in  all  the  varied
relations  of  family  life.  2.  Their  rejection  of  the  Lord.  They  were  oHended  in  him.
Their  previous  knowledge  of  him,  of  his  early  lile  among  them,  of  his  occupation,  of
his  family,  was  a  stumbling-block  to  tliem.  They  could  not  get  over  it.  They  stumbled
and  lell.  Yet  his  life  had  been  an  exam|  le  of  unparalleled  innocence  and  holiness.  They
had  loved  him  in  his  holy  childhdod,  whea  he  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and  in
favour  with  God  and  man  But  they  could  not  receive  "  the  carpenter's  Son  "  as  the
Ml ssiah.  Let  us  lenrn  not  to  despise  the  poor,  the  lowly  ;  let  no  Ohiistian  dare  to  look
down  on  honest  trade.  The  Lord  Christ  was  once  a  carpenter.  The  humble  in  earthly
rank  may  be  very  high  in  holiness,  first  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

HI.  liis  DKPARTURB.  1.  Eis  view  of  their  conduct.  A  prophet  is  not  without
hi.Eour.  A  prophet,  a  true  man  who  speaks  for  God,  who  speaks  in  simplicity  and
earnestness,  out  of  the  abundance  of  his  heart, — such  a  man  is  not  without  honour.  He
is  honoured  of  God,  and,  sooner  or  later,  hu  is  honoured  of  men ;  not  always  in  his  life-
time, but  at  last,  when  death  raises  him  above  the  petty  jealousies  of  life,  men  will  own
that  there  liatli  been  a  prophet  among  them,  and  will  render  him  that  meed  of  honour
which  perhaps  in  his  lifetime  tliey  kept  from  him.  But  he  is  not  always,  not  commonly,
honoured  in  his  own  country  and  in  his  own  house.  Men  do  not  envy  those  very  high
ab.'ve  them  in  rank  and  wealth,  or  those  far  removed  from  tliem  in  any  way.  They
envy  most  those  who  are  nearest  to  them  in  place,  in  time,  in  circumstances.  It  is  so
now;  it  was  so  in  our  Saviom-'s  case.  His  fellow-countrymen  held  him  not  in  honour.
His  brethren  did  not  believe  in  him.  If  we  suffer  from  the  envy  of  others,  let  us  think
of  iiin..  He  was  despised  and  rejected.  We  may  well  be  content  if  the  disciple  is  as
his  Master.  And  oh,  let  us  drive  envy  out  of  own  hearts.  It  kept  the  Xazarenos  from
Christ;  it  Isecps  men  Irom  Christ  now.  The  envious  cannot  know  him  who  is  love.
2.  His  presence  was  not  blessed  to  them.  "  He  did  not  many  mi>ih  I  y  works  there  because
of  their  uubolief."  He  was  there,  the  Sa\  iour,  the  niighty  Son  of  God,  but  his  presence
brought  little  blessing.  It  was  not  the  mere  bodily  presence  of  the  Christ  that  tavod
and  blessed.     "  He  could  there  do  no  mighty  work,"  says  St.  Maik,  "  save  that  he  laid


2(5  THE    GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,    [ch.  xin.  1—58.

\iL  h;iuds  ou  a  few  sick  folk,  and  healed  them."  The  Lord's  miraolea  of  healing  wei-e  not
mere  dis))1ayH  ol  power;  they  had  a  spiritual  meaning.  Faith  was  required  in  the
recipient.  He  does  not  exercise  his  power  arbitrarily ;  it  is  directed  by  his  wise  and
holy  will.  A  few  had  faith,  those  few  he  healed.  The  unbelieving  derived  no  benettt
from  his  visit.     How  earnestly  we  should  pray,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith  "  I

Lessons.  1.  Never  despise  men  because  of  their  humble  origin  ;  it  is  a  sin-Vi  thing
in  the  Christian,  whose  King  was  called  "  the  carpenter's  Son."  2.  Honour  God's  saints;
to  honour  them  is  to  honour  God,  whose  servants  they  are.  3.  Plee  from  envy ;  it
kills  the  soul.  4.  Be  very  careful  to  use  all  the  means  of  grace  1  do  not  drive  Christ
uwa)  by  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  parahh  of  the  soils.  Our  Lord's  popularity  is  now  at  its  height.
Crowds  throng  him  wlieiever  he  goes.  But  he  is  not  dazzled  by  the  blaze  of  public
favour.  On  the  contrary,  he  sees  how  unsubstantial  and  delusive  it  is.  Multitudts
follow  him  for  the  charm  of  his  words  and  the  fame  of  his  miracles;  but  of  these  large
numbers  do  not  truly  accept  his  message  and  profit  by  it.  It  is  necessary  that  he
should  sift  his  disciples,  separating  those  who  are  in  earnest  from  the  superficial  and
indifferent.  The  method  employed  with  this  object  in  view  is  parabolic  teaching  (see
vers.  13 — 16).  By  means  of  such  teaching  those  who  are  only  amused  at  a  tale  will  not
see  the  truth  which  they  do  not  care  to  have,  while  those  who  are  awal<e  and  alive  to
the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  will  be  prompted  to  think  and  inquire,  and  to  get  a  better
hold  of  Christ's  teaching.  It  is  natural  that  the  transition  to  this  more  veiled  method
of  instruction  should  be  made  in  a  parable  that  illustrates  the  different  classes  of
hearers.

I.  The  principle  of  the  parable.  A  great  principle  underlies  the  whole  parable,
and  is  revealed  in  all  its  parts,  viz. :  That  the  success  or  failure  of  preaching  is  partly
dependent  on  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  hearers.  In  the  present  instance  the
Sower  is  Christ — the  greatest  of  preachers ;  and  the  seed  is  the  word  of  his  gospel — the
best  of  all  teaching.  Yet  there  are  no  uniformly  good  results,  but  a  variety  of  issues,
from  utier  failure  to  a  bountiful  harvest.  Then  the  preacher  is  not  always  to  blame
if  his  preaching  is  barren,  and  the  doctrine  is  not  to  be  accounted  false  simply  because
in  some  cases  it  docs  not  produce  good  effects.  The  hearer  is  responsible.  He  has  free-
will, and  he  may  reject  the  highest  truths  of  the  greatest  teacher,  or  he  may  receive
them  with  different  degrees  of  profit.

II.  The  bad  soils.  These  represent  three  characters.  1.  DuU  indifference
Instead  of  being  receptive  soil  for  the  seed  of  truth,  the  heart  of  the  worldly  man  is
hard.  Tlie  hardening  is  the  result  of  the  traffic  of  innumenible  earthly  interests.
Troops  of  these  secular  concerns  trample  the  heart  into  a  highway.  They  may  be
harmless  in  themselves  and  even  necessary,  but  the  full  surrender  to  them  is  ruinous
to  the  spiritual  life.  The  heart  that  is  given  up  to  the  world  is  a  prey  tu  the  ravaoes
(if  Satan.  2.  Sentimental  fervour.  The  rocky  ground  is  hot,  and  it  provokes  quuk
growth.  Sentimental  people  show  a  passion  of  devotion.  But  they  have  no  reser-
V  jirs  of  strengtii.  When  circumstances  are  adverse  they  are  weak  and  they  yield.
3.  Stifling  worldliness.  In  the  thini  case  more  progress  is  made,  and  yet  there  is  no
harvest.  Here  we  have  not  the  gross  worldliness  which  produces  indifference  from  the
begiiining  as  in  the  first  case.  There  is  a  competition  between  the  spiritual  and  the
worldly,  and  the  latter  wins  by  reason  of  its  rank  vigour.

III.  The  oood  soils.  1.  A  common fruitfulness.  All  the  good  soils  bring  forth  fruit.
This  is  the  one  result  looked  for.  If  it  appears,  we  have  the  joy  of  harvest.  Christ's
preaching  was  not  a  failure,  though  many  failed  to  profit  by  it.  If  no  good  comes
from  preaching,  the  fault  may  not  lie  wholly  with  the  hearers.  The  gospel  of  Christ
Iwings  in  a  rich  harvest  of  souls.  2.  A  variation  of  productiveness.  All  who  profit  by
the  truth  of  the  gospel  do  not  profit  equally.  It  is  not  enough  that  some  fruit  is
nbtaiued.  The  aim  should  be  for  an  abundant  return.  The  seed  is  capable  of  enormous
productiveness ;  there  is  no  limit  to  the  possibilities  bf  Divinie  grace  if  only  we  will  let
them  be  realized  in  our  own  lives. — W.  P.  A.


-CH.  xm.  1—58.]    THE   GOSPEL   ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  27

Ver.  17. —  Christians  enjoying  what  prophets  desired.  They  who  truly  receive  the
teaching  of  Christ  and  profit  by  it  enjoy  privileges  which  prophets  and  righteous  men
longed  for  in  vain.

I.  The  prophets'  desires.  The  saints  and  seers  of  antiquity  were  not  satisfied  with
the  revelations  made  to  them  and  the  favour  bestowed  upon  them.  They  looked
forward  to  a  glorious  futuie  when  fuller  light  should  appear,  and  when  greater  works
of  heavenly  power  should  be  accomplished.  Let  us  consider  the  objects  of  the  prophets'
desire,  what  things  they  were  the  prophets  longed  to  see  and  hear.  1.  The  vision  of
Qod.  Job  yearned  to  tee  God  (Job  xxiii.  3).  The  older  revelations  of  God  awakened
a  hunger  fur  a  nearer  vision.  The  best  men  of  antiquity  desired  above  all  things  to
"  see  the  King  in  his  beauty."  2.  The  redemption  of  man.  Some  were  satisfied  with
the  course  of  events  aild  the  conditiun  of  the  world.  But  two  classes  of  men  were
profoundly  dissatisfied,  viz.  (1)  prophets,  who  saw  the  truth  of  God  and  perceived  the
falseness  of  the  world,  its  direct  antagonism  to  the  Divine  will ;  and  (2)  righteous  men,
who  had  a  keen  conscience,  and  were  horrified  at  the  sin  and  guilt  of  mankind.  Both
of  these  saw  that  only  ruin  faced  man  when  left  to  himself;  both  cried  out  for  a
Divine  redemption.  3.  The  advent  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  This  was  the  grand
topic  of  Messianic  prophecy  ;  it  was  the  supreme  object  of  the  patient  hope  of  devout
people,  such  as  Anna  and  Simeon  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  infancy  (Luke  ii.  25 — 38).
Such  a  hope  went  beyond  deliverance  and  redemption ;  it  pointed  to  a  golden  age  in
the  future,  excelling  the  best  days  of  the  past.

n.  The  Ohkistianb'  pbivileobs.  Christ  congratulates  his  true  disciples  on  their
happy  estate.  Let  us  consider  what  privileges  this  brings.  1.  The  presence  of  Christ.
(1)  He  is  the  Eevelation  of  God,  longed  for  by  prophets,  but  never  seen  in  Old  Testa-
ment times.  Philip  said,  "Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth  us;"  and  Jesus
replied,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  "  (John  xiv.  8,  9).  (2)  He,  too,
brings  redemj^tion,  for  he  is  the  Eedeemer,  and  he  comes  to  save  the  world  by  the
sacrifice  of  himself.  (3)  He  establishes  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for  he  is  its  King.
When  Christ  has  come  to  us  the  kingdom  is  among  us.  But  many  saw  Christ  "  after
t'le  flesh,"  in  his  bodily  presence,  and  yet  discerned  none  of  these  things.  We  do  not
see  him  walking  in  our  streets  or  sitting  at  our  table.  Yet  when  we  see  him  with  the
eyes  of  the  heart,  and  perceive  his  Divine  and  redeeming  presence,  ours  also  is  the
vision  longed  lor  by  the  good  and  wise  in  ancient  time.  2.  The  Word  of  life.  This  is
what  Christians  hear.  It  is  the  good  news  of  salvation  in  Christ.  But  it  is  also  a
living  Word  that  awakens  dead  souls  and  quickens  the  Divine  life  within  men.  All
who  are  within  reach  of  the  gospel  may  be  familiar  with  the  sound  of  this  Word.
But,  alas  I  how  many  never  perceive  that  to  them  has  come  a  privilege  greatly  desired
by  prophets  and  righteous  men  of  old.  This  Word  must  be  heard  in  the  heart  to  be
appreciated.  Then  its  gracious  tones  awaken  responses  of  faith  and  love,  because  then
it  speaks  in  deep  harmonies  as  the  very  music  of  heaven. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  24 — 30. —  The  tares.  The  parable  of  the  soils  showed  the  various  results  of
sowing  the  same  good  seed  according  to  the  various  conditions  of  soil  on  which  the
seed  fell;  now  this  parable  of  the  tares  disregards  differences  of  soil,  but  treats  of
different  kinds  of  seed  sown  by  different  hands.  Thus  it  introduces  us  to  something
worse  than  the  failure  of  good  work,  to  the  existence  of  evil  influences  in  the  world.

L  Chuistian  people  aeb  the  growth  of  seed  sown  bt  Christ  in  the  world.  In
his  explanation  of  the  parable  our  Lord  tells  us  three  things  about  this  branch  of  his
teaching.  1.  Christ  is  the  Sower.  All  good  spiritual  life  springs  from  him.  2.  The
field  is  thewtirld.  Christ  is  no  narrow  ecclesiastic  confining  his  interests  to  the  Church.
Nor  has  he  the  parochial  mind.  His  gospel  is  for  the  whole  world.  Christians  are  to
be  "  the  salt  of  the  earth."  3.  The  good  seed  represents  the  "  sons  of  the  kingdoms,"  i.e.
Christian  people.  Christ  is  not  satisfied  with  teaching  ideas ;  he  aims  at  growing  souls.
His  harvest  is  not  of  thoughts  and  doctrines,  but  of  men  and  women.

II.  Bad  men  abb  like  tares  sown  by  Satan.  1.  Evil  influences  are  at  work  in
the  world.  There  is  worse  than  the  neg^ive  failure  of  good  seed.  Weeds  sprinp;  up;
nettles  and  poison  plants  take  their  place  in  the  garden  of  nature.  The  world  as  we
know  it  has  been  sown  with  the  seed  of  sin.  Here  is  positive  evil,  alive  and  propagating
further  eTll.     2.  Tftese  eoU  infixiences  are  due  to  the  great  enemy  of  souls.    A  malignant


28  THE   GOSrSL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiii.  1—58,


power,  the  enemy  of  Christ  and  of  mankind,  is  busy  sowing  evil.  3.  The  fruit  of
these  evil  influences  is  seen  in  the  lives  of  had  people.  It  is  not  in  false  doctrine-  but  in
wicked  living  that  the  greatest  mischief  is  manifested.  The  aim  of  Satan  is  to  grow  a
crop  of  noxious  characters.

III.  The  sekvants  of  Christ  are  forbidden  to  use  foboiblb  means  fob  the
EXTINCTION  OF  EVIL  LIVES.  TMs  parable  has  often  been  abused  by  being  applied  to
Church  discipline,  a  subject  with  which  it  has  nothing  to  do,  seeing  that  "  the  field  is  the
world  " — not  the  Church.  What  it  excludes  is  the  violent  uprooting  of  bad  men  from
the  world.  If  it  is  to  be  pressed  to  a  literal  application,  it  may  be  thought  to  forbid
capital  punishment.  But  as  it  deals  with  religious  relations  it  is  rather  aimed  at
persecution  ;  e.g.  it  is  absolutely  opposed  to  such  action  as  that  of  the  Spanish  Inquisi-
tion. The  violation  of  its  precepts  has  vindicated  our  Lord's  warning.  The  wheat
has  been  rooted  up  with  the  tares.  Too  often  persecution  selected  the  very  sons  of  the
kingdom  for  its  victims.  This  may  be  done  honestly,  by  a  horrible  hlunder ;  we  cannot
well  distinguish  between  the  blades  of  wheat  and  those  of  the  plant  that  simulates  it.
At  present  it  is  premature  to  judge  men  finally,  for  characters  are  not  yet  developed.

IV.  There  will  be  a  final  judgment  and  doom  op  the  wicked.  1.  This  mil
happen  at  the  end  of  all,  when  characters  have  fully  ripened,  when  the  harvest  is  come.
Even  now  the  harvest  is  anticipated  by  the  reaper  Death,  and  after  death  there  is  the
great  judgment.  The  liberty  of  the  present  is  no  guarantee  against  the  great  doom  of
the  future.  Evil  cannot  flourish  for  ever.  2.  This  will  he  in  the  hands  of  God.  It  is
not  for  man  to  use  violent  measures  against  his  fellow- man ;  but  God  and  his  angels
will  search  into  all  characters,  and  the  issue  must  be  fearful  for  those  who  have  permitted
themselves  to  become  as  the  rank  growth  of  Satan. — W,  P.  A.

Vers.  31 — 33. — ITte  mustard  seed  and  the  leaven.  These  parables  illustrate  the  world-
wide growth  and  influence  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  might  not  be  wonderful  that
a  peasant  living  in  remote  Syrian  highlands  should  have  dared  to  predict  such  a  vast
future  for  his  work  if  he  were  only  speaking  in  the  enthusiasm  of  hope ;  but  it  is  the
wonder  of  the  ages  that  the  Galilseau  predictions  have  been  verified  by  history,  which
has  proved  that  the  Speaker  uttered  true  words  and  was  able  to  realize  what  he  fore-
told. Lei  us  consider  the  prophecy  in  the  light  of  its  fulfilment.  The  two  parables
set  forth  two  different  phases  of  the  extension  of  the  kingdom.

I.  The  visible  growth  of  the  kingdom  itself.  1.  It  appears  in  a  snuiU  beginning.
Christ  gathered  al)out  him  a  little  group  of  fishermen;  there  was  the  kingdom,  but  as
yet  a  minute  seed.  How  many  of  the  best  movements  spring  from  small  beginnings —
the  river  from  the  brook,  the  man  from  the  child,  the  city  from  the  hamlet,  the  empire
from  the  city!  History  forbids  us  to  despise  the  day  of  small  things.  It  is  better
to  begin  obscurely  and  grow,  than  to  commence  with  a  flourish  of  trumpets,  raising
expectations  which  we  may  not  be  able  to  fulfil.  2.  It  contains  a  centre  of  life.  The
pebble  will  not  grow.  Multitudes  of  small  ventures  are  destined  to  remain  small  or
to  fade  away  altogether.  It  is  only  the  vital  seed  that  grows.  There  is  a  lite- principle
in  Christianity.  Christ  himself  is  in  it.  3.  It  has  a  great  development.  The  mustard
seed  becomes  a  tree.  The  little  group  of  disciples  becomes  a  world-wide  Church.
Christ  has  large  aims,  and  he  accomplishes  them.  He  has  not  yet  seen  the  full  growth
of  the  seed  he  sowed.  Christianity  is  still  spreading — spreading  in  heathen  lands  as  in
no  previous  age;  it  has  in  it  vitality  enough  to  fill  the  whole  world.  4.  Its  growth  is
henrflcial  to  the  world.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  a  deadly  Upas  tree ;  it  does  not
destroy  all  other  lives  in  fostering  its  own  life.  The  mustard  tree  furnishes  ni"ht
shelter  for  the  birds ;  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  great  refuge  for  helpless,  benighted
souls.

IL  The  invisible  influence  of  the  kingdom.  It  works  like  leaven  in  a  mass  of
meal.  1.  It  spreads  through  the  world.  The  gospel  has  a  marvellous  penetrating
influence.  Early  Christianity  extended  itself  without  any  organized  method  of  propao-a-
tion,  reaching  all  classes  of  society  and  touching  remotest  regions.  There  is  a  hamjy
infection  in  Christian  truth.  A  saintly  example  is  healthily  contagious.  2.  It
influences  the  world.  The  whole  mass  of  meal  is  leavened.  Christ  gives  us  a  leaven
of  society,  not  merely  a  new  life  to  be  in  society  and  to  spread  itself,  giowi.ng  and
multiplying,  but  a  transforming  and  uplifting  influenoe.     Lett  to  itself  the  world  is


OH.  xm.  1-58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  29

dead.  The  gospel  comes  as  a  ferment,  breaking  up  the  old  lethargy  and  rousing  fresh
activity.  It  affects  every  part  of  life,  and  whatever  it  affects  it  assimilates  to  itself.
We  are  not  to  think  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  standing  aloof  from  the  world,  which  is
to  be  let  lie  in  its  own  deadness.  It  is  sent  into  the  world  that  it  may  benefit  the
world.  Plunged  into  the  midst  of  society,  it  works  for  the  benefit  of  society.  Com-
merce, science,  literature,  art,  politics,  social  onler,  and  domestic  life  are  all  sought  out
by  the  Christian  spirit,  and  as  they  come  under  its  influence  they  are  purified  and
quickened.  Seeing  that  the  influences  of  the  gospel  are  destined  to  be  so  widespread
and  manifold,  it  becomes  us  not  to  cramp  them  by  any  narrowness  of  our  own,  but
rather  to  further  them  with  courageous  hopefulness. — W.  P.  A.

Vers.  45,  46. — The  pearl  of  great  price.  Many  people  regard  religion  as  a  matter  of
grave  duty  which  it  behoves  them  to  attend  to,  but  to  which  they  turn  reluctantly
and  with  weariness,  because  they  never  hope  to  see  in  it  any  attractions  or  to  make  it
an  object  of  eager  desire.  To  such  people  our  Lord's  words  may  be  a  new  revelation.
In  his  teaching  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  supremely  desirable.

I.  The  freoioubness  of  the  peabl.  Our  Lord  is  not  speaking  of  the  Aiture
heavenly  reward,  which  most  men  vaguely  imagine  to  be  very  valuable.  What  he
means  by  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  a  present  possession — the  rule  of  God  in  the  hearts
of  his  people.  We  have  to  see  that  this  is  an  exceedingly  good  thing,  here  and  now.
It  is  good  on  its  own  account,  not  for  the  sake  of  its  promises  of  the  future,  not  because
of  any  further  advantages  which  may  be  got  out  of  it.  Religion  is  meant  to  be  an
end  in  itself;  it  is  abused  and  degraded  when  it  is  treated  as  a  means  to  some  other
end.  To  gain  favour  with  the  Church,  to  wia  a  reputation  for  piety,  even  to  court
customers  in  business,  may  be  the  ends  of  some  people  in  their  religion.  But  it  has  to
be  seen  that  such  low  aims  utterly  obscure  the  true  glory  of  the  gospel.  The  soul's
darkness  and  misery  arise  from  enmity  against  God.  To  be  reconciled  to  him  is  its
sunrise  and  the  advent  of  its  peace.  'There  is  no  gladness  on  earth  so  pure  and  deep
and  strong  as  that  which  springs  from  fellowship  with  God  enjoyed  through  Jesus
Christ.     He  who  has  this  has  the  pearl  of  great  price.

n.  The  mebchant's  quest.  We  see  a  merchant  seeking  pearls.  This  point
distinguishes  our  parable  from  the  previous  one,  in  which  a  man  comes  unexpectedly
on  a  hidden  treasure.  That  parable  shows  how  God  may  be  found  even  by  those  who
do  not  seek  him.  Now  we  have  the  reward  of  one  who  does  seek  brought  before  us.
Perhaps  the  merchant  has  travelled  far,  and  sought  carefully  before  he  has  lighted  on
his  great  prize.  There  are  men  and  women  who  earnestly  set  themselves  to  seek  for
what  is  truly  worth  having  in  life — they  crave  for  knowledge,  hunger  for  righteousness,
thirst  for  God.  They  may  be  long  before  they  are  satisfied,  but  if  they  will  persevere
they  will  not  be  disappointed  in  the  end.     The  pearl  is  for  them.

III.  The  COST  OF  ACQUISITION.  1.  Thepemi  is  found.  This  is  the  first  step.  But
the  pearl  is  not  yet  owned.  We  may  see  the  kingdom  afar  off,  we  may  be  close  to  its
borders,  yet  we  may  not  have  possession  of  it.  We  need  to  know  the  gospel,  to  see
the  kingdom.  Then  we  must  go  further  if  we  would  make  the  prize  our  own.  2.  The
pearl  is  costly.  The  merchant  must  sell  all  he  has  acquired  on  his  journey  to  buy  this
one  pearl.  Now,  we  know  that  the  gospel  is  God's  free  gift;  it  was  costly,  for  it  cost
the  life  of  Christ  on  the  cross  ;  therefore  it  is  not  a  cheap  gospel ;  yet  it  is  not  bought
by  us,  but  by  Christ.  These  facts,  however,  do  not  exclude  the  necessity  of  sacrifice
on  our  part.  We  can  pay  nothing  to  God.  But  we  must  renounce  sin  and  self,  and
the  idolizing  and  trusting  in  all  things  but  God.  3.  The  price  is  gladly  paid.  The
merchant  is  a  connoisseur,  and  he  at  once  recognizes  the  value  of  his  great  discovery.
He  feels  that  he  has  made  a  good  bargain,  though  he  has  sold  all  to  buy  the  pearl  of
great  price.  He  who  gives  up  all  for  Christ  requires  no  commiseration,  but  rather
congratulation,  because  his  gain  is  great. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  47 — 50. —  The  drag-net.  This  parable  may  be  compared  with  the  parables  of
the  soils  and  the  tares.  All  three  show  different  results  following  the  teaching  of
Christ  according  to  the  characters  of  those  whom  he  teaches.  The  parable  of  the  soils
draws  attention  to  the  varying  degrees  of  success  or  failure  dependent  on  the  condition
of  the  hearers ;  the  tares  illustrate  evil  influences  side  by  side  with  the  work  of  Christ  j


30  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    {pw.  xiii.  1—58.

the  drag-net  disregards  these  two  causes  of  failure,  and  deals  only  with  results — it  carries
us  on  to  the  final  judgment.  Nevertheless,  we  should  hear  the  lessons  of  the  earlier
parahles  in  mind,  in  order  to  avoid  drawing  conclusions  of  fatalism  and  injustice  from
this  one.

I.  The  qospel  net.  Our  Lord  compares  his  method  to  the  casting  of  a  great  net
and  the  drawing  it  through  the  waters.  1.  Christ  seeks  men.  He  spoke  to  fishers,
who  knew  the  sea  and  its  commerce,  and  he  compared  his  work  to  theirs.  While  the
parable  of  the  pearl  of  great  price  shows  us  a  man  seeking  the  kingdom,  this  parable
))resHnt3  to  us  the  sight  of  the  kingdom  seeking;  men.  Here  is  the  grace  of  the  gospel.
It  is  further  suggested  by  the  woman  sweeping  for  her  lost  coin,  and  the  shepherd
going  after  his  wandering  sheep  (Luke  xv.).  2.  Christ  uses  means  to  gather  disciples.
The  net  may  represent  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  or  all  the  agencies,  first  of  Christ
and  his  apostles,  then  of  his  missionary  Church.  We  are  not  to  wait  till  the  world
comes  to  Christ.  We  must  mend  our  nets  lest  any  slip  through  the  broken  meshes,
and  cast  and  drag  them,  using  all  means  to  gain  some.  3.  Christ  aims  at  a  large
gathering  of  souls.  The  fisher  does  not  angle  with  a  line  ;■  he  casts  a  net,  and  that  net,
the  drag-net,  is  of  the  largest  kind.  Plainly  his  aim  is  large.  Christ  does  not  seek
one  here  and  there.  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  His  love  embraces  all ;  his  work
is  for  the  people.

II.  The  great  draught  or  fishes.  1.  The  net  gathers  in  many  fishes.  At  first
the  popularity  of  Christ  won  a  multitude  of  adherents.  Most  of  these  fell  away ;  but
after  Pentecost  a  larger  host  was  brought  in.  Subsequently  great  numbers  pressed  in,
till  the  balance  of  policy  in  the  Roman  empire  swayed  from  heathenism  to  Christianity.
"  Like  a  sunbeam,"  says  Eusebius,  "  it  streamed  over  the  face  of  the  earth."  2.  'J  he
fishes  are  of  various  hinds.  The  members  of  the  Christian  Church  are  not  all  of  one
class  or  type.  Socially  they  differ,  belonging  to  all  grades  and  ranks ;  intellectually
they  differ,  from  a  Newton  to  a  simple  ploughboy.  But  these  differences  are  slight
compared  to  the  moral  distinctions  that  are  seen  throughout  Christendom.  The
Church  includes  a  St.  Francis  and  a  Cfflsar  Borgia.  Church-membership  is  no  proof
of  Christianity.

III.  The  sifting  and  sorting.  Christ  calls  all  kinds  of  people ;  but  he  does  not
accept  all.  "  Many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen."  It  is  even  possible  to  be  a  guest
seated  at  the  king's  banquet,  and  yet  to  be  cast  out,  if  the  wedding-garment  is  not
worn.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  unfairness  or  partiality;  much  less  is  there  fioKloness
or  unfaithfulness  in  Christ.  He  desires  to  accept  all.  If  he  must  reject  any,  it  is
against  his  will,  a  pain  to  him.  The  rejection  is  not  because  of  his  caprice,  but  wholly
because  of  the  characters  of  those  whom  he  cannot  receive.  But  how  are  we  to
reconcile  this  with  Christ's  express  declaration  that  he  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,
but  sinners  (oh.  ix.  13)?  The  explanation  is  that  the  fish  are  found  to  be  worthless
when  they  are  brought  to  land.  If  men  remain  sinners  after  entering  the  Church,  they
must  be  rejected  by  Christ.  But  Christ  can  change  the  sinner  into  a  holy  man,  and
he  will  do  this  with  the  truly  penitent  who  trust  him.  Then  they  will  not  be  like
the  worthless  fish. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  52. — The  Christian  teacher.  Christ  ban  a  word  for  the  scribe.  It  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  all  the  official  teachers  of  Israel  were  unworthy  men  and  unprofitable
in  their  work.  Some,  doubtless,  merited  the  description  here  set  before  us.  But  this
description  is  also  meant  as  the  guide  for  the  Christian  teacher.

I.  The  teacher  must  be  trained.  He  must  be  "a  disciple  to  the  kingdom  of
heaven."  Secular  training  is  valuable.  As  the  Magi  brought  their  wealth  and  poured
it  out  before  the  infant  Jesus,  so  the  learned  and  the  intellectual  may  well  bring  all
their  mental  acquisitions  to  be  used  in  the  service  of  Christ.  There  is  no  merit  in
ignorance.  Dulness  is  not  devotion;  stupidity  is  not  sanctity.  Nevertheless,  it  is
not  of  the  very  valuable  general  training  of  which  our  Lord  here  speaks.  It  is  possible
to  be  highly  cultivated  in  the  schools  and  yet  quite  a  tyro  in  the  kingdom.  The
essential  training  of  the  Christian  teacher  must  be  a  Christian  training.  As  the  lawyer
must  study  law  and  the  doctor  medicine,  so  the  Christian  scribe  must  study  Chris-
tianity. It  is  strange  that  any  should  think  themselves  fit  to  teach  others  the  greatest
of  truths  without  first  devoting  especial  attention  to  learning  them.    It  is  well  that


OH.  xiTi.  1—58.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  HI

the  Christian  minister  should  know  his  Homer  anil  his  Cicero;  hut  it  is  nioublrous  tbtit
he  should  he  satisfied  with  an  acquaintance  witli  the  pagan  classics,  without  acquiring
at  least  an  equally  familiar  knowledge  of  the  New  Testament,  which  it  is  his  life-work
to  teach.  Now,  the  discipleship  of  the  kingdom  is  not  a  merely  intellectual  schooling.
It  is  more  than  learning  the  letter  of  Scripture.  Only  that  living  grasp  of  spiritual
truth  which  comes  from  a  sympathetic  study  of  it,  interpreted  by  experiouce,  can  fit
one  to  teach  it  to  others.

II.  The  teacher  must  being  fobth  new  teeasuubs.  He  must  not  be  a  mere
machine  grinding  out  exactly  the  same  ideas  year  after  year.  Yet  he  is  not  to  invent
notions  of  his  own  and  give  them  forth  as  Divine  revelations.  The  treasury  to  which
he  is  to  go  for  Ma  materials  is  the  sacred  Scriptures.  How,  then,  can  he  find  anything
new?  1.  By  neiu  insight.  Each  is  to  read  for  himself.  There  is  always  a  freshness
in  what  we  perceive  ourselves,  even  if  others  have  perceived  it  before.  To  us,  at  least,
it  is  new ;  and  our  own  living  apprehension  of  it  gives  it  a  new  vitality  for  others.

2.  With  fresh  applications.  Truth  is  ever  assuming  new  colours  as  it  is  rciiected  on
fresh  objects.  The  Christian  teacher  has  to  apply  truths  of  the  Bible  to  present  cir-
cumstances. It  is  not  his  business  to  linger  among  the  archaeological  conditions  of
ancient  Israel,  but  to  show  how  the  revelation  of  God  concerns  the  England  of  to-day.

3.  Because  of  the  inexhaustible  fvlness  of  the  Bible.  There  is  always  fresh  light  for
earnest  eyes.

III.  The  tbachbb  must  not  neglect  old  tbeasubbs.  An  idea  does  not  cease  to
be  valuable  because  it  is  old.  Truth  is  eternal.  Facts  remain.  The  great  events  of
Bible  history  are  always  speaking  to  us ;  they  have  living  lessons  for  our  own  day.
The  experiences  of  psalmist  and  apostle  are  true  to  the  heart  of  man,  and  types  of
devotion  for  all  time ;  we  cannot  afford  to  forget  them.  Above  all,  the  revelation  of
Christ,  though  now  old  in  centuries,  is  still  fresh  and  living.  We  can  never  outgrow
the  gospel.  Bethlehem  and  Calvary  will  always  be  the  centres  of  our  most  helpful
Kieditations.  The  new  truth  is  only  inspiring  when  it  springs  out  of  the  old,  which  it
does  not  obscure,  which  rather  it  explains  and  exalts. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  54 — 58. — "  Hie  carpenter's  Son,"  Jesus  returns  to  Nazareth  after  having
taught  and  wrought  uiirao  eg  in  many  places,  and  follows  his  usual  method  of  preach-
ing even  in  the  synagogue  of  this  town  of  his  boyhood.  Of  all  fields  of  labour  this  is
the  most  difficult,  and  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  the  result  is  disappointing.  The  ons
thing  that  all  hearers  think  of  is  the  well-known  homely  up-briuging  of  the  great
Prophet,  and  their  familiar  knowledge  of  tills  is  enough  to  destroy  the  influence  of  his
words  and  works.

I.  The  fact.  Jesus  was  a  carpenter's  Son ;  St.  Mark  tells  us  that  he  was  himself
a  carpenter  (vi.  3),  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  he  would  have  lived  for  thirty
years  in  the  humble  Nazareth  home  without  ever  contributing  to  its  maintenance,
1,  Jtsut  was  a  complete  Man.  He  was  not  a  mere  appearance  of  man.  He  took  on
him  man's  life  and  its  toil.  2.  Jesus  belonged  to  the  artisan  class.  He  was  so  truly
human,  so  large  in  his  sympathies,  that  we  cannot  connect  any  class  prejudices  with
him.  He  would  not  side  unfairly  with  labour  against  capital,  any  more  than  ho  would
with  capital  against  labour.  Still,  if  there  is  one  class  which  beyond  all  others  we
may  be  sure  he  does  not  forget  or  misunderstand,  it  is  that  of  handicraftsmen.  Work-
ing men  should  claim  Christ  as  one  of  themselves.  3.  He  was  trained  in  a  secular
calling.  He  was  not  brought  up  in  a  monastery;  he  did  not  spend  hia  time  in  a
church.  His  school  was  the  carpenter's  workshop,  *  Among  the  shavings  and  sawdust
his  thoughts  rose  to  heaven  and  the  redemption  of  man.  A  wholesome  secular  training
is  a  help  and  not  a  hindrance  to  the  spiritual  life.

II.  How  it  was  eeqaedbd.  1.  Jesus  ivas  Judged  by  his  circumstances.  Other
grounds  of  judgment  were  not  wanting.  The  people  of  Nazareth  listened  to  the
wonderful  teaching  of  Christ,  and  it  astonished  them.  Yet  they  only  turn  to  the
well-known  external  facts  in  coming  to  a  conclusion  about  the  Teacher.  They  seem
to  be  attempting  to  dispel  what  they  regard  as  the  glamour  of  his  words  by  the  l>ard,
common  circumstances  that  are  familiar  to  them.  Thus  men  will  judge  by  the  out-
side, by  the  earthly.  By  the  conventional.  2.  Jesus  was  rejected  where  he  was  best
inown.     He  wa»  judged  by  his  circumstances  and  his  family,  all  familiar  to  the


32  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW     [ch.  xiii.  1—58.


Nazareth  townsfolk.  Perhaps  the  character  of  his  relatives  was  not  such  as  to  inspire
great  respect;  but  we  have  no  hint  of  this.  Social  inferiority  and  familiar  homeliness
■were  enough.  Therefore  we  do  not  lose  much  by  not  having  seen  Jeaus  in  his  earthly  life.
111.  The  unhappy  results.  Nazareth  suffered  fur  its  rejection  of  the  one  Man
who  has  since  given  eternal  fame  to  the  hitherto  obscure  Galilasan  town.  The  sick  went
unhealed.  A  chill  fog  of  unbelief  crept  over  the  community  and  quenched  the  gracious
curative  influences  of  the  Saviour.  Unbelief  is  a  fatal  hindrance  to  the  work  of  Christ.
It  is  not  that  he  is  offended  and  will  not  help.  It  is  that  the  very  possibility  of  aid  is
cut  off.  Christ's  miracle-working  was  dependent  on  the  faith  of  its  subjects,  and  when
they  were  unbelieving  he  simply  could  not  heal.  "  According  to  tliy  faith  be  it  unto
thee"  was  a  common  remark.  Spiritually,  Christ  cannot  save  those  who  do  not  trust
him,  though  he  desires  to  save  all,  and  this  is  the  simple  explanation  of  the  miserable
fact  that  all  are  not  saved.  Faith  is  not  an  artificial  condition.  It  is  the  link  of  con-
nection with  Christ.  If  this  link  is  missing  we  cannot  have  living  relationship  with
him.— W.  P.  A.

Vers.  1 — 23  (see  also  Mark  iv.  1 — 20;  Luke  viii.  4 — 15). — The  beginning  of
parables.  Utilize  introduction  to  dwell  on  the  plain  assertions  of  vers.  10 — 17.  How-
ever deep  their  real  theological  meaning,  however  mysterious  their  significance  in
respnct  of  the  sovereign  conduct  of  the  world  and  the  judgment  of  mankind,  the  state-
ments are  plain.  The  deep,  unfathomable  fact  underlying  the  quotation  from  Isaiah
(vers.  14,  15)  is  not  altogether  free  from  offering  some  analogy  to  the  subject  of  the
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  (see  our  homily,  supra),  "  not  to  be  forgiven,  in  this  world
nor  in  the  world  to  come."  In  the  very  pleasantest  paths  of  the  gospel  the  inscrntable
meets  us,  and  stands  right  across  our  way;  yet  not  at  all  to  destroy  us,  but  to  order
knowleilge,  faith,  and  reverence.  It  is  plain,  from  the  express  assertion  of  Christ,  that
it  is  to  be  regarded  by  us  as  some  of  the  highest  of  our  privilege,  to  have  authoritative
revelation  of  matters  that  may  be  called  knowledge  in  "  things  present  or  things  to
come,"  which  may  be  nevertheless  utterly  insomtable.  The  absolutely  mysterious  in
the  individual  facts  of  our  individual  life,  and  for  which,  nevertheless,  the  current  of
that  life  does  not  stand  still,  may  stand  in  some  sort  of  analogy  to  these  greater  pheno-
mena and  greater  pronouncements  of  Divine  knowledge  and  foreknowledge.  The  pro-
mise is  not  to  be  found — it  were  an  impossible  pronuse  to  find — that  the  marvels  of
Hi  aven's  government  of  earth  should  be  all  intelligible  to  us,  or  should  be  all  of  them
even  uttered  in  revelation.  But  some  are  uttered ;  they  are  written,  and  there,  deep-
graven,  they  lie  from  age  to  age,  weather-beaten  enough,  yet  showing  no  wear,  no
attrition,  no  obliteration  of  their  hieroglyphic  inscription — hieroglyphic  not  for  their
alphabet,  but  confessedly  for  their  construction,  and  the  vindicating  of  it.  Note  also,
in  introduction,  that  the  seven  parables  related  in  this  chapter,  a  rich  cluster,  certainly
appear  from  internal  evidence  (alike  the  language  of  the  evangelist,  ver.  3 ;  that  of
the  disciples  in  their  question,  ver.  10;  and  that  of  Christ  himself,  vers.  9,  13)  to
have  been  the  first  formally  spoken  by  Christ.  Of  the  beginning  of  parables,  therefore,
as  of  the  beginning  of  miracles,  we  are  for  some  reason  specifically  advised.     Notice —

I.  The  perfect  naturalness,  familiar  homeliness,  exquisite  aptness,  of  the

MATERIAL    OUT    OF    WHICH    THE    STRUCTURE    OF    THIS    PARABLE    IS    MADE.        Seed   and

Bull ;  Sower  and  sowing ;  and,  to  throw  moving  life  into  the  picture,  the  touch  throwt
ill  of  the  sower  "  going  forth  "  to  sow.

II.  The  spbcifio  subject  of  this  parable— an  illustration  of  the  kingdom
OF  heaven,  i.e.  the  will  of  God  "done  in  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  Such
an  illustration  might  be  given  very  variously.  The  view  might  be  taken  from  many  a
point  of  vantage,  and  as  the  kingdom  should  bo  found  growiuL;  or  grown  at  many  a
date.  This  Christ  might  have  given  from  all  his  stores  of  knowledge,  and  his  true
gift,  true  possession,  of  foresight.  He  might  have  shown  it  in  the  early  days  of  martyrs  •
he  might  have  shown  it  when  Constaiitine  proclaimed  it  the  kingdom  of  Europe  and
something  beside;  he  might  have  shown  it  as  Christendom  projects  it  now;  or  he
might  have  shown  it  even  as  gliniiises — so  strange  are  they  that  we  are  frightened  to
fix  our  gaze  on  them — are  flashed  before  our  doubting  vision  in  the  wonderful  Book  of
the  Revelation.  But  that  which  Jesus  did  really  choose  to  give  was  one  of  a  more
present,  practical  character.     It  was,  as  one  might  suppose  from  very  first  glance   an


CH.  xm.  1— 58.]    THE   GOSPEL   ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  33

illustration  of  sowing-time.  The  sowing-time  of  God's  truth,  God's  will,  God's  love
and  grace,  in  the  midst  of  a  hard,  and  unprepared,  and  shallow,  and  ill-preocoupied
world — with  nevertheless  some  better,  some  more  promising  material,  in  it.

III.  The  illustration  itself  in  detail.  It  consists  of  the  statement  of  the
ways  in  which  men  would  act  on  the  "  hearing"  of  the  "  Word  of  God."  Four  leading
ways  are  described.  1.  That  of  the  man  who  is  said  (in  Christ's  own  Interpretation  ot
his  parable)  "  not  to  understand  "  the  Word  spoken ;  t.e.  he  has  no  sympathy  with  it,
he  possesses  no  instinct  for  it,  finds  awakened  within  him  no  response  whatever.  This
is  the  man  whose  receptive  state  amounts  to  nothing.  As  the  trodden  path  (all  the
more  trodden  and  more  hard  as  it  is  comparatively  narrow)  across  the  ploughed  field  is
approached  again  and  again  by  the  bountifully  flinging  hand  of  the  sower,  as  he  paces
the  acres,  even  it  receives  of  the  good  seed,  but  its  callous  surface  finds  no  entrance  for
it,  ofi:ers  it  no  fertilizing  or  even  fertilized  resting-place,  and  yet  others,  who  at  least
better  know  its  value,  for  whatsoever  reason,  see  it,  seize  it,  and  bear  it  off.  2.  That
of  the  man  who  "  anon  vrith  joy  receives  "  the  Word.  But  it  is  a  vapid  and  shallow
joy.  It  does  not  last,  it  does  not  grow ;  its  very  root  withers.  The  coating  of  hardness
is  not,  as  in  the  callous  pathway,  visible  to  the  eye  at  first,  for  it  is  just  concealed  and
covered  over  by  a  slightest  layer  of  earth,  just  below  which  the  hardness  is  not  simply
''■/fee  that  of  "  rock,"  but  it  is  rock  itself.  There  is  nothing  that  has  such  a  root  where-
with to  root  itself  as  the  Word  of  God,  and  this  needs  deep  earth.  Not  the  birds  of
the  air,  not  Satan  and  his  evil  emissaries,  take  this  seed  away,  before  ever  it  could  show
1  symptom  of  its  own  vital  force,  at  any  rate ;  this  has  shown  its  vitality,  and  has
detected,  discovered,  and  laid  ruinously  bare  to  sight  the  unsustaining,  because  itself
unsustained,  power  to  feed  life,  of  that  other  element,  that  other  essential  in  the  solemn
matter.  3.  That  of  the  man  "  who  hears  the  Word,  but  the  cares  of  this  world,  and
the  [seductive]  deceitfulness  of  riches,  and  the  [crowding]  desires  of  other  things,"  i.e.
other  things  than  the  Word,  "choke  that  Word,  and  it  becometh  unfruitful,"  or,  if  not
unfruitful  altogether,  "it  bringeth  no  fruit  to  perfection."  It  is  the  seed,  still  the  good
seed,  lost,  wasted,  mocked  of  its  glorious  fruit,  because  that  same  liberal,  scattering.
Sower's  hand  has  not  grudged  it,  to  earth,  that  is  all  the  while  attesting  its  own  rich-
ness, quality,  force,  by  what  is  growing  out  of  it,  but  is  untitled,  undressed,  unweeded
— thorns,  briers,  brambles,  and  all  most  precocious  growths  suffered  to  tyrannize  and
usurp  its  best  energies  1  How  often  have  men  moralized,  and  justly,  that  the  clever-
ness of  the  sinner,  and  bis  wisdom  in  his  generation,  and  his  dexterity  and  resources
when  pushed  to  the  last  exlremities,  would  have  made  the  saint,  and  the  eminent  saint,
had  his  gifts,  instead  of  being  so  prostituted,  so  miserably  misdirected,  been  turned  in
the  right  direction,  fixed  on  the  right  objects !  But  short  far  of  flagrant  vice,  true  it  is
that  the  absorbing  things  and  the  seductive  things  and  the  crowding  competition  of
desires  of  things  of  this  world,  have,  millions  of  times  untold,  choked  the  Word.  No
room,  no  time,  no  care,  no  energy,  has  been  left  for  the  things  of  eternal  value,  immortal
wealth,  present  holiness.  4.  That  of  the  man  who  "  heareth,  and  understandeth,  who
also  beareth  fruit ; "  or  again,  "  who  in  an  honest  and  good  heart,  having  heard  the
Word,  keeps  it,  and  brings  forth  fruit  witb  patience."  It  is  the  seed,  that  pricelessly
good  seed,  which  now  at  last  has  found  its  af^ropriate  earth.  It  falls  not  on  the  hard
pathway;  it  falls  not  on  the  treacherous,  deceptive,  depthlessness,  all  radiant  with
light  and  sun  though  it  be;  it  falls  not  on  the  soil  bearing  at  the  same  time  incontest-
able evidence  of  two  things — ^its  own  power  to  grow,  and  its  own  doomed  state  to  grow
the  things  "  whose  end  is  to  be  burned."  It  falls  "  into  the  good  ground."  We  are  in
the  presence  of  the  mystery,  not  of  "  who  made  us  to  differ,"  but  of  how  and  why  he
who  Made  us  to  differ,  did  so.  The  practical  part  of  the  question  is  plain  for  every
one  who  has  an  eye  to  see.  Every  man  must  give  account  of  himself  at  the  last ;  and
every  one  must  now  prepare  for  that  account.  What  sign  of  "goodness,"  what
slightest  germ  of  •'  goodness,"  what  instinct,  as  it  may  seem,  and  power  of  "  go<jdaess,"
any  man's  heart,  passing  thought,  Ufe  may  just  suggest — if  it  be  but  like  a  suggestion
— must  be  reckoned  with  now,  improved  now,  solemnly  consecrated  now,  and  the
mystery  vdll  still  for  the  present  be  left  mystery.  But  the  facts  and  the  results  and
the  blessedness  will  speak  for  themselves.  And  the  kingdom  of  heaver,  be  receiving
its  fairer  and  fairest  illustration,  instead  of  its  darlvcr  and  darkest  illustrations.  That
kingdom  will  bo  the  more  a  "  coming  "  kingdom. — B.

WATTHEW — II.  D


34  TUE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,     [cu.  xiii.  1—68

Vers.  24—30,  30— 43.— The  great  Administrator's  foresight.  I'his  second  parable  of
the  seven  proceeds  in  a  certain  degree  upon  the  lines  of  the  first.  But  its  object  is
different;  and  though  quite  in  the  nature  of  an  advance  on  the  former,  it  is  more  limited
in  its  scope.  The  first  parable  manifestly  is  the  foundation  of  this  one,  and  perhaps  it
may  be  said  of  all  others.  We  may,  perhaps,  judge  that  to  each  parable,  as  one  succeeded
another,  quickened  attention  was  given,  at  any  rate,  by  some  of  the  hearers.  But  this
parable  seems  to  have  specially  asked,  on  the  part  of  the  disciples,  ior  explanation.
The  former  spoke  broadest  truth  of  broalest  application  for  all  the  world,  whether
"received "or  "not  received."  But  very  possibly  even  the  invidious  element  con-
tained in  this  may  have  gained  for  it  a  quicker  ear  and  a  more  curious  attention  on
the  part  of  the  disciples.     Notice —

I.  How  THIS  PARABLE  DATES  THE  KINOSOM  OF  HEAVEN  AS  AN  ORIGINAL  PLANTATION
IN  THE  WORLD.      It  DOBS  THIS  ALIKE  IN  FORM   AND  IN   THE   NECE8SAET   IMPLICATION  OF

ITS  MATTER.  In  however  true  a  sense  Jesus  Christ  was  now  himself  planting  afresh
the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth,  its  foundation  was  from  the  beginning.  Long  time,
with  most  varying  rate  of  growth,  had  it  been  growing.  In  how  true,  and  even  double
sense  true,  was  it  that  while  men  slept  the  enemy  came  I  And  how  naively  true,  only
in  one  sense,  that  when  he  had  sowed  his  tares,  he  "  went  his  way  "  1  Note  also,  as
some  instance  of  the  perpetually  recurring  evidential  coincidences  of  Scripture,  the
ministerial  function  of  the  "  Son  of  man  "  is  likewise  dated  to  the  beginning,  creation
itself.

II.  How  FBANE  AND  CALM  THE  ADMISSION  OF  THE  DiVINB  HoUBEHOLDEB  OF  THE
DI8ASTR0O8   DAMAGE  DONE   IN   HIB  FIELD  OF   THE   WORLD  I

III.  How  SILENT-LEFT  AND  UNTOUCHED  TO  THE  SERVANTS,  THE  QUESTION  (THEO-
RETIC ONLY,  FOB  THEM  AS  IT  WOULD  APPEAR  TO  BE  DEKMEd)  HOW  THIS  WAS;  AND
WHY  NO  IMMEDIATE  STRENUOUS  BTEPB  FOB  THE  DISCOVERY  AND  CONDIGN  PUNISHMENT
OF  THE  ENEMY  WERE  TAKEN,  OB  ORDERED,  OR  SUGGESTED — THE  COUNSELS  OF  HeAVEN,
AND  ITS  HIGHEST  OK  DEEPEST  DECREES  BEING  HEREIN  LEFT,  UNQUESTIONED,  UNB8PIED,
IN   THEIB  PROPER   PROFOUND   INSCRUTABLE  I

IV.  How  WITH  perfect  patience,  with  large- eyed  observation,  with  UNPRO-
VOKED FOBBBABANOB,  AND  ENDURING  LONG-SUFFERING,  THE  SCENE  IS  SURVEYED,  THE
directions  that  ALONB  ABE  NEEDFUL  FOB  SERVANTS  ARE  BENT  FORTH,  AHD  TIME
ALLOWED   TO   FLOW   ON.

V.  How  TREMENDOUS  BUT  MOST  GBAOIOVS  THE  WITNESS  BOBNE  TO  THE  LIMITED
KNOWLEDGE,  LIMITED  DISCRIMINATION,  AND  EVEN  VBBY  LIMITED  SKILL  OF  HANDIWOBK,
ABLE   TO   BE  OLAIMBl)   BY   THE   SBRVANTB   NOW   IN   QUESTION.

VI.  How    BOLD,    TRENCHANT,    UNDISMAYED,    THE     DISTINCT    AFFIRMATION,    OF    THE

GREAT  Prophet  present,  as  begabds  thk  end,  its  solemn  apportionments,  and  its

ENTIBB   DETAILED   80ENEBT. ^B.

Vers.  31,  32  ^see  also  Mark  iv.  30—82  j  Luke  xiii.  18,  19).— TSe  herb  that  is  a  tree.
Note,  in  introduction,  how  much  of  most  relevant  suggestion  is  comprised  in  this
very  brief  parable,  not  nevertheless  of  the  tssunce  of  its  direct  meaning  or  direct
object.  M.g.  is  it  not  almost  a  parable  within  a  parable  to  be  able  to  observe  on  the
appropriateness  of  the  use  of  the  illustration  of  the  small  mustard  seed,  and  the  seed
instanced  being  such  kind  of  seed  as  the  mustard  seed,  to  characterize  Jesus  Christ
himself  (the  Sower  of  the  seed  of  the  kingdom)  as  well  as  that  kingdom  which  he
sowed  ?  Another  very  relevant  suggestion,  as  just  intimated,  springs  out  of  the  character
of  the  mustard  seed,  its  own  intrinsic  quality  for  fragrance,  pungency,  power  to  bring
out  flavour,  either  adding  to  that  with  which  it  is  used,  or  counteracting  it,  or  so  com-
biuing  with  it  as  to  make  a  new  tertium  quid.  And  bo  once  more  a  most  relevant
suggestion  springB  out  of  the  descriptive  touch  respecting  the  birds  that  fly  to  its
shadow  by  day  and  its  hospitable  lodging  by  night.  The  subject,  however,  of  thi«
parable  is  of  courio  still  illustration  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  some  one  certain
respect  or  more.  As  the  first  parable  was  an  illustration  of  it,  ever  applicable  and
on  the  broadest  foundation ;  and  the  second,  one  still  ever  applicable,  but  intensely
important  as  it  might  be,  and  that  especially  in  its  far-reachingness,  yet  somewhat
more  limited  in  its  scope ;  so  we  shall  be  sure  to  find  the  specialty  of  this  third  parable
utamped  unmistakably  upon  it.    Notice  that  it  is  distinctly  foretold  that—


OH.  xui.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  85

I.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  to  have  its  own  development  ;  it  is  to  grow  op
ITSELF  AND  FiiOM  ITSELF.  Whirever  it  is,  wha.ever  it  works  upon,  whatever  it  may
attract  to  itself,  it  shall  receive  into  itself;  leave  some  of  it,  take  some  of  it,  incorporate
this,  have  one  body  and  one  spirit,  and  own  to  no  rival.

II.  That  development  will  in  no  sense  be  simply  commensubable  with  its
beginning,  even  when  evebt  allowance  shall  be  made  fob  the  obdinaby  mbasueb
OF  diffbbenoe  between  a  beginning  and  that  to  which  it  may  geow.  It  will
contradict  and  gloriously  disappoint  untaught  expectation.  No  mere  proverbial  oak
from  acorn  will  suffice  to  set  forth  the  development  this  growth  will  attain.  The  only
analogy  that  will  suit  will  be  the  example  of  something  that  is  indeed  perfectly
natural,  but  looks  something  other  than  natural.  Wide  nature,  the  work  of  Grod,  will
indeed  find  the  analogue,  however  humble  the  scale  of  it.  This  is  a  very  small  seed,
and  its  proper  growth  a  herb ;  but  the  herb  refuses  to  answer  very  strictly  to  its  own
sort,  and  waxes  into  a  tree ;  and  shows  the  features  and  properties  of  the  tree,
"shooting  out  great  branches."  So  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  whether  the
seed  be  called  that  which  was  once  found  in  the  manner,  or  that  which  was  once  found
in  the  tomb,  it  seemed  small  indeed — neither  at  the  former  time  nor  at  the  latter  was
it  counted  for  anything  but  a  thing  to  be  disregarded  and  despised — yet  to  what  was  it
to  grow  1

J II.  That   gbowth  peom  smallest  seed,  that  kingdom  founded  from  most

UNPBOMISINO  material,  SHALL  PROVE  ITSELF  NOT  A  GBOWTH  OF  MERE  GBANDEOR  TO
behold,  not  a  monument  of  human  PBIDE  OF  POWBB  AND  CONQUEST  ;  BUT  A  BKSOET
OF  HEAVENLY  SHADE,  HEAVENLY  SAFETY,  HEAVENLY  REST — A  HKAVENLY  HOME  FOB
ALL  THAT  WILL  SEEK  IT,  FOR  ALL  THAT  WILL  WINO  THEIR  PLIGHT,  WEAKY  OB  GLAD,  TO

IT.  This  tiee  is  in  a  new  sense  the  tree  of  life,  offered  to  all,  and  as  free  to  all  as
air,  and  spreading  branches,  and  whispering  winds,  the  breath  of  morning,  or  the  sweet
sighings  of  evening,  with  their  invitations,  could  make  it,  for  all  birds  and  "fowl  of
every  wing  "  that  fly  under  heaven. — B.

Vers.  33 — 36  (see  also  Luke  liii.  20,  21). — The  foretold  now  leeome  the  told.  In
introduction',  note  that  perhaps  no  parable  more  postulates  that  the  student  of  it  insist
on  observing  the  essential  canon  in  the  interpretation  of  every  parable,  viz.  that  its  one
main  object  be  kept  steadily  in  view,  and  that  it  was  kept  in  view  by  the  Author  of
it.  Su  much  may  be  made,  even  by  warrant  of  Scripture,  in  respect  of  the  ill  associa-
tions of  leaven,  that  if  this  be  dwelt  upon  witliout  a  steady  memory  of  the  quality
tmd  the  one  use  of  leaven,  whether  in  good  association  or  in  bad,  the  student-vision  will
be  a  douV.Je  one,  and  his  judgment  warped  and  distorted.  So,  thougli  in  risk  far  inferior,
and  of  fa'  less  moment,  the  incidents  of  this  very  brief  parable,  e.g.  of  the  mention  of
the  "  :70man "  who  took  the  leaven,  and  of  the  "  three  measures  "  of  meal  in  which
she  is  •epresented  as  hiding  it,  may  easily  be  turned,  for  they  have  been  so  turned,  to
what  tends  to  ma/r,  instead  of  to  complete  our  distinct  apprehension  and  appropriatiou
of  the  matter  of  the  parable.  These  may,  indeed,  heighten  effect,  and,  if  possible,  may
beautify  effect.  They  may  be,  perhaps,  not  illegitimately  used  to  these  very  ends.
They  may  so  chime  in  with  history,  with  fact,  with  reverent  associations  of  faith,  as
not  to  be  unjustified,  for  the  very  helpfulness  and  devoutness  of  them.  But  they  must
be  subordinated  to  their  right  place  and  sphere  with  a  stern  resolution.  Of  this
simplest  parable-illustration  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth  many  difficulties
have  been  made,  and  not  a  little  distortion  and  perversion  even;  but  in  its  brief
simplicity  it  says —

I.  That  a  certain  presence  of  self-aotinq  intrinsic  quality  and  tbansmutiko

FOBCE  IS  INTEODUOED  INTO  WHAT  MAY  BE  CALLED  THE  SOCIETY  OF  THIS  WORLD,  OB,
MOEE  FORMALLY,  THE  KINGDOM  OF  THIS  WOBLD.

II.  That  this  is  brought  distinctly  from  without,  in  no  sense  being  oni?  with

THAT  into  WHICH  IT  IS  INTRODUCED.

III.  That  bo  boon  as  inteoduced,  howbvbb  silently,  however  suddenly,   it

BEGINS  TO  INCORPORATE  ITSELF,  AND  TO  BE  ASSIMILATED,  WORKING  UNCEASINGLY  AND
IN  EVERY  DIRECTION  UPON  THE  MASS  OF  MATERIAL  IN  WHICH  IT  IS  HIDDEN,  AND  IS
WHICH   IT  SEEMS  SMOTHEEED.

lY,  That  itb  ofebation  doxs  not  oxase  until  it  has  tbanbhuted  that  wholb


36  THE  QOSPEL  ACCOBDIMG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiu.  1— 6d.

iktAss.  All  this  was  foretold ;  and  all  this  was  divinely  called  parable.  But  history
has  told  it,  and  it  has  ceased  by  any  possibility  to  be  able  to  be  called  mere  parable.
In  every  respect  it  has  been  witnessed  to,  illustrated  by  most  evident  facts,  and  proved
with  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  or  uncertainty.  The  amazing  mission  of  Christ  to  this
world,  his  sojourn  in  it,  his  replacement  by  the  Hi.ly  Spirit,  the  suddenness  of  this  new
and  most  wonderful  and  most  gracious  "  departure,"  the  silence  and  obscurity  of  the
subduing  and  transforming  work,  and  its  unceasinguess  to  the  present  hour,  have  all
been  fact,  and  are  all  lorming  an  overwhelming  presage  of  the  further  development
and  growth  of  their  conquering  power  and  grace.  It  means  that  the  process,  so
wonderful,  so  potent,  so  beneficent,  shall  know  no  pause  till  the  whole  lump  is
leavened. — B.  .

Ver.  44. — The  treasure  of  great,  but  careful,  Joy.  Note,  in  introduction,  that  this  fifth
parable  was  not  spoken  from  the  ship  to  the  multitude  upon  the  shore,  but  within  "  the
house;"  and  tlie  character  of  it  seems  in  some  relative  degree  to  alter.  It  is  no  longer
a  parable,  illustrating  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  respect  of  the  manner  of  its  operation,
but  emphiisiziug  the  value  of  itself,  and  the  sense  of  its  value  as  entertained  and  proved
by  some;  and  it  is  no  longer  a  parable  revealing  the  wide  hold  it  shall  establish  over
the  mass  of  mankind,  but  the  mighty  hold  it  shall  gain  upon  the  individuals  of  whom
the  mass  is  couiposed.  The  parable  exhibits  these  facts  respecting  the  kingdom,
and  that  which  is  of  the  very  essence  of  it — the  treasure  of  the  gospel,  the  truth  of
Christ.

I.  How  SOVKBBION  AND  FREE   IT  IS,  IN  THE   NATURE   OF  ITS   FIRST  APPROACH  TO  ANT

ONE  t  Th(!  present  parable  is  not  spoken  of  one  who  seeks  already,  but  of  one  who,  in
the  midst  of  bis  own  duty,  life's  labour  and  toil,  lights  on  the  treasure.  Why  has  he
lighted  upon  it?  In  this  case  it  will  not  do  to  say  chancel  Nor  is  it  often  given  to
us  to  say  why.  It  is  for  the  blest  man  himself,  however,  to  count  it  an  example  of
free,  unmerited,  sovereign  goodness  and  mercy.

II.  How  IT   IN   A  MOMENT   EXCITES   THE   ATTENTION,  AND   LAYS  HOLD   OF  THE  DESIRE

OF  HIM  WHO  GETS  BUT  ONE  REAL  GLIMPSE  OF  IT  I  The  effect  in  such  oases  is  iuimodiate ;
the  man  takes  in  at  once  the  value  of  the  opportunity  that  has  opened  before  him.

III.  How   GREAT   THE  JOY   OF  THAT   SUDDEN   SURPRISE  1

IV.  How   OAUEFUL,  AT   THE   SAME   TIME,  THAT  JOY   SHOWS  ITSELF  1

V.  How  COBRfiOT  THE  ESTIMATE  PUT  UPON  THE  VALUE !  It  IS  TREASURE,  AND  IT
IS  SUCH  TREASURE,  THAT  HE  WILL  FORSAKE  AND   WILL  SELL  ALL  ELSE  FOR  THAT. — B.

Vers.  45,  46. — The  superlative  prize  going  to  the  seeker.  This  sixth  parable  is  also
one  which  rather  illustrates  the  power  oJ  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  its  action  on  the
individual.  Under  some  aspect  of  it,  it  has  justly  fascinated  him.  For  some  reason
he  has  seen,  justly  seen,  his  advanta;4e  in  it,  and  has  not  contused  that  advantage
with  any  lower  one,  nor  lost  it  in  even  a  thousand  others.  Therefore  it  seems  to  him,
manifold  though  it  really  is,  as  one  undivided  thing,  one  prize  of  boundless  desirable-
ness— a  pearl  justly  appraised  as  of  great  price.  The  parable  exhibits,  then,  the
kingdom  of  heaven  as —

I.  Presbntikq  itself  a  prize  to  one  WHO  SEEKS  PRIZES.  He  has  the  advantage  of
being  a  business  man  ;  he  knows  his  business ;  he  is  accustomed  to  weigh,  and  compare,
and  judge,  and  choose,  ami  to  pay  accordingly.  He  is  an  expert  of  a  trained  eye,
trained  miud,  and  trained  knowledge.     He  knows  pearls,  and  very  many  of  them.

JI.  Impressing  him  irrbsistidly,  as  an  incomparable,  a  superlative  prize.

III.  Justifying  him  reasonably  and  unhesitating lt,  at  the  same  time,  in

STAKING    everything   ELSE    WHATSOEVER   ON    THE    POSSESSING    HIMSELF    OF    THAT   ONE

PRIZE.  This  seeker,  this  merchant  of  pearls,  had  thought  to  make  his  advantage  out
of  a  succession  of  pearls,  or  had  hoped  fondly  to  find  his  fortune  in  many  of°them
gathered  together ;  but  he  comes  to  find  he  needs  only  one,  that  only  one  will  answer
his  idea  and  his  quest,  and  that  it  is  now  before  him. — B.

Vers.  47 — 50.— 2%e  gathering  together  in  order  to  the  separating.  Note,  in  Intro-
duction, that  tills  parable  is  by  no  means  merely  another  version  of  that  of  the  tares.
As  a  priori  we  should  feel  certain  it  could  not  be  so,  it  needs  neither  long  nor  deep


OH,  XIII.  1—68.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTUEW.  B?

search  to  see  that  it  certainly  is  not  so.  The  reseiiiblance  between  the  two  parablet>
lies  only  on  the  surface,  and  not  less  true  is  it  that  on  the  very  surface  also  lies
suflBcient  conviction  of  the  real  diiferen<;e  between  the  two.  The  illustration  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven  furnished  by  this  parable  sets  it  forth —

I.  As  A  LARGE  GATHERING  OF  PERSONS  OF  VERY  VARIOUS  CHABACTBB,  WHO  HAVE
ENTERED  PROM  THB  RESTLESS  WAVES  OF  THIS  TROUBLESOME  WORLD  WITHIN  AN  ENCLO-
SURE, NOT  OF  THEIR  OWN  MAKING,  NOT  OF  THEIR  OWN  DESIGNING,  AND  NOT  OF  THBIB  OWT
PLACING,  AND  THERE  FOB  A  TIME  KEPT  TOQBTHBB.

II.  As  A  GATHERING  OF  DIFFERENT  PERSONS,  WHO,  THOUGH  LONG  FOUND  TOGETHER
WITHIN  THAT  ENCLOSURE,  WOULD  AT  LENGTH  BE  SEPARATED  ;  BE  CALLED  THE  GOOD  OB
THB  BAD,  THB    "  WICKED  "   OR  THB  "  JUST  ;  "    AND  BE  DEALT  WITH  ACCORDINGLY.

III.  As  A  GATHERING  OF  SUCH  AS  ABOVE  DBSCEIBKD,  THB  SEPARATION  AMONG  TVHOM
AT  LAST  WOULD   BB   MADE  BY    SOVEREIGN  AND   IRRESISTIBLE   AND   SUPREME   AUTHORITY.

— B.

Vers.  53 — 58  (see  also  Mark  vi.  1 — 6). — The  defying  of  conviction.  What  is  written
in  this  passage  is  not  to  be  understood  as  following  close  upon  the  speaking  of  the
four  parables  from  the  ship,  and  tlie  three  following  upon  them,  and  which  were  spoken
in  the  house.  Nevertheless,  the  Evangelist  Matthew  furnishes  us  with  the  suggestive
link,  which  consists  of  the  fifty-third  verse.  The  parabh-s,  with  all  their  Divine
f'ilness  of  menning,  whether  more  or  less  mystic,  and  whether  those  to  the  multitude
3x2  disciples,  or  to  the  disciples  alone,  are  for  the  present  "finished."  But  "wisdom
acd  mighty  works  "  are  not  finished ;  and  he  who  speaks  the  wisdom  and  who  does  the
mighty  works  journeys  untiringly  elsewhere,  and  with  his  face  toward  "his  own
country."    Notice —

I.  A  CERTAIN  POSITION  OF  HUMAN  NATURE  HERB  DESCRIBED ^VIZ.  CONVICTION  ITSELF,

CONFRONTED  BY  A  STUMBLING-BLOCK.  The  "  wisdoni  "  and  the  "  mighty  works"  are
not  denied,  are  not  doubted  ;  are  asserted  and  proclaimed.  The  material  of  conviction
was  all  present,  and  its  work  asserted  itself.  The  way  is  surely  perfectly  plain  for  the
humiin  mind,  and  what  further  need  be  said?

II.  A  CERTAIN  ATTITUDE  OF  HUMAN  NATURE  UNDER   THB  OIROUMSTANOES   DESCRIBED.

It  is  an  uneasy  attitude,  one  of  uncertainty,  one  of  casting  about,  how  it  is  possible  to
make  a  diflicuUy,  to  get  over,  and  conquer  plain  duty.  It  may  be  readily  granted  that
there  did  exist  a  difGcelty  nut  inconsiderable  for  those  who  are  here  spoken  of;  that  a  diffi-
culty was  present  in  the  very  existence  of  so  great  a  cause  for  wonder  ;  that  the  difficulty
was  not  lessened  by  the  fact  that  he  who  was  now  the  centre  of  observation  and  of
admiration,  and,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  of  unparalleled  surprise,  had  been  one  familiarly
known,  and  his  family  familiarly  known,  and  familiarly  known  not  as  among  those
who  were  princes  of  the  world  in  wealth,  or  in  station,  or  in  power  and  exalted  sphere
of  influence.

III.  A  CERTAIN  UN8ATISFACT0RT,  INCONSEQUENTIAL,  AND  UTTERLY  RECKLESS  TEBAT-
MENT  OF  THE  DILEMMA  BETWEEN   THB   DIFFICULTY  AND  THE  CONFESSED-TO  CONVICTION.

It  is  the  treatment  called  defiance.  The  difficulty  is  not  reasoned  out  to  the  end ;  nor
is  it  treasured  in  reverent  patience  to  await  further  light;  nor  is  its  comparative,
practical,  uwimportance  acknowledged,  and  permitted  to  relegate  it  to  its  proper  subor-
dinate place.  But  the  difficulty  is  petted  and  made  much  of,  while  conviction  is
defied,  and  conscience  is  dishonoured.  These  are  bowed  off  the  solemn  scene;  and
with  them  another  retreats  awhile  at  least.  It  is  he  of  wliom  it  is  said,  "He  could  do
no  mighty  work  there,  save  that  he  laid  his  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk,  and  healed  them;"
and  again,  "He  did  not  many  mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief;"  and,
"He  marvelled  because  of  their  unbelief."  Some  day  later,  when  their  eyes  were
perforce  opened,  and  something  beside  their  eyes  also,  what  a  marvel,  what  a  reproach,
what  a  remorse,  that  identical  instance  and  working  of  "unbelief"  must  have  been  to
them  /— B.

Vers.  3 — 23. — Parable  of  (h*  sower.  The  object  of  this  parable  is  to  explain  the
causes  of  the  failure  and  success  of  the  gospel.  It  might  have  been  supposed  enougii
to  ]!:nclaim  the  kingdom.  Why  does  this  fail?  It  fails,  says  our  Lord,  because  of
the  nature  of  the  soil.    This  soil  is  often  impervious,  often  shallow,  often  dirtf/.


38  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xm.  1—58.


I.  -  Some  seeds  fell  by  the  wayside,  and  the  fowls  came  and  devoured  them."
The  s|jii-itual  analogue  is  sairl  to  be  in  him  "  who  heareth  the  Word,  but  understandeth
it  not."  The  beaten  footpath  and  the  cart-track  have  their  uses,  but  they  grow  no
corn.  The  seed  may  be  of  tjje  best  quality,  but  for  all  purposes  of  sowing  you  might  as
well  sprinkle  pebbles  or  shot.  So  there  is  a  hearing  which  keeps  the  Word  entirely
outside.  It  does  not  even  enter  the  understanding.  It  rouses  no  inquiry,  provokes  no
contradiction.  You  have  occabion  sometimes  to  mention  a  fact  to  a  friend  which
should  alter  all  his  purpose,  but  you  find  he  has  not  taken  it  in.  So,  says  our  Lord,
there  are  hearers  who  do  not  take  in  what  is  said ;  their  understanding  is  impervious,
impenetrable.  'J  hey  hear  because  this  has  come  to  be  one  of  the  many  employments
with  which  they  fill  up  their  time,  but  they  have  never  considered  why  they  should  da
so,  or  wliat  result  they  should  look  for.  Or  there  may  be  a  slowness  and  cold  frosti-
ness  ol  nature  which  prevents  the  seed  from  fructifying.  The  proposals  made  suggest
nothing  to  the  waysiile  hearer.  In  some  cases  the  seed  apparently  lost  for  years  is
quickened  and  brings  forth  fruit,  bict  in  this  case  never.

II.  The  second  fault  is  shallowness.  The  sprinkling  of  soil  on  the  surface  of  the
rock,  where  the  seed  quickly  springs,  and  for  the  same  reason  quickly  decays.  There
is  not  depth  of  soil  for  any  time  to  be  spent  in  rooting.  The  shallow  hearer  is  dis-
tinguished by  two  characteristics — he  straightway  receives  the  Word,  and  he  receives  it
with  joy.  The  man  of  deeper  character  receives  it  with  seriousness,  reverence,  trem-
bling, foreseeing  the  trials-he  will  be  subjected  to.  But  while  these  are  pondering  the
vastness  of  the  revelation  and  the  majesty  of  the  hope,  and  striving  to  forecast  all  the
results  in  and  upon  them,  hesitating  because  they  would  receive  the  Word  for  eternity
or  not  at  all,  the  superficial  man  has  settled  the  whole  matter  out  of  hand,  and  he  who
yesterday  was  known  as  a  scoffer  is  to-day  a  loud-voiced  child  of  the  kingdom.  These
men  are  almost  certainly  taken  to  he  the  most  earnest ;  you  cannot  see  the  root,  and
what  is  iioen  is  shown  in  greatest  luxuriance  by  them.  But  the  same  nature  which
made  them  susceptible  to  the  gospel  and  quickly  responsive  makts  them  susceptible
to  pain,  suffering,  hardship,  and  easily  defeated.  When  consequences  have  to  be  faced
they  give  way.  The  question  of  how  these  shallow  natures  can  be  saved  hardly  falls
within  the  parable,  but  it  may  be  right  to  say  a  man's  nature  may  be  deepened  by  tlie
relationships  and  conflicts  of  life.  Much  deepening  of  character  is  effected  in  passing
through  life.

III.  The  thibd  fault  is  what  is  technically  known  as  dikt.  The  soil  can  only
support  a  certain  amount  of  vegetation,  and  every  living  weed  means  a  choked  blade  of
corn.  This  is  a  picture  of  the  preoccupied  heart,  the  rich  vigorous  nature  occupied
with  so  many  other  interests  that  only  a  small  part  is  available  for  giving  effect  to
Christ's  ideas.  Their  interest  is  real,  but  there  are  so  many  other  cares  and  desires  that
the  result  is  scarcely  discernible.  The  good  crop  is  not  the  one  with  the  greatest
density  of  vegetation,  but  where  all  is  wheat.  Most  soils  have  a  kind  of  weed  con-
genial, and  the  weeds  here  specified  are  "  the  care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness  of
riches,"  tl  e  former  being  merely  the  poor  man's  species  of  the  latter.  Among  rich  and
poor  alike  you  will  find  many  who  would  he  left  without  any  subject  of  thought  and
any  guiding  principle  in  action,  if  you  took  from  them  anxiety  about  their  own  position
in  life.  It  is  not  enough  to  put  aside  distracting  thoughts.  Cutting  down  the  thorns
won't  do;  still  less  holding  them  aside  till  the  seed  be  sown.  It  is  vain  to  hope  for  the
only  light  harvest  of  a  human  life  if  your  heart  is  sown  with  worldly  ambitions  a
greedy  hasting  to  he  rich,  an  undue  love  of  comfort,  a  true  earthliness  of  spirit.  One
seed  only  must  be  sown  in  you,  and  it  will  produce  all  needed  diligence  in  business  as
well  as  all  fervour  ol  spirit.

There  is  one  important  distinction  between  material  and  moral  sowing.  Man  is
possessed  of  free-will,  the  power  of  checking  to  some  extent  natural  consequences.
Therefore  the  gospel  is  tt  be  preached  to  every  creature,  and  we  may  oe  expected  to
bring  to  the  hepi-'ng  of  it  a  soft,  deep,  clean  soil  of  heart — what  Luke  calls  "an  honest  and
good  heart."  There  will  be  differences  of  crop  even  among  those  who  briug  good  hearts
but  wherever  the  Word  is  held  tasi  and  patiently  cared  for,  there  the  life  will  produce
all  that  God  cares  to  have  from  it.  but  even  the  honest  heart  is  not  enough  unless  we
keep  the  Word.  The  sower  must  be  ac  pains  to  cover  in  the  seed  and  loatch  that  it  V  not
taken  away.     So  the  hearer  loses  hia  i»»Kinr  unless  bis  mind  goes  back  on  what  he  hju


oa  £111. 1—58.]    THE  GOSPKL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.  39

heara,  and  he  sees  that  he  has  really  got  hold  of  it.  We  have  all  heard  all  that  is
necessary  for  life  and  gorlliness ;  it  remains  that  we  make  it  our  own,  that  it  secures  a
living  loot  in  us  and  in  our  life.  We  must  bear  it  in  mind,  so  that  all  that  comes
before  us  may  throw  new  lijjht  on  it  and  give  it  further  hold  on  us. — D.

Vers.  24 — 30. — Parable  of  the  tares.  In  the  parable  of  the  tarei  we  see  what
appearance  the  kingdom  of  heaven  presents  in  this  world,  and  are  warned  against
expecting  to  see  now  that  perfect  condition  which  will  in  the  end  be  brought  about.
It  has  perplexed  God's  servants  in  all  times  that  all  in  this  earth  should  not  be
unmingled  good.  This  world  is  God's;  men  are  his  propeity.  And  all  that  is  needful
for  the  production  of  the  fruit  dear  to  God  has  been  done  by  him  ;  and  yet  look  at  the
result.  Has  he  mistaken  the  capabilities  of  the  field,  or  does  he  not  care  to  develop
them  ?  The  answer  is,  "  An  enemy  hath  done  this."  This  is  enough  for  us  to  know.
We  are  not  to  stop  short  of  this,  and  pause  at  men  and  hate  ihem ;  but,  pitying  them,  are
to  pass  with  our  indignation  and  hatred  to  the  enemy.  We  are  not,  on  the  other  hand,
to  go  beyond  Satan,  and  think  blasphemously  of  God  as  the  Sower  of  bad  seed ;  but,
viewing  his  friendliness,  and  the  cost  he  spends  on  tliis  field,  and  his  destruction  of  our
enemy  by  his  Son,  are  to  spend  all  our  hate  on  Satan.  Such  being  the  condition  of  the
field  and  such  the  cause,  what  is  to  be  the  conduct  of  the  servants?  "  Wilt  thou  that
we  go  and  gather  them  up?"  This  and  th«t  other  propagator  of  falsehood,  anil  per-
petrator of  evil,  would  it  not  be  well  if  their  hindrance  were  taken  out  of  the  way  ?
Would  not  good  men  come  to  a  quicker  and  more  iruitful  maturity  were  they  not
continually  held  do'wn  by  the  scoffing,  exasperated  by  the  persecution,  and  led  astray
by  the  example  of  the  ungodly  ?  "  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest,"  is  tlie
law  of  the  Master.  Again  and  again  the  Church  has,  in  the  face  of  this  paiable,  taken
upon  her  to  root  up  infidels  and  heretics.'  The  reasoning  has  been  shnrt  and  summary.
We  are  Christ's ;  these  men  are  Satan's — let  us  destroy  them.  This  attempt  to  make
the  field  of  the  world  appear  uniform  has  been  one  of  the  most  disastrous  hindrances
to  the  growth  of  religion.  This  measure  of  the  servants  has  effected  a  more  frightful
desolation  and  barrenness  than  anything  which  the  existence  of  tlie  tares  couW  have
done.  But  each  of  us  has  something  of  the  persecutor  within  him,  and  needs  to  apply
this  parable  to  himself.  It  does  not  say  that  the  world  is  as  it  ought  to  be,  does  not
say  that  there  is  no  distinction,  or  a  very  insignificant  one,  between  good  and  bad  men,
but  tells  ua  we  are  not  to  act  upon  this  distinction  to  the  extent  of  injuring  a  man.-  If
a  man,  because  he  is  ungodly,  defrauds  his  neighbour,  murders,  or  robs,  he  is  of  course
lawfully  punished,  but  not  on  the  score  of  his  ungodliness,  but  of  his  breaking  human
law;  not  because  he  has  been  an  unprofitable  creature  vi  God's  and  an  offence  in  the
sight  of  God,  but  because  he  is  an  injurious  member  of  a  civil  commimity.  No  punish-
ment is  to  be  inflicted  by  us  purely  on  the  ground  of  a  man's  spiritual  condition,  of  his
not  bearing  fruit  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  most  detrimental  to  the  cause  of
Christianity  when  a  Christian  in  his  conduct  towards  an  ungodly  peison  seems  to  be
always  saying,  "'  I  wish  you  were  out  of  the  world ;  and  for  my  part,  and  as  far  as  I  can,
you  shall  be  deprived  of  all  its  advantages."  From  the  earliest  times,  however,  it  has
been  the  all  but  universal  opinion  that  this  parable  had  reference  to  ecclesiastical
discipline.  And  if  not  meant  in  its  first  intention  to  be  applied  thus,  it  is  valid  for
this  purpose  as  well.  Within  the  Church  it  is  often  very  difficult  to  know  what  is
wheat  and  what  is  not.  An  opinion  which  is  condemned  as  scandalous  or  full  of
danger  may  turn  out  to  be  true  and  wholesome  ;  if  it  be  at  once  pronounced  tares  and
thrown  over  the  hedge,  the  good  fruit  it  might  have  borne  is  thrown  away  with  it.
And  even  where  it  is  clear  that  evil  has  sprung  up  in  the  Church,  it  is  a  further  quesrion
whether  it  should  be  summarily  removed.  If  you  leave  false  doctrine  alone,  may  you
not  get  rid  of  it  sooner  than  if  you  fix  public  attention  upon  it  ?  Ho  man  who  had  a
regard  for  his  field  would  carry  a  seeding  thistle  through  every  part  of  it  and  shake  it
in°every  corner.  Our  Lord  gives  two  reasons  for  this  method  of  delay.  1.  If  we
endeavour  to  anticipate  the  end,  we  shall  injure  the  children  of  the  kingdom.  You  are
not  to  root  up  the  tares,  because  you  will  inevitably  root  up  good  corn  along  with  them.
You  cannot  injure  one  man  and  one  only,  and  of  those  who  are  attached  to  him  can
you  be  sure  there  are  none  who  are  of  the  kingdom?  2.  But  the  kingdom  of  heaven
has  a  Judge  Mid  an  executive  of  its  own,  which  will  be  apparent  in  the  end.     And


iO  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xin.  1—58.

when  we  reflect  that  what  has  raised  our  indignation  has  been  observed  by  God,  and
will  assuredly  be  dialt  with  by  him,  this  not  only  stifles  our  indignation,  but  impels  ua
to  seek  to  save  the  sinner  from  the  punishment  he  is  earning.  The  bearing  of  this
parable,  then,  on  ourselves  cannot  be  mistaken.  Wheat  and  darnel,  it  says,  are  almost
identical  in  appearance,  but  the  root  of  the  principle  of  the  one  is  difl'erent  from  the
other ;  the  one  is  good  food,  the  other  is  poison  and  they  will  eventually  be  treated
accordingly.  From  this  similarity  it  arises:  (1)  That  the  darnel  is  apt  to  think  itself
as  good  as  the  wlieat.  But  the  question  is  not  whether  you  are  not  at  present  to  all
appearance  as  useful  and  pleasant  a  member  of  society  as  they,  but  whether  there  is
not  tliat  in  them  which  will  grow  to  good  and  that  in  you  which  will  grow  to  evil.
What  is  it  that  is  producing  your  actual  life  and  character?  Wtjat  is  the  motive
power  ?  Is  it  mere  desire  to  get  on,  or  respect  for  your  own  good  name  ?  Or  is  your
character  being  more  and  more  formed  by  the  belief  that  God  calls  you  to  live  tor  him
and  for  eternity  ?  Are  you  rooted  in  Christ  ?  Do  you  grow  out  of  him  ?  (2)  The  wheat  is
a[it  to  think  itself  no  better  than  darnel.  You  are  troubled  because  oth'TS  seem  to  be  as
regular,  as  zealous,  as  successful,  in  duty  as  you ;  they  have  even  the  advantage  of  you
in  some  respects.  Some  natural  infirmity  of  temper  has  fixed  its  stamp  on  you,  or  you
are  choked  by  uncongenial  surroundings.  But  look  to  the  end  here  predicted,  "  when
all  that  offends  shall  be  taken  out  of  the  way,"  and  "  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."  Be  sure  only  that  there  is  that  in  you  which
will  shine  forth  if  the  hindrances  and  blinds  be  taken  out  of  the  way. — D.

Ver.  33. — Parable  of  the  leaven.  This  parable  directs  our  attention  to  two  points
connecter)  with  the  extension  of  Christianity.  It  illustrates  (1)  first,  the  hind  of
change  which  Christianity  works  in  the  worlji;  (2)  second,  the  method  by  which  this
change  is  wrought.

I.  The  change  oue  Lobd  meant  to  effect  in  the  wobld  was  to  be  a  change  not
BO  much  of  outward  forms  as  of  the  spirit  and  character  of  all  things.  The  propagation
of  his  influence  is  set  forth  and  illustrated,  not  by  a  woman  taking  a  mass  of  dough
and  making  it  into  new  shapes,  but  by  a  woman  putting  that  into  the  dough  which
alters  the  character  of  the  whole  mass.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  you  may
revolutionize  a  country  or  society.  You  may  pull  down  the  old  forms  of  government,
or  you  may  fill  them  with  men  of  a  difl'erent  spirit,  revise  tlie  constitution,  or,  leaving  it
untouched,  fill  official  positions  with  the  right  men.  A  machine  refuses  to  work,  and
people  tell  you  the  construction  is  wrong ;  but  the  skilled  mechanic  pushes  aside
the  ignorant  crowd,  ami  puts  all  to  rights  with  a  few  drops  of  oil.  Few  distinctions  are
of  wider  application.  What  is  pointed  at  is  rather  the  regenerative  than  the  creative
power  of  Christ's  Spirit ;  not  so  much  the  new  facts  and  habits  to  which  Christian
leeling  gives  birth,  as  the  new  feelings  and  views  it  has  about  existing  customs,
institutions,  relationships,  occupations.  His  Spirit,  he  says,  does  not  require  new
channels ;  a  man  does  not  require  new  arteries,  but  to  have  them  filled  with  health-
giving  blood.  In  establishing  the  kingdom  of  heaven  our  Lord  did  not  intend  to  erect
a  vast  organization  over  against  the  world,  but  he  meant  to  introduce  into  the  world
itself  a  leaven  which  should  subdue  all  things  to  his  own  Spirit.  It  was  to  be  without
observation,  hidden  as  leaven  among  meal.

II.  The  method  by  which  the  kingdom  is  to  grow.  Kingdoms  have  been
extended  in  various  ways,  but  chiefly  by  Ibrce,  by  the  strong  hand.  And  the  idea  that
men  can  be  compelled  to  accept  the  truth  seems  never  to  be  wholly  eradicated  from  the
human  mind.  But  our  Lord  teaches  that  the  extension  of  his  Spirit  throughout  the
world  is  to  be  by  the  secret  unnoticed  influence  of  man  upon  man.  No  doubt  there  is
a  direct  agency  of  God  in  each  case,  but  God  works  through  natural  means,  and  the
natural  means  heie  pointed  to  is  personal  influence.  Than  this  there  is  no  mightiei
power.  Take  even  the  influence  of  those  who  least  intend  to  influence  you,  and
seem  least  capable  of  it.  Think  of  the  influence  in  many  ways  of  the  little  child  who
cannot  stand  alone ;  or  of  those  who  seem  wholly  pushed  aside  from  the  busy  world  by
ill  health  or  misfortune.  Huw  we  have  been  brought  to  a  chastened,  sober  habit  by
their  t uffering:  and  to  the  recognition  of  what  is  essential  and  what  accidental,  what
pood  and  what  evil  in  the  world  I  For  the  operation  of  this  influence  there  must  be  :
X.  A  mixitig ;  that  is  to  say,  there  must  be  contact  of  the  closest  kind  between  tb«


OH.  xm.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  41

regenerate  and  the  unregenerate.  The  leaven  is  manifestly  useless  while  it  lies  by
itself.  If  our  Lord  had  secluded  himself  in  the  household  of  Bethany,  and  never  eaten
with  publicans  and  sinners,  little  of  his  Spirit  could  have  passed  into  other  men.  The
closeness  of  the  intimacy,  the  depth  of  the  love,  is  the  measure  of  the  effect  produced.
And  in  a  country  like  ours,  where  what  belonged  yesterday  to  one  person  is  to-day
possessed  by  a  thousand,  good  or  evil  propagates  itself  with  the  speed  and  certainty  of
contagion,  the  more  effectually  because  insensibly.  There  is  no  banishment  for  the
moral  leper ;  no  man  can  be  evil  for  himself  alone.  This  mixing  is  provided  for  in
various  ways — ^by  nature,  which  sets  us  in  families  j  by  society,  which  compels  contact
of  various  kinds  with  others.  Beyond  these  are  the  casual  meetings  we  are  unawares
thrown  into,  and  the  voluntary  friendships  and  associations  we  form.  Of  the  first  we
may  ^ay,  tliat  if  we  cannot  always  choose  our  company  we  can  always  choose  how  we
shall  conduct  ourselves  in  it;  we  can  make  our  meeting  a  means  of  spreading  the  Siiirit
of  Christ.  The  additions  to  his  kingdom  must  be  chiefly  from  among  those  who  do
not  at  present  respond  to  Christian  sentiments.  For  the  regulation  of  connections  which
we  form  of  our  own  choice  the  parable  sufBces.  Can  they  be  leavened,  and  by  us  ?
It  is  folly  to  argue  that  because  some  one  else  can  go  into  certain  company,  or  engage  in
certain  pursuits  and  not  be  the  wor.se  for  it,  that  therefore  you  can  do  so.  But  there  is
a  culpable  refusal  to  mix  as  well  as  a  too  great  eagerness  to  do  so.  Two  very  opposite
feelings  lead  to  this.  (1)  One  is  the  Pharisaic  contempt  for,  or  hopelessness  about,  other
people.  A  converted  person  often  seems  to  forget  the  hole  of  the  rock  whence  he  was
digged — Trha*  he  was  yesterday,  and  what  the  unbeliever  on  whom  he  scowls  may  be
tc-morrow.  Or  (2)  there  is  the  opposite  feeling,  that  our  influence  can  only  do  harm.
But  this  feeling  should  prompt  us  not  to  separate  ourselves  from  the  world,  but  to
renew  our  connection  with  the  leaven.  If  we  fear  to  touch  another  lest  we  com-
municate disease,  let  us  first  touch  him  out  of  whom  flows  healing  for  all  diseases.
2.  But,  the  mixing  being  accomplished,  how  does  the  process  succeed  f  The  parable
says — Be  leaven,  and  you  will  leaven.  Be  a  Christian,  and  you  must  make  Christians
or  help  to  make  them.  No  doubt  direct  addre.-5S  forms  one  great  part  of  the  means  of
leavening  those  around  you,  but  the  figure  here  points  rather  to  the  all-pervading  and
subtle  extension  of  Christian  principles  than  to  their  declared  and  aggressive  advocacy.
What  is  the  influence  of  your  example  ?  If  you  are  not  leavening  others,  it  is  because
you  are  yourself  unleavened.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  leaven  that  does  not  work.
You  cannot  confine  the  perfume  to  the  flower,  or  restrict  the  light  of  the  sun  to  its  own
globe.  It  is  a  glorious  consummation  here  spoken  of — till  "  the  whole  "  is  leavened.  In
Christ's  kingdom  is  to  be  gathered  all  that  has  ever  served  or  gladdened  humanity.
His  Spirit  is  to  take  possession  of  all  national  characteristics  and  all  individual  gifis.
And  all  is  to  be  achieved  through  personal  influence.  Can  you  know  the  earnestness  of
Christ  in  this  behalf,  and  lift  no  finger  to  help  him?  Is  there  nothing  you  ought  to  do
in  leavening  some  little  bit  of  the  great  mass  ? — D.

Vers.  44 — 46. — ParcMes  of  the  hid  treasure  and  the  pearl  of  price.  These  parables
depict  the  two  great  classes  of  men  who  become  Christians.  Some  men  are  born  mer-
chants, others  day-labourers ;  some,  i.e.,  are  born  with  a  noble  instinct  which  prompts
them  to  believe  that  there  is  infinite  joy  and  satisfaction  to  be  found,  and  that  it  shall
bo  theirs ;  others,  again,  never  look  beyond  their  present  attainment,  have  no  specu-
lation  in  them,  no  broad  plan  of  life  nor  much  idea  that  any  purpose  is  to  be  served
by  it.  Tliis  difference,,  when  exhibited  in  connection  with  religion,  becomes  very
marked,

I.  The  point  of  the  first  parable,  and  its  distinction  from  the  other,  seems  to  lie  in
this — that  while  the  man  was  giving  a  deeper  furrow  to  his  field,  intent  only  on  his
team,  his  ploughshare  suddenly  grated  upon  the  chest  that  contained  the  treasure.  Or
he  may  have  been  sauntering  through  a  neighbour's  field,  when  his  eye  is  attracted  by
Bume  sign  that  fixes  him  for  the  moment  to  the  spot,  because  he  knows  that  treasure
must  be  there.  Ages  before  this  treasure  had  been  hid ;  for  him  it  had  been  prepared
without  any  intention  or  labour  of  his,  and  now  suddenly  he  lights  upon  it.  Out  of
poverty  he,  to  his  own  astonishment,  steps  into  wealth,  and  his  whole  life  is  changed
for  a  time  without  hope  or  effort  of  his  own.  So,  says  our  Lord,  is  the  kingdom  of
heaven.     Suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  other  thoughts,  a  man  is  brought  face  to  face  witA


42  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xiii.  1— 58.

Christ,  and  while  earning  his  daily  bread  and  seeking  no  more  than  success  in  life  can
give  him,  unexpectedly  finds  that  eternal  things  are  his.  We  only  think  of  what  we
can  make  of  life,  not  of  thn  wealth  God  has  laid  in  our  path.  But  suddenly  our  steps
are  arrested ;  circumstances  that  seem  purely  accidental  break  down  the  partition  that
has  hemmed  us  in  to  lime,  and  we  see  that  eternity  is  ours.  We  thought  we  had  a  house,
a  hundred  acres  of  land,  a  thousand  pounds  well  invested,  and  we  find  we  have  God.  We
were  coinfortinp;  ourselves  with  the  prospect  of  increased  salary,  of  ampler  comforts  aad
advantages,  and  a  voice  comes  ringing  through  our  soul,  "  All  things  are  yours ;  for  ye
are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's."  Ebw  it  is  that  the  eyes  are  now  opened  to  this
treasure,  we  can  as  little  tell  as  the  ploughman  how  he  has  never  till  this  day  seen  the
treasure.  A  few  words  casually  dropped,  some  pause  which  allows  the  mind  to  wander  in
unaccustomed  directions — one  cannot  say  what  is  insufficient  to  bring  the  wandering
and  empty  soul  to  a  settled  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  this  morning  he
was  content  with  what  a  mau  can  have  outside  of  God's  kingdom,  this  evening  every-
thing outside  that  kingdom  has  lost  its  value  and  is  as  nothing.  We  are  apt  to  think
that,  as  the  acceptance  of  Christ  is  the  most  important  attainment  a  man  can  make,
there  ought  to  he  some  proportionate  effort  or  expectancy  on  his  part — that  so  great  a
treasure  is  not  to  be  made  over  to  one  who  is  not  caring  for  or  thinking  of  it.  But
this  parable  shows  us  that  there  may  be  a  finding  without  any  previous  seeking;  that
the  essential  thing  is,  not  whether  a  man  has  been  seeking,  and  how  long  and  how
earnestly,  but  whether  he  has  found.  The  question  is — ^Does  a  man  know  the  value  of
what  has  turned  up  before  him  ?  and  is  he  so  in  earnest  as  to  sell  all  for  it?    .

II.  The  second  parable  introduces  us  to  the  man  who  sets  out  with  the  inboi-u
conviction  or  instinct  that  there  is  something  worth  the  labour  and  search  of  a  life,
something  to  which  we  can  wholly,  freely,  and  eternally  give  ourselves  up.  He  refuses
to  be  satisfied  with  the  moderate,  often  interrupted,  often  quenched  joys  of  this  world,
though  he  considers  them  as  goodly  pearls.  He  goes  on  from  one  acquirement  to
another.  Money  is  good,  but  friendship  is  better;  he  parts  with  the  one  to  get  the
other.  The  respect  of  his  fellows  is  good,  but  self-respect  and  a  pure  conscience  are
better  Human  love  is  a  goodly  pearl,  but  this  only  quickens  him  to  crave  insatiably
for  the  love  of  God.  He  refuses  to  believe  that  God  has  created  us  to  be  partially
satisfied,  happy  at  intervals,  content  with  effort,  Idievitig  ourselves  blessed,  but  to  be
partakers  of  his  own  blessedness.  This  spirit  of  expectation  is  encouraged  by  the
parable.  It  seems  to  say  to  us,  "  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  It  is  not  lor  you  who
have  a  God  of  infinite  resource  and  of  infinite  love  to  accustom  yourselves  to  merely
negative  blessings,  and  doubtful,  limited  conditions.  There  does  exist  a  perfect  con-
dition, a  pearl  of  great  price,  and  there  is  but  a  question  of  the  way  to  it,  a  question
of  search.  You  are  to  start  with  this  belief,  and  to  hold  it  to  the  end.  Under  no
compulsion,  in  the  face  of  no  disappointment,  give  up  the  persuadion  that  into  your
life  and  soul  the  full  sense  of  ample  possession  is  one  day  to  enter.  You  have
certainty  on  your  side — simple,  sheer  certainty ;  for  "  he  that  seeketh  findeth."  The
important  point  in  these  parables  is  that  which  is  common  to  both — the  incom-
parable value  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the  readiness  with  which  one  who
perceives  its  valuu  will  give  up  all  for  it.  The  merchant  does  not  part  with  his  other
possessions  reluctnntly  when  he  wishes  to  obtain  some  better  possession  ;  he  longs  to
get  rid  of  them.  People  may  think  him  mad  selling  out  at  low  prices,  at  unsuitable
times,  at  a  loss ;  but  he  knows  what  he  is  doing.  The  world  is  full  of  stories  that  dis-
play the  ingenuity,  craft,  perseverance,  consuming  zeal,  spent  on  winning  the  piece  of
ground  coveted.  But  is  this  not  rather  a  picture  of  what  ought  to  be  than  of  wliat  is  ?
We  see  men  hesitating  to  part  with  anything  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  looking  at  it
as  a  sad  alternative,  as  a  resort  to  which  they  must  perhaps  betake  themselves  when
too  old  to  enjoy  life  any  longer,  but  not  as  that  on  which  life  itself  may  best  be  spent.
Entrance  into  it  is  looked  upon  much  as  entrance  into  the  fortified  town  is  viewed  by
the  rural  population;  it  may  be  necessary  in  time  of  danger,  but  it  is  by  coiistraiot,
not  from  love,  that  they  make  the  change.  What  meaning  has  this  "  selliog  of  all  "
in  our  life  ?  For  it  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  always  this  selling  wherever  the
kingdom  of  heaven  is  won.  It  is  what  you  really  love  that  you  spend  thought  and
effort  and  money  upon,  not  what  you  know  you  ought  to  love  and  are  tryini'  to
persuade  yourself  to  love.    In  conclusion,  this  parable  lets  fall  two  words  of  waruiuE.


OH.  xm.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  iS

1,  Mak«  your  choice  and  act  upon  it.  If  there  is  no  better  pearl,  no  higher  treasure
than  what  you  can  win  by  devotion  to  business  and  living  for  yourself,  then  by  all
nieani  choose  that  and  make  the  most  of  it.  But  if  you  think  that  Christ  was  right,
if  you  foresee  that  what  is  outside  his  kingdom  must  perish,  and  that  he  has  gathereil
within  it  all  that  is  worthy,  all  that  is  enduring,  then  let  the  reasonableness  and
remonstrance  of  this  parable  move  you  to  show  some  eagerness  in  winning  that  great
treasure.  2.  If  you  have  this  treasure,  do  not  murmur  at  the  price  you  have  paid  for
it.  Having  what  woilds  cannot  buy,  you  will  surely  not  vex  yourself  by  longing  for
this  or  that  which  the  poorest-spirited  slave  of  this  world  can  easily  obtain. — ^D.

Veri.  47 — 50. — The  parable  of  the  net.  This  parable,  the  last  of  the  series,  directs  our
thoughts  to  the  completion  of  the  kingdom.  "  So  sh  ill  it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world  ;  "
this  is  the  starting-point  of  the  interpretation.  We  are  to  consider  what  part  the  king-
dom of  heaven  is  to  play  then  ;  when  other  kingdoms  have  played  their  parts ;  when
things  are  being  settled  for  eternity  according  to  their  value  to  God.  It  miikes  no
practical  difference  in  the  application  of  the  parable  whether  you  make  the  net  the
Church,  or  simply  the  progress  of  all  things  towards  eternity.  Our  Lord  would  have
us  consider  the  consummation  of  all  things,  when  the  great  net  shall  at  last  be  drawn
to  shore,  when  there  shall  be  no  more  sea,  no  ebb  and  flow,  especially  no  mingling  of
bad  and  good  in  an  obscure  and  confusing  element;  but  decision  and  separation,  a
deliberate  sitting  down  to  see  what  has  been  made  of  this  world  by  us  all,  and  a  sum-
ming up  on  that  eternal  shore  of  all  gains  and  results,  and  every  man's  aim  made
manifest  by  his  end.

I.  This  parablk  sdgkjests  that  we  abb  all  inevitably  advanoinq.  Our  con-
dition in  this  respect  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  fish  enclosed  in  a  net.  At  first,  while
the  net  is  w!de,  they  frisk  and  leap  and  seem  free,  but  soon  they  discover  that  their
advance  is  but  in  one  dinction,  and  when  they  halt  they  feel  the  pressure  of  the  net.
So  it  is  with  ourselves.  We  must  go  on ;  we  cannot  break  through  into  the  past ;  we
cannot  make  time  stand  still  till  we  resolve  how  to  s|jend  it.  The  years  spent  in
indecision,  in  doubt,  in  self-seclusion,  cannot  now  be  filled  with  service  of  God  and  profit
to  our  fuUows.

II.  The  net  bcgqests  the  idea  of  entanglement.  Looking  at  fish  in  a  net,  you
see  many  that  are  not  swimming  freely,  but  caught  in  the  meshes  and  dragged  on.
Many  have  this  interpreted  by  their  own  experience.  They  feel  daily  the  pressure  of
the  net ;  their  position  is  not  altogether  of  their  own  choosing,  and  now  tliey  discharge
its  duties  because  they  must,  not  because  they  would.  Such  a  condition  may  be  sinful
or  sinless.  If  the  duties  required  of  you  be  sinful,  then  have  you  not  recognized  the
detriment  to  your  own  soul  ?  Do  you  not  reflect,  that  what  was  guod  when  first
entangled  may  be  landed  broken,  bruisf d,  and  useless  ?  But  if  the  duties  required  of
you  are  not  violations  of  God's  Law  or  ofiences  to  your  own  conscience,  then  rest
satisfied  with  them,  till  God  shows  you  a  way  of  escape.  Do  not  toss  and  struggle  in
the  net,  but  quietly  set  yourself  to  make  the  most  of  the  condition  you  have  unfor-
tunately fallen  into.  It  may  be  your  duty  to  continue  in  a  position  it  was  not  originally
your  duty  to  enter.  Just  because  it  seems  in  many  points  uusuitable,  it  may  call  out
dee[)er  qualities  within  you — a  patience  that  would  otherwise  have  been  undeveloped  in
you,  a  knowledge  of  man  and  of  God  that  enlarges  and  mature*  your  spirit.  By  very
strange  influences  aud  means  are  we  passing  onwards,  and  we  would  often  fain  escape
from  the  gentle  compulsion  by  which  God  draws  us  to  our  end  and  bliss ;  and  there-
fore must  we  bear  in  mind  that  however  entangled  and  tied  up  we  are  and  prevented
from  our  own  ways  and  directions,  this  present  is,  after  all,  only  the  di'awing  of  the  net,
and  not  the  time  of  our  use.  We  are  pressing  to  a  shore  where  there  is  room  and  time
enough  for  the  fulfilment  of  every  humau  purpose  and  exercise  of  every  facuUy.

Hi.  Again,  a  thi)d  thing  the  net  shows  us  is  the  mixtubk  in  it.  "  It  gathers  of
every  kind."  And  until  it  is  fairly  landed  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the  weight  is
to  be  rejoiced  in  or  no.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  that  there  is  no  man
to  whom  it  is  not  appropriate.  It  does  not  only  gather  those  in  whom  it  finds  some-
thing congenial,  a  natural  susceptibility  of  temperament  inoliuing  them  to  devotion ;
but  it  gathers  in  of  every  kind  because  it  is  suited  to  that  moral  condition  in  respect
of  which  there  is  no  difference  of  importance  between  one  man  and  another.    But  this


i4  THE  GOSPEL  AUCOHDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xui.  1—58.


mixture  has  its  chief  importance  in  connection  with  tlie  ultimate  separation.  There
are  two  great  classes  in  which  are  to  be  for  ever  included  all  other  distiuctiong  and
diversities.  All  must  pass  through  the  hands  of  the  Judge,  By  lieeping  God  out  of
your  thoughts  now,  you  do  not  secure  that  you  shall  never  think  of  him,  and  that  he
shall  never  think  of  you.  And  this  is  specially  a  parable  of  warning.  The  figure  is
earned  out  and  applied  only  so  far  as  it  concerns  the  fate  of  the  wicked.  The  ancrels
sever  the  wicked  from  among  the  just,  so  that  the  just  alone  are  left  in  the  net.  The
fishermen  have  thrown  the  net  for  a  purpose,  and  whatever  is  not  suitable  for  this  pur-
pose is  refuse  and  rubbish  to  tliem.  And  so  it  shall  be  in  the  end  of  the  world.  Men
will  then  understand  uhat  now  scarcely  one  can  constantly  believe,  that  it  is  God's
purpose  that  is  silently  being  accomplished,  and  that  it  is  usefulness  to  him  that  is  the
final  standard  of  value.  This  will  make  a  rapid  separation  among  men.  Have  you
those  qualities  which  would  serve  to  carry  out  such  purposes  as  you  know  God's  to  be  ?
Do  you  find  now  so  much  delight  in  doing  his  commandments,  in  living  under  his  eye,
that  you  can  believe  that  in  the  end  he  can  make  some  use  of  you  ?  Do  not  say,  "  I
will  not  alarm  myself  by  judging  of  my  own  qualities;  I  am  trusting  to  Christ;"  ior
precisely  in  so  far  as  you  are  trusting  to  Christ  you  have  those  qualities  which  Goid  will
require  you  to  show.  One  other  thing  must  be  observed.  The  fisli  taken  in  the  net
are  disposed  of  by  the  fishermen ;  are  in  their  hands  as  mere  dead  matter  without  choice
or  motion.  This  handling  and  disposing  of  by  others  is  not  more  new  to  the  fishes
than  it  will  be  to  us.  Here  iu  this  world  we  are  conscious  of  a  power  to  choose  and
regulate  our  own  destiny — a  power  to  change  and  become  something  quite  different
from  what  we  are.  But  there  comes  a  time  when  whatever  you  are  that  you  shall  for
ever  be ;  when  you  must  abide  by  your  choice  and  take  all  its  consequencea.  This
parable,  therefore,  has  a  most  significant  hint  for  those  wlio  decline  to  accept  Christ  on
these  two  grounds.  1.  That  they  do  not  practically  need  his  help ;  that  they  can  do
4II  that  is  required  of  them  very  well  without  him.  2.  That  they  do  not  see  in
the  lives  of  those  who  do  believe  iu  him  any  such  superiority  as  to  induce  them  to
follow  their  example  and  believe.  But  the  difficulty  now  is  for  any  serious  and  right-
minded  person  to  avoid  accepting  Christ's  help.  In  order  to  do  so  a  man  would  need
to  have  been  born  outside  of  Chiistendom  altogether.  Besides,  as  regaids  conduct,  can
a  man  satisfy  his  conscience  without  Christ's  help  ?  He  holds  a  relation  to  God  as  well
as  to  man,  and  it  is  no  apology  fur  an  unfilial  attitude  towards  God  to  affirm  that  wo
fulfil  all  our  duties  to  men.  This  parable  reminds  us  that  it  is  seiviceableness  which
must  determine  our  destiny  in  the  future  life;  or,  as  God  does  not  desire  mere  service,
but  the  delighted  co-operation  of  sons,  it  is  sonship  which  determines  our  destiny.
And  who  but  Christ  enables  us  to  see  what  sonship  is,  and  to  become  sons?  As  to  the
second  reason,  this  parable  not  only  admits,  but  makes  much  of  the  fact,  that  all  that
is  within  the  net  is  by  no  means  approved  by  God.  But  is  not  the  kingdom  as  it
ought  to  be  worth  striving  for  ?  Was  the  life  of  Christ  misspent  ?  and  would  it  be  a
lamentable  state  of  affairs  on  earth  if  his  rule  and  spirit  everywhere  prevailed  ?  The
eternity  that  some  are  advancing  towards,  our  Lord  does  not  hesitate  to  describe  as  "a
furnace  of  fire,  where  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  Surely  the  condition
that  is  so  sad  as  to  occupy  the  souls  of  those  who  are  in  it  with  eternal  lamentation
ought  to  occupy  with  sume  feelings  the  hearts  of  those  who  can  give  no  reason  why
they  shall  not  be  there.  It  is  not  by  some  other  and  extraordinary  way  that  you  will
evade  what  God  warns  you  of,  but  only  by  the  timeous  use  of  what  he  has  long  ago
told  you,  and  what  you  ought  long  ago  to  have  used.-^D.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Sower.  Jesus  had  wrought  many  splendid  miracles.  He  w!»
himself  the  greatest  Wonder.  It  is  not  surprising  that  he  should  have  been  followed
by  crowds.  For  convenience  in  addressing  the  multitude  on  this  occasion,  he  entered
a  boat,  and  stood  out  from  the  beach.  As  ho  was  about  to  open  his  mouth  in  parables
perhaps  this  action  was  parabolic.  The  pious  Quosnel  remarks,  "  We  see  here  a
representation  of  the  Church,  which  consists  of  people  united  with  their  pastors.
Theie,  being  more  exposed  to  violent  tossinas  and  storms,  are,  as  it  were,  in  a  ship,
while  those  continue  at  ease  on  the  shore."  Foremost  among  the  parables  uttered  is
that  of  the  sower  (see  Mark  iv.  13).     It  is  afterwards  interpretLd.     Let  us  view  it

L  As  TO  THE  SOWING.     Under  this  head  we  have;  1.  The  seed.     (I)  This  is  the


OH.xiu.  1— 68.]    TUB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  45

saving  truth  of  God.  In  the  interpretation  it  is  styled  "  the  Word  of  the  kingdom  "
(ver.  19 ;  see  also  Maik  iv.  14).  (2)  That  truth,  like  a  seed,  has  a  body.  The  earlier
enshrinement  of  tht:  saving  truth  was  the  letter  of  the  Sinai  covenant.  This  is  called
"  the  hody  of  Moses  "  (see  Jude  9).  Now  it  comes  to  us  in  ttie  Law  from  Ziim.  This
is  also  called  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem  "  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  3 ;  Luke  x?iv,  47).

(3)  The  truth,  like  a  seed,  has  a  germinant  principle.  It  is  a  living  tbiag.  The  Spirit
of  God  is  the  life  of  the  Word.  In  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  it  is  that  "  the  Law  of  the
Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul."  2.  The  Bower.  (1)  "  The  Sower  is  the  Son  of
man."  So  we  have'  the  interpretation  in  the  corresponding  parable  of  the  tares  (see
ver.  37).  The  Son  of  man  is  the  Word  in  person.  The  character  of  the  Sower  belongs
to  him,  as  he  is  the  Author  of  all  truth.  (2)  The  Son  of  man  sows  the  Word  of  the
kingdom  by  his  servants,  (a)  Apostles,  These  were  immediately  commissioned.
(by  Ministers.  He  provided  for  a  succession  of  labourers  separated  to  this  great  work,
(c)  Disciples.  A  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  committed  to  every  believer.  (3)  As
the  Sower  the  Lord  is  gone  forth.  He  has  sown  the  truth  in  every  age  of  the  world.
He  carries  the  gospel  into  every  land.  He  inseminates  his  truth  in  the  mind  of  every
child  of  man  (John  i.  9).  3.  The  soil.  (1)  This  is  the  heart  of  the  hearer.  The
interpretation  makes  this  also  plain.  (2)  He  that  made  the  seed  made  also  the  soil  ,-
and  the  Word  and  the  heart  are  corelated.  In  the  Bible  there  is  food  for  every  faculty
of  the  mind.  It  has  science  for  the  reason.  It  has  poetry  for  the  imagination.  It
has  history  for  the  understanding.  It  has  prophecy  for  the  anticipative  faculties.  It
has  doctrines  for  the  faith.  It  has  promises  for  the  hope.  It  has  assurances  for  thd
love.  (3)  But  the  soil  of  the  heart  should  be  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the  seed  of
truth,  (a)  It  should  be  ploughed  and  harrowed  and  crushed  with  conviction  and  grief
and  sorrow  for  sin.  (6)  It  should  also  be  weeded  and  cleaned  by  a  thorough  reformation
and  amendment,     (c)  It  should  be  dressed  by  the  holy  excitements  of  faith  and  hope.

(4)  The  reception  depends  upon  the  recipient.  There  are  various  kindt  of  reception.
There  are  various  degrees  of  reception,

II.  As  TO  THE  YIELD.  1.  T%e  Seed  is  wasted  on  the  trampled  soil.  (1)  Tha
allusion  .s  to  the  beaten  footpaths  in  corn-fields.  When  the  seed  falls  upon  such  a
surface  it  cannot  sink.  It  is  therefore  liable  to  be  trodden  underfoot  (cf.  Luke  viii.  5).
It  is  also  liable  to  be  carried  away  by  the  birds.  In  his  '  Travels  in  Palestine,'  Bucking-
ham has  the  following :  "  We  ascended  an  elevated  plain  where  husbandmen  were
sowing,  and  some  thousands  of  starlings  covered  the  ground,  as  the  wild  pigeons  do  in
Egypt,  laying  a  heavy  contribution  on  the  grain  thrown  into  the  furrows,  which  are
not  covered  by  harrowing  as  in  Europe."  (2)  The  careless  and  unawakened  are  here
described.  They  "  hear  the  Word  of  the  kingdom,  but  understand  it  not "  (see  ver.  19);
i.e.  they  do  not  lay  it  to  heart.  The  defect  is  moral.  Note :  Satan  has  diminished
power  where  the  truth  is  understood  in  the  heart.  (3)  Understanding  in  the  sense  of
intellectual  apprehension  is  important.  What  our  Lord  means  is  to  "  understand  with
the  heart,"  or  to  receive  the  truth  in  love.  Note:  The  love  of  the  truth  is  the  soil
suitable  to  the  reception  of  the  seed  of  the  kingdom.  (4)  The  love  or  goodness
received  from  the  Lord  through  parents  and  otherwise  in  earlylife  is  often  so  trampled
upon  by  the  practical  errors  of  Inter  years  that  the  heart  becomes  hardened  into
unconcern  for  eternal  life.  (5)  The  seed  that  falls  into  such  a  heart  is  carried  away
by  the  devil,  whose  agents  are  compared  to  the  "birds  of  the  air."  To  forget  the
Creator,  whom  we  were  taught  to  "  remember  "  in  our  youth,  is  one  of  the  temptations
of  early  manhood.  Thoughts  of  light  pleasures  or  of  vain  philosophy  "  catch  away  "
that  which  pious  hands  have  sown.  The  careless  heart  is  the  devil's  thoroughfare,
2.  The  seed  is  wasted  on  superficial  soil.  (1)  The  "  rocky  places  where  they  had  not
much  earth  "  are  places  where  the  rock  lies  under  the  scanty  surface  (see  Luke  viii.  6).
Such  places  represent  the  heart  of  the  hearer  who  will  at  once  receive  the  Word  with
gladness,  but  "having  no  root  in  himself,  but  dureth  for  a  while"  (vers.  20,  21).
(2)  The  seed  which  quickly  germinates  in  the  slight  but  genial  soil  comes  to  a  weak
maturity  quickly  under  favourable  conditions.  "  In  Palestine,  during  the  seed-time
in  November,  the  sky  is  generally  overspread  with  clouds.  The  seed  then  springs  in
stony  places.  But  when  the  sun  dissipates  the  clouds,  having  outgrown  its  strength,
it  is  quickly  dried  away  "  (Rosenmiiller).  Note :  What  is  swallowed  without  mandu-
catioE  is  not  perfectly  digested.     The  ready  hearer  is  not  always  the  best  fruit- bearer


46  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xin.  1—68.

(cf.  1  Thess.  V.  21).  Many  endure  "  for  a  season,"  but  not  "  to  the  end  "  (of.  ch.  x.
22  ;  Gal.  T.  7).  (3)  The  failure  is  "  because  they  have  no  root  in  themselTes."  They
have  no  fixed  principles  in  their  judgmeuts.  Tliey  have  no  rooted  habits  in  their  good
affections.  "  The  lack  is  not  in  the  soil,  but  in  careful  husbandry  "  (Trench).  The
shallow  are  often  the  first  to  receive  the  good,  as  they  are  also  to  receive  the  evil ;  but
they  are  fickle  and  unreliable.  (4)  If  Nature  has  her  zephyrs,  dews,  and  tempered
sunshine,  so  has  she  her  floods,  tempests,  and  scorching  heats.  So  has  providence  its
"  tribulations  and  persecutions."  No  heavenly  plant  can  be  reared  without  these.  Tha
plant  that  cannot  endure  them  must  perish.  3.  TAe  seed  is  wasted  that  falls  among
thorns.  (I)  The  soil  here  is  neither  deficient  nor  barren.  That  which  can  nourish
briavs  can  nourish  something  better.  There  are  those  who  want  not  capacity,  but
culture.  Not  only  must  the  wheat  be  sown;  the  thorns  also  must  be  rooted  out.
There  are  studious  and  exemplary  persons  who  do  not  examine  themselves  in  order  to
eradicate  the  evils  of  their  neglected  hearts.  (2)  The  neglect  of  the  briar  is  fatal  to
the  wheat.  The  overgrowth  of  "  the  cares  of  the  world  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches"
is  often  more  disastrous  than  "  tribulations  and  persecutions."  Grace  is  more  needed
in  prosperity  than  in  adversity.  (3)  "The  deceitfulness  of  riches"  is  a  significant
phrase.  It  suggests:  (a)  That  riches  promise  more  than  they  give.  (6)  That  men  are
readily  deluded  by  them.  How  plausible  is  the  suggestion  to  one  who  is  "  making
haste  to  be  rich,"  that  it  is  prudent  to  make  provision  for  the  future  1  They  do  not
reflect  that  it  is  still  more  prudent  to  make  provision  for  the  future  life.  How
plausible,  that  to  increase  wealth  is  to  increase  ability  to  do  goodl  The  effect  upon
the  disposition  to  do  good  is  left  out  of  the  question.  The  appetite  for  accumulating
becomes  more  voracious  and  the  liberality  more  stinted  as  men  become  more  wealthy.
(4)  Luke's  version  adds,  "  the  pleasures  of  this  life."  Riches  encourage  the  pursuit  of
these  by  furnishiug  the  means  for  their  gratification.  Luke  adds,  "  the  lust  of  other
things,"  such  as  desires  after  honour,  distinction,  show,  and  the  praise  of  men.  (5)
These  things,  so  esteemed  among  men,  are  by  Christ  described  as  "  briars,"  "  thorns,
"  weeds."  4.  But  the  Sower  has  encouragement.  (1)  Some  of  the  seed  of  the
kingdom  finds  its  way  into  "  good  and  honest  hearts  "  (see  Luke  viii.  15) — hearts
prepared  by  Divine  grace  (see  Acts  xvi.  14).  Ground  made  good  by  ploughing,  weed-
ing, and  dressing.  (2)  Note  the  gradation  in  respect  to  growth,  (a)  In  the  careless
and  unawakened  the  effect  is  nil.  (6)  The  superficial  readily  accept  the  truth,  profess
it,  but,  discovering  that  the  cross  must  go  before  the  crown,  renounce  the  crown  to
avoid  the  cross.  "  Swift  to  come,  swift  to  go."  (c)  In  the  third  class  the  Word  sinks
deeper,  and  gives  more  promise  by  abiding  "  persecutions  and  tribulations."  They  fail
before  the  subtle  power  of  the  world.  Note :  We  may  be  better  than  our  neighbours
and  yet  fall  short  of  heaven,  (d)  But  the  fourth  class  receive  the  Word,  retain  it,  and
come  to  fruitfulness.  The  fruit-bearers  are  the  genuine  disciples  (see  John  xv.  8).
(3)  Note  now  the  gradation  in  respect  to  fruit-bearing.  The  return  is  in  tens — three
tens,  six  tens,  ten  tens.  Tithes  of  produce  are  the  Lord's.  Our  riches  are  what  we
bring  to  God.  Ten,  including  under  it  all  units,  the  factors  of  all  values,  was  by  the
ancients  taken  as  a  symbol  of  richness  and  fulness.  As  there  are  degrees  of  fruitfulness,
so  will  there  be  degrees  of  reward. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  10 — 17. — The  reason  of  the  parable.  After  our  Lord  had  discoursed  in  parables
to  the  multitude  assembled  on  the  seashore,  his  disciples  inquired  of  him  why  he  used
that  mode  of  teaching,  for  hitherto  he  had  spoken  in  simple  and  explicit  language,
The  reply  shows  that  the  design  was —

I.    To    EVINCE    THE    SPIBITUALITT    OF    SAVING    TRUTH.      1.    It   %S    a    mysteiy    tO    be

revealed.  (1)  The  universe  is  dual,  having  material  and  spiritual  complements.
Between  these  there  are  wonderful  correspondences.  There  are,  therelbre,  similitudes
in  abundance  in  the  visible  to  illustrate  the  spiritual.  (2)  Yet  we  cannot,  by  natural
reason  unaided,  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  the  spiritual.  We  know  not  how  to  apply
the  similitudes.  (3)  Revelation  from  God  is  therefore  necessary  to  supply  this  need.
"  The  things  of  God  none  knoweth  save  the  Spirit  of  God."  (4)  So  this  knowledge
comes  to  us  as  a  gift  from  God.  "  Unto  you  it  is  given,"  etc.  (ver.  11 ;  see  also
1  Kings  iii.  9,  12;  Prov.  ii.  6 ;  John  iii.  27;  Jas.  i.  17).  2.  It  is  still  mystery  when
revealed.     (1)  In  its  doctrine.     God  manifested  in  the  flesh  is  the  great  mystery  oi


OH,  XIII,  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  fl

godliness.  Connected  with  the  incarnation  are  the  awful  mysteries  of  the  passion  and
death  of  Christ.  And  with  these,  again,  the  resurrection  and  ascension,  and  the  coming
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (2)  In  its  experience.  What  a  blessed  mystery  is  the  justiBcation
of  a  sinner  before  God  I  Then  his  adoption,  regeneration,  and  sanctification.  And
finally  his  resurrection  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  51).  3.  The  revelation  is  Messed.  (1)  Saving
truth  is  the  highest  truth.  The  things  of  God  are  the  grandest  things.  The  Godward
side  of  all  things  is  their  nobler  side.  The  things  of  God  are  the  things  of  the  soul.
These  are  as  superior  to  the  things  of  the  budy  as  mind  is  superior  to  matter,  (2)  The
gospel  is  the  fuller  revelation  of  the  transcendent  truth.  Of  this  the  "  prophets  and
righteous  men"  of  earlier  times  had  glimpses  which  whetted  their  desire  to  see  the
brighter  day  (cf.  Heb.  xi.  40 ;  1  Pet.  i.  9 — 12).  The  "  eyes  "  of  the  disciples  were
"blessed"  in  beholding  the  Person  of  Messiah  (see  Luke  ii.  30).  Their  "ears"  were
"blessed"  in  listening  to  his  wonderful  doctrine.  (3)  In  these  privileges  the  least  in
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  the  greatest  of  the  prophets  (see  ch.  xi.  11).
And  we  are  no  less  favoured  than  the  first  disciples.  For  there  is  still  the  personal
manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  to  the  believing  heart  (see  John  xiv.  21).

II.    To   LIMIT   THE   BBVBLATION   OF   THE   BAVINO  TBOTH.      1.  It  WOS   tO  hide  it  from

the  false.  (1)  The  disciples  perceived  that  in  using  the  parable  Jesus  intended  to
conceal  his  meaning,  and  this  prompted  their  question.  The  answer  confirmed  their
suspicion.  (2)  It  also  showed  that  it  was  a  judgment  upon  unbelief.  Jesus  did  not
at  first  discourse  in  parables.  He  adopted  this  method  after  his  message  had  been
refused.  The  Pharisees  had  seen  the  grandest  miracles ;  they  had  heard  the  noblest
doctrine ;  they  were  only  moved  to  rancour.  Now  he  abandons  them  to  their  obduracy.
Pharaoh  for  a  long  time  hardened  his  heart;  then  God  hardened  it  for  bim  (see
Exod.  viii.  15,  32;  ix.  12;  x.  20).  A  gross  heart  is  a  heart  stupefied  by  sensual
indulgence  (see  Deut.  xxxii.  15 ;  Ps.  Iviii.  4,  5).  (3)  In  the  passage  cited  from  Isaiah
the  prophet  anticipated  the  judgments  which  came  upon  the  Jewish  nation  in  the
Babylonish  captivity  (see  Isa.  vi.  9 — 12).  But  the  prophecy  also  refers  to  the  days  of
Messiah.  This  is  suggested  in  the  fact  that  it  was  uttered  in  connection  with  a  vision
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  which  was  the  glory  of  Christ  (see  John  xii.  39 — tl).  This
double  or  second  fulfilment  is  recognized  in  the  words,  "in  them  is  fulfilled"  (ver.  14),
dmnKripodTiu,  "  again  fufiUed,"  So  the  parabolic  teaching  of  Jesus  was  a  prelude  to  the
abandonment  of  the  nation  to  the  terrible  consequences  of  their  unbelief.  (4)  The
Gentile  also  has  his  admonition.  Prom  him  that  hath  not,  uses  not,  God's  gifts,  the
gifts  will  be  withdrawn.  They  will  not  see,  therefore  they  shall  not  see.  They  will
not  be  converted,  therefore  thoy  shall  not  be  converted.  God  says  this  at  the  end  of
every  sinner's  life.  Sometimes  he  says  it  before  the  sinner's  life  is  ended.  2.  It  was
to  preserve  it  for  the  true.  (1)  The  parable  encourages  the  diligent.  The  similitude
is  striking  and  pleasing,  and  arrests  aitention.  It  isa  mystery,  or  secret  thing.  Its
meaning  is  not  on  the  surface.  Inquisitiveness  is  excited.  The  prayerful  heart  has
the  help  of  the  Spirit  of  truth.  So  the  parable  is  "  a  shell  that  keeps  good  fruit  for
the  diligent,  but  keeps  it  from  the  slothful "  (Henry).  (2)  A  man  has  what  he  uses.
What  he  uses  not  he  only  seems  to  have  (cf.  Luke  viii.  18).  What  a  man  uses  not  is
wasted ;  but  in  the  using  it  becomes  a  part  of  himself.  Its  resultant  is  in  his  character.
Thus  it  is  preserved.  He  hath  it.  (3)  God  increases  his  gifts  to  those  who  use  them.
Men  act  on  the  same  principle.  Truth  attained  is  the  key  to  truth  concealed.  Fcr  in
all  truth  is  unity  and  harmony.  In  the  disciples  of  Christ  is  fulfilled  the  promised
blessing,  viz.  that  the  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  dim  (Isa.  xxxii,  3),  (4)  Those
who  now  "  see  through  a  glass  darkly "  shall  in  the  world  to  come  see  "  face  to  face."
The  noblest  blessings  are  entailed  upon  the  true  understanding  of  the  mysteries  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  18 — 23. — The  Bower.    (See  antt  on  vers.  1 — 9.)— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  24 — 30. — The  tare*  in  thefidd.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  Church  of  God
at  once  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  This  parable,  like  that  of  the  sower,  was  afterwards
explained  to  the  disciples.  As  the  exposition  explains  the  parable,  and  the  parable
illustrates  the  exposition,  it  is  fitting  they  should  be  considered  together.  From  thia
parable  w«  learn —


48  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING   TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xni.  1—58.

I.  That  this  tira  is  a  scene  op  teial.  1.  The  field  is  the  world.  (1)  So  we
have  it  in  the  interpretation  (ver.  38).  It  is  a  wide  field,  whether  viewed  physically
or  morally.  Still  it  is  the  Lord's  domain.  One  day  it  will  be  universally  Iruitful  to
his  glory  (see  Isa.  xi.  9 ;  Hab.  ii.  14).  (2)  Here  we  are  now  on  our  trial.  This
thought  makes  life  solemn.  The  more  so  since  there  is  no  second  probation.  (3)  The
issues  are  tremendous.  In  quality.  In  duration.  (4)  How  precious  are  the  oppor-
tunities of  the  present !  2.  The  soil  will  nourish  any  seed.  (1)  It  will  nourish  the
good.  This,  as  interpreted  in  the  parable  of  the  sower,  is  the  "  Word  of  the  kingdom  "
(ver.  19).  In  the  interpretation  here  it  is  those  in  whom  that  Word  is  incorporated —
"  the  sons  of  the  kingdom  "  (ver.  38).  Note :  The  sons  of  the  kingdom  are  distinguished
by  their  relation  to  the  truth.  (2)  It  will  nourish  the  evil.  Tho  truth  of  God  is
opposed  by  the  pei-versions  of  Satan.  Those  ruled  by  error  are  the  "  sons  of  the  evil
one."  The  wicked  do  not  consider  their  spiritual  lineage  (see  John  viii.  44 ;  Eph.  ii.
2).  (3)  Note :  Here  are  only  two  classes.  There  are  orders  of  good,  and  there  are
orders  of  evil.  But  if  the  seed  be  not  good,  then  it  is  evil.  To  which  of  these  classes
do  you  belong?  3.  There  are  two  seed-sowers.  (1)  The  Son  of  man,  as  in  the  parable
of  the  sower,  is  one.  The  seed  he  sows  is  good.  He  is  the  incarnation  of  Infinite  good.
Christ  sowed  this  good  seed  in  person  when  he  preached.  He  still  sows  it  by  his
ambassadors  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  (2)  The  enemy,  not  mentioned  in  this  capacity  in  the
parable  of  the  sower,  is  the  other.  The  devil  is  the  enemy  of  Christ  (ver,  39  ;  see  also
Gten.  iii.  15).  So  is  he  the  enemy  of  the  sons  of  Jesus.  The  enemy  is  the  anti-Messiah,
possessed  of  the  devil,  as  was  Judas  Iscariot  (cf.  Isa.  xi.  4 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  8).  (3)  Note
the  differences  in  the  sowing.  The  Son  of  man  sows  openly  in  the  day.  The  evil  one
works  in  the  darkness  of  night.  "While  men  slept"  (ver.  25).  Satan  takes  every
advantage  of  our  drowsiness,  indolence,  lukewarmness.  The  approaches  of  evil  are
stealthy.  (4)  Note  what  follows.  The  evil  one  "  went  his  way."  He  takes  care  not
to  be  seen  in  his  work.  He  can  trust  his  weeds  to  grow.  "  When  the  blade  was  up."
Beware  of  the  seeds  of  evil.    They  may  be  small,  but  they  grow.

II.  That  this  scene  of  trial  presents  difficult  problems.  1.  There  is  the
oriyin  of  moral  evil.  (1)  Jt  puzzled  the  servants  to  see  the  darnel,  or  the  bastard
wheat,  spring  up  among  the  good  wheat  (ver.  27).  We  may  puzzle  ourselves  with
many  things.  (2)  Christ  disclaims  this  authorship.  He  owns  to  sowing  the  good
seed.  He  is  infinitely  good.  Evil  he  can  neither  be  nor  do.  (3)  He  fixes  this  author-
ship upon  Satan.  He  is  the  enemy  alike  of  God  and  man.  Further  than  this  in  the
solution  of  the  question  of  the  origin  of  evil  we  cannot  go.  (4)  Note :  The  personality
of  the  devil  is  here  asserted.  The  author  of  moral  evil  must  be  a  moral,  and  therefore
an  intelligent,  agent.  2.  There  is  the  forbearance  of  Ood  towards  evil.  (1)  This  also
puzzled  the  servants.  "  Wilt  thou  then  that  we  go  and  gather  them  up?"  "  Wilt
thou  that  we  bid  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven,  and  consume  them  ?  "  (Luke  ix.  54 —
56).  Zeal  is  commendable  only  when  it  is  discreet.  (2)  God  tolerates  the  evil  for  tho
sake  of  the  good,  (a)  Were  he  to  root  all  the  wicked  out  of  the  earth,  the  population
would  be  so  reduced  that  the  wild  beasts  could  not  be  kept  under.  (5)  The  graces  of
the  good  are  exercised  by  the  toleration  of  the  wicked,  (c)  So  the  grace  of  God  is
exemplified  in  supi  ortiiig  the  good  amongst  the  evil.  (3)  The  wicked  are  tolerated
to  render  it  possible  for  the  grace  of  God  to  convert  them.  3.  There  is  the  difference
hetween  discipline  and  persecution.  (1)  Persecution  is  an  evil  against  which  zeal  must
be  guarded.  Men  may  think  they  do  God  service  when  they  make  havoc  of  his  Church
(cf.  Acts  viii.  3;  Gal.  i.  13;  1  Tim.  i.  13).  (2)  The  darnel  so  resembles  the  wheat
that  it  may  be  mistaken  for  it.  So  may  the  unbeliever  be  mistaken  for  the  bol.ever,
the  hypocrite  for  the  true  man.  So,  on  the  contrary,  some  saints  are  so  clumsy  and
awkward  that  ihey  may  be  mistaken  for  deceivers.  Where  there  is  a  doubt  let  the
subject  have  the  benefit.  The  wheat  rather  than  the  darnel  has  generally  suffered  from
persecution.  (3)  But  the  toleration  of  darnel,  which  resembles  wheat,  is  no  reason  for
the  toleration  of  thorns,  which  resemble  it  not  (cf.  vei-.  22 ;  1  Cor.  v.  13).  The
teaching  of  our  parable  is  not  directed  against  discipline,  but  against  persecution.  (4)
Note:  Our  Lord  gives  us  no  authority  to  expect  a  perfect  Church  in  this  age.  The
objection  against  joining  a  Church  because  it  is  imperfect  is  unreasonable.

III.  That  the  great  judgment  will  vindioatb  the  ways  of  God.  1.  T/ien
will  he  separate  the  evil  from  the  good.    (1)  Angels  will  b*  employed  in  this  service.


on.  XIII.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDTNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  49

They  are  superior  to  the  prejndioea  of  mortals.  They,  act  also  in  the  presence  and
under  the  direction  of  the  omniscient  Son  of  man.  (2)  There  are  no  masks  in  heaven.
Where  no  evil  is  there  is  nothing  to  conceal.  Society  is  at  its  best  wlien  confidence
has  no  restraint.  (3)  Masks  are  torn  off  in  hell.  Holy  angels  will  unmask  the  wicked.
What  a  spectacle  will  be  the'n  displayed  1  Society  is  nt  its  worst  when  mistrust  has  no
restraint.  2.  Then  will  he  punish  the  wicked.  (1)  The  tares  are  bound  in  bundles.'
Is  this  a  classification  according  to  character?  Are  atheists  to  be  bimilled  together?
Blasphemers  ?  Epicures  ?  Persecutors  ?  Hypocrites  ?  (2)  Is  the  bundling  pro-
miscuous? Will  the  scientist  be  bound  in  the  same  bundle  with  the  sot?  (3)  "  Bind
them  in  bundles  to  burn  them."  The  Son  of  man  "shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace
of  fire"(ver.  42).  What  a  prison  I  What  an  imprisonntientl  (4)  Despair  has  its
woeful  expression.  "  There  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth  "  (ver.  42).  3.  Then
will  he  reward  the  good.  (1)  They  will  enjoy  secwrity,  "  Gather  the  wheat  into  ray
barn"  (ver.  30;  Ps.  1,  5).  Seourity  from  wind  and  weather.  Beyond  the  mutations
of  probation.  (2)  They  will  enjoy  distinction,  "  In  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."
"  Now  we  are  the  sons  of  God."  Then  will  the  grandeur  of  this  sonship  appear  (of.
John  XX.  17  ;  1  John  iii.  2).  The  palace.  The  throne  (Rev.  iii.  2 1).  (3)  They  will
be  invested  with  glory.  "  Shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  "  (of.  Judg.  v.  31 ;  Dan.  xii.  3).
In  the  glory  of  purity  like  the  "  Snn  of  Eighteousness."  In  glorified  bodies  like  that
of  Jesua.  They  shall  not  "  burn  "  like  the  wicked,  but  "  shine."  (4)  Who  hath  ears,
let  him  hear  how  tenderly  God  cares  for  the  good. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  31 — 35. — Parable  and  prophecy.  The  spirit  of  prophecy  in  ancient  times
enshrined  itself  in  parables.  The  prophecy  of  Balaam,  accordingly,  is  called  "  his
parable  "  (Numb,  xxiii.  18).  Under  the  parable  of  two  eagles  and  a  vine  Bzekiel  shows
forlh  the  judgments  of  God  upon  Jerusalem  for  revolting  from  Babylon  to  Egypt  (Ezek.
xviii. ;  see  also  xxiv.  3 ;  Micah  ii.  4 — 6 ;  Hab.  ii.  6).  So  are  the  parables  of  Christ
prophetic.     Observe —

I.  That  Jesus  taught  in  parables  in  pursuance  of  prophecy.  1.  The  end  of
that  teaching  wan  predicted.  (1)  The  end  was  to  hide  the  saving  truth  from  those  who
proved  themselves  unworthy  of  it.  Our  Lord  did  not  assume  the  parable  until  his
plainer  teaching,  with  its  miraculous  demonstrations,  had  been  wickedly  rejected.  (2)
Ibis  judgment  upon  the  jiroud,  obstinate,  and  sensual  people  was  foretold  (cf.  Isa.
vi.  9 — 12  ;  see  homily  on  vers.  10 — 17).  (3)  The  parable,  at  once,  so  wisely  enshrined
the  saving  truth  as  richly  to  reward  the  diligence  of  the  prayerful.  To  these  the
parables  of  Christ  are  the  utterance  of  "  things  hidden  from  the  foundation  of  the
world"  (cf.  Rom.  xvi.  25;  1  Cor.  ii.  7;  Eph.  iii.  9  ;  Col.  i.  26).  2.  So  was  the  means
to  the  end.  (1)  Asaph,  to  whom  the  authorship  of  the  psalm  cited  by  Matthew  in  the
text  is  ascribed,  was  a  "  seer,"  or  prophet  (see  2  Chron.  xxix.  30).  Under  the
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  he  predicted  that  Messiah  should  speak  to  the  people  in
parables.  For  the  psalm  itself  contains  no  parable.  (2)  In  uttering  these  "dark
sayings,"  Messiah  was  to  "  establish  a  testimony  in  Jacob,"  and  to  afipoint  "a  law  in
Israel"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  5).  These  are  distinct  from  the  testimony  and  Law  from  Sinai,
which  were  given  long  before  the  days  of  Asaph  or  David.  What,  then,  can  they  be
but  the  law  destined  to  emanate  from  Zion  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem  ?
(cf.  Isa.  ii  3).  (3)  The  psalmist,. moreover,  speaks  of  these  as  to  be  "given  to  the
generation  to  come ; "  literally,  "  the  latter  generation,"  or  the  generation  of  the  latter
days.  (4)  In  this  mysterious  teaching,  therefore,  Jesus  exhibited  another  mark  of  his
Messiahship.  The  unbelieving  Jews  seek  in  vain  for  any  mark  of  Messiahship  which  is
not  verified  in  him.

II.  That  the  parables  before  us  mat  be  viewed  as  prophecies.  1.  They
describe  the  gospel  in  its  feeble  beginning.  (1)  How  a|ipirently  insignificant  is  the
grain  of  mustard  seed !  So  apparently  insignificant  was  Jesus  in  his  feeble  infancy ;  in
the  meanne.'js  of  his  circurristances;  in  the  social  grade  of  his  few  foilowiirs.  Fisher-
men of  Galilee  1  "  Hath  any  of  the  rulers  believed  on  him,  or  of  the  Pharisees?  "  (2)
How  apparently  insignificant  is  the  lump  of  leaven  as  compared  with- the  lump  of  meal !
How  are  these  words  of  Jesus  uttered  in  the  air  of  Galilee  so  to  multiply  as  to  rever-
berate in  every  human  ear  the  world  over  ?  How  is  this  company  of  fishermen  to  preach
the  gospel  to  every  creature?     2.  They  describe  the  gospel  in  its  secret  power.    (1)  The

MATTHEW n.  "


50  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cm.  xm.  1—58.

grain  of  mustard  geed  is  small;  but  it  is  a  seed.  It  has  in  it  an  unlimited  power  of
growth  and  multiplication.  So  Jesus  has  in  himself  illimitable  lesources.  See  his
power  flashing  from  him  in  miracles.  Physical.  Moral.  (2)  The  "  little  leaveu,"  also,
possesses  wonderful  potency.  The  word  of  Christ  differs  from  ever »  other  word  in  that
it  carries  in  it  the  energy  of  omnipotence.  During  the  first  year  of  the  ministry  of
Jesus  we  read  of  "  seventy  disciples."  Note :  They  were  not  seventy  units,  but  seventy
preachers.  In  three  years  "  the  number  of  the  names  was  one  hundred  and  twenty."
After  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  the  disciples  multiplied  by  thousands  (Acts  ii.  41 ;
iv.  4).  (3)  The  gospel  has  not  only  won  its  converts  by  millions,  but  it  has
demolished  the  idolatrous  systems  of  the  classic  nations.  It  is  now  undermining  the
colossal  systems  of  the  East.  It  is  in  the  van  of  all  true  science  and  civilization.  3.
They  describe  the  gospel  in  its  ultimate  triumph.  (1)  These  parables  do  not  predict
that  the  visible  Church  by  the  gospel  is  to  convert  the  whole  world  befure  Christ  comes"
again.  For  this  would  oppose  his  own  teaching,  as  \<%en  he  advises  us  that  at  his
coming  the  moral  state  of  the  world  will  sadly  resemble  that  of  the  antediluvians  in
the  days  of  Noalj  (see  Luke  xvii.  24 — 30).  Paul  also  declares  that  "  in  the  last  days
perilous  times  shall  come ; "  that  "  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,
deceiving,  and  being  deceived  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  1, 13).  (2)  The  interval  of  the  seed  lying  in
the  soil  is  that  portion  of  the  parable  of  the  mustard  seed  to  which  may  be  compared
'  the  period  through  which  we  are  passing,  extending  from  the  first  to  the  second  advent
of  Christ.  So  with  the  leaven.  Leaven  works  secretly  in  the  meal  for  a  long  time
before  its  power  is  visible  in  a  universal  commotion.  As  yet  the  kingdom  of  God  is
without  observation.  It  comes  secretly  in  the  heart  without  ostentation  or  display,
(y)  The  parables  carry  us  beyond  the  time  of  the  coming  of  Christ.  They  carry  us
forward  to  the  millennium,  in  which  season  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  will  have  become
a  great  tree,  in  which  the  birds  of  the  air — all  nations  and  peoples — will  find  rest  and
shelter  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxx.  9,  11 ;  Isa.  Ix.  1,  2 ;  Amos  ix.  15).  Then  will  the  work  of  the
leaven  be  visible  in  the  whole  lump.  "  We  cannot  consider  these  words,  the  whole,  less
than  a  prophecy  that  the  leaven  shall  yet  pervade  all  nations  and  purify  all  life"
(Trench).  Note:  Tlie  gosi  el,  like  leaven,  wurks  silently  and  insensibly  in  the  heart
(see  Ps.  cxix.  11).  The  Word,  like  fermenting  leaven,  is  quick  and  powerful  (Heb.  iv.
12).  It  works  "  until  the  whole  is  leavened,"  or  brought  into  similitude  to  itself.
Leaven  does  not  W(jrk  in  corn  unground.  So  neither  does  the  gospel  work  on  the
unbroken  heart.  The  similes  in  these  parables  are  encouraging  to  those  who  work  for
Chiist  and  souls.  1'he  same  gospel  which  now  converts  the  individual  believer  will
convert  the  race  in  the  coming  age. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  36 — 43. — The  tares  in  the  field.    (See  ante,  on  vers.  24 — 30.) — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  44 — 46. — The  chief  good.  The  parable  of  the  treasure  and  that  of  the  pearl  as
they  are  here  together  may  well  be  considered  together,  for  the  subject  is  the  same.
The  repetition  emphasizes  the  importance  and  value  of  the  gospel.  These  parables  set
before  us —

1.  The  chief  good.  1.  What  is  it  t  (1)  It  is  a  "  treasure."  The  allusion  here
may  be  to  a  pot  of  money  or  a  casket  of  jewels  "  hidden  in  a  field ; "  or  possibly  to  a
mine  of  precious  ore.  It  is  the  "pearl  of  great  price" — a  stone  of  incomparable  size,
purity,  and  beauty.  But  these  are  only  figures.  (2)  Christ  unites  in  himself  all
qualities  of  excellence  and  value.  He  is  the  King  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (cf.  Luke
xvii.  20 — 25).  The  monarch  is  the  representative  of  the  kingdom's  wealth  and  glory
(cf.  John  i.  16;  Cnl.  i.  19;  ii.  3).  (3)  In  him  are  the  treasures  of  pardons  for  the
guilty.  He  has  paid  the  great  price  of  our  redemption.  In  him  also  are  the  riches  of
purity  for  the  believer.  Purity  is  the  title  to  the  riches  of  the  heaven  of  everlasting
glory.  2.  Why  is  it  hidden  f  (1)  For  the  rousing  of  our  faculties  and  quickening  of
our  diligence  (seeProv.  ii.  1—7).  This  stimulus  is  an  important  factor  in  our  moral
education  llie  miner  becomes  skilful  in  mining.  So  the  merchaniman  in  estimating
the  quality  and  value  of  pearls.  (2)  The  diligence  thus  called  forth  enhances  the  value
of  the  treasure.  We  value  things  according  to  the  price  we  will  pay.  Also  according
to  the  price  we  have  paid.  The  endurance  of  our  faith  is  intiuiately  associated  with
the  thoroughness  of  our  repentance.     (3)  They  are  hidden  t«  conceal  them  from  the


OH.  xiii.  1—68.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  61

unworthy,  (a)  Lest  they  should  insult  them.  The  swine  will  trample  on  the  pearl,
and  turn  and  rend  the  merchantman.  (6)  As  a  judgment  upon  their  brutishness  (of.
vers.  10 — 1 5  ;  Isa.  vi.  9).  3.  From  whom  are  they  hidden  t  (1)  From  the  wise  and
understanding,  viz.  in  their  own  conceits  (cf.  oh.  xi.  25 — 27).  Not  many  of  our  sophs
are  called.  (2)  From  the  self-righteous.  From  the  Pharisees,  who  were  notably  of
this  order,  especially  it  was  that  Christ  taught  in  parables  to  hide  the  saving  truth.
(3)  From  the  sensual.  The  treasure  of  the  gospel  is  spiritual.  It  is,  therelore,  to  be
discerned  by  the  spiritual  senses.  The  grosser  sensualism  of  the  flesh  blinds  the  finer
sense  of  the  spirit  (cf.  John  xiv.  9).  (4)  Prom  the  worldly.  They  can  only  see  the
surface  of  the  field.  A  nobleman  once  gave  a  celebrated  actress  a  Bible,  telling  her  at
the  same  time  that  there  was  a  treasure  in  it.  She,  thinking  he  meant  religion,  laid
the  Bible  aside.  She  died,  and  all  she  had  was  sold.  The  person  who  bought  the
Bible,  on  turning  over  its  leaves,  found  a  five  hundred  pound  note  in  it.  Had  the
actress  read  that  book  she  might  not  only  have  found  the  note,  but  the  "  Pearl  of  great
price."

II.  Its  DI8C0TEBT.  1.  Where  is  it  found*  (1)  In  this  present  world.  "The  field
is  the  world  "  (ver.  38).  (o)  In  that  part  of  the  world  called  Palestine  the  treasure
was  once  hidden.  Now  the  Pearl  is  to  be  found  wherever  the  merchantman  with
sufficient  diligence  may  seek  for  it  (see  John  iv.  21 — 24).  (5)  In  this  present  world
we  are  probationers  for  eternity.  If  we  miss  the  opportunities  of  this  probation  we
have  no  promise  of  a  second.  There  are  no  treasures  of  salvation  for  the  richest  of  the
rich  men  in  hell  (see  Luke  xvi.  26).  (2)  In  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in
nature.  God's  plan  of  salvation  is  not  written  upon  the  ethereal  dome  in  the  fire  of  the
stars.  It  is  not  uttered  by  the  tongue  of  thunder.  We  neither  hear  it  in  the  roar  of
the  sea  nor  in  the  whispers  of  the  groves.  It  is  the  theme  of  holy  revelation  (see  John
V.  39).  (3)  In  the  ordinances  of  religion.  These  are  fittingly  called  "  means  of  grace."
In  them  the  Word  of  revelation  is  read,  expounded,  preached.  The  Holy  Spirit  of
inspiration  is  present.  There  by  his  own  appointment  (cf.  Exod.  xxix.  43 ;  ch.  xviii.
20).  (4)  In  the  believing  heart.  The  blessings  of  salvation  are  revealed  to  faith  (see
Rom.  X.  4 — 10).  2.  How  is  it  to  he  fmi/nd  t  (1)  Sometimes  it  may  be  found  without
seeding.  The  gospel  found  the  Gentiles  when  they  sought  not  for  it  (see  Rom.  x.  19
— 21).  Sinners  in  the  mid-career  of  madness  have  been  arrested  by  a  word.  (2)  It  is
always  to  be  found  by  seeking.  The  miner  may  infallibly  strike  upon  this  lode.  The
merchantman  need  never  miss  the  Pearl  of  great  price  (cf.  ch.  vii.  7,  8).  (3)  The
purpose  of  the  seeker  must  be  simple.  To  the  "  babes  "  ia  revealed  the  wisdom  hidden
from  the  "  wise  and  understanding  "  (ch.  xi.  25).

III.  Its  EFFECT.  1.  It  Jills  the  soul  with  Joy.  (1)  It  brings  the  greatest  relief.  We
have  the  treasure  which  discharges  all  our  heavy  liabilities  to  God.  It  delivers  ui
from  liability  to  the  damnation  of  hell.  (2)  It  assures  the  highest  hope.  For  what
hope  is  higher  than  the  hope  of  heaven?  Holiness  is  the  qualification  and  assurance
for  that  hope.  (3)  It  is  the  purest  joyi  What  joy  can  be  purer  than  the  love  of  God  ?
2.  /(  inspires  a  holy  vigilance.  (1)  The  finder  of  the  hidden  treasure  bides  it  stiil
until  he  can  make  it  his  own.  Note :  The  parable  does  not  pronounce  one  way  or
another  upon  the  ethical  question  as  to  how  far  a  man  may  take  advantage  of  the
ignorance  of  his  neighbour.  The  teaching  of  the  simile  is  a  commendation  of  vigilance.
The  true  treasure  is  in  everybody's  field.  One  is  not  deprived  of  it  in  order  that
another  may  be  enriched.  But  the  unbelieving  are  ready  to  barter  for  folly  that  which
the  wise  will  buy  at  any  cost.  (2)  But  is  it  not  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  confess
Christ  ?  Undoubtedly.  But  how  can  a  man  confess  him  before  he  has  him  ?  The
treasure  is  hidden  only  while  it  is  in  the  prospect  of  possession.  3.  It  begets  the  true
spirit  of  sacrifice.  (1)  The  wise  man  buys  the  field ;  then  the  treasure  becomes  liis.
(2)  But  what  does  he  give  for  it  ?  "  All  that  he  has  "  (see  ch.  xix.  16—22).  (3)  But
what  has  a  man  before  he  finds  Christ?  Nothing  but  sin.  What,  then,  does  he
"sell  "  ?  Simply  sin — all  his  sin.  Blessed  riddance  1  (4)  What,  then,  does  he  gain?
Christ.     In  Christ  he  has  everything  worth  possessing.     Blessed  exchange  I — J.  A.  M.

Vers,  47 — 50. — The  drag-net.  The  import  of  this  parable  is  similar  to  that  of  the
tares,  though  perhaps  of  wider  application.  The  theatre  of  the  earlier  parable  is  the
land,  which  in  prophecy  designates  the  Hebrew  people ;  while  the  sea,  in  the  latter,


52  THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xui.  1— 58.

points  to  the  Gentile  nations  (of.  Isa.  v.  30;  Dan.  vii.  2,  3;  Rev.  xiii.  1;  xvii.  1,  15).
The  kingdom  of  heaven  was  first  offered  to  the  Jews,  and  when  they  rejected  it,  it  was
then  carried  to  the  Gentiles  (of.  eh.  xxi.  43 ;  Acts  xiii.  46,  47).     Note —

I.  Thb  disciples  oj'  Jebus  abb  FI8HBB9  OF  MEN.  1.  To  this  Service  they  are  called.
(1)  Some  of  the  first  disciples  were  literally  fishermen  (ch.  iv.  17 — 22).  The  distinc-
tion of  Christ's  servants  is  spiritual  rather  than  st  cial.  (2)  From  the  lower  thoy  were
promoted  to  the  higher  fishing-grounds.  In  calling  them  to  hicome  fishers  of  men
Jesus  said  practically,  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  net."  Their  call  was  a
parable,  a  prophecy,  and  a  sermon.  (3)  Jeaus  found  the  fishermen  diligent  in  their
humble  calling  and  promoted  them.  It  is  a  dishonour  to  the  gospel  to  send  the
weaklings  of  a  family  into  the  Church.  2.  For  this  service  they  were  equipped.  (1)
Christ  gave  them  his  drag-net.  This  is  the  "  Word  of  the  kingdom."  This  is  a  drag-
net that  sweeps  all  before  it.  (2)  He  taught  them  bow  to  use  it.  They  heard  his
preaching.  They  went  forth  under  his  commission  and  preached.  (3)  His  almighty
energy  went  with  them.  The  physical  miracles  they  wrought  exemplified  the  corre-
sponding moral  power  of  the  truth  they  preached.  (4)  He  gave  them  remarkable
pledges  of  future  success.  Conspicuous  amongst  these  was  the  miraculous  draught  of
fislies.    That  was  a  prophetic  anticipation  of  the  work  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.

II.  The  men  they  qatheb  abb  "  of  bvebt  kind."  1.  The  good  are  enclosed  in  the
Ohwch.  (1)  These  were  the  fish  recognized  as  dean  according  to  the  Law,  viz.  such  as
have  both  "  fins  and  scales  "  (see  Lev.  xi.  9, 10).  By  means  of  their  fins  they  rist,-  to
the  surface  and  swim  in  the  purer  water  and  under  the  clearer  light  of  the  heavens.
The  metallic  lustre  of  their  scales  suggests  the  "  armour  of  light."  (2)  Anciently,  the
clean  creatures  represented  the  Hebrew  people,  who  were  the  people  of  the  covenant,  in
contradistinction  to  the  unclean  Gentiles,  who  were  "  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of
Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenant  of  promise,  being  without  hope  and  atheists  in
the  world."  (3)  Now  they  stand  for  the  morally  good  as  opposed  to  the  wicked.
"  For  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  God  and  worketh  righteousness  is  accepted  of
him."  (4)  Of  the  good  among  men,  as  among  fishes,  there  are  many  varieties.  Religion
does  not  destroy  individuality.  But  they  have  the  common  marks  of  Christian
discipleship.  2.  The  had  also  are  included.  (1)  These  are  represented  by  the  unclean
fish ;  those  without  fins  or  scales,  as  the  eel,  whose  habits  are  foul,  writhing  in  the  mud.
We  say  of  cunning  men  that  they  "  wriggle  like  eels."  They  may  have  fins  like  the
shark,  but  if  they  hi\ve  not  also  scales  they  are  unclean.  Men  of  rapacious  dispositions
we  still  call  "  sharks."  (2)  Anciently,  the  unclean  creatures  denoted  the  "  sinners  of
the  Gentiles,"  as  opposed  to  the  "  saints  "  or  "  holy  people  "  of  Israel.  (3)  Now,  since
national  distinctions  in  religion  are  abolished,  the  unclean  are  the  unbelievers  of  every
nation,  Jew  as  well  as  Gentile.  3.  I%e  visible  Ohurch  is  there/ore  imperfect.  (1)  The
world  is  a  vast  sea,  and  the  sons  of  men  are  "  in  it  things  creeping  innumerable  both
small  and  great"  (Fs.  civ.  25).  Men  in  their  natural  state  are  "like  fishes  in  the  sea,
and  moving  things  that  have  no  ruler  over  them  "  (Hab.  i.  14).  (2)  Frum.this  mass
multitudes  are  gathered  into  the  net  of  the  Church,  Some  of  the  evil  becomes  trans-
formed by  true  conversion.  Others  are  conveited  only  in  semblance.  (3)  This  mixed
state  of  things  is  evident  in  wide  Christendom,  It  is  no  less  real,  though  not  equally
evident,  amongst  communicants.

III.  The  good  and  the  wiokbd  abb  destined  to  a  final  sbpabation.  1.  The
wicked  will  he  separated  to  destruction,  (1)  They  are  "severed,"  separated  with
violence,  as  by  cutting  or  rending.  They  will  with  reluctance  yield  to  this  final
separation  from  the  good  and  from  their  hopes.  (2)  They  will  be  severed  by  the
"  angels."  The  angels  of  heaven  can  distinguish  between  the  hypocrite  and  the  true
n  an,  which  the  angels  of  the  Church  cannot  do.  As  the  tares  among  the  wheat  in  the
Jewish  field,  so  are  the  bad  fish  among  the  good  in  the  Gentile  net  (cf.  vers.  28 — 30,
41).  (3)  "  And  shall  cast  them  into  the  furnace  of  fire."  This  is  in  allusion  to  the
Eastern  punishment  of  burning  alive.  If  figures  do  not  come  up  to  the  reality,  the
punishment  of  the  sinner  must  be  fearful  in  the  extreme.  Note :  The  furnace  of  fire  is
reserved  for  unworthy  members  of  Churches.  (4)  "  There  shall  be  weeping  and  gnash-
ing of  teeth."  The  agony  of  despair.  The  distress  of  impotent  resentment.  This,
after  the  burning,  shows  that  the  burning  of  the  wicked  is  not  their  consumption.
Destruction,  in  Scripture,  differs  from  annihilation.     2.  The  good  will  be  separated  to


OH.  XIII.  1-53.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  53

salvation.  (1)  Salvation  from  the  associations  of  the  wicked.  Those  associations  are
now  uncongenial.  They  are  contaminating.  They  are  damaging  to  the  better  reputa-
tion. In  the  new  earth  there  will  be  "  no  more  sea  "  (Eev.  xxi.  1).  There  will  be  no
more  Gentiles  in  wickedness ;  all  will  be  Israelites  in  goodness.  (2)  The  gooii  will  be
"  gathered  into  vessels."  Are  not  these  the  antitheses  of  the  "  bundles  "  into  which  the
wicked  are  gathered,  as  in  the  coiresponding  parable  of  the  tares ?  Does  not  this
suggest  order  and  class  in  heavenly  society  ?  (3)  The  time  of  this  separation  is  when
the  net  shall  be  "  filled."  The  gospel  must  first  fulfil  its  commission  in  witnessing  to
all  the  world  (cf.  Isa.  Iv.  10, 11 ;  oh.  xxiv.  14),— J.  A.  M.

Vers,  51,  52, — Hie  Householder.  This  is  the  last  of  a  connected  series  of  parables.
It  was  intended  to  emphasize  and  fix  upon  the  minds  of  the  disciples  the  lessons  of
those  already  spoken.     It  has  also  precious  lessons  of  its  own.

I.  Ghkist  18  THE  Householder.  1.  He  is  the  Head  of  a  spiritual /(J-mily,  (1)  He
is  the  second  Adam  (cf.  Bom.  v.  14 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  45  ;  Eph.  v.  31,  32).  (2)  He  is  the
Founder  of  the  new  creation.  "  The  Father  of  tlje  everlasting  age "  (cf,  Isa.  ix.  6 ;
Col.  i,  15;  Kev.  iii.  14),  (3)  His  children  are  the  sons  of  God.  They  are  the  children
of  the  everlasting  covenant.  "  Children  of  Abraham's  faith."  (4)  They  are  the
"  children  of  God,  being  children  of  the  resurrection."  Spiritually  risen  with  Christ
already.  Entitled  to  the  better  resurrection  of  the  last  day.  2.  He  has  an  arr^ple
treasure  for  their  maintenance,  (1)  "  His  treasure."  The  allusion  is  to  the  house-
holder's store  for  the  maintenance  of  his  establishment.  (2)  The  bountifulness  of  the
store  is  expressed  in  the  phrase,  "things  new  and  old.  The  old  produce  is  not
exhausted  when  the  fruits  of  the  new  year  are  gathered  in  (cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  9, 10).  (3)
The  stores  of  Christ  are  tlje  infinite  treasure  of  his  wisdom  and  knowledge.  These  he
derived  not  from  human  sources.  He  never  studied  under  the  doctors  of  the  Hebrew
colleges.  Yet  even  at  the  early  age  of  twelve  he  could  astonish  them.  He  drew  his
resources  from  heaven  (cf.  John  iii.  36 ;  Col.  i.  19).  (4)  This  store  is  for  his  children
first  (see  Eph.  i  6 — 8 ;  Col.  ii,  9,  10).  The  servants  also  have  their  nourishment.
The  dogs  may  he  thankful  for  the  crumbs.  The  world  is  indebted  to  the  gospel  for
the  better  elements  of  its  civilization.

II.  He  bblnqbth  forth  oot  of  his  TaBAsnRE  thinqs  new  and  old.  1.  He  discovers
a  monarchy  in  humility.  (1)  This  was  a  new  thing.  The  Jews  expected  the  King
Messiah  to  appear  after  the  type  of  Solomon  in  all  his  glory.  They  had  yet  to  learn
that  the  "  Greater  than  Solomon  "  is  Jesus  in  Ids  humility.  The  dignity  and  glory
of  suffering  had  never  been  so  seen.  (2)  Yet  was  this  thing  of  the  New  Testament
also  in  the  Old.  Messiah  must  first  come  io  humiliation  for  purposes  of  redemption
before  he  can  appear,  as  he  will  in  his  second  advent,  "  without  sin  unto  salvation  "
(sea  Luke  xxiv.  25 — ^27).  (3)  In  the  depths  of  his  humility  he  asserts  Divine  claims.
He  claims  to  be  the  Son  of  God  (see  John  x.  36).  To  be  the  Lord  of  the  sabbath  day
(see  Mark  ii.  27,  28 ;  Luke  vi.  5).  To  be  David's  Lord  though  David's  Son  (ch.
xxii.  41 — 46).  To  have  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins  (see  Mark  ii.  7;  Luke  v.
21 — 26).  2.  He  proclaims  a  spiritual  kingdom.  (1)  This  was  a  new  thing.  Secular
kingdoms  were  old  enough.  Bo  familiar  were  these  that  the  Jews  expected  Messiah
to  establish  a  "  kingdom  under  the  whole  heavaa''  after  their  type  (see  Dan.  vii.  27).

(2)  What,  then,  was  their  astonisliment,  while  they  were  dreaming  of  release  from  the
Koman  yoke,  and  ruling  the  Gentiles  with  a  rod  of  iron,  to  be  told  that  the  kingdom
"  conieth  not  with  observation ; "  that  it  is  a  spiritual  kingdom  "  within,"  in  the  heart  ?

(3)  What  was  their  astonishment  when  they  heard  the  requisites  which  made  it  hard
for  a  rich  man  to  enter  the  kingdom?  (4)  When  they  heard  that  love  is  the  principle
of  the  kinj;dom?  Not  only  love  supreme  to  God,  but  love  also  to  the  brotherhood.
Love,  moreover,  to  our  neighbour,  which  is  every  man.  Love  even  to  our  enemies.
Such  love  as  constrains  us  to  bless  when  we  are  cursed,  to  requite  hatred  with  benevo-
lence, to  answer  persecution  with  supplication  (see  ch.  v.  43—45).  3.  In  his  gospel  he
fulfill  the  Law.  (1)  That  Messiah  should  dignify  and  perfect  the  Law  of  Moses  was
nothing  new  to  the  Jews.  They  looked  for  this.  But  the  manner  of  its  accomplisli-
inent  astonished  them.  (2)  They  did  not  see  that  in  his  death  he  should  become  the
antitype  of  all  the  sacrifices;  that  summing  up  in  himself  all  their  virtues,  and
infinitely  more,  they  should  disappear,  and  henceforth  be  seen  only  in  his  cross.    (3)


54  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiii.  1-58.

It  was  new  that  henceforth  the  ablutions  of  Leviticus  should  be  seen  in  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  (4)  It  was  new  that  the  gospel  should  so  bring  out  tlie  spirit  of  the
"Law  of  commandments  contained  in  ordinances"  as  to  render  obsolete  the  letter.
(5)  Yet  all  these  things  were  as  old  as  the  Law  itstlf,  and  were  likewise  testified  by
the  prophets  (of.  ch.  v.  17  ;  Bom.  iii.  21 ;  x.  4;  xv.  8;  Gal.  iii.  24).

III.  He  encourages  the  sons  of  his  household.  1.  Ee  instructs  them  in  his
wisdom.  (1)  Teaching :  (a)  The  doctrines  of  his  gospel.  (6)  The  evidences  of  his
religion,  (c)  The  practical  ends  for  wliich  it  is  instituted.  Withont  Divine  illumina-
tion no  man  can  attiiiii  to  this  knowledge.  (2)  The  question,  "  Have  ye  understood
all  these  things?  "  suggests :  (a)  That  it  is  the  will  of  Gljrist  that  those  who  read  and
hear  his  Word  should  understand  it.  This  is  an  encouragement  to  study.  (6)  That
Divine  truths  must  not  be  lightly  passed  over,  (c)  That  he  is  ready  to  expKin  to  his
disciples  what  may  be  obscure.  This  is  an  encouragement  to  prayer.  (3)  Tlu  answer,
"  Yea,  Lord,"  shows  that  the  explanations  which  the  disciples  received  of  the  parables
of  the  sower  and  of  the  tares  opened  to  them  the  meaning  of  the  other  parables  (cf.
Mark  iv.  13).  Truth  is  the  key  to  truth  (see  Prov.  viii.  8,  9;  xiv.  6).  2.  He  com-
mends their  proficiency.  (1)  He  styled  them  scribes.  The  scribe  among  the  Jews  was
a  person  versed  in  the  letter  of  the  Old  Testament.  Some  of  them  had  knowledge  also
in  its  spirit.  Ezra  was  "  a  ready  scribe  in  the  Law  of  Moses."  He  "  prepared  his
heart  to  seek  the  Law  of  the  Lord  "  (Ezra  vii.  6,  10).  (2)  But  the  disciples  of  Jesus
were  more.  They  were  made  "  disciples  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Herein  they
were  greater  than  the  greatest  of  the  old  prophets  (see  ch.  xi.  11).  Note :  He  who
undertakes  to  preach  Christ  should  know  Christ.  A  minister  may  be  a  linguist,  a
mathematician,  a  scientist,  a  politician,  but  unless  he  is  "  instructed  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven  "  he  is  not  qualified  (see  2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17).  (3)  Like  his  Lord  :  (a)  He  must
Aaw  a  "  treasure."  (6)  From  it  he  must "  bring  forth.  He  must  not  bury  his  talents.
A  good  pastor  must  not,  like  a  miser,  hoard  his  knowledge.  He  must  not,  like  a
merchant,  make  gain  of  it.  Like  a  "  householder,"  as  a  father,  he  n[iust  deal  it  out
generously,  yet  with  discretion.  (4)  He  too  must  bring  forth  "  things  new  and  old."
No  man  can  understand  the  Old  Testament  but  by  means  of  the  New.  The  Old
Testament  is  the  best  commentary  upon  the  New.  Old  truths  should  come  forth  with
new  expression,  and  with  new  affection  and  emotion. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  53 — 58. — Prejudice,  "When  Jesus  had  finished  these  parables" — ^this  cycle
or  system  of  parables,  affoiding  a  general  view  of  the  conditions  of  the  Church  under
the  new  dispensations — "he  departed"  from  Capernaum.  "And  coming  into  his  own
country,"  arriving  at  Nazareth  across  the  lake  (see  Luke  iv.  16),  he  taught  the  Naza-
renes  in  their  synagogue.  They  had  formerly  rejected  him,  and  now  he  receives  from
them  no  better  treatment.    In  the  narrative  before  us  we  see  evidence  of —

I.  The  unbeasonableness  of  rREjoDiOB.  1.  The  Nazarenes  were  astonished  at  his
wisdom.  (1)  His  parables,  the  fame  of  which  had  piobably  reached  them,  evinced  it.
Not  only  do  they  open  the  mysteries  of  spiiitual  wealth.  They  propliesied  also  things
to  come.  A  fool  could  no  more  utter  a  parable  than  a  cripple  gracefully  dance  (see
Prov.  xxvi.  7).  (2)  It  was  evinced  in  his  teaching  in  their  synagogue.  Not  only  was
his  doctrine  astonishing,  but  also  the  manner  in  which  he  was  wont  to  confound  the
diictors  when  they  ventured  to  question  him.  2.  So  were  they  astonished  at  his  miracles.
(1)  He  had,  probably,  formerly  wrought  miracles  among  them.  The  fame  of  his
wonderful  works  at  Capernaum  had  certainly  reached  them  (see  Luke  iv.  23).  They
had  ocular  proofs  of  his  power  in  that  he  now  "  laid  his  hand  upon  a  few  sick  folk,
and  healed  them  "  (see  Mark  vi.  5).  (2)  The  wisdom  and  power  of  Jesus  should  have
conducted  them  to  a  believing  recognition  of  his  Person.  They  rested  in  astonishment.
Astonishment  is  no  substitute  for  faith.  It  can  consist  with  prejudices.  Miracles  may
confirm,  but  they  cannot  produce,  faith.  Faith  is  of  the  heart.  It  is  in  the  honest
heart /rom  (?o(i.  3.  They  rejected  the  evidence  of  both.  Prejudice  has  its  reasons,  but
they  refute  themselves.  (1)  The  Nazarenes  rejected  the  claims  of  Jesus  because  they
did  not  see  whence  he  derived  his  wisdom  and  power.  The  rational  conclusion  would
have  been  that  if  he  did  not  receive  them  from  the  doctors  of  the  Law  or  from  any
human  source,  then  he  must  have  had  them  from  heaven.  (2)  They  objected  that  he
was  the  "carpenter's  Son."    But  the  carpenter  was  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  David


)H.  xm.  1—68]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  65

(see  ch.  i.  20 ;  Luke  i.  27).  And  Messiah  must  be  the  "  Son  of  David  "  in  order  to
satisfy  the  prophets.  (3)  They  objected  that  "  his  mother  was  called  Mary."  She
was  of  too  humble  a  station  to  have  any  splendid  title.  Yet  was  this  Mary  by  descent
a  princess  of  the  great  house  of  David.  Moreover,  she  was  the  mother  of  the  Son  of
God.  Mary's  miraculous  conception  seems  to  have  been  unknown  to  them.  Prejudices
are  fostered  by  ignorance.  (4)  They  could  name  his  brothers,  and  his  sisters  they  knew,
though  they  did  not  deem  thern  worthy  of  being  named.  Nute :  Those  who  should
know  Christ  best  are  often  most  ignorant  of  him.  "  Mean  and  prejudiced  spirits  are
apt  to  judge  of  men  by  their  education,  and  to  inqmre  more  into  their  rise  than  into
their  reasons "  (Henry).  "  His  sisters,  are  they  not  all  iifith  ust"  Note :  How
thoroughly  is  Christ  one  "with  us" — Immanuel/

11.  Its  direful  consequences.  1.  It  hardened  the  Nazarenes  in  their  unbelief.
(1)  "They  were  offended  in  him."  Their  astonishment  was  their  offence.  Prejudice
is  offended  in  wisdom,  and  resists  the  demonstration  of  power.  Superior  merit  is
envied,  and  envy  turns  the  knowledge  it  has  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  envied.  (2)  If
we  approach  the  Scriptures  in  a  cavilling  humour  we  shall  remain  in  ignoiance,  and
become  hardened  in  unbelief.  2.  It  exposed  them  to  the  reproof  of  Christ.  (1)  "  Jesus
said  unto  them,  A  prophet  is  not  without  honour,  save  in  his  own  country,  and  in
his  own  house."  Note :  A  prophet  should  have  honour.  A  man  of  God  is  a  great
man.  The  Son  of  God,  how  great  1  (2)  But  familiarity  breeds  contempt.  The
contempt  a  prophet  experiences  abroad  is  nothing  to  that  he  experiences  at  home.
Even  Columbus,  when  meditating  the  discovery  of  America,  had  to  seek  patrons  out
of  his  own  country.  3.  It  led  to  their  abandonment.  (1)  "  And  he  did  not  many
mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief."  Unbelief  is  an  impediment  to  the
performance  of  miracles.  Hence  the  question,  "  Dost  thou  believe  that  I  am  able  to  do
this?  "  "  Unbelief  is  a  sin  that  locks  up  the  heart  of  a  sinner,  and  binds  up  the  hand
of  the  Saviour  "  (ITIavel).  (2)  Christ  did  not  judge  it  suitable  to  obtrude  his  miracles
upon  the  Nazarenes.  "  A  few  sick  folk  "  among  them  had  faith  to  be  healed.  "  Many  "
remained  in  their  misery  "  because  of  their  unbelief."  (3)  "  The  reason  why  mighty
works  are  not  wrought  now  is  not  that  the  faith  is  everywhere  planted,  but  that
unbelief  everywhere  prevails"  (Wesley).  "All  things  are  possible"  to  the  faith  ot
promise  (of.  ch.  xix.  26;  Mark  ix.  23;  Rom.  i.  16;  Eph.  ii.  8).  (4)  Soon  after  this
JesuB  finally  abandoned  the  Nazarenes.  Their  pride  and  envy  and  resentment  became
their  desolation  and  destruction.  And  those  who  now  reject  the  claims  of  Christ  are
even  less  excusable  than  they,  since  they  despise  the  additional  evidence  of  his  resur-
rection and  ascension,  and  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  10. — Hie  reason  for  the  use  of  parables.  It  is  not  sufficiently  observed  that  our
Lord  adopted  the  parabolic  style  only  after  he  had  been  teaching  for  some  time.  His
earlier  discourses  are  full  of  illustrations,  and  they  set  truth  in  paradoxical  sentences
which  excite  thought  and  inquiry;  but  the  parabolic  was  a  new  method  of  hiding
truth  for  a  while,  and  from  some,  which  was  called  for  by  certain  results  attending
Christ's  teachings.  It  should  be  clearly  seen  that  the  parable  is  designed  to  wrap  trutli
up  so  that  it  may  be  kept  safe,  but  be  hidden  from  the  many  for  the  present ;  and
uncovered  and  brought  to  light,  by  the  spiritually  minded  now,  and  for  all  by-and-by.
The  previous  chapters  of  Matthew  have  shown  what  a  divided  feeling  was  growing  up,
even  in  Galilee,  concerning  Christ.  Some,  indeed,  held  fast  their  hope  in  him ;  but
the  official  Pharisees  took  a  decided  position  against  him,  and  they  influenced  very
many  ;  even  our  Lord's  own  relations  had  joined  the  distrustful  party.  Jesus  was
influenced  by  these  conditions.  He  wanted  to  warn,  correct,  and  reprove;  but  these
people  would  only  turn  to  evil  everything  he  said,  and  become  more  embittered  against
him  if  he  spoke  out  plainly.  So  he  wrapped  truth  of  warning  and  correction  up  in
parables,  which  would  carry  his  meaning  without  his  actually  speaking  it  out.  Three
reasons  for  the  use  of  parables  may  be  given.

I.  One  reason  was  related  to  his  immediate  disciples :  It  enabled  him  to  con-
TtKUE  HIS  teaching  OF  THEM.  A  chief  part  of  our  Lord's  work  was  preparing  the
apostles  for  their  future  work.  And  he  did  this  not  only  by  direct  teaehiugs,  but  also
by  examples  of  teaching.  But  opposition  might  have  stopped  those  examples  if  our
Lord  had  not  changed  his  style  and  adopted  the  parabolic.


56  rUJS  UOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xni.  1—68.

n.  One  reason  was  related  to  his  ordinary   congregations :    It  bkabled  him  to

ADAPT   HIMSELF   MOBB   PBBOIBELY   TO   THEIB   CAPACITIES.      It   is   quite  possible  that  OUr

Lord  found  the  paradoxical  style  of  the  sermon  on  the  mount  misused,  and  therelore
tried  the  pictorial  style  of  the  parable,  which  is  so  eminently  suited  to  the  child-
minded.  AH  who  teach  such  know  how  they  are  helped  by  being  shown  what  things
are  like.  By  them  principles  are  grasped  when  they  are  illustrated  in  incidents,  or
painted  in  pictures.

III.  One  reason  was  related  to  his  enemies :  It  enabled  him  vebt  bevebelt  to
BBPROVE  them  WITHOUT  GIVING  OPEN  OFFENCE.  No  One  could  take  exception  to  our
Lord's  beautiful  descriptions  and  incidents,  but  men  with  bad  consciences  quickly  per-
ceived that  he  spake  the  parables  against  them. — R.  T.

Ver.  13. — The  responsibility  of  the  hearer.  The  "  parable  of  the  sower  "  might  with
equal  appropriateness  be  called  the  " parable  of  the  soil"  The  point  of  it  is  not  so
much  what  the  sower  did,  as  what  the  soil  did,  and  what  the  soil  was.  In  each  case
good  seed  was  scattered.  In  each  case  we  are  set  thinking  of  the  capacity  of  the  soil,
and  of  the  manner  in  which  it  dealt  with  the  seed.  And  this  fact  comes  out  forcibly
to  view  :  only  when  the  soil  was  deep  and  soft  and  clean — well  ploughed,  well  harrowed,
well  weeded — could  even  that  good  seed  yield  its  thirty,  sixty,  or  a  hundredfold.

I.  The  0HABACTEBI8TIC8  OF  CUB  LoBD  AS  A  Teagher.  Compare  him  with  the
rabbinical  moralists  of  his  time.  It  is  sometimes  inconsiderately  said  that  our  Lord's
moial  teachings  were  not  neM).  Of  course  they  were  not.  How  could  they  be?  What
new  moral  principles  and  duties  can  any  teacher  announce  ?  New  morals  could  not  be
true  morals,  for  morals  are  the  possession  of  humanity  from  man's  earliest  relations
with  God  and  with  his  fellows.  You  will  find  in  our  Lord's  teachings  some  things
new,  some  things  old,  and  some  things  skilfully  adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  day.
Stalker  says  tlie  teaching  of  Jesus  "consisted  of  numerous  sayings,  every  one  of
which  contained  the  greatest  possible  amount  of  truth  in  the  smallest  possible  com-
pass, and  was  expressed  in  language  so  concise  and  pointed  as  to  stick  in  the  memory
like  an  arrow."  But  observe  that  even  Christ's  Divine  teachings  were  a  partial  failure,
when  men  were  not  "  prepared  to  hear."

II.  The  besfonbe  men  made  to  oob  Lobd's  teachings.  It  surprises  us  that  all
men  did  not  receive  him.  But  the  fact  is  that  our  Lord  shared  the  common  experience
of  all  teachers,  and  proved  a  direct  blessing  to  only  a  few.  Some  of  the  people  took
offence  at  Christ's  teaching.  He  did  not  say  what  they  had  been  accustom^  to  hear
just  as  they  had  been  accustomed  to  hear  it.  He  did  not  come  forth  with  the  proper
approval  of  the  ecclesiastical  officials.  He  often  spoke  too  plainly.  He  came  right  home
tu  them.  He  made  them  see  sins  which  they  had  tried  hard  to  cover  over  and  hide.
He  read  iheir  hearts,  and  made  them  feel  uncomfortable.  Some  found  him  too  advanced
a  Teacher  for  them.  Some  were  impulsive,  and  became  disciples  at  once,  but  could
stand  no  testing  aud  strain.  The  moral  and  spiritual  results  of  our  Lord's  ministry
depended  on  the  moods  of  the  people.  The  common  people  heard  bim  gladly.  The
learned  people  questioned  and  criticized,  and  so  gained  no  blessing.  Jesus  was  to  men
as  men  were  to  him.    All  depended  on  the  soil. — R.  T.

Ver,  24. — Seedirig  the  earthly  fields  to  get  seed  for  the  heavetily  fields.  See  the
farmer.  The  ground  is  provided  for  him  and  prepared  for  him.  Ho  cannot  alter  his
surroundings  and  conditions.  His  chief  aim  is  good  seeding,  and  for  the  sake  of  the
seed  he  wants  he  is  anxious  to  secure  good  flowers.  His  harvest  is  largely,  and  ideally
it  is  altogether,  a  gathering  of  seed  for  next  year's  sowing.  We  are  familiar  with  the
idea  that  the  present  life  is  our  sowing-time,  aud  the  next  life  our  harvest-time.  But
this  view  is  less  familiar.  The  present  life  is  the  growing  iind  the  preparing  of  the
seeds  which  are  to  be  sown  in  the  fields  of  the  next  life.  Every  plant  has  this  for  its
object,  to  seed  the  fields  next  year.

I.  Our  earth-life  is  the  harvest-field  in  which  we  both  sow  and  beai.
The  field  is  prepared  for  us.  We  cannot  choose  or  make  onr  own  particular  place  and
work.  Our  age,  family,  nation,  circumstances,  abilities,  and  disabilities  are  all  arranged
for  us.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to  sow  our  own  particular  field,  and  exactly  what  we
sow  we  shall  reap,  a  f\ilness  of  the  same  thing.     Youth  is  the  time  of  sowing }  early


OH.  xiiT.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  57


manhood  is  the  time  of  growing.  The  full  maturity  of  life  is  our  reaping-time.  The
man  in  middle  liCe  has  attained  the  character  which  is  the  seed-result  of  the  spring
sowing  and  the  siimnier  growing.     He  will  not  be  very  different  as  long  as  he  lives.

II.  The  habvest  of  this  life  peovides  the  beed-corn  fob  the  next  life.
Kemember,  every  plant  is  working  tor  next  year.  The  flower  or  the  fruit  of  this  year
is  not  its  end ;  the  seed  is  its  end.  And  cultured,  finished,  high-toned,  spiritual  character
is  the  seed  which  we  are  to  have  ready  for  the  next  harvest-field.  The  eternal  ages  may
lirove  to  be  successions  of  harvest-fields,  in  which,  like  the  plants,  we  shall  be  over  sowing
and  maturing  for  the  next  age's  seeding  ;  ever  trying  to  secure  better,  worthier,  character-
mi  ds.

III.  There  is  much  to  bS  done  with  the  seed-oorn,  when  it  is  mathee,  before
IT  IS  fctTOGETHER  FIT  FOE  THE  NEXT  yeae's  SOWING.  It  Seems  as  if  a  piece  of  life
were  left  out,  and  we  ended  jt  with  manhood.  But  there  is  a  space  between  full  man-
hood and  decay.  That  piece  of  life  should  be  the  weathering,  winnowing,  cleansing  of
the  seed-corn  character,  ready  for  the  eternal  fields.  Weathering,  or  exposing  to  the
sun  and  wind  ol'  prosperity.  Winnowing,  or  getting  rid  of  the  useless  by  adversity.
Cleansing,  or  getting  free  from  the  mischievous  by  culture.  Fully  ripe  and  well  pre-
pared, God  bears  us  off  to  seed  his  eternal  fields. — E.  T.

Ver.  30. — Evil  and  good  only  together  for  a  time.  In  every  parable  we  should
expect  to  find  three  things.  1.  General  hints  in  relation  to  the  kingdom,  common  to
many  parables.  2.  Special  points  of  description  necessary  to  the  completion  of  the
picture,  but  not  to  be  unduly  pressed  to  yield  a  meaning.  3.  A  particular  aspect  of
truth,  for  the  sake  of  which  the  parable  is  specially  given.

I.  The  salient  points  of  this  parable.  1.  Our  inability  to  form  perfect  judg-
ment of  individnals  now.  2.  The  duty  of  accepting  profession  now,  and  leaving
perfect  judgment  for  God's  future.  3.  The  distinction  between  good  and  evil  is  vital;
there  is  really  no  possible  confusion  between  them.  4.  The  distinction  between  good
and  bad  persons  will  one  day  be  clearly  seen.  5.  The  temptation  to  use  outward
physical  force  to  accoiiiplish  the  objects  of  the  Church  must  be  steadfastly  resisted.

II.  The  one  point  calling  foe  particulae  attention.  It  is  the  fact  of  life
that  evil  and  good  do  now  grow  together.  Illustrate  weeds  and  flowers ;  poison  and
food  ;  fierce  and  gentle  animals ;  good  and  bad  men  in  every  association.  This  is  true
of  Christian  worship,  and  even  of  the  Church.  Illustrate  Epistle  to  Corinthians,  which
deals  with  a  wicked  man  in  the  Church.  Our  Lonl  assumes  the  fact  when  he  says,
"By  their  frnits  ye  sliall  know  them."  It  would  be  an  incompiehensible  fact  if  this
were  our  only  life  We  can  a  little  understand  it,  if  we  see  God's  purpose  to  morally
test  every  man.  Everything  in  life  js  arranged  for  testing  purpose's.  Disposition  is
tried  at  home.  Character  is  tried  in  business.  Principles  are  tried  in  society.  Evil
has  everywhere  the  chance  of  mastering  good  if  it  can.  Suppose  evil  people  were  now
])Ut  all  by  themselves;  there  would  be  no  hope  of  their  deliverance  from  evil.  Suppose
the  good  people  were  put  all  by  themselves;  they  would  get  conceited  past  bearing.
As  it  is  (1)  evil  finds  itself  revealed  as  evil;  (2)  evil  gains  space  for  repentance;  (3)
evil  has  opportunity  and  incentive  to  repentance.  Evil  put  iii  close  association  with
goodness  (1)  tests  goodness  itself;  makes  it  no  easy  thin^,  to  be  good:  (2)  finds
spheres  for  goodness  to  work  in ;  and  so,  by  working,  goodneso  is  nourished.  Heaven
is  not  to  be  thought  of  as  the  place  for  becoming  good,  but  for  hting  good.  This  life  is
the  time  for  the  training  of  man's  character.  We  need  have  no  fear  concerning  the
issues  of  Divine  training.  As  certainly  as  no  tares  will  be  spared  from  the  burning,  so
cortninly  no  true  wheat  will  ever  be  lost. — R.  T.

Ver.  31. —  The  hope  that  may  he  in  little  things.  Dr.  Eoyle  thinks  the  mustaid  is
the  plant  called  in  Syria  khardal,  and  known  to  botanists  as  the  Salvadora  persica.
From  a  small  seed  it  grows  into  a  considerable  tree,  and  its  fruit  has  a  pleasant  arom-itio
taste ;  birds  like  it  much,  and  frequent  the  branches.  Il  is  sai'l  that  it  grew  abundantly
on  the  shores  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  and  so  came  under  Christ's  direct  notice.  But
Dr.  Thomson  thinks  the  khaidal  was  very  rare  in  Palestine,  and  that  our  Lord
referred  to  the  common  wild  mustard,  Hinapis  nigra,  which  grows  to  a  considerable
height — as  tall,  indeed,  as  a  horte  and  his  rider.    To  call  the  mustard  the  least  of  seeds


68  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xm.  1—58,

wag  a  proverbial  expression  of  the  time.  It  was  the  least  that  the  husbandman  would
BOW,  and  is  fittingly  tciken  as  a  type  of  little  thiugs  that  have  great  possibilities  in  them.

I.  Christ's  kingdom  advances  by  growth.  That  is,  by  unfoldirigs  out  of  rather
than  by  additions  to.  It  is  as  a  tree  rather  than  as  a  house.  Compare  the  mechanical
extension  of  a  religion,  as  in  the  case  of  Mohammedanism ;  and  the  miraculous  exten-
sion of  a  religion,  which  would  tend  to  destroy  its  moral  character.  If  Christ's  king-
dom spreads  by  growth,  we  should  not  expect  forced  leaps,  though  we  may  look  for
periods  of  fuller  flowing  life,  such  as  is  the  spring-time  of  nature.  Christ's  kingdom
comes  by  the  "  out-populating  of  the  Christian  stock,"  and  by  the  out-reaching  of  the
Christian  example  and  influence.

II.  The  qkowth  often  starts  from  very  minute  bbginnings.  Illustrate :  1.  By
the  mustard  seed,  the  acorn,  or  the  cedar-cone.  2.  By  the  Christian  Church  in  Europe,
which  began  with  the  woman  Lydia  at  Philippi.  3.  By  the  unfoldings  of  missionary
enterprise.  4.  By  the  Sunday  schools,  which  started  in  an  effort  to  save  a  few  children
from  the  street.  5.  By  instances  of  personal  Christian  labour.  A  youth's  prayer
unfolded  into  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association.  Never  "  despise  the  day  of  small
things,"  or  miss  the  opportunity  of  doing  a  little.

III.  The  growth  may  at  last  reach  glorious  results.  A  little  seed,  scarcely
covering  a  spot,  may  grow  to  spread  its  branches  in  the  sky.  lUustr.ite  from  the
Christian  Church  of  to-day,  which  is  represented  in  well-nigh  every  land.  Do  you  say,
"  The  results  are  not  yet "  ?  That  is  only  the  result  of  your  mode  of  reckoning.  If  the
kingdom  be  a  life,  if  it  be  righteousness  and  mercy,  then  the  kingdom  is  nearer  its
full  triumph  than  we  have  imagined. — R.  T.

Ver.  33. — The  force  there  may  he  in  quiet  thing*.  "  Like  leaven."  The  word
"  leaven  "  means  "  something  that  raises,"  from  the  mode  of  its  operation.  In  one  way
it  corrupts;  in  another  way  it  makes  edible  and  wholesome.  Leaven  consists  of
myriads  of  the  cells  of  the  common  green  mould  in  an  undeveloped  state.  It  is  at
once  a  principle  of  destruction  and  construction,  of  decay  and  of  growth,  of  death  and
of  life.  In  this  parable  our  Lord  seems  to  fix  attention  on  the  very  silent,  quiet,
hidden,  yet  persistent  way  in  which  leaven  works  its  great  results.  The  parable
teaches  the  self-developing  power  of  truth.  The  mode  of  its  operation;  ever  from
within  outwards.  And  the  fact  which  can  be  verified  in  human  experience,  that  tne
greatest  results  may  follow  the  most  insignificant  beginnings.

I.  How  SILENT  are  THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  THE  NEW  LIFE   IN  SOULS !      The  deVOtion  of

the  disciples  to  Christ  was  a  power  they  did  not  estimate.  It  was  a  small  beginning,
but  it  grew  in  power  to  make  them  martyrs.  The  first  faith  and  love  of  Christ's
disciples  was  so  weak  that  an  evening  breeze  could  have  blown  it  away ;  by-and-by  it
stood  the  raging  wintry  storms  of  persecution.  It  was  life,  and,  spreading,  it  gained
power.  The  beginning  of  the  new  life  in  us  is  the  time  when  mind-and  lieart  waken
to  personal  interest  in  Christ.  But  this  beginning  is  often  hidden  from  others,  and
even  from  the  man  himself.  If  we  recognized  this  fact  (1)  we  should  make  more  of
God's  part,  and  less  of  our  own,  in  the  work  of  redemption ;  (2)  we  should  be  more
quick  to  discern  signs  of  God's  working;  (3)  we  should  much  oftener  be  encouraged
by  noticing  the  results  of  our  Christian  labour.

II.  How   CONSTANT   ARE   THE   ACTIVITIES   OF    THE    NEW   LIFE    IN    SOULS  1        Like  the

leaven,  that  is  always  going  on  leavening.  Think  of  it  as  the  spirit  of  faith,  of  trust
in  God,  put  into  our  carnal,  corrupt,  self-seeking  nature,  even  as  leaven  is  put  in
meal;  and  as  Christianity  is  put  into  an  evil  world.  The  spirit  of  trust  is  active,  like
the  leaven.  Christian  life  and  relations  provide  the  spheres  in  which  the  active
principle  of  faith  is  spreading.

III.  How    GLORIOUS    IS    THE    ISSUE    TOWARD    WHICH    THE    NEW    LIFE    IN    SOULS    IS

WORKING  I  It  will  "  leaven  the  whole  lump."  True  of  humanity ;  but  now  we  see
that  it  is  especially  true  of  oitr  humanity,  ourselves.  It  is  working  to  win  (1)  the
body,  with  all  its  passions  and  relations;  (2)  the  mind,  with  all  its  endowments  and
interests ;  (3)  the  soul,  with  all  its  capacities  and  possibilities.  When  the  whole  lump
is  leavened,  then  holiness,  and  therefore  heaven,  is  gained. — R.  T.

Yer,  44. — Religion  gained  at  jpersonal  sacrifice.    A  man  is  ploughing  in  a  field


OH.  XIII.  1—58.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  59

■whicli  he  only  rented,  or  perhaps  only  worked  in  as  a  labourer.  He  oomes  casually
on  the  sign  of  a  buried  treasure ;  but  he  dares  not  touch  a  thing.  So  he  covers  up  the
signs,  and  sets  all  his  heart  and  effort  on  gaining  possession  of  that  field.  He  counts
no  sacrifice  too  great  if  it  helps  to  realize  his  aim.  This  parable  deals  with  the  indi-
vidual man  and  personal  religion.

I.  Tkue  ebugion  is  a  mattbb  op  individual  ooncbbn.  Christ  came  to  redeem
the  human  race  from  sin;  but  he  does  it  by  redeeming  them  "one  by  one."  Illustrate
our  Lord's  dealing  with  individuals,  as  Nicodemus  or  woman  of  Samaria.  It  is  easy
to  rest  in  a  mere  connection  with  Christianity;  to  belong  to  a  Christian  country,  or  a
Cliristian  family,  or  a  Christian  society.  But  the  gospel  singles  the  individual  out,
and  says,  "  Thou  art  the  man  " — the  sinner  that  needs  Christ  the  Saviour.

II.  Teue  kbliqion  is  a  matter  of  direct  PBESONAii  BELATioNS.  This  man
may  know  of  the  hid  treasure,  but  that  does  not  satisfy  him.  He  must  have  that
treasure  for  his  very  own.  We  know  of  the  great  salvation,  but  that  does  not  make  it
<mrs.  Christ  says,  "  Come  unto  me ; "  have  personal  dealiugs  with  me.  The  apostle
says,  "  He  that  hath  the  Son,"  in  the  grip  of  his  own  personal  trust  and  love,  "  hath
life."  Here  so  many  fail.  There  must  be  personal  appropriation.  We  must  be  able
to  say,  "  Who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."

III.  Tbue  religion  requires  a  man  to  make  personal  sacrifice.  This  man
gave  up  all  else  to  gain  possession  of  this  treasure.  Everything  that  is  worth  possessing
is  hard  to  win.  Illustrate  by  the  friends  seeking  healing  foi-  the  paralytic,  and  break-
ing up  the  I'oof  in  order  to  get  to  Jesus ;  also  by  the  persistency  of  the  Syro-Phoenician
woman.  The  forms  of  effort  and  sacrifice  demanded  depend  on  the  age  and  the  dis-
position. 1,  Intellectual  pride  may  have  to  be  lowered.  2.  Ensnaring  talents
(artistic  or  scientific)  may  have  to  be  put  aside.  3.  The  common  sneer  at  all  who  are
in  real  earnest  in  spiritual  religion  may  have  to  be  borne.  4.  All  forms  of  self-confi-
dence and  self-reliance  have  to  be  broken  down.  So  many  entrench  themselves
behind  their  own  moral  goodness,  and  fail  to  get  the  hid  treasure,  because  they  cannot
make  full  sacrifice  of  that  moral  goodness. — R.  T.

Vers.  45,  46. — Satisfied  only  with  the  best.  The  general  truth  taught  in  this  and  in
the  preceding  parable  is  that  he  who  would  be  a  follower  of  Christ  must  be  prepared  to
sacrifice  everything  for  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  differeuce  between  the  two  parables
is  that  in  the  one  case  the  man  foimd  accidentally,  but  in  the  other  case  he  sought
deliberately.  "The  one  parable  illustrates  the  eagerness  of  a  poor  man,  who  lights
upon  the  treasure  apparently  by  accident ;  the  other  illustrates  the  eagerness  of  a  rich
man,  whose  finding  of  the  pearl  of  price  is  the  result  of  carefully  studied  and  long-
sustained  search  "  (Dods).

I.  SouL-SBEKiNO.  What  does  a  toul  seek  ?  Man  seeks  the  true  and  the  beautiful.
Souls  seek  the  good ;  and  this  is  but  a  way  of  saying  they  seek  God.  "  Man  feels
that  he  was  not  made  in  vain,  there  must  be  a  centre  of  peace  for  him,  a  fiood  that
will  satisfy  all  the  cravings  of  his  soul,  and  he  is  determined  not  to  rest  until  it  is  found."

II.  Unsatisfied  soul-sbeking.  No  ordinary  pearls  content  the  man.  The  human
seeker  often  fancies  for  a  time  that  he  has  found  rest  in  things — art,  science,  literature,
or  human  love.  Tha  soul  never  deludes  itself  or  permits  any  delusions.  Short  of
God  it  never  rests;  it  cannot.  Illustrate  by  the  hopeless  wail  of  disappointment
with  which  Solomon  closes  his  life-quest;  or  by  the  delusion  of  the  mirage  in  the
desert  regions.

III.  Satisfied  boul-sbbkino.  Only  reached  when  the  soul  gets  full  possession  of,
and  calls  its  very  own,  the  "  Pearl  of  great  price."  To  the  unsatisfied  soul  there  pre-
sently comes  the  voice,  "  None  is  good  save  one,  that  is  God."  He  is  good.  All  good
is  but  some  ray  from  that  sun.  And  then  the  soul  says,  "  Can  I  find  him,  can  I  get
him,  can  I  possess  him  as  my  own  ?  "  He  can.  When  he  does,  he  may  say  as  the
poet,  who  uses  another  figure —

"  Now  I  have  found  the  ground  wherein
Sure  ray  soul's  anchor  may  remain."

C?n  the  soul  find  full  satisfaction?  It  is  not  away  in  heaven,  to  be  journeyed  for.  It
i?    ot  in  the  deep,  to  be  searched  for.     It  is  close  nigh  to  every  one  of  us.     He  who  is


60  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xin.  1— 6a

the  soul's  satisfaction  is  nigh.  It  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  It  is  God  manifest  in  tha
flesh,  who  can  be  appropriated  and  possessed  by  our  trust  and  our  love. — E.  T.

Ver.  48. — The  final  sorting-time.  Those  who  have  watched  the  hauling  in  of  tha
great  seine-net  on  our  shores,  the  rapid  sorting  of  its  contents,  the  throwing  of  the  bad
away,  and  the  noisy  auction  on  the  sands,  will  fully  realize  every  point  of  our  Lord's
illustration.  The  net  represents  the  gospel  message,  the  good  news  of  God  the  Saviour.
It  is  like  a  net;  it  will  catch  and  hold  men.  Put  into  words  it  is  this:  "  Repent,  for
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  Jesus  "  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all
that  coma  uuto  God  by  him."  The  gospel  net  is  given  in  charge  to  the  Church.  The
Church  must  work  freely  and  constantly  at  casting  the  net  in  the  wide  sweep  of  the
sea  of  humanity.

I.  The  gospel  net  encloses  all  sobtb  of  PBOPiiS.  From  all  sorts  of  motives,
and  with  very  different  degrees  of  earnestness  and  sincerity,  men  accept  the  gospel
message,  and  make  Christian  profession.  Several  parables  teach  that  the  Church  is  a
very  mixed  body.  Mere  standing  in  a  Churcli  is  no  more  guarantee  of  acceptance  with
Christ  than  presence  in  the  net  shows  the  goodness  of  the  fish.

II.  The  people  oannot  be  sorted  while  they  ark  in  the  net.  Some  of  the
fish  would  escape  if  sorting  were  attempted  while  the  net  was  being  dragged  through
the  water.     Illustrate  from  the  parable  of  the  tares.

IIL  When  the  net  is  drawn  ashore  sorting  work  can  be  done.  A  revealing
day,  a  testing  day,  must  come  for  us  all.  But  no  imperfect  human  judgment  will  do
the  great  sorting  work.  God  himself  will  supei  intend  the  severing  of  the  righteous
from  the  wicked.  We  will  not  venture  to  describe  the  wicked.  We  can  safely  describe
the  good.  They  are  such  as  (1)  receive  Christ  with  meekness ;  (2)  bring  forth  the
fruits  of  righteousness ;  (3)  patiently  continue  in  well-doing.  So  Christ's  gospel,  like
a  great  net,  is  to  be  aent  out  into  all  the  world,  that  it  may,  if  possible,  gather  all  men
in.  So  the  contents  of  the  gospel  net,  when  gathered  in  at  last,  will  need,  and  will
receive,  a  final  sifting. — R.  T.

Ver.  55. —  Unexpected  learning  in  a  carpenter't  son.  "  Whence  hath  this  Man  this
wisdom,  and  these  mighty  works  ?  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son?"  The  Jews  never
despised  handicralts,  and  this  expression  must  not  be  explained  as  Booming  Je.sus
because  he  was  a  carpenter's  son,  or  a  carpenter.  What  is  in  the  minds  of  these
scorners  is  that  .he  was  nothing  hut  a  carpenter;  he  had  received  no  training  whatever
in  the  rabbinical  schools.  He  was  no  educated  and  authorized  rabbi,  and  that  they
knew  very  well.  Hillcl,  the  greatest  rabbi  of  the  same  age  as  Joseph,  though  he  was
a  descendant  of  Daviil,  spent  most  of  his  life  in  the  deepest  poverty  as  a  common
workman.

1.  A  surprise  that  PKOPiSKLT  EXCITED  THOUGHT.  .lesus  Certainly  was  an  unusual
Teacher.  He  dealt  with  unusual  subjects  in  an  unusual  way,  and  with  an  unusual
attractiveness  and  authority.  There  were  no  such  subtle  distinctions  as  exhibited  the
great  learning  of  the  rabbis ;  but  men  had  skill  enough  to  recogaize  unusual  and  extra-
ordinary intellectual  as  well  as  moral  power  in  Christ.  It  wai-,  quite  right  for  them  to
flunk  about  such  a  strange  fact  and  phenomenon.  It  is  quite  right  for  us  to  think  about
it.    We  may  well  say  to  one  anutlier,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?    Whose  Son  is  he  ?  "

IL    A    SURPRISE    THAT    RECEIVED     MISTAKEN    EXPLANATIONS.        Exactly    how    they

explained  the  fact  thoy  admitted  we  are  not  told ;  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  prejudice
blinded  their  eyes,  and  prevented  their  getting  any  true  ideas  of  Christ.  No  doubt
they  accused  him  of  conceited  self-assertion.  He  was  pnshing  himself  to  the  front,
and  talking  big,  as  if  he  were  better  than  his  brothers  and  sisters.  Tliey  were
offended  at  him,  and  thought  unkind  things  of  him.  Illustrate  by  the  things  pre-
judiced men  say  of  Christ  now.

III.  A    SURPRISE    THAT    CAN    HAVE  A   SATISFAOTOKY   EXPLANATION.      This  man  WaS

taught  of  Gud;  was  a  Prophet  of  God  who  received  Divine  messages;  nay,  was  the
Son  of  God  revealing  the  things  of  the  F.ither-God  to  men.  Never  mind  about
remembering  hiiu  when  he  was  a  boy.  Never  mind  about  his  never  having  gone  to
a  school  of  the  rabbis.  Never  mind  his  having  toiled  at  the  carpenter's  bench.  Fix
thought  on  what  he  m — the  divinely  taught  Teacher  and  Saviour  of  men. — R.  X.


OH.  XIV.  1— 36J    THE  GOSPEL,  ACGORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


61


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIV.
Vers.  1 — 36.— Christ's  Power  to  supply
amd  fboteot   and  he)al,  prefaced  by  a
Statement  op  Herod's  Relation  to  him.

Vers.  1 — 12. — Herod's  opinion  of  Jems,  and
a  parenlheiical  aoeount  of  Ms  murder  of  John
the  Baptist.  Parallel  passages :  Mark  vi.
14—29 ;  Luke  ix.  7—9 ;  ill.  19, 20.

Ver.  1. — At  that  time;  season  (Revised
Version);  oh.  xi.  25,  note.  Herod  the
tetraroh ;.  i.e.  Antipas,  youngest  son  of
Herod  the  Great,  and  by  one  of  hig  father's
wills  named  his  successor  on  the  throne,
but  by  the  last  will  appointed  only  tetraroh
of  Galilee  and  Persea.  Though  not  legally
king,  he  sometimes  received  the  title  by
courtesy  (ver.  9;  Mark  vi.  14;  of.  oh.  ii.
1,  note).  "In  point  of  character,  Antipas
was  a  genuine  son  of  old  Herod — sly,
ambitious,  and  luxurious,  only  not  so  able
as  his  father."  He  was  deposed  by  Caligula,
a.d.  39,  when,  at  the  instance  of  Herodias,
be  had  gone  to  Rome  to  try  to  obtain  the
same  title  of  king  that  had  been  granted  to
her  brother  Agrippa  I.  (Schurer,  I.  ii.  18.  36).
Heard  of  the  fame — heard  the  report  (Revised
Version);  ch..iv.  24,  note— of  Jesus.

Ver.  2. — And  said  unto  his  servants.  Ac-
cording to  Luke,  the  following  assertion  was
brought  forward  by  some,  but  was,  it  would
seem,  summarily  rejected  by  Herod  (Luke
ix.  7,  9) ;  according  to  Mark  (_e\eyoy,  West-
cott  and  Hort,  text)  it  was  common  talk,  and
agreed  to  by  Herod  (Mark  vi.  14,  16).  If
a  leconoiliation  of  so  unimportant  a  verbal
disagreement  be  sought  for,  it  may  perhaps
lie  in  Luke  representing  Herod's  first  ex-
clamation, and  Matthew,  with  Mark,  his
ai;ttled  belief.  Clearly  Herod  did  not  ori-
fj'lnate  it,  as  the  summary  account  in  our
Gospel  would  lead  us  to  suppose.  This  is
John  the  Baptist  (ch.  iii.  1  and  iv.  12,  notes).
(For  this  opinion  about  our  Lord,  compare,
besides  the  parallel  passages  referred  to  in
the  last  note,  also  ch.  xvi.  14.)  He  (airis,
ch.  1.  21,  note)  is  risen  from  the  dead.
The  other  dead  still  lie  in  Hades  (iwh
tSv  vfKpdv).  Plumptre,  on  Mark,  add  i  ces
a  curious  passage  from  Persius,  v.  180  —
188,  which  he  thinks  is  based  on  a  story
that  when  Herod  celebrated  another  of
Ids  birthdays  (cf.  ver.  6)  in  Rome,  in  a.d.
39,  he  was  terrified  by  a  Banquo-like  ap-
pearance of  the  murdered  prophet.  The
Buporstition  that  already  suggested  to  Herod
the  resurreetiou  of  John  might  well  act
more  strongly  on  the  anniversary  of  the
murder,  and  after  he  had  connived  at  the


death  of  the  One  who,  by  his  miracles,

'  showed  that  he  possessed  greater  power  than
John.  And  therefore;  "because  he  is  no
ordinary  man,  bnt  one  risen  from  the  dead  "
(Meyer).  Kighty  works  do  show  forth  them-
selves in  him  (o^  Suvd/iets  hepyovirtv  iv  aiT^) ;
do  these  powers  work  in  Him  (Revised  Ver-
sion). "  These"  (oi.tlie  article  of  reference),
i.e.  these  which  are  spoken  of  in  the  report
(ver.  1).  AtSwinfts  may  be  (1)  specifically
miracles  (cf.  eh.  xili.  58),  in  which  case
they  are  regarded  as  potentially  active  in
John  before  their  completion  in  history ;  or
(2)  the  powers  of  working  miracles,  as  per-
haps in  1  Cor.  xii.  28.  Observe  that  this
pasiiage  confirms  the  statement  of  John  x.
41,  that  John  performed  no  miracle.  Ob-
serve that  it  is  also  an  indirect  witness  to
the  fact  of  our  Lord  performing  miracles.
Por  Herod's  utterance  is  not  such  as  a  forger
would  have  imagined.

Ver.  3. — For  Herod  had  laid  hold  on  John,
and  bound  him.  Although  had  simplifies
the  meaning  to  the  English  reader,  as
definitely  marking  what  must  have  boon
the  case,  that  John's  imprisonment  began
some  time  before,  yet  in  the  Greek  only  the
Eu>rist  is  used  to  commence  a  vivid  narra-
tive. And  put  him  in  prison;  "put  liim
away  in  prison  (ly  <pv\aicfi  airtflero)."  So
of  Mioaiah  by  Ahab  (2  Chron.  xviii.  26,
LXX.,  but  not  Luciau's  text).  Probably
here  in  allusion  to  the  distance  of  Machsorus
from  Herod's  usual  residence  at  Tiberias.
Possibly,  also,  a  reference  to  John  being
safer  there  from  the  designs  of  Herodias
(Mark  vi.  19,  20).  Anyhow,  notice  the
stages  in  Herod's  action — capture,  binding,
imprisonment  in  a  place  where  he  was  quite
out  of  the  way.  For  Herodias'  sake.  John
was  imprisoned,  according  to  the  Ifew  Testa-
ment, (1)  as  a  punishment  for  his  rebuke  of
Herod;  (2)  to  protect  him  from  Herodias'
vengeance.  (On  the  statement  by  J  osephus,
that  it  was  for  political  reasons,  see  ch.  iii.
1,  note.)  His  brother  Philip's  wife.  Ac-
cording to  Josephus  ('Ant.,'  xviii.  5.  4),
the  first  husband  of  Herodias  was  "  Herod,"
son  ot  Herod  the  Great  by  Mariamne  tlJe
high  priest's  daughter,  and  the  daughter
of  Herodias,  Salome,  married  Pliilip  the
tetraroh,  who  was  also  the  son  of  Herod  the
Great  by  Cleopatra  of  Jerusalem.  Hence
many  critics  (e.g  Bwald ;  Schiirer,  I.  ii.  22)
suppose  the  account  in  Matthew  and  Mark
to  be  mistaken,  and  due  to  a  confusion  of
Herodias  with  I  ler  daughter.  But,  although
it  is  curious  that  two  sons  of  Herod  the
Great  should  have  been  called  Philip,  yet,
in  view  of  their  being  by  different  mothers,
it  cannot  be  pronounced  impossible  ("  An-


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1—36.


tiijas"  aud  "  Antipater ''  are  not  precisely
identical).  Besides,  Herod  the  eon  of
Mariamne  would  probably  Iiave  liad  some
otlier  name  thun  that  of  his  tlither  aloue.
It  is  noticeable  that,  in  the  same  context,
Josephus  speaks  also  of  Antipas  by  tlie
name  Herod  only.

Yer.  4. — For  John  said  unto  him.  It  is  not
lawful  (piiK  eJeo-Tti/,  oh.  xii.  2)  for  thee  to
have  her.  Herod  Philip  being  still. alive.
Bengel  remarks,  "  Causas  matrimoniales
nun  possunt  plane  abdioare  theologi."  Was
he  thinking  of  Luther's  unfortunate  advice
to  Philip  of  Hesse  ?

Ver.  5. — And  when  he  would  have  put
him  to  death,  he  feared  the  multitude  (of.
Luke  XX.  6).  Mark  has, "  And  Herodiaa  set
herself  against  him,  and  would  have  put  him
to  death ;  and  she  could  not ;  for  Herod
feared  John."  The  more  detailed  account
in  Mark  is  doubtless  the  more  exact.  Per-
haps the  facts  of  the  case  were  that,  in  the
first  heat  of  his  resentment,  Herod  wished  to
kill  John,  but  feared  the  anger  of  the
people,  and  that  afterwards,  when  he  had
him  in  his  power  and  Herodias  still .  urged
his  death,  Herod  had  himself  learneil  to
respect  him.  Observe  (1)  that  it  is  quite
impcissible  to  suppose  that  either  evangelist
had  the  words  of  the  other  in  front  of  him.
The  difference  does  nit  consist  merely  of
addition  or  explanation;  (2)  that  these  are
exactly  the  kind  of  verbal  coincidences
which  might  be  expected  to  be  found  in  two
oral  traditions  starting  from  a  common
basis.  For  they  counted  him  as  a  prophet
{iis  Trpo^-finiv  avThv  eI;^o^)  ;  so  ch.  xxi.  26
(cf.  ch.  xxi.  46  ;  Mark  xi.  32;  Phil.  ii.  29).

Ver.  6. — But  when  Herod's  birthday  was
kept ;  came  (Revised  Version)  ;  y^veiriois  Se
7ei/o/ieVois  ToC  'HpqJSou,  dative  of  time  (Winer,
§  xxxi.  9),  with  the  addition  of  a  participle.
Birthday.  So  "  Pharaoh's  birthday"  (Gen.
xl.  20,  TiiJ.epa  yevetrfas').  Thayer's  Grimm
refers  to  "  Alciphr.  Epp.  3, 18,  and  55 ;  Dio
Cass.,  47,  18,  etc.,"  for  ya>ea-ta  being  used
in  the  same  sense.  The  Talmudio  N'DWJ
(see  Levy,  s.«.)  apparently  represents  the
same  word,  and  (preceded  by  DV)  has  the
same  meaning  (of.  Schiirer,  L  ii.  27).  Pos-
sibly Jews  found  yevla-ta  an  easier  word  to
pronounce  than  the  more  classical  yev46\ia.
The  daughter  of  Herodias;  ie.  Salome,
daughter  of  Herod  Philip  and  Herodias ;  she
afterwards  married  her  half-uncle,  Philip
the  tetrarch  (ver.  3,  note).  She  could  not
now  be  less  than  seventeen  or  eighteen  years
old  (cf.  Gutsohmid,  in  Schiirer,  I.  ii.  28),  so,
in  the  East,  could  only  just  be  still  called
a  Kopda-iov  (vex.  11).  Mark's  text  (like  the
Greek  of  Codex  Bezsa  here)  speaks  of
her  as  though  she  lieroelf  was  called
Herodias,  and  was  the  daughter  of  Antipas
aud  Herodias;  but  the  issue  of  this  union


could  not  then  have  been  more  than  two
years  old  (Schiirer,  loc.  cit.).  Besides,  the
trait  mentioned  by  Murk  (vi.  25),  that  she
came  back  with  haste  to  the  king,  asking
for  the  head  of  the  Baptist, implies  th.it  she
was  more  than  a  child.  Kendel  Harris
('  Texts  and  Studies,'  II.  1.  p.  68)  suggests
that  the  confusion  is  due  to  an  early  Latini-
zation  of  the  Greek  from  an  ambiguous  ejus,
Banced.  Probably  with  the  same  kind  of
voluptuous  dance  as  that  of  the  Egyptian
dime  described  by  Warburton  ('Orescent
and  Cross,'  chap.  xiv.).  But  that  a  member
of  the  royal  family  should  so  dance  before
a  company  must  have  been  almost  unheard
of.  Before  them;  in  the  midst  (Revised
Version).  Matthew  only.  Such  a  dance
with  men  sitting  round  would  be  speoially
abhorrent  to  the  Jewish  mind.  And  pleased
Herod.  And  of  course,  as  St.  Mark  adds,
"  them  that  sat  with  him  "  (of.  ver.  9).

Ver  7. — Whereupon  he  promised  with  an
oath  to  give  her  whatsoever  she  would  ask.

Ver.  8. — ^And  she,  being  before  instructed;
ieing  put  forward  (Kevised  Version);
Trpo^iPaa-eetcra  (Acts  xix.  33,  Received  Text ;
Deut.  vi.  7,  LXX.).  The  word  implies  that
the  girl  herself  would  not  have  thought  of
it,  and  perliaps  that  she  had  at  tirst  some
little  reluctance.  But  if  so,  it  was  soon
over,  for  she  came  back  "in  haste  "  (Mark).
Of  her  mother.  St.  Mark  explains  that  she
left  the  room  to  ask  her  mother.  Said,  Give
me.  This  is  the  gift  I  want.  Here.  And
evidently  at  once.  The  word  excludes  the
possibility  of  the  feast  being  in  Tiberias,  if
John  was  slain  at  Machaerus,  as  the  passage
in  Josephus  states  (cf.  ch.  iii.  1,  note).
There  is  no  very  great  difSculty  in  supposing
the  chief  men  of  Galilee,  etc.  (Mark),  to  have
gone  as  far  as  Maciserus  to  pay  their  re-
spects to  Herod  and  to  partake  of  the  feast,
but  whether  the  statement  in  Josephus  is
accurate,  and  how,  if  it  be  so,  it  is  to  be
reconciled  with  the  preceding  statement
that  Machserus  belonged  to  Aretas,  are
questions  not  easily  answered  (see  Schiirer,
I.  ii.  26).  John  Baptist's  head  in  a  charger ;
in  a  charger  Hie  head  of  John  the  Baptist
(Revised  Version).  She  defines  here  still
more  closely  (eSSs  lirl  irlvaxC),  and  then  states
her  request.  On  the  form  of  her  demand
for  John's  death,  Chrj  sostom  says  that  she
wished  to  see  his  tongue  lying  there  silent,
for  she  did  not  merely  long  to  be  freed  from
his  reproaoheB,  but  to  iusnlt  and  jeer  him
(^■KifirivM  Ka\  4itiTa>ediTiu  Kci^eyf.).  Charger.
A  wooden  trencher.

Ver.  9.— And  the  king  was  sorry :  never-
theless for  the  oath's  sake;  bettel-,  and
though  the  king  was  grieved,  yet  for  the  sake
of  his  oaths  (/cal  \u7rrjeeis  6  /SoffiAeis  Sici  ruos
SpKovs,  K.T.A.).  That  he  was  grieved  at
John's  deatli  ig  a  verbal  contradiction  to


OH.  XTV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.


63


ver.  5,  but  after  some  weeks'  or  months'
delay  psychologically  quite  possible  (of.
note  there).  Kiibel  attributes  the  change  to
liis  conscience  recoiling  when  his  wish  had
a  sudden  chance  of  being  accomplished ;  or
it  luay  be  that  he  still  feared  the  multitude
(cf.  ver.  5),  and  felt  anxious  lest  he  should
bring  about  some  political  disturbance.
Oalhs;  for  iu  making  the  promise  of  ver  7
he  would  certainly  take  more  than  one.
And  them  which  sat  with  him  at  meat.
Had  he  uttered  the  promise  and  the  oaths
in  private,  it  would  have  been  different,  but
now  there  were  so  many  witnesses.  Observe
that  these  said  nothing  to  stop  him.  They
were  no  friends  of  the  enthusiast  who  was
now  a  prisoner.  He  commanded  it  to  be
given  her.

Vers.  10, 11. — And  he  sent,  and  beheaded
John  in  the  prison,  and  his  head  was  bronght
in  a  charger  (ver.  8,  note),  and  given  (the
fourth  time  that  the  word  "  give  "  has  come
in  live  verses ;  the  head  of  the  herald  of  the
kingdom  becomes  a  royal  gift)  to  the  dam-
sel— (t^  Kofaaiif,  ver.  6,  note) — and  she
bronght  it  to  her  mother.  But  a  few
minutes  after  she  had  firsst  spoken  her  re-
quest (ver.  8,  note).

Ver.  12. — And  his  disciples  came.  "  And
when  his  disciples  heard  thereof,  they  came"
(Mark).  Perhaps  they  were  not  permitted
to  be  so  much  with  liim  as  at  an  earlier
period  iu  his  imprisonment  (ch.  xi.  2).  But
if  the  murder  was  in  the  evening,  as  would
appear  probable  frum  tlie  circumstances  of
it,  they  would  naturally  not  be  in  the  castle
at  the  time.  And  took  np  the  body;  the
corpse  (Eevised  Version,  xi  irxw/ta).  And
buried  it ;  him  (Revised  Version,  avrii/).  It
is  right  iu  Mark,  but  St.  Matthew  has  pre-
served the  more  popular  form  of  expression.
And  (Revised  Version  adds  they)  went  and
told  Jesus.  Matthew  only.  In  Mark  (vi.
30;  cf.  also  Luke  ix.  10)  this  expression
clearly  belongs  to  the  next  paragraph,  and
is  predicated  of  the  twelve  apostles  on  their
return  from  their  mission  (Mark  vi.  7 — 12 ;
om'  ch.  x.  5).  It  looks  as  though  some  con-
fusion had  arisen  in  the  source  before  St.
Matthew  used  it.  As  the  words  stand  here
they  show  the  kindly  feelings  which  both
John  and  his  disciples  felt  towards  our
Lord.

Vers.  13 — 21. — The  feeding  of  the  five  thou-
mnd.  Parallel  passages :  Mark  vi.  30  — 44 ;
Uike  ix.  10-17;  John  vi.  1—13.  The
miracle  was  deemed  so  characteristic  of  our
pord's  work,  in  his  care  for  men  and  Iiis
power  to  sustain  them,  and  more  especially
in.  itB  being  a  parable  of  his  readiness  to
uupyly  spiritual  food,  that  it  was  recorded
not  -uily  by  eftob  of  the  tUree  evangelists


who  used  the  framework,  but  also  by  the
one  who  depended  entirely  upon  his  own
materials.  But  though  St.  John's  account
of  it  is  on  the  whole  independent,  yet  even
this  has  expressions  which  are  certainly  due
to  the  influence  of  the  source  used  by  the
synoptists,  or,  less  probably,  of  one  or  other
of  our  present  Gospels.

The  evangelist  relates  (1)  the  occasion  of
the  miracle  (vers.  13, 14)  ;  (2)  the  prepara-
tion of  the  disciples  (vers.  15—18) ;  (3)  the
miracle  itself  (vers.  19,  20) ;  (4)  a  summary
statement  of  the  numbers  fed  (ver.  21).

Ver.  13. — When  Jesus  heard  of  it  (of.  ver.
126,  note),  he  departed.  (For  the  form  of
the  sentence,  see  ch.  iv.  12;  xii.  15.)  Thence
by  ship;  in  a  boat  (Revised  Version);  ch.
viii.  23.  Into  a  desert  place  apart.  De-
fined in  John  vi.  3  as  "  the  mountain ;  "  in
Luke  ix.  10  as  "  a  city  called  Bethsaida."
The  spot  appears  to  have  been  in  part  of
the  plain  ElSatiha,  which  is  at  the  north-
east corner  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  on  the
Gaulonitis  side  of  the  Jordan,  and  in  which
stood  Bethsaida-Julias.  Mark  vi.  45  im-
plies that  there  was  a  second  Bethsaida  on
the  western  side  of  the  lake,  which,  though
not  alluded  to  by  Josephus,  is  expressly
spoken  of  in  John  xii.  21,  and  is  probably
referred  to  in  all  the  other  passages  of  tlie
New  Testament  where  the  name  Beth-
saida occurs.  And  when  the  people  (the
multitudes,  Revised  Version)  had  heard
thereof,  they  followed  him  on  foot  out  of  the
eities.  The  fact  that  it  was  near  a  feast-
time  (John  vi.  4,  the  Passover,  if  the  text
be  right ;  and  cf.  infra,  ver.  19,  note)  per-
haps accounts  for  the  multitudes  being  so
large.  Some  at  least  would  be  on  their  way
np  to  Jerusalem.

Ver.  14.— The  first  half  of  this  verse  is
found  verbally  in  Mark  (vi.  34) ;  comp.  also
ch.  ix.  36,  note.  And  Jesus  went  forth;
eame  forth  (Revised  Version);  i.e.  from  I  he
more  retired  place  where  he  Ijad  been  con-
TOrsiug  with  his  disciples  (cf.  Mark  and
Luke).  And  saw  a  great  multitude.  "  The
multitudes "  of  ver.  13  have  now  become
one  body.  And  was  moved  with  compassion
toward  them ;  and  he  had  compassion  on
them  (Revised  Version).  The  true  reading,
eV  avTols  (contrast  Mark  and  ch.  xv.  .S2),
regards  the  Lord's  pity  at,  so  to  say,  a  later
stage  than  the  common  reading,  iv'  outous.
It  was  not  only  directed  towards  them,  bnt
actually  resting  on  them.  And  he  healed
(^iSepitrevaiv,  ch.  iv.  23,  note)  their  sick
{rovs  a^fidtffTovs  avrStv).  ''A^^tinrroshexe  only
in  Matthew,  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testa-
ment i  n  Mark  vi.  5, 1 3  [xvi.  1 8] ;  1  Oor.  xi.  30.
As  compared  with  air9ivhs,  it "  seems  to  point


64


THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 36.


to  diBeases  predominantly  marked  by  loss  of
bodily  power  ('diuturno  languore  teneri,'
Calvin),  while  the  moie  comirion  IttrSei'iis  is
simply  used  to  denote  sickness  generally  "
(Bishop  Ellioott,  on  1  Cor.,  he.  eit.).  But  in
our  passage  it  is  used  without  any  such
limitation  (cf.  Luke,  "And  he  healed  them
that  had  need  of  healing  ").  Mark  and  Joljn
do  not  speak  of  miracles  of  healing  on  this
occasion.

Yer.  15. — And  when  it  was  evening.  But
not  as  late  as  the  "  evenin}; "  of  ver.  23.
(For  a  discussion  upon  the  technical  division
of  two  "  evenings,"  see  Gesenius,  '  Thesau-
rus,' p.  1064.)  It  appears  that  the  iirst
evening  was  from  the  ninth  to  the  twelfth
hour  (our  3  p.m.  to  6  p.m.  at  the  equinoxes),
and  the  second  evening  was  for  a  short  time,
perhaps  forty  minutes,  after  sunset  (of.  ch.
viii.  16,  note).  His  {the.  Be  vised  Version)  dis-
ciples came  to  him,  saying.  St.  John  alone
has  recorded  our  Lord's  previous  oonveriiation
with  Philip  (vi.  5—7).  This  is  a  desert
place ;  the  plaee  is  desert  (Revised  Version),
which  better  marks  the  parallelism  with  the
next  clause.  And  the  time  is  now  (already,
Eevised  Version)  past  (^  S>pa  ^5ij  irap^\flej/) ;
i.e.  probably  the  hour  at  wliich  he  was  ac-
customed to  dismiss  his  audience.  For  he
would  often  have  to  consider  their  wish  to
get  home  before  niglitt'all.  Send  the  multi-
tude away;  the  multitudes  (Eevised  Ver-
sion) ;  for  now  again  they  are  regariied  sepa-
nitely  as  having  to  go  in  different  direc-
tions. That  they  may  go  (go  away)  into
the  villages,  and  buy  themselves  victuals;
food  (Eevised  Version).  One  at  least  of
the  disciples  would  have  a  keen  eye  for
tlie  amount  of  the  contents  of  the  common
purse.

Ver.  16. — But  Jesus  said  unto  them,  They
need  not  depart;  they  have  no  need  to  go
away  (Eevised  Version).  Matthew  only.
The  Lord  takes  up  the  expression.  There
is  no  need  for  tliem  to  move  from  this  place,
desert  though  it  is.  Give  ye  them  to  eat.
Ye;  emphatic.  He  throws  upon  his  dis-
ciples the  duty  of  feeding  them,  and,  stiauge
though  the  command  seemed  to  them  (cf.
2  Kings  iv.  43),  they  carried  it  out.

Ver.  17. — And  they  say  unto  him,  We
have  here  (£5e)  but  five  loaves  (ch.  iv.  3,
note),  and  two  fishes  (ch.  vii.  9,  note).  St.
Matthew  omits  the  question,  "Shall  we  go
and  buy  ? "  etc.,  which  comes  in  Mark  and
Luke,  and  essentially  in  John  (ver.  5).

Ver.  18.— Matthew  only.  He  said,  Bring
them  hither  to  me  (<p^psrc  not  wSe  aurovs).
This  gives  the  sense,  but  still  more  is  im-
plied. He  takes  up  their  a>Se.  "Yes,"  he
says,  "it  is  possible  to  feed  them  where  wo
are,  and  especially  where  1  ain.  For  there
is  not  the  poverty  of  supply  hero  that  you
think  there  is."    Observe  that  for  tlie  dis-


ciples to  bring  them  "here"  was  in  itself
an  act  of  faith.

Ver.  19. -And  he  commanded  the  multi-
tude; the  multitudes  (Revised  Version).
Here  also  the  plural  (ver.  15),  because  they
are  thought  of  as  grouped  over  the  ground.
To  sit  down;  i.e.  to  recline  as  at  a  meal
(apaKAiBTjvai),  On  the  grass  (ivl  tov  xi^ptou).
The  addition  of  "  green  "  (x^wpifj)  in  Mark
suits  the  time  of  the  Passover  (ver.  13,  note),
but  hardly  of  any  later  feast,  for  the  grass
would  have  been  dried  up.  And  took  the
five  loaves,  and  the  two  fishes.  He  used  all
the  means  there  were.  And  looking  up  to
heaven.  So  also  Mark  vii.  34 ;  John  xvii.  1.
He  blessed,  He  may  well  have  used  the
blessing  that  is  still  used  over  bread
("  Blessed  art  thou,  Jehovah  our  God,  King
of  the  world,  that  causest  bread  to  come
forth  from  tlie  earth  ") ;  for  this  can  be  appii-
rently  traced  to  the  second  or  third  century
A.D.,  and  is  probably  much  older  still  (cf.
Edersheim,  'Life,'  i.  684;  Zunz,  'Gottes-
dienstliche  Vortrage,'  p.  371,  edit.  1832).
(For  the  habit  of  saying  grace  before  meals,
cf .  ch.  XV.  36  ;  xxvi.  26  ;  Eom.  xiv.  6 ;  1  Cor.
X.  30 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  5 ;  see  also  1  Sam.  ii.  13.)
And  brake,  and  gave  the  loaves  to  his
disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude.
That  the  people  received  the  bread  at  the
hands  of  the  disciples  is  not  mentioned  by
St.  John.  Perhaps  beeause  his  chapter
dwells  so  much  on  the  need  of  direct  contact
with  Christ.  But  Christ's  work  through
his  agents,  both  before  and  after  his  time
on  earth,  is  an  important  point  with  the
syn'>ptisls.

Ver.  20. — And  they  did  all  eat,  and  were
filled(6xo/)Tii<rfli7irai',ch.  v.6,note).  Andthey.
Undefined,  but  seen  from  ch.  xvi.  9 ;  John
vi.  12,  to  have  been  the  disciples.  Took  up
of  the  fragments  that  remained ;  that  which
remained  over  of  tlte  broken  pieces  (Revised
Version) ;  i.e.  of  the  pieces  broken  by  our
Lord  for  distribution  (ver.  19).  Twelve
baskets  fuU,  The  disciples  personally  lost
nothing  by  the  miracle  (ver.  15,  note),  the
provision  basket  that  each  always  carried
was  now  replenished.  Baskets;  "oofyus"
(Wiekliffe) ;  ko<i>Ivovs  (cf.  Luke  ix.  17,  note ;
and  the  Taln)udio  saying,  "He  that  has
bread  in  his  basket  is  not  like  him  that  bus
not  bread  in  his  basket,"  Talm.  Bab.,
'Yon1a,'746).

Ver.  21. — And  they  that  had  eaten  were
about  five  thousand  men,  beside  women  and
ohUdren.  Only  Matthew  mentions  the  pre-
sence of  other  than  men.  We  may  assume
that  no  great  uumber  of  women  and  chil-
dren were  there  ;  and  this,  considering  the
distance  that  most  had  been  obliged  to  go
(ver.  13),  is  what  we  should  expect.  "  Qh-
serve  here  the  diminutive  iratSiwi>,  little
children,  whom  their  mothers  either  car-


CH,  2UV.  1— 36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  65


ried  in  their  arms  or  led  by  the  hand"
(Meyer).

Vers.  22— 33.— Ohrist'a  power  over  the
elements.  He  walks  on  the  water  and
Btays  the  storm.  St.  Peter's  attempt  to
walk  on  the  water  is  successful  so  long  as
he  exercises  faith  on  Glirist.  Jesus  receives
homage  as  Messiah.  Parallel  passages :
Mark  vi.  4.5—52 ;  John  vi.  15—21.  It  is
strange  that  the  incident  of  St.  Peter  is
recorded  in  Matthew  only,  and  not  in  Mark,
for  it  serves  to  emphasize  what  is  a  leading
thought  of  the  preceding  narrative,  even  in
Mark,  viz.  the  power  that  believers  receive
by  virtue  of  faith  on  Christ  (vers.  16,  19).
With  Christ  in  the  boat,  diiSculties  cease
'ver.  32);  they  that  believe  on  him  can
triumph  as  he  did  (vers.  28 — 31;  cf.  the
tliought  of  John  xiv.  19,  end).  For  St.
John's  purpose  the  mention  of  St.  Peter
was  not  necessary ;  since,  by  way  of  Intro-
duction to  the  following  discourse,  he
desired  rather  to  familiarize  his  readers
with  the  idea  of  Christ's  body  being  trium-
phant over  earthly  limitations  (cf.  ver.  19,
note).

Yer.  22. — And  straightway  Jesus  con-
strained his  disciples.  It  was  not  their
wish  to  leave  him,  especially  when  the
multitudes  seemed  likely  to  elect  him  king
(John  vi.  15).  But  from  the  temptation  to
side  with  the  multitudes  our  Lord  desired
now  to  bliield  them.  Separation  and  physi-
cal work  (ver.  24)  would  calm  tlieir  excite-
ment, and  the  object-lesson  that  their
Master  already  ruled  over  wind  and  sea
would  lead  them  to  more  perfect  trust  in
his  methods.  Another  reason  for  his  send-
ing tiiem  forward  may  have  been  that  they
sliould  use  the  failing  light ;  and  yet
another,  that  he  himself  desired  time  for
prayer.  To  get  into  a  ship ;  a  boat  Qinffwi"
els  TtKoiov) ;  cf.  ch.  viii.  23  (fhe  boat,  Revised
Version,  reading  «'s  t^  irKoiov).  And  to  go
before  him  {vpoiyeu'  aJT6i/:  ch.  ii.  9;  xxi.
9).  For  he  would  follow.  He  fulfilled  his
promise  muoli  more  literally  than  they
anticipated.  ITnto  the  other  side.  "  Unto
Bethsaida"  (Mark);  "unto  Capernaum"  I
(John).  Probably  they  landed  at  the
western  Bethsaida  (ver.  13,  note),  in  6en-
nesaret  (ver.  34),  and  went  on  to  Caper-
naum, where  our  Lord  again  addressed  the
people  (John  vi.  24—26).  While  he  sent —
till  he  thotdd  send  (Bevised  Version) ;  Uas
o5  diToKia-y,  ch.  xiii.  33 — the  multitudes
away.  Why  should  this  take  up  time?
Why  did  he  not  dismiss  them  then  and
tliere?  Possibly  they  were  too  eager  to
lUTTHEW — ^n.


carry  out  their  own  plans  on  his  behalf  to
attend  to  only  one  expression  of  his  wish.

Ver.  23.— And  when  he  had  sent  the
multitudes  away.  Matthew  speaks  merely
of  the  dismissal  as  such  (hroKiiras  robs
Sx^^ovs);  Mark  refers  to  his  parting  words
^aTora^i/ievos  outois,  i.e.  probably  to  the
multitude).  He  went  up  into  a  mountain —
the  mountain  (Eevised  Version);  ch.  v.  1,
note — apart.  Ka/  ISiar  is  to  be  joined  with
the  preceding,  and  not  to  the  following
words  (cf.  ver.  18;  oh.  xvii.  19).  And  when
the  evening  was  come  (ver.  15,  note),  he
was  there  alone.  For  some  eight  hours,  if
it  was  spring  or  autumn  (ver.  25).

Ver.  24. — But  the  ship;  boat  (Revised
Version);  ver.  22.  Was  now;  rather,
already,  when  the  following  incident  iiap-
peued.  In  the  midst  of  the  sea.  So  also
the  text  of  the  Revised  Version  (with
practically  Mark  vi.  47),  but  its  margin,
"  was  many  furlongs  distant  from  the  land."
Westcott  and  Hoit  prefer  the  latter,  with
Codex  B  and  the  Old  Syriao.  It  some-
what resembles  Jolin  vi.  19.  Tossed  j  dii-
tressed  (Revised  Version).  For  0ao-avi-
idnevov  suggests  not  physical  motion,  but
pain  and  anguish,  the  idea  being  trans-
ferred in  figure  to  the  bo  it.  In  Mark  it
is  applied  more  strictly  to  the  disciples,
■flTith  waves ;  by  the.waves  (Revised  Version).
The  agents  of  the  torture  (ra-i  ray  Kvnarav).
For  the  wind  was  contrary.  Yet  he  came
not  at  once,  for  he  would  teach  us  to  bear
troubles  bravely  (cf.  Chrysostom).

Ver.  25. — And  in  the  fourth  watoh  of  the
night.  Therefore  some  nine  hours  after
sunset  (ver.  23,  note).  They  had  been
battling  for  hours,  and  had  only  gone  about
three  miles  and  a  lialf  (John  vi.  19).  Jesus
went;  came  (Eavised  Version);  ^Affe,  not
wirri\9e,  with  Received  Text.  Unto  them,
walking  on  the  sea  {M  t^iv  edXatraav);
contrast  ver.  26  (eirl  Trjs  BaXdirirTis).  Here
there  is  more  tliought  of  motion  (cf.  ver.  29),
but  in  the  next  verse  the  advance  is  almost
forgotten,  and  the  fact  of  Christ  being  on
the  water  is  all-important ;  "  they  saw  him
on  the  sea,  walking."

Ver.  26. — And  when  the  disciples  saw
him  walking  on  the  sea,  they  were  troubled,
saying,  It  is  a  spirit— a»  apparition  (Revised
Version,  tpavTaorixi  iariv) — and  they  cried
out  for  fear.

Ver.  27. — But  straightway  Jesns  spake
unto  them  (JshdXtiaiv,  not  iKfa^ev).  He
was  evidently  near  them.  Saying,  Be  of
good  oheer  (ftaoffeiTf,  ch.  ix.  2);  it  is  I;  be
not  afraid.  Encouragement,  self-manifesta-
tion, recall  from  present  terror.  But  the
absence  of  flap(re?re  in  John  vi.  20  suggests
that  it  is,  perhaps,  a  duplicate  rendering  of
the  Aramaic  for  lih  ipo$€7a-0e.  For  the
LXX.  commonly  translates  "  fear  ye  not "


66


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORPING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 3S


by  eapfffirf  {e.g.  Exod.  xiv.  13;  xx.  20).
One  or  two  second-rate  manuscripts  omit
Sapafhe  in  Mark,  but  this  may  be  only  due
to  a  reminiscence  of  John.  It  is  also  omitted
in  Tatiau'a'Diatessaion'  (edit.  Hemphill).

Vera.  28—31.—^.  PeUt't  venture.  Mat-
thew only.

Yer.  28. — And;  S4,  slightly  adversative,
because  St.  Peter's  words  were  so  contrary
to  what  might  have  been  expected.  Peter
answered  him  and  said,  Iiord,  if  it  be  then
(ei  irii  eV).  No  doubt  is  implied  (ch.  iv.  8,
note).  Bid  me  (icc\eu(riiv  fie) ;  j«6e  me  (Vul-
gate). He  will  only  come  at  Christ's  com-
mand. In  this  lies  the  difference— and  it
is  a  decisive  difference — from  the  second
temptation  (ch.  iv.  6).  Come  unto  thee  on
the  water.  Kot  "bid  me  walk  on  the
water ; "  for  he  does  not  want  to  perform  a
miracle,  but  to  come  to  Jesus.  His  request
is  not  due  to  the  hope  of  making  a  sbow,
but  to  impulsive  love.  Observe,  too,  that
he  seems  to  have  realized  that  the  Lord
would  enable  his  followers  to  do  as  he  him-
self did  (cf.  Chrysostom).  On  the  water;
the  watere  (Bevised  Version) ;  rough  though
they  were.  Had  we  any  other  account  of
this  incident,  it  would  be  interesting  to  see
if  it  contained  these  words.  They  read
very  like  an  explanatory  addition  by  the
narrator,

Ver.  29. — ^And  he  said,  Come.  Our  Lord
takes  him  at  his  word,  and  gives  the
command.  It  is  not  merely  a  permission.
Observe  that  our  Lord  never  blames  him
for  having  made  the  request.  His  venture
of  faith  would  have  been  altogether  success-
ful had  his  faith  continued.  And  when
Peter  was  come  down  out  of  the  ship.  The
Eevised  Version  has  more  simply,  And  Peter
weiit  down  from  the  boat,  and.  He  walked  on
the  water.  For  the  narrator  was  chiefly  in-
terested in  his  walking  there  (contrast  ver.
28).  To  go  to  Jesns ;  rather,  and  came  to
Jesue  (Westcott  and  Hort;  of.  margin  of
Bevised  Version).  'I'he  true  text  states
what  did,  in  fact,  happen,  notwithxtandiug
Peter's  lack  of  faith  (cf.  ver.  81).

Ver.  SU. — But  when  he  saw  the  wind
boysterous  Q<rxvp6i'  is  clearly  a  gloss,  and
therefore  omitted  by  the  Revised  Version).
He  was  afraid ;  and  beginning  to  sink.  The
natural  tendency  to  sink,  which  he  had  had
all  the  time,  was  cnuntcracted  before  by  his
faith,  which  enabled  him  to  rtoeive  Olirist's
power.  But  now  that  his  doubt  made  liim
incapable  of  receiving  this,  he  sank  (cf.
Meyer).  He  cried  (^/cpaifv),  saying,  Lord,
save  me  (oh.  viii.  25).  Aphraates  ('  Homi-
lies,' vide  Hesch, '  Agrapha,'  p.  880)  quotes
au  apocryphal  saying  of  our  Lord's,  "  Doubt
Hot,  lest  ye  are  engujifed  iu  the  world,  a«


Simon  ;  for  he  doubted,  and  began  to  aink  in
the  sea."

Ver.  31. — And  immediately.  Without
any  waste  of  time,  just  as  in  ver.  27.  Jesus
stretched  forth  his  hand.  So  that  St.  Peter
had  come  up  to  him  (ver.  2\)).  And  caught
him ;  and  took  hold  of  him  (Revised  Vcr-
eion,  €Tre\(ifiero  avTou :  cf.  Heb.  ii.  16 ;
Tiii.  9).  Aiid  said;  eat't/i (Revised  Version).
The  writer  passes  to  more  vivid  narration.
Unto  him,  0  thon  of  little  faith  (J>\i.y6m(TT  f ) ;
ch.  vi.  30,  note.  But  in  cIj.  xvii.  20  (West-
cott and  Hort)  the  substantive  is  used  of
faith  in  a  more  active  sense.  Wherefore  (e»
tO;  "no'?,  literally  rendered"  (Dr.  Guille-
mard).  Didst  thou  doubt  ?  (^Sttrrairas).  In
the  New  Testament,  ch.  xxviii.  17  only.
Christ  saves  first,  and  rebukes  afterwards.
Perhaps  the  need  for  help  was  more  imme-
diate than  in  ch.  viii.  26,  or  possibly  the
fervency  of  St.  Peter's  love  deserved  gentler
treatment.

Ver.  82. — ^And  whan  they  were  oome — gone
up  (Revised  Version) — into  the  ship,  the  wind
ceased.  Apparently  not  before,  so  that
Peter  may  still  have  walked  a  little  further
on  the  water  in  the  midst  of  the  storm,  but
upheld  by  the  Lord's  hand.

Ver.  33.— Matthew  only.  Then — and  (Ee-
vised Version,  Se')— they  that  were  in  the
ship ;  hoat  (Revised  Version).  If  there  were
others  than  the  disciples  in  the  boat,  as  is
probable,  these  also  would  be  included;  but
the  disciples  would  naturidly  take  the  lead
(cf.  tlie  notes  on  ch.  viii.  23, 27),  Came  and.
'fhe  Bevised  Version  omits  these  two  words,
with  the  manuscripts.  They  are  due  to  the
analogy  of  ch.  viii.  2;  ix.  18.  Worshipped
him  (ch.  iv.  9,  note).  In  ch.  viii.  27  we
read  of  wonder ;  here,  of  homage.  Saying,
Of  a  truth  (aA7)«us):  cf.  ch.  v.  18,  t.v.  "verily."
The  word  seems  to  imply  that  the  suggestion
did  not  enter  their  minds  now  for  tbe  firot
time.  Two  had,  perhaps,  heard  the  words
spoken  at  the  baptism  (ch.  iii.  17),  and  most
of  them,  if  not  all,  the  utterance  by  the
demons  in  oh.  viii.  29.  Yet  these  utteiauces
in  reality  far  surpassed  what  they  even  now
imagined  (vide  infra).  Thou  art  the  Son  of
God  (06oC  vibs  cJ).  Although  the  phrase
is  not  of  the  definite  form  found  in  ch.  xxvi.
63  and  xvi.  16,  where  it  is  used  with  express
reference  to  tbe  Messialiship  of  Jesus  (cf.
for  the  intermediate  form,  ch.  xxvii.  40
with  43),  yet  it  is  impossible  to  take  it
here  as  merely  referring  to  a  moral  relalion
between  Jesus  and  God.  In  ch.  xxvii.  54
this  miglit  be  sufficient  (Luke  has  "  right-
eous"); but  here  there  is  no  question  of
coming  up  to  a  standard  of  moral  upright-
ness, but  rather  of  manifestation  of  power,
and  this  is  connected  with  Messiah:  His
authority  over  the  elements  leads  to  the
homage  of  those  who  witaesa  its  exuruiiMk


OH.  XIV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


67


knd  forces  from  them  the  ezpTesdon  that  he
is  the  promised  Bepresentative  of  God  on
earth  (Pa.  ii.  7 ;  of.  oh.  ii.  15,  note).  Ob-
»erve,  however,  that  not  even  so  is  it  a  pro-
fession of  faith  in  his  absolute  Divinity.
(KiibeVs  note  on  this  subject  in  oh.  viii.  29
is  very  good.)

Vers.  34 — 36. — On  landing  at  Oennetaret
numbers  come  to  him  and  are  healed.  Parallel
passage :  Mark  vi.  53 — 56,  which  is  fuller.

Ver.  34. — And  when  they  were  gone  over
—hadcrossed  ot)er(Re vised  Version);  Siawepd-
cravTes,  ch.  ix.  1 — they  came  into  the  land
of  Oennesaret — to  the  land,  unto  Oenrusaret
(Eevised  Version,  with  the  true  text).  The
plain  El-SuKtr,  part  of  the  noith-west  side
of  the  lake,  and  some  three  miles  long  by
one  broad,  extending,  roughly,  from  Chorazin
(perhaps  Khan  Minyeh ;  but  cump.  oh.  xi.
21,  note)  to  Magdala.  (For  its  fertility,  see
JoaephuB, '  Wars,'  iii  10.  8.)


Ver.  35. — And  when  the  men  of  that  place
had  knowledge  of  him,  they  sent  ont  into
all  that  country  round  about  (ef.  ch.  iii.  5).
Matthew  alone  states  definitely  that  this  zeal
was  shown  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Plain
of  Gennesaret.  Mark's  words  (vi.  55)  are
vaguer.  And  brought  unto  iha  all  that
were  diseased;  sick  (Revised  Version);  of.
ch.  iv.  24 ;  viii.  16.

Ver.  36. — And  besought ;  and  they  besought
(Bevised  Version) ;  t.e.  the  sick,  for  probably
the  change  of  person  takes  place  here  and
not  at  "  that  they  might  touch."  Him  that
they  might  only  touch  the  hem  of  his
garment  (ch.  ix.  20,  21,  notes):  and  as
many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly  whole
(SiiirdSTiiTav')  i  were  made  whole  (Bevised
Version).  For  Sid  here  is  probably  not
intensive,  but  rather  gives  the  thought  of
being  brought  out  safe  through  the  danger.
In  the  LXX.  Staaii(e(reau  is  a  common
rendering  of  ahD\  "  escape."


HGMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  death  of  John  the  Baptist.  I.  Herod  the  tetrarch.  1,  He
heard  of  the  fame  of  Jesus.  Herod  Antipas  was  a  weak,  cruel,  voluptuous  tyrant ;  he
resembled  his  father  In  his  vices,  not  in  his  capacity  and  energy  of  character.  He  heard
of  Christ's  miracles;  it  seems  strange  if,  as  the  words  appear  to  imply,  he  now  heard  of
Christ  for  the  first  time.  For  Christ  had  long  been  preaching  in  Galilee ;  about  a  year,
perhaps  more.  Great  multitudes  had  flocked  to  hear  him ;  bis  mighty  works  bad  excited
a  far-spread  interest  and  wonder.  Herod  may  have  been  absent  from  Galilee  during
much  of  the  time,  possibly  at  the  distant  fortress  of  Machasrus,  where  John  the  Baptist
was  imprisoned.  But  his  life  was  spent  in  ostentatious  display  and  sensual  excesses.
He  would  take  no  interest  in  a  religions  movement  unless  his  fears  were  aroused  by  the
popular  excitement  which  it  caused.  His  courtiers  would  not  listen  themselves  to  the
preaching  of  Jesus;  or  if  any  did,  such  as  the  nobleman  whose  son  was  healed  by
the  Lord  at  Capernaum,  or  Chuza,  Herod's  steward  (possibly  identical  with  that  noble-
man), whose  wife  Joanna  ministered  to  our  Lord,  they  would  not  relate  to  the  hard-
hearted selfish  tyrant  teaching  so  uncongenial  to  hie  character.  The  miracles,  it  is
true,  would  excite  more  interest ;  they  would  stir  up  his  curiosity.  Some  account  of
them  reached  him  at  last.  Thus  the  ruler  of  Galilee  was  perhaps  one  of  the  last  men
in  the  province  to  hear  of  the  Saviour.  The  great  in  this  world  are  not  always  great  in
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  tumult  of  political  cares  and  the  glitter  of  earthly  pomp
often  prevent  them  from  hearing  the  fame  of  Jesus.  His  blessed  work  i  oes  on  among
the  lowly.  Souls  are  healed,  the  eyes  of  the  blind  are  opened.  The  good  news  does  not
reach  those  who  dwell  in  kings'  houses.  Thank  God,  it  is  not  always  so ;  there  are
men  high  in  rank  who  are  also  living  near  to  Christ.  2.  His  superstitious  fears.  Herod
is  thought  to  have  been  s  Sadducee.  Probably  he  had  no  real  religious  convictions.
But  inconsistencies  are  common  in  human  nature ;  the  unbelieving  are  not  unfrequently
superstitious.  Herod  was  haunted  by  a  guilty  conscience.  The  spectres  of  those  whom
he  had  foully  murdered  troubled  his  dreams.  Christ's  mighty  works  excited  his  atten-
tion. No  ordinary  man,  he  knew,  could  do  such  things.  It  must  be  some  one  more
than  mortal;  some  one  in  whom  the  powers  of  the  unseen  world  were  active  and
energetic.  And  conscience  whispered,  and  an  awful  shudder  thrilled  through  the
despot's  soul,  "  It  is  John — John,  whom  I  beheaded."  Better  to  be  the  most  miserable
prisoner  perishing  in  the  gloomy  dungeons  of  Maohaerus  than  that  tyrant,  whom  the
world  called  happy,  terror-stricken  in  his  g  Ided  palace.  3.  Be  desired  to  see  Christ.
T)m  Lord  would  not  come ;  he  departed  into  a  desert  place-     "  I  will  come  and  heftl


68  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xiv.  1—36.

him,"  he  said,  when  the  centurion  Bent  for  him.  He  would  not  go  to  Herod.  For  what
were  Herod's  motives?  Partly  mere  curiosity;  partly  that  awful  power  of  conscience
which  seems  sometimes  to  draw  the  criminal  to  the  scene  of  his  crime  or  the  murdered
boily  of  his  victim  ;  partly,  perliaps,  malice  and  fear ;  he  would  have  slain  the  Lord  as
ho  had  slain  the  prophet.  The  Lord  Christ  doth  not  manifest  himself  to  those  who
seek  him  from  motives  such  as  these.  Herod  saw  him  at  last.  The  sight  did  him  no
good  ;  it  increased  his  condemnation.  He  set  Christ  at  nought,  and  shared  with  Pilate
the  guilt  of  his  death.

II.  The  imprisonmbnt  of  John.  1.  The  sin  of  Herod.  He  had  married  Herodiaa.
That  wicked  woman  had  ensnared  him  with  her  deceitful  beauty.  She  was  not  con-
tented with  the  quiet  life  of  her  husband  Philip ;  she  sought  rank,  wealth,  magnificence.
Antipas  was  the  greatest  prince  of  the  family.  She  lured  him  to  his  niin.  She  heeded
not  sin  and  shame  and  scandal,  so  that  she  might  compass  her  wicked  purpose.  Now
she  was  the  tetrarch's  queen,  but  her  soul  was  stained  with  the  double  guilt  of  incest
and  adultery.  What  is  beauty  of  person  when  it  hides  a  black  and  loathsome  soul  ?
Herod  was  weak  and  self-indulgent.  He  fell  into  the  snares  of  Herodias.  He  took  her
from  her  husband.  The  stronger  will  of  that  wicked  woman  led  him  on  from  sin  to
sin  ;  she  became  a  second  Jezebel  to  a  second  Ahab.  2.  The  rebuke  of  John.  John
had  had  considerable  influence  with  Herod.  "  Herod  feared  John,"  St.  Mark  tells  us,
"  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  a  holy,  and  observed  him  [or  rather, '  kept  him
in  safety '] ;  and  when  he  heard  him,  he  did  many  things  [or  rather,'  he  was  much  per-
plexed '],  and  heard  him  gladly."  Herod  had  paid  some  attention  to  John ;  partly,  per-
haps, from  political  rt-asons,  for  John  had  been  for  some  time  a  great  powtr  in  the  land ;
partly  from  curiosity  and  some  sort  of  languid  interest  in  Jolin's  mission  and  character.
He  was  struck,  too,  witli  the  intense  earnestness  of  his  preaching ;  be  felt  the  power  of
his  commanding  personality.  Worldly  men  sometimes  take  a  sort  of  interest  in  religious
matters.  Statesmen  are  forced  to  do  so  from  the  widespread  influence  of  religious
motives.  Men  are  attracted  by  a  strong  character  or  great  spiritual  eloquence.  But
this  external  interest  in  religion  may  coexist  with  irreligious  habits  and  a  hatred  of
religious  restraints.  John  the  Baptist  knew  this.  He  did  not  care  to  retain  Herod's
favour  at  the  cost  of  condoning  his  sin.  He  wanted  Herod's  soul;  his  spiritual  good,
not  his  patronage.  So  he  rebuked  him  boldly  for  his  sin :  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee
to  have  her."  John  possessed  in  a  high  degree  that  holy  courage  which  is  so  often
necessary  in  dealing  with  souls.  It  is  easy  to  speak  to  the  humble  and  the  timid  of
their  faults ;  but  when  the  sinner  is  great  and  powerful,  stem,  perhaps,  and  masterful,
it  needs  a  brave  man  then  to  set  his  sin  before  him,  and  to  urge  him  to  repentance.
John  did  so  plainly.  The  guilty  pair  must  be  separated.  Nothing  else  could  avail
Herod  ;  no  affectation  of  religion,  no  costly  gifts,  no  patronage  of  John's  cause.  He  could
not  be  saved  in  his  sin — that  was  impossible;  he  must  at  any  cost  tear  himself  from
it.  3.  Herod's  answer.  He  cast  John  into  prison.  Wicked  men  will  do  the  like  now
as  far  as  lies  in  their  power;  they  will  do  all  they  can  to  injure  the  laitliful  Christian
who  reproves  them  for  their  souls'  good.  So  it  was  with  Herod.  John  might  reprove
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  the  publicans  and  .soldiers ;  but  when  he  came  to  reprove
Herod  himself,  then  he  shut  up  John  in  prison.  It  was  a  hard  lot  for  one  like  John,
accustomed  to  the  free  open  life  of  the  desert,  to  be  penned  up  in  some  wretched  dungeon.
Herod  would  have  put  him  to  death  at  once;  his  own  anger  prompted  hiin,  Herodias
urged  him  in  her  unfeminine  malice.  But  he  feared  the  people;  and,  as  St.  Mark  tells
us,  lie  feared  and  respected  John  himself.  Herod  feared  John,  he  feared  the  people;
he  did  not  fear  God.  John  feared  God,  and  that  holy  fear  raised  him  above  all  other
fears ;  he  feared  nothing  else,  but  only  Gtod.  Oh  for  that  brave  and  holy  faith  to  keep
the  fear  of  God  in  our  hearts,  and  in  that  fear  always  to  obey  him !  Worldly  men
are  restrained  from  crime  by  some  lower  motive;  it  was  sdfish  fear  that  kept  Herod  for
a  time  from  the  awful  guilt  of  murder.

III.  The  birthday  feast.  1.  The  dance  of  Salome.  There  were  high  festivities
at  Mach»ru8  to  celebrate  Herod's  birthday  or  perhaps  his  accession  to  the  crown.  He
had  gathered  a  great  company  round  him — his  lords,  high  captains,  and  chief  estates  of
Galilee.  We  may  be  sure  that  his  guests  were  entertained  with  all  the  costly  luxury
of  the  time.  Even  the  Boman  Persius  had  heard  of  the  sumptuousness  of  these
Herodian  banquets  (v.  180).    But  there  was  one  show  which  could  not  have  been


en.  XIV.  1— 36.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  69

expected.  Salome,  Ilcrod'a  own  niece,  the  great-granddanghtet  of  Mariauiue,  the
descendant  of  the  long  line  of  Asmou«an  princes,  so  utterly  forgot  the  delicacy  of  a
Hehrew  maiden  and  the  decorum  of  a  princess  as  to  dance  alone  in  the  midst  of  Herod's
nobles  when  excited  with  feasting  and  heated  witli  wine.  Vashti,  the  Persian  queen,
had  forfeited  the  crowa  rather  than  even  appear  at  such  a  banquet.  Salome,  it  seems,
came  unbidden,  and  in  all  the  bright  beauty  of  her  early  youth  danced  before  the
assembled  guests.  It  was  unbecoming,  indecent.  But  the  guests  were  delighted ;  and,
strange  to  say,  Herod  too  was  pleased,  though  it  was  his  own  niece,  and  now  his  step-
daughter, who  was  thus  transgressing  the  accepted  rules  of  society.  Feasting  and  wine
often  lead  to  sin.  A  simple  life  is  safest  for  a  Ohristiau.  2.  Herod's  rash  oath.  In  his
excitement  and  folly  he  promised  her  with  an  oath  whatever  she  would  asli.  He  involied
the  holy  Name  of  God  at  this  wild,  dissolute  feast.  He  swore  to  what  he  knew  not.
Wine  and  luxury  help  the  devil  in  his  work  of  slaying  souls.  The  plot  had  been  laid.
The  princess  was  instructed  by  her  wicked  mother.  The  malice  of  hell  lurked  under
the  girlish  beauty  of  Salome.  That  fatal  oath  was  to  bring  the  most  awful  guilt  upon
the  soul  of  Herod.  For  Salome  claimed  his  promise.  "  I  will  that  thou  forthwith  give
me  in  a  charger  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist."  She  would  have  it  immediately.  The
tetrarch  was  weak  and  vacillating;  she  would  hold  him  to  his  wicked  oath.  She
would  have  it  there  and  then  on  a  charger — on  one  of  the  great  dishes,  perhaps  of  silver
or  gold,  which  had  been  used  at  that  gorgeous  banquet;  a  thing  ghastly  and  horrible
exceedingly.  The  king  was  sorry.  He  had  hated  John ;  once  he  wished  to  kill  him.
But  not  now.  He  feared  the  people ;  his  old  reverence  for  John  returned ;  he  shrank
from  the  fearful  deed.  But  he  had  sworn ;  all  his  courtiers  had  heard  him.  He  had  not
cared  for  the  shame  of  his  niece ;  but  he  thought  it  shame  that  a  prince  should  break
his  word,  should  be  false  to  his  oath.  He  thought  much  more  of  those  half-drunkEU
guests  who  sat  around  than  he  thought  of  God.  For,  had  he  thought  of  God's  honour,
his  couscience  would  have  told  him  that  to  break  such  an  oath  was  far  less  insulting
to  the  honour  of  God  than  to  keep  it.  It  was  sinful  exceedingly  to  swear  as  Herod  had
done,  and  so  to  expose  hiuiself  to  the  snare  of  the  devil.  But  it  was  beyond  all  com-
parison more  wicked  to  keep  that  wicked  oath  than  to  break  it.  Herod's  grief  did  not
save  him ;  it  was  only  the  sorrow  of  the  world ;  not  godly  sorrow,  not  repentance.  3.
The  mariyrdom.  The  wicked  woman  gave  him  no  time  for  thought;  she  forced  him
to  Send  an  executioner  immediately,  John  was  beheaded  in  the  prison.  It  was  a  noble
death,  the  death  of  a  hero,  the  death  of  a  high  saint  of  God.  Salome  might  bear  the
bleeding  head  upon  the  golden  charger — a  strange  burden  for  a  young  and  beautiful
princess ;  Herodias  might  exult  over  it  in  lier  gratifled  malice.  The  holy  martyr's  soul
was  safe  in  the  Paradise  of  God.  Herod  might  wear  his  blood-stained  diadem;  John
had  received  the  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.  He  has  left  behind  him  a
gloiious  example.  Let  us  ask  God  to  give  us  his  grace  that  we  may  truly  repent
according  to  the  Baptist's  teaching;  and  after  his  example  constantly  speak  the  truth,
boldly  rebuke  vice,  and  patiently  suffer  for  the  truth's  sake.  4.  The  burial.  The
disciples  of  John  cared  for  his  decent  burial.  Herod,  conscleuce-strieken,  perhaps,
already,  did  not  hinder  them.  They  laid  his  body  in  the  grave,  and  then  went  and
told  Jesus.  It  was  as  he  would  have  wished.  He  himself  while  livirjg  had  sent  his  own
followers  to  Christ.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  1 "  he  said  to  them ;  and  now  that  he  was
dead,  to  whom  should  his  disciples  go  but  to  the  Lord  whom  he  had  honoured,  before
whose  face  he  had  been  sent  ?  We  shouH  go  to  Chiist  in  all  our  troubles ;  we  should
tell  him.  He  will  listen ;  he  will  give  us  bis  loving  sympathy.  He  will  be  a  Father
to  the  fatherless,  and  a  Husband  to  the  widow.  In  our  great  and  in  our  little  troubles,
in  the  bitter  sorrow  of  bereavement,  in  the  petty  vexations  of  daily  life,  let  us  tell
Jesus.     If  we  come  to  him  in  faith  and  love,  we  shall  never  come  in  vain.

Lessons.  1.  Oh ristiaas  are  sometimes  called  to  rebuke  vice;  let  the ra  do  it  fearlessly
when  it  is  their  duty.  2.  Much  feasting  often  leads  to  tin ;  the  Christian  must  be
temperate  in  all  things.  3.  Rash  oaths  are  full  of  guilt;  take  not  God's  holy  Name
in  vain.  4.  One  sin  leads  to  another;  hate  the  beginnings  of  sin.  6.  Bring  all  your
troubles  to  Christ ;  he  will  help  you  to  bear  them,
,  •^

Vers.   13 — 21.— The /ceding  of  the  Jive  thousand.    I.  The  Lord's  dbpartube  from
Gauleb.    1.  E»  went  hy  shiji  into  a  desert  ^laae.    His  apostles  had  letuwed  from


70  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1—36

iheir  mission  (Luke  ix.  10) ;  they  needed  rest,  "  for  there  were  many  coming  and
going,  and  they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat."  He  had  also  heard  of  Herod's
superstitious  fears,  and  that  he  was  desirous  to  see  him.  The  Lord  would  not  meet
the  tyrant ;  ho  departed  out  of  his  tetiarchy.  He  crossed  the  lake  to  a  place  near
Bethsaida  Julias,  in  the  dominions  of  Herod  Philip.  His  hour  was  not  yet  come;  he
would  not  expose  himself  to  the  cruelty  of  Antipas,  nor  would  he  satisfy  his  curiosity.
2.  The  people  followed  him.  It  seems  to  have  been  long  before  Herod  heard  of  the  fame
of  Jesus.  The  humble  inhabitants  of  Galilee  heard  of  all  his  movements ;  they  followed
him  on  foot  out  of  the  cities.  The  poor  Galilseans  were  better  instructed  than  the
wealthy,  wicked  prince.  They  followed  Christ  whithersoever  he  went ;  so  should  we.
They  went  with  him  into  the  desert,  trusting  in  him ;  so  should  we  always  trust.
While  he  is  with  us,  we  are  safe.  3.  His  compoLSsion,  (1)  He  went  forth,  perhaps
from  the  ship.  He  found,  not  the  quiet  which  the  apostles  needed  so  much,  but  a  great
multitude.  They  had  looked  for  retirement,  and  they  found  crowds  of  people;  they
had  looked  for  rest,  and  they  found  more  work  awaiting  them.  (2)  His  forge  tfulness
of  self.  He  had  compassion  on  the  multitude.  Wearied  as  he  was,  he  healed  their
sick.  The  Lord  is  an  Example  to  us  here  as  always.  We  are  apt  to  repine  it  work  is
thrust  upon  us  when  we  need  rest.  We  must  learn  of  Christ ;  we  must  imitate  his
compassion  for  the  needy  and  suffering,  and  take,  as  he  did,  every  opportunity  of  doing
good  to  the  souls  or  bodies  of  our  neighbours.  He  began  to  teach  them  many  things,
the  other  evangelists  tell  us ;  he  spake  unto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God.

II.  The  mibaclb:.  1.  The  conversation  with  the  apostles.  The  multitude  was  great;
the  place  was  desert ;  the  hour  was  late ;  there  were  no  ordinary  means  of  providing
for  their  wants.  The  disciples  were  burdened  with  a  deep  sense  of  responsibility.  The
Lord  had  himself,  earlier  in  the  afternoon,  put  tlie  question  to  Philip,  "Whence  shall
we  buy  bread,  that  these  may  eat  ? "  (John  vi.  5).  Then  the  difficulty  was  only
suggested ;  it  was  not  removed ;  it  became  more  pressing  as  the  day  wore  on.  Later  in
the  evening  the  disciples  came  to  Christ,  not  to  ask  advice,  but  to  give  it ;  it  was  late,
they  said,  too  late  already.  "  Send  the  multitude  away,  that  they  may  go  into  the
villages,  and  buy  themselves  victuals."  There  was  something  of  presumption,  per-
haps, in  this  advice ;  certainly  there  was  a  want  of  faith.  They  did  not  understand
the  Lord's  majusty,  his  power,  his  love.  We  too  often  wish  to  dictate  to  Almighty
God  what  we  tliink  he  should  do  for  us.  It  is  best  to  trust  ourselves  absolutely  to  his
providence.  He  doeth  all  things  well.  He  himself  knoweth  what  he  will  do.  "  They
need  not  depart,"  the  Lord  replied.  It  can  never  be  necessary  for  any  needs  of  ours
to  depart  from  Christ.  In  the  greatest  tumult  of  business,  in  the  utmost  poverty,  in
the  most  imminent  danger,  faithful  soi\ls  will  not  depart ;  they  will  draw  nearer  to  the
Lord,  as  temptations  thicken  round  them.  He  who  has  learned  to  know  and  love  the
Lord  Jesus  will  cling  closest  to  him  in  want,  in  peril,  in  distress.  "  Give  ye  them  to
eat,"  he  added.  There  is  an  emphasis  on  the  pronoun.  It  was  good  that  they  should
feel  their  helplessness.  They  had  but  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes.  It  was  nothing
for  that  great  taultitude.  How  often  we  feel  our  ability,  otu-  strength,  our  means,
utterly  inadequate  to  fulfil  the  work  which  the  Lord  has  given  us  to  do !  If  we  offer
them  to  him  in  simple  trustfulness,  he  will  multiply  them.  "Bring  them  hither  to
me,"  he  said.  He  asks  us  for  what  we  can  give  him,  what  is  in  our  power.  Let  us
bring  our  offerings  in  faith.  He  will  accept  them,  if  only  we  bring  that  offering
which  he  most  desires — our  hearts,  ourselves.  If  we  give  him  that,  then  those
little  offerings  which  we  thought  unworthy  of  his  acceptance  shall  be  honoured,  and
will,  it  may  be,  by  his  grace  become  the  means  of  working  great  results.  2.  The
feast  in  the  wilderness.  He  bade  them  sit  down  in  companies.  He  would  have
order,  not  confusion.  They  must  sit  in  their  ranks ;  they  must  not  press  rudely
round  him ;  they  must  not  try  to  anticipate  one  another ;  they  must  so  sit  that
the  apostles  could  move  freely  among  them ;  each  must  wait  till  his  turn  came.
Mark  how,  even  in  these  smaller  matters  of  courtesy  and  order,  the  Lord  gives  us
an  example  for  the  regulation  of  our  daily  life.  He  looked  up  to  heaven,  tearhmg
us  to  n:cognize  the  great  truth  that  it  is  our  Father  in  heaven  who  gives  us  day  by
day  0U-'  daily  bread,  and  that  we  should  always  look  to  him  in  every  time  of  need.
Then  he  blessed  ;  he  blessed  God,  the  Giver  of  all ;  he  blessed  the  food.  As  God  in
the  beginning  blessed  his  creatures,  saying,  "  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,"  so  now  God


CH.  xtv.  1— 36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  tl

the  Son,  by  whom  all  things  were  made,  blessed  this  little  store  of  food,  that  through
the  power  of  that  Divine  blessing  it  might  be  multiplied  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
hunger  of  that  great  multitude.  He  gave  thanks,  St.  John  tells  us.  Our  food  is  blessed
to  our  use.  It  is- sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer  when  it'  is  received  with
thanksgiving.  We  learn  of  Christ  to  ask  a  blessing  on  our  food.  To  eat  bread  with
unwasheu  hands,  the  Pharisees  said,  was  against  the  tradition  of  the  elders;  to  eat
without  asking  a  blessing  is  against  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us
.  follow  that  example,  recognizing  at  every  meal  the  bounty  of  our  heavenly  Father ;  let
us  look  up  to  heaven,  as  Christ  did,  and  make  the  grace  before  and  after  meat  a  real
act  of  worship.  "Whether  therefore  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to
the  glory  of  God."  Then  the  Lord  lirake  the  bread,  as  he  brake  it  a  year  afterwards
at  the  institution  of  the  Holy  Eucharist ;  as  he  brake  it  on  the  resurrection-day,  when
he  was  made  known  to  the  two  at  Emmaus  in  the  breaking  of  bread.  He  gave  the
loaves  to  his  disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  the  multitude.  And  lo  I  "  they  did  all  eat,
and  were  filled."  It  was  a  mighty  miracle,  beyond  our  comprehension,  but  no  wonder
to  him  who  filleth  all  things  living  with  plenteousness.  "  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the
world  was  made  by  him."  It  was  only  to  be  expected  that  the  presence  of.the  Son  of
God  should  be  marked  by  wonderful  works.  His  presence  in  the  form  of  man  was  of  all
wonders  the  greatest — a  mystery  of  almighty  power,  a  mystery  of  ineffable  love.  3.
The  twelve  baskets  fidl.  The  Lord  had  provided  largely  for  his  guests.  There  was
enough  and  to  spare.  That  which  remained  over  and  above  was  more  than  the  five
loaves  and  the  two  fishes,  the  little  store  which  they  had  at  first.  He  bade  his  disciples,
"  Gather  up  the  fragments  which  remain,  that  nothing  be  lost."  He  is  an  Example  at
once  of  generous  bounty  and  of  carefulness.  He  would  have  nothing  wasted.  The
Christian  should  guard  against  waste,  that  he  may  have  to  give,  to  the  needy.  4.  The
number.  There  were  five  thousand  men,  beside  women  and  children.  The  men  were
arranged  in  companies  of  fifty ;  they  were  easily  numbered.  The  women  and  children
seem  to  have  sat  apart.  Probably  there  were  not  many.  The  multitude  seems  to  have
been  gathered  together  for  the  Passover  (John  vi.  4),  which  only  men  were  commanded
to  attend ;  though  religious  women,  like  the  virgin  Mary,  went  sometimes  with  their
husbands.  The  Lord  cared  for  all  alike — ^men,  women,  and  children.  So  should  his
servants  do.  6.  Lessons  of  the  miracle.  Herod  feasted  in  his  palace  with  his  nobles,
Christ  in  the  wilderness  with  his  disciples;  Herod's  feast  was  costly  and  luxurious,
Christ's  very  simple.  The  sumptuous  banquet  of  Herod  ended  in  guilt  and  murdw.
It  was  a  godless  feast,  profaned  by  wicked  oaths.  The  Christian  should  never  be  pre-
sent at  any  festivities,  any  amusements,  on  which  he  cannot  ask  the  ble.-sing  of  Go'l.
The  simplest  food,  when  Christ  is  present,  when  we  feel  that  it  is  he  who  gives  and  he
who  blesses,  satisfies  the  Cliristian's  wants.  The  presence  of  Christ  gives  peace  and
blessedness  in  the  wilderness.  Without  Christ  the  gorgeous  palace  is  a  desert.  Christ
can  pi  epare  a  table  in  the  wilderness ;  he  can  provide  for  his  people  wherever  they  are.
The  multitude  had  followed  him  into  this  desert  place.  He  had  compassion  on  them ;
he  would  not  send  them  away  fasting.  So  he  hath  compassion  now  on  all  who  seek
first  the  kingdom  of  God ;  he  knows  that  we  have  need  of  food  and  raiment ;  .he  will
give  them.  Let  us  trust  in  him.  But  let  us  pray  with  the  deepest  earnestness  not  for
the  meat  which  perisheth,  but  for  that  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life.  He  who
on  that  day  fed  the  five  thousand  with  earthly  food,  feeds  now  the  ten  thousand  times
ten  thousand  of  his  saints  with  the  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven.  He  himself
is  the  spiritual  Pood  of  believers.  "  He  that  eometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger ;  and  he
that  bejieveth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  They  need  nothing  more  whom  he  feedeth
with  that  heavenly  food.  All  the  cravings  of  their  souls  are  stilled ;  all  the  yearnings
of  iheir  hearts  are  satisfied  with  his  gracious  presence  who  is  the  Bread  of  life.  Let  us
feed  on  him  in  the  daily  life  of  faith  ;  let  us  ask  him  to  feed  us  with  the  spiritual  food  of
his  own  most  precious  body  and  blood  in  the  holy  sacrament  which  he  himself  ordained.
Lessons.  1.  Try,  like  Christ,  to  forget  self  and  to  care  for  others.  2.  Trust  him
always ;  he  will  multiply  the  five  loaves  if  we  are  following  him.  3.  Feast  with  Christ,
not  with  Herod ;  with  Oliristians  in  a  Christian  home,  not  with  the  wicked  in  unholy
revelry.         .  T

Vers.  22 — 36. — The  walking  on  tht  sea.    I.  Jesus  ijvt  alonb.    X,  He  itmds  ihs


72  THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDmG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 36.

disciples  across  the  lake.  He  "  constrained  his  disciples  to  get  into  a  ship."  It  is  a  strong
word.  He  compelled,  he  forced  them ;  evidently  they  were  very  unwilling  to  leave  liim.
St.  John's  narrative  throws  a  light  upon  this.  The  miracle  had  produced  a  great
ImpreBsion-;  it  was  in  accordance  with  the  hopes  of  the  Jews ;  it  was  what  they  looked
for  in  the  expected  Messiah.  It  mutitbe  he,  the  multitude  thought ;  he  is  come  indeed.
This  great  Wonder-worker  is  surely  the  Christ  of  God.  They  were  right ;  but  their  con-
ception of  the  work  of  the  Christ  was  not  the  true  one.  Ha  was  to  reign  at  Jerusalem,
they  thought;  to  set  them  free  from  the  tyranny  of  Herod,  from  the  detested  Roman
yoke.  They  wanted  to  "  take  him  by  force,  to  make  him  a  King  "  (John  vi.  15).
The  Lord  was  not  blinded  by  popular  excitement.  He  was  a  King  indeed,  but  his
kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  His  kingdom  was  to  come,  but  in  the  way  appointed
by  God;  and  that  was  the  way  of  the  cross.  He  would  not  attempt,  to  seize  it  pre-
maturely, whether  at  the  prompting  of  the  evil  one  (ch.  iv.  8,  9)  or  at  the  clamour  of
the  multitude.  The  apostles  shared  the  enthusiasm  of  the  crowd.  They  had  been
prominent  in  the  distribution  of  the  miraculous  food ;  doubtless  the  people  magnified
them.  They  were  great  men  now;  they  hoped  to  tit  near  to  the  Lord,  on  his  right
hand  and  on  his  left,  in  his  kingdom.  They  bad  a  right  above  all  other  men,  they  may
well  have  thought,  to  be  with  their  Master  in  this  day  of  triumph,  as  they  had  been
faithful  to  him  in  his  tribulations.  They  were  very  unwilling  to  leave  him.  Bat  he
forced  them  to  go.  This  excitement  was  not  good  either  for  the  multitude  or  for  the
disciples.  Ambition  is  an  evil  thing,  especially  the  ambition  of  reaching  the  high
places  of  the  Church.  The  best  of  men  have  theii'  faults;  the  apostles  had  theirs.
Christ  forced  them  to  leave  him  for  a  time  when  their  hearts  were  set  on  earthly
triumphs.  Eeligion  loses  all  its  beauty  when  men  try  to  make  it  a  means  for  self-
exaltation.  2.  Ee  dismisses  the  multitude.  He  could  do  it  more  easily  and  quietly  now
that  the  apostles  were  gone.  They  were  probably  the  most  enthusiastic.  They  had  to
be  forced  ;  the  others  were  dismissed.  Doubtless  that  enthusiasm  was  mainly  honest
zeal  for  their  Master's  glory ;  though  selfish  motives,  such  as  those  just  mentioned,  were
perhaps  unconsciously  mingled  with  it.  But  even  that  honest  enthusiasm  was  mistaken.
It  could  do  only  harm ;  it  would  excite  the  suspicions  of  Herod  ("  that  fox,"  Luke  xiii.
32),  and  the  hostility  of  the  Bomau  governor.  Christ's  hour  was  not  yet  come.  He
would  not  anticipate  the  time  appointed  in  the  counsels  of  God.  He  sent  the  multi-
tude away.  Their  disappointment,  we  may  be  sure,  was  great.  The  apostles,  perhaps,
were  more  than  disappointed;  perhaps  they  were  vexed  and  even  angry;  he  had  to
force  them  to  leave  him.  How  often  it  is  so  now  I  Success,  popularity,  excites  us.  We
hope  for  great  things;  perhaps  our  hopes  for  spiritual  victories  include  (though  we
scarcely  know  it)  hopes  for  our  own  advancement.  Then  we  are  disappointeil.  He
teaches  us  the  holy  lesson  of  patience.  We  must  wait  for  him,  for  his  time.  The  Lord
reigneth ;  but  it  doth  not  always  please  him  to  manifest  his  power  when  we  expect  and
wish  it.  3.  He  retires  to  a  mountain  for  prayer.  He  had  retired  to  a  mountain;  he
had  prayed  there  all  night  long,  before  he  called  his  apostles.  Now  he  does  the  like.
This  great  popularity  did  not  dazzle  him.  He  knew  that  that  excited  multitude  did
not  understand  his  mission  or  his  purpose.  He  himself  would  the  very  next  day  turn
that  popularity  into  suspicion  or  even  active  opposition.  He  would  offer  them  the
bread  of  life,  and  they  would  not  receive  it ;  many  of  his  disciples  would  go  back  and
walk  no  more  with  him.  It  was  a  crisis  in  his  earthly  life.  He  retired  to  collect  his
thoughts,  to  hold  communion  in  solitude  with  his  heavenly  Father.  It  is  what  we
should  do  in  times  of  excitement  and  difGculty.  The  hours  spent  in  earnest  prayer  are
the  best  spent  hours  of  our  lives;  they  give  strength,  calmuess,  perseverance.  The
Lord  prayed  long.  When  the  evening  was  come,  he  was  there  alone ;  he  prayed  on
into  the  late  night.  A  few  hours  before  he  had  more  than  five  thousand  zealous
adherents  round  him.  Now  they  had  left  him  ;  he  himself  had  sent  them  away.  He
was  alone,  with  only  God.  He  was  preparing  himself,  we  may  reverently  believe,  for
the  struggle  which  lay,  before  him — the  controversies,  the  desertions,  the  bitter  opposi-
tion. He  was  holding  communion  with  the  Father.  He  never  sought  counsel  of  men  ;
for  in  some  sense  he  was  always  alone.  His  Divine  nature  isolated  him,  not  from  human
sympathy  an>i  love— that  was  precious  even  to  him  (ch.  xxvi  40)— but  from  human
advice,  human  help.  Ht  could  receive  strength  only  from  heaven  (Luke  xxii,  43).
II.  Thjs  mihaols.     1.  The  disciples.    They  were  in  peril  now,  and  the  Lord  wag


OH.  MV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  73

not  with  them  in  the  ship,  as  he  had  been  once  before.  There  was  a  great  wind ;  the
ship  was  tossed  with  waves ;  they  were  in  distress,  toiling  in  rowing.  But  the  Lord
saw  them  in  their  danger ;  he  saw  them  from  the  lonely  mountain  where  he  was  kneel-
iuf;  in  prayer ;  he  saw  and  came.  So  ho  sees  us  now  from  heaven,  where  he  ever  liveth
to  make  intercession  for  us.  He  sees  all  our  trials ;  and  he  comes,  as  then  he  came,  to
help  and  to  save.  He  sent  them  from  him  when  they  would  have  made  him  a  King  ;
he  comes  to  them  now  they  need  his  help.  2.  They  see  him  coming.  It  was  dark —
three  or  four  in  the  morning ;  they  were  struggling  still  with  wind  and  wave.  They  see
suddenly  an  august  Form  moving  over  the  surface  of  the  waier,  coming  towards  them,
seeming  as  though  it  would  pass  by.  It  was  a  strange  sight  in  the  darkness  of  that
tempestuous  night.  It  increased  their  terror.  It  must  be  an  apparition,  they  thought.
.  It  boded  ill.  Danger,  death,  was  at  hand.  They  cried  out  for  fear.  Then  in  that  moment
of  agony  there  came  a  well-known  voice,  sweet  and  clear,  amid  the  din  of  the  storm,
"  Be  of  good  cheer ;  it  is  I ;  be  not  afraid."  So  the  good  Lord  cheers  his  people  now,
in  sickness,  sorrow,  in  the  hour  of  death.  "  It  is  I,"  he  saith.  He  comes  to  his  people
in  the  hour  of  need.  He  sees  them  in  their  distress  from  afar  off,  from  the  heaven
where  he  is  making  intercession  for  them.  He  comes,  manifesting  himself  in  all  his
love  and  mercy  to  those  who  cry  to  him  in  fear  and  peril.  He  cometh ;  it  seems  some-
times as  though  he  would  pass  by  and  leave  us  in  our  anguish.  But  it  is  only  a  trial
of  ouv  faith,  to  make  us  feel  our  need  of  him — that  without  him  we  can  do  nothing.
Faithful,  earnest  prayer  always  brings  him  to  our  side.  When  he  is  with  us,  we  can
fear  no  more.  "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afiaid."  He  is  not  afraid  who  hath  the  blessed  presence
of  the  Saviour.  Wind  and  wave  may  roar;  but  when  the  Lord  moves  Over  the  tossing
billows  there  is  peace  ami  hope  for  the  fearful  trembling  soul  even  in  the  immediate
nearness  of  the  king  of  terrors.  "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid."  May  we  hear  that  gracious
word,  may  we  feel  that  gracious  presence,  in  the  hour  of  our  death  I  3.  Peter.  Peter,
ever  impulsive,  ever  impetuous,  was  not  willing  to  wait  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord ;  he
would  go  to  him,  and  that  upon  the  water.  So  ardent  souls  think  tu  do  great  things  and
expose  themselves  sometimes  to  great  perils,  over-estimating  their  own  faith,  under-esti-
mating thedanger,thinkii]g  perhaps  too  much  of  self,  too  little  of  others.  "Bid  me  come
unto  thee,"  Peter  said,  as  if  he  had  a  special  interest  in  the  Lord  above  his  brotlier
apostles,  as  if  he  indeed  loved  him  more  than  these  (John  xxi.  15).  He  would  not
come,  indeed  he  dared  not,  without  the  Lord's  bidding ;  but  he  asked  for  that  bidding,
instead  of  waiting,  as  the  Christian  should  wait,  to  hear  his  Master's  will.  Balaam,
with  baser  motives,  sought  permission  to  ex|)ose  himself  to  danger;  he  obtained  his
request,  and  it  ended  in  his  ruin.  Peter  was  saved,  but  "scarcely"  (1  Pet.  iv.  18;
perhaps  his  narrow  escape  was  in  his  thoughts  when  he  wrote  those  words),  by  the
Lord's  direct  interposition.  Christ  himself,  when  tempted  to  do  the  like,  taught  us  the
course  of  duty.  "  It  is  written  again,  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  But
the  Lord  said,  "  Come."  He  said  it,  we  may  be  sure,  in  love,  to  teach  Peter  his  own
weakness  and  the  danger  of  presumption.  Peter  came,  and  he  too  walked  upon  the
water.  While  he  was  strong  in  faith,  looking  unto  Jesus,  he  felt  the  truth  of  that
blessed  promise,  "  When  thou  passcst  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee;  and
through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee."  But  his  faith  failed.  He  ceased
to  look  with  the  steadfast  gnze  of  trustfulness  upon  the  face  of  Christ.  "  He  saw  the
wind  boisterous."  It  had  been  so  from  the  beginning.  He  would  not  have  seen  it
had  his  eyes  been  still  fixed  upon  the  Saviour.  And  now  he  was  afraid — he  who
bu-i  2.  moment  before  had  been  so  daring.  His  very  skill  in  swimming  (Juhn  xxi.  7)
failed  him  in  his  extremity.  Earthly  resources  will  not  help  us  when  our  faith
gives  way ;  and  faith  will  give  way  when  men  look  at  their  troubles,  not  at  their
Lord.  He  felt  himself  sinking.  His  friends  were  near,  his  brother  disciples ;  but  they
could  not  help  liim  in  that  great  peril.  In  deep  distress,  in  the  kour  of  mortal
anguish,  One,  only  One,  can  help.  "  Out  of  the  deep  have  I  cried  unto  thee,  O
Lord.  Lord,  hear  my  voice."  Peter  still  believed  in  Christ's  love  and  power.  His
faith  had  not  the  calm  strength  which  he  had  attributed  to  it,  but  it  was  true
and  roiil;  it  was  like  the  faith  of  the  poor  father  at  the  Mount  of  the  Transfigura-
tion: "Lord,  I  believe;  hdp  thou  mine  unbelief."  He  looked  again  to  Christ;
"  Lord,  save  me  I  "  be  cried.  It  is  the  prayer  of  humility  and  penitence  and  self-abase-
ment.    The  trial  had  done  him  good.     The  danger  had  shown  him  his  weakness.    The


74  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1—36.

old  self-confidence  was  gone ;  it  returned  afterwards,  and  was  dispelled  for  ever  by  tlie
deep  repentance  which  followed  a  yet  graver,  a  far  more  humiliating  failure.  Now  he
felt  his  weakness.  His  first  request  was  unbecoming,  not  such  as  a  sinner  should
make ;  bis  second  was  a  true  prayer,  such  a  prayer  as  we  all  should  lift  up  out  of  the
depths  of  our  heart  to  our  loving  Saviour.  Such  a  prayer  is  never  made  in  vain.
"  Immediately  Jesus  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  caught  him,  aad  said  unto  him,  0
thou  of  little  faith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt?  "  The  Lord  waited  not  one  moment.
The  needed  change  was  wrought;  Peter  felt  his  helplessoesa.  The  Lord  stretched
forth  his  hand.  So  doth  he  now.  We  feel,  when  we  come  to  him  with  strong  crying
and  fervent  prayer,  that  gracious  hand  holding  us  up,  lifting  us  out  of  distress  and
terror,  drawing  us  closer  to  himself.  "  0  thou  of  little  faith,"  he  said,  in  gentle  sweet
reproof  Peter's  faith  never  wholly  failed  him ;  but  it  was  mingled  with  doubt.  That
doubt,  that  divided  mind,  divided  between  faith  and  fear,  might  have  been  his  ruin
had  not  the  Lord  in  his  great  mercy  saved  him.  Let  us  learn  never  to  doubt  the  love
of  our  dear  Lord.  If  only  he  is  with  us,  let  us  think,  not  too  much  of  our  difficulties
and  distresses,  but  of  his  grace  and  power.  "Lord,  increase  our  faith,"  be  that  our  con-
stant prayer,  i.  The  adoration  of  the  disciples.  They  came  into  the  ship,  the  Lord  and
the  thankful,  penitent  apostle.  Immediately  the  wind  ceased.  Immediately,  St.  John
tells  us,  the  ship  was  at  the  land  whither  they  went.  Then  they  that  were  in  the  ship
came  and  worshipped  him.  They  did  not  forget  to  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  and
thanksgiving  for  his  great  mercies  vouchsafed  unto  them.  "Of  a  truth  thou  art  the
Son  of  God,"  they  said.  It  was  the  first  time,  except  the  cases  of  John  the  Baptist
and  Nathanael  (John  i.  34  and  49),  that  men  had  given  this  title  to  the  Lord.  It
followed  a  night  of  exceeding  groat  terror.  Our  trials  are  blessed  if  they  bring  us
near  to  Christ,  if  they  help  us  to  realize  his  love  and  power,  if  they  bring  us  to  our
knees  in  awe  and  love  and  adoration.

III.  The  return  to  the  land  of  Gbnnesarbt.  1.  ITie  sick  hrought  to  him.  He
was  recognized  at  once;  all  knew  him  as  the  Healer,  the  Wonder-worker.  The  men  of
the  place  went  out  into  all  that  country  round  about,  and  brought  unto  him  all  that
were  diseased.  That  care  for  the  afilicted,  that  eagerness  to  bring  them  to  the  Saviour,
is  an  example  to  us ;  let  us  go  and  do  likewise.  2.  Thei/  were  healed.  They  believed
in  him ;  their  faith  was  like  that  of  the  woman  who  followed  him  when  he  was  on  his
way  to  heal  the  daughter  of  Jairus — a  faith  deep  and  strong,  if  not  altogether  the  taith
of  the  instructed  Christian.  They  did  not,  however,  come  behind  him,  as  she  did ;
they  asked  his  permission  to  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment,  and  all  who  touched  were
made  perfectly  whole.  So  it  is  now.  He  cleanseth  from  aU  unrighteousness  those  who
come  to  him  touching  him  with  the  touch  of  faith.

Lessons.  1.  Let  us  learn  of  the  Lord  not  to  desire  popular  applause,  not  to  seek
the  high  places  of  the  world.  2.  Let  us  learn  in  all  times  of  difficulty  and  anxiety  to
seek  for  peace  and  guidance  in  feiTcnt,  persevering  prayer,  3.  Let  us  trust  in  him  ;  he
will  help  us  in  our  troubles.  "  It  is  I,"  he  saith ;  "  be  not  afraid."  4.  Let  us  shrink
from  presumption ;  we  are  safe  when  we  distrust  ourselves,  when  we  trust  only  in
Christ.  5.  Let  us  always  look  unto  Jesus ;  in  temptation,  in  sorrow,  in  agony,  let  ua
look  steadfastly  to  him.     He  will  stretch  forth  his  hand ;  he  will  not  let  us  sink.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Eerodi's  hypothesis.  Men's  minds  were  much  perplexed  about  the  won-
derful life  of  the  new  Prophet,  and  various  theories  were  started  to  explain  it.  Here
we  have  the  king's  hypothesis.  This  has  something  in  common  with  the  other  sugges-
tions, and  also  a  peculiar  aptness  in  regard  to  Herod  liimself.

1.  It  18  not  easy  to  account  for  Jesus  Christ.  The  very  variety  of  the
theories  shows  that  the  problem  was  not  solved  at  a  glance.  It  was  evident  to  his  con-
temporaries tliat  our  Lord  was  no  ordinary  man.  And  yet  these  people  saw  little  more
than  his  outer  life.  The  teachmg  of  his  apostles  and  the  revelation  of  Christ  in  his
Church  have  brought  out  far  greater  marvels  in  his  nature,  ll  we  accept  him  and  his
claims,  his  Divine  nature  and  mission  will  explain  all.  But  if  we  nject  him  we  have
still  to  account  for  him.     And  just  here  is  ihe  great  difficulty  for  all  uul;clievers.     It


OH.  XIV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.  7S

is  not  enough  for  them  to  urge  certain  objections  against  the  Christian  position.  Christ
remains  the  wonder  of  all  history.  How  could  the  carpenter  of  Nazareth  live  and  leach
and  work  and  revolutionize  the  world  as  Jesus  did  if  he  was  only  a  village  artisan  ?

II.  Men  vainly  try  to  hxplain  the  new  by  the  old.  Herod  thinks  of  the
one  great  man  whom  he  has  known.  Others  recall  the  historic  figures  of  Hebrew  pro-
phecy (ch.  xvi.  14).  In  all  this  there  is  no  idea  that  God  is  surpassing  antiquity;  that
he  is  making  a  new  start  with  a  greater  revelation  and  glory  than  anything  yet  wit-
nessed on  earth.  It  was  difficult  to  understand  Jesus  Christ — in  part,  because  he  was
not  a  repetition  of  antiquity.  So  long  as  there  was  no  idea  of  a  mew  work  of  God,  the
New  Testament  gospel  could  not  be  enteitained.  The  same  mistake  was  made  later
and  in  another  way  by  those  Jewish  Christians  who  wished  to  limit  Christianity  by
tying  it  to  the  ordinances  of  the  old  Law;  and  the  old  mistake  is  repeated  to-day  by
those  who  think  that  Christ  must  be  explained  by  what  we  know  of  the  ord'Jiary
workings  of  human  lives  and  characters.

III.  The  ouilty  conscience  invents  its  own  tormbntob.  Herod's  hypothesis
is  the  creation  of  bis  conscience.  The  stain  of  bloo.l  is  on  his  soul,  and  it  colours  all
his  thoughts.  He  is  a  murderer,  and  he  is  haunted  by  suspicions  of  the  return  of  his
victim.  He  cannot  silence  the  voice  of  the  faithful  prophet.  Although  he  ha«  shut
him  up  in  a  dungeon,  although  at  the  instijiation  of  his  wicked  wife  he  has  lawlessly
murdered  him,  he  cannot  forget  bim,  cannot  elude  his  warning  voice.  There  is  no
escape  from  the  guilt  and  consequences  of  sin,  except  by  the  narrow  door  of  repentance.
A  king  may  be  a  slave  to  the  terrors  of  his  own  evil  conscience.

IV.  The  rejection  op  Christian  truth  is  often  accompanied  by  the  accept-
ance OF  A  FOOLISH  SUPERSTITION.  Hcrud  could  not  bring  himself  to  accept  the  claim
of  Christ;  yet  he  was  willin;;  to  believe  iu  a  most  extraordinary  alternative.  In  early
ages  multitudes  who  rejected  the  Christian  gospel  yielded  to  the  spell  of  ridiculous
charlatans  in  the  profession  of  magic.  To-day  we  see  the  negation  of  the  gospel  accom-
panied by  a  ready  belief  in  what  is  called  "  spiritualism."  There  is  no  superstition  so
abject  as  the  superstition  of  scepticism.  It  is  the  greatest  mistake  to  suppose  that  the
unbeliever  is  always  walking  in  the  white  light  of  reason.  Christian  faith  is  the  true
way  of  escape  from  unchristian  superstition.  To  believe  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God
who  has  risen  from  the  dead  is  the  best  security  for  intellectual  sanity  in  religion. —
W.  P.  A.

Vers.  3 — 12. — The  murder  of  John  the  Baptist.  This  is  introduced  quite  inciden-
tally to  account  for  the  superstitious  terror  of  Herod;  but  the  story  is  so  graphic  that
we  seem  to  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  scene  of  dissipation  and  crime.  It  is  a
hideous  picture,  and  its  chief  lessons  are  of  warning,  and  yet  its  gloom  is  not  utterly
unrelieved,  for  the  portrait  of  the  Baptist  stands  out  in  grand  contrast  to  its  vicious
surroundings.

I.  The  prophet's  fidelity.  John  the  Baptist  was  a  prophet  of  repentance.  His
was  a  difficult  task,  because  he  aimed  at  making  it  effective.  It  is  easy  to  denounce
sin  in  the  general;  no  one  will  be  affected.  It  is  safe  to  accuse  the  weak  of  their
wickedness;  tliey  cannot  retaliate  on  their  censor.  Therefore  the  temptation  is  to  take
one  or  the  other  of  these  courses;  but  the  first  is  useless,  and  the  second  mean  and
cowardly.  1.  John  denounced  partictdar  sins.  He  did  so  with  the  various  classes  who
came  to  his  baptism.  The  animus  of  Herodias'  hatred  springs  from  the  fact  that  his
shaft  went  home  lo  one  great  and  shameful  act  of  wickedness.  2.  John  feaiiessly
accused  the  great.  He  was  not  stern  with  the  miserable  outcast,  and  meek  with  the
sinner  in  high  places.  Pharisees  could  rail  at  the  weeping  penitent  and  he  silent  about
the  sin  of  the  harlot-queen.  John  preached  to  the  court ;  but  he  was  no  court  preacher.
The  faithful  prophet  must  denounce  the  sins  of  princes  as  well  as  those  of  peasants.

II.  The  princess's  shame.  In  the  flush  and  splendour  of  her  youth,  the  highest-
born"  maiden  of  tlie  land  lowers  herself  to  perform  a  disgraceful  dance  under  the
gloating  gaze  of  a  company  of  half-drunken  men  of  pleasure.  The  sin  of  the  guijty
mother  is  already  bearing  bitter  fruit  in  the  shame  of  her  ill-trained  daughter.  We
are  appalled  at  the  contrast  betweei.  the  lofty  character  of  the  faithful  prophet  and  the
miserable  state  of  the  princess  on  whose  young  soul  the  bloon.  of  inn-.cence  is  so  early
destroyed.     The  ruiu  of  natural  modesty  prepares  for  a  more  horrible  evil— caUousness


76  THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1— 36.

in  brutal  crime.    Thus  the  loss  of  the  pure  simplicity  of  maidenhood  leads  to  the
hardened  heart  of  unwomanly  cruelty.     None  are  so  cruel  as  the  dissolute.

III.  The  queen's  vindiotivenbss.  It  was  the  king's  sin  that  John  denounced,  for
that  was  the  first  evil ;  and  the  prophet  was  a  man,  and  one  who  dared  to  bring  a  vile
deed  home  to  its  true  author.  But  naturally  the  queen  feels  the  sting  of  the  reproach
most  keenly.  Then,  instead  of  admitting  its  justice  and  humbling  herself,  she  turns  on
the  preacher  like  an  infuriated  tigress.  Her  very  ferocity  shows  that  her  conscience
has  been  wounded.  When  people  will  not  repent  at  the  word  of  a  faithful  admonitor,
they  flame  out  in  a  rage  against  him  as  though  lie  were  their  mortal  enemy.  If  they
did  but  see  th-;  truth  they  would  own  him  as  their  best  friend.

IV.  The  king's  wicked  weakness.  Herod  himself  had  some  respect  for  the  pro-
phet. He  even  kept  him,  as  he  might  have  kept  an  actor  or  a  singer,  to  amuse  his  idle
hours;  or  perbaj  s  he  was  somewhat  drawn  to  the  serious  teaching  of  John,  Yet  he
weakly  yielded  iio  the  bloodthirsty  demand  of  the  daughter  of  Herodias.  He  wm
moved  by  two  considerations.  1.  Eis  oath.  But  it  was  a  gross  error  to  suppose  tLat
his  oath  could  be  made  to  demand  compliance  with  the  savage  request  made  to  him
under  it,  for  the  most  awful  oath  cannot  bind  a  man  to  do  wrong.  2.  Eis  fear.  He
dreaded  to  be  thought  weak  by  his  guests.  In  this  he  revealed  the  very  weakness  he
wanted  to  avoid.  There  is  no  cowardice  so  despicable  as  that  which  does  wrong  from
fear  of  ridicule. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  15—21. — Jesus  feeding  the  mnltituda.  On  the  death  of  John  the  Baptist
Jesus  retired  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  lake,  oppressed  with  grief  and  longing  for  a  time
of  seclusion.  But  it  was  one  of  his  trials  that  he  was  Ibrbidden  the  rest  of  privacy
when  he  most  craved  it.  The  crowds  followed  him  with  such  enihusiasm  that  they
quite  forgot  to  provide  themselves  with  needful  food,  and  therefore  when  the  evenng
was  come  they  were  out  among  the  lonely  mountains  faint  aud  hungry.  Jesus  had
not  brought  about  this  awkward  situation.  But  he  could  not  see  distress  withnut
desiring  to  remove  it.  Thus  there  was  an  adequate  occasion  for  the  wonderful  feeding
of  the  thousands.

I.  Jesus  has  compassion  on  bodily  distress.  He  had  manifested  this  compassion
earlier  by  healing  the  sick  who  were  brought  out  to  him  in  this  remote  region;  and
now  the  sight  of  the  weary  multitude  touched  his  heart,  as  it  became  apparent  to  him
that  the  evening  shadows  would  find  them  far  from  home  and  without  the  means  of
providing  themselves  with  their  evening  meal.  1 .  The  motive  of  Christ  was  compassion.
This  was  the  motive  of  his  life-work  and  of  his  atoning  death.  He  came  into  the
woild  because  he  took  pity  on  the  world's  misery.  The  same  motive  moved  him  iu
particular  actions.  This  is  the  grand  Chiistian  motive.  The  passion  of  pity  is  a
peculiarly  Christ-like  feeling  that  seems  to  bo  rising  among  us  in  the  present  day.  2.
The  trouble  was  bodily  distress — hunger.  Then  it  is  a  Christ-like  thmg  to  feed  the
hungry.     We  are  not  to  neglect  men's  bodies  in  caring  for  their  souls.

II.  Jesus  helps  through  earthly  means.  He  utilized  the  existing  provisions.
He  did  not  create  fcod  out  of  nothing,  but  he  wrouglit  with  the  loaves  and  fi.shc3
already  in  hand.  They  were  few,  but  he  did  not  despise  them,  for  they  were  invaluable
in  affording  a  foundation  for  his  miracle.  Christ  now  uses  the  instruments  of  human
work.  We  have  to  contribute  our  share,  and  if  we  selfishly  or  despairingly  refuse  to
do  so  we  have  no  right  to  look  for  his  blessing.

III.  Jesus  produces  wonderful  provisions.  We  do  not  know  how  the  miracle
was  wrought;  we  caunot  even  conceive  of  it.  But  we  do  not  know  how  Gud  makes  the
com  to  grow  in  the  fields.  Nature  only  seems  to  us  less  wonderful  than  miracle  because
we  are  (amiliar  with  her  external  aspect  and  her  visible  processes.  But  behind  all
nature,  as  behind  every  miracle,  there  is  the  unfathomable  mystery  of  life  and  beinw
which  God  only  understands.  It  is  enough  for  us  that  our  Lord  is  not  tliwarted,  thai
there  is  nothing  to  which  he  sets  his  hand  in  which  he  fails.  Ho  is  powerful  as  well  as
pitiful.  We  bemoan  the  distress  we  cannot  aid.  When  Christ-  is  moved  with  compas-
sion he  helps  effectively.

IV.  Jesus  satisfies  the  hunory.  He  gave  no  princely  banquet,  but  mere  loaves
and  fishes— the  common  barley  loaves  of  the  jioor,  the  familiar  fishes  of  the  lake.  His
object  was  not  to  pamper  jadtd  appetites— that  was  not  needed  in  the  keen  moiintaia


!


CH.  xiT.  1-36.]      THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW:  77

air  ;  he  simply  fed  the  hungry.  Moreover,  he  gave  what  he  received ,  and  of  the  same
kind.  He  will  b'ess  our  work  according  to  its  character  and  quality.  He  gives  the
increase,  but  it  is  according  to  the  seed  we  sow — "  after  its  kind."

Surely  this  miracle  is  more  than  a  miracle ;  it  is  a  sacrament,  a  sacred  symbol,  as
our  Lord  shows  in  the  discourse  that  follows  in  St.  John's  account  (John  vi.).  Christ
is  the  real  Bread  of  Life,  feeding  hungry  souls. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  2Z—B5.— Walking  on  tTie  sea.  The  wonderful  feeding  of  the  thousands  pro-
duced a  great  effect,  rousing  the  multitude  to  enthusiasm,  so  that  the  people  actually
tried  to  force  on  an  insurrection  iu  support  of  the  kingship  of  Jesus,  and  so  that  he  had
to  dismiss  them  with  haste,  sending  his  disciples  across  the  sea,  and  retiring  to  the
mountains  f.  r  prayer.  Then  it  was  th  it  the  sudden  squall  fell  on  the  lake,  and  the
need  of  his  disciples  called  him  to  their  aid.

I.  Jssirs  isr  pbayee.  1.  -He  was  much  in  prayer.  No  doubt  he  thus  obtained
spiritual  refreshment  after  the  toils  and  vexations  of  the  day.  Here  he  found  the  joy
of  communion  with  his  Father  williout  distracting  influences.  To  Jesus  prayer  was  a
necessity ;  it  was  also  a  joy.  He  could  not  have  treated  it  as  a  formal  duty.  If  Christ
could  not  live  without  piayer,  is  it  possible  for  the  Christian  to  be  healthy  in  the  neg-
lect of  it?  3.  He  prayed  in  solitude.  He  hated  the  showy  prayers  of  the  religioi.s
people  of  his  day,  ostentatiously  offered  up  in  the  market-place,  primly  littered  in  the
synagogue.  He  hungered  to  be  alone  with  God.  He  found  God  among  the  moimtains.
3.  Me  prayed  at  critical  moments.  IS.g.  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  in  Gethsemane.
Now  there  was  great  danger  of  an  insurrection  which  would  wreck  his  plan  s.  To  1 1  im ,
too,  the  third  temptation  may  have  returned,  and  he  may  have  sought  strengtli  to
overcome  it.  Prayer  is  most  valuable  in  the  soul's  hardest  struggles  with  temptation.

ir.  The  DI30IPLBS  in  teottblb.  Away  from  their  Master  they  were  overtaken  by
a  tempest.  It  would  seem  that  they  were  rowing  up  north  in  order  to  take  Jesus  on
board  at  a  spot  further  along  the  eastern  shore.  Therefore  it  was  for  his  sake  that  Ihey
were  facing  the  contrary  wind,  for  had  they  turned  directly  homewards  they  would
have  been  able  ti  run  before  the  gal'^.  Trouble  may  come  upon  the  servants  of  Christ
in  their  very  efforts  to  keep  near  him  and  to  serve  him.

III.  The  coming  of  Cheist.  In  that  wild,  dark  night,  while  the  wind  lashed  the
sea  to  fury,  it  must  have  howled  with  fearful  blasts  among  the  rocks  of  the  wilderness
where  Jesus  stood  alone  in  his  prayer,  and  then  he  mtist  have  recognized  the  danger
this  would  mean  to  h  s  disciples.  He  was  never  selfish  in  his  devotions.  It  y  as  his
habit  to  permit  the  interi  uption  of  his  most  sacred  hours  of  retirement  by  some  cry  of
distress,  some  appeal  for  help.  So  he  came  down  to  his  disciples  on  the  sea.  It  must
have  been  an  act  of  faith  on  his  part  to  venture  on  the  black,  boiling  waters.  But
faith  was  working  through  love.  The  sea  m  list  be  risked  in  an  unheard-of  miracle  to
save  his  friends  out  on  its  was'  e  of  waters.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  disciples  cou'd
not  believe  their  eyes,  and  mistook  their  Saviour  for  a  spectre.  Sometimes  his  deliver-
ances are  quite  as  unexpected,  and  almo=t  too  good  to  be  believed.  It  is  difiScult  for
our  faith  to  keep  pace  with  his  far-reaching  grace.

IV.  St.  Pbtbe's  ad  vsNinEB.  This  singular  sequel  is  quite  true  to  the  character  of
the  apostle.  His  impetuosity,  his  enthusiasm  for  Christ,  his  failure  to  measure  his
own  weakness, are  all  in  accordance  with  what  we  know  of  "theprince  of  the  apostles."
But  perhaps  in  the  incident  we  may  detect  a  touch  of  humour.  There  was  no  neces-
sity for  the  apostle  to  walk  on  the  water.  Yet  Christ  indulged  his  whim  andpermitled
it  to  be  a  means  of  revealing  Peter's  weakness,  and  of  introducing  one  source  of
strength.  Foolish,  needless,  and  even  ridiculous  adventures  may  be  turned  to
good  ends.  We  learn  to  know  Christ  even  by  means  of  the  follies  of  which  we  are
heartily  ashamed. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  1,  3,  3—5,  6—13  (see  also  Mark  vi.  14—16;  17—30,  21-39;  Luke  ix.  7—
9 ;  ill.  19,  30). — The  ruin  of  reckless  rashness.  Note,  in  introduction,that  in  an  historic
point  of  view  this  stretch  of  verses,  numbering  twelve  in  our  Gospel  and  seventeen  in
St.  Mark's  Gospel,  is  remarkable  for  the  way  in  which  it  gives  the  information  with
which  it  is  charged.  The  same  way  is  identically  followed  in  the  parallel  of  St.  Mark  ;
and  oae  not  dissimilar  in  its  leading  feature  in  that  of  St.  Luke.   As  regards  the  two


78  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xnr.  1— 36.


former,  the  narrative,  starting  from  the  fact  that  Herod  is  startled  by  the  growing
notoriety  and  repute  of  Jesus,  continues  (until,  indeed,  it  finds  its  end)  by  glances  at  two
several  retrospective  passages  of  the  history  (an  ill  history)  made  by  him.  These  two
retrospective  glimpses  concern  Herod's  first  and  second  dealings  with  John  the  Baptist
— haw,  first,  he  was  tempted  to  put  him  in  prison,  and  yielded  to  the  temptation ;  and
how,  tectmdly,  he  was  snared  on  by  his  own  sin,  in  first,  second,  anA.  third  degree,  till  he
put  him  to  death  by  beheadmg  him.    Notice  this  career  in  its  simplest  steps  of  sin.

L  A  HABBIAQB  AUJAKOB  XNOEBTnOUS,  ADULTEBOUS,  AND  AT  THE  EZFEN8B  07  A
HALF-BROTHEB.

n.  A  GOOD  MAN  IMFBISONED  FOB  HOLT  TE8TIM0NT  AGAINST  THIS,  HADE  IN  THE
UNDENIED   DISCHABOE  OF  HIS   DUTY   AS   A   PBOFHET   OF  BEUOION.

m.  Bt  THAT  IMFBISONMENT,  NOT  ONLY  CEUBL  PRESENT  INJUSTICE  DONE  TO  THE
TlOnU,  BUT  THE  WAT  PAVED  FOB  THE  PEBPETBATION  OF  TET  WORSE  OBUELTT  AND
XNIQITITT.

IV.  Undib  the  stimulub  or  debauohebt,  a  boastful  and  reckless  pbouisk

HADE.

y.  Undeb  the  blindedness  of  debauohebt,  a  bnabe  laid,  WHICH  too  effeotvallt

FITTED   IN  WITH   RISKS   ALREADT   8ELF-HAZABDED  AND   SBLF-CHALLENOED.

YI.  The  snare  entered  with  tainlt  heard,  tainlt  uttebed  bemonstbahoes
OF  conscience.
VIL  In  that  bnabe  a  tebbible  fall;  and  ibbetbietablb  habm  both  done

AND  taken.

Yin.  Lateb  on,  conscience  oallino  on  a  very  faithful  allt  called  ueuobt,

STARTLED  AND  GALVANIZED  INTO  LIFE  BT  OIBCUMSTANCES  AND  EVENTS  THAT  SHOULD
have   been,   and   even   EASILY   MIGHT  HAVE   BEEN,   ALL    MATTKB    OF    INTEREST    AND

JOY CREATORS      AND      STBENGTBENERS     OF      PEAOS      INSTEAD     OF      DIBTUBBEB8     AND

DESTB0YEB8  OF   IT. — ^B,

Yers.  13—21  (see  also  Mark  vi.  82—44;  Luke  be  10—17;  John  vl  2— 14).— ?%«

Moera/ment-mirade.  Distinguish  this  miracle  of  the  feeding  the  five  thousand,  so  glorious
in  all  its  incidents,  and  with  its  full  fourfold  narration,  from  that  of  the  feeding  the  four
thousand,  recorded  by  Matthew  (xv.  32 — 39)  and  Mark  (viiL  1 — 9)  only.  Lead  to  the
consideration  of  this  miracle  by  dwelling  briefly  on—

L  Tee  motives  of  this  uibaole.  There  was  one  leading  motive — a  kind  human
compassion,  a  condescending  memory  of  the  bodily  want  of  the  multitude  of  people,
and  a  gentle  consideration  of  the  same.  We  may  imagine  that  the  mixture  of  "  women
and  children  "  among  the  repeatedly  mentioned  "  five  thousand  men  "  will  have  added
to  the  feeling  of  thoughtful  pity  in  Christ.  But  beside  this  pf&dominating  incentive,
it  may  well  be  that  this  occasion  proffered. itself,  considering  certain  peculiar  character-
istics of  the  miracle  (for  which  see  next  head),  as  a  most  fit  occasion  for  such  a  miracle,
as  would  be  adapted  to  utilize  itself,  in  the  most  direct  moral  service,  like  an  acted
discourse,  for  instance.  It  was  a  wide-spoken  discourse  indeed  for  thousands  upon
thousands,  who  never  heard  so  plainly  as  when  they  were  now  thus  fed ;  nor  were
open  to  blame,  in  anything  like  all  cases,  for  its  being  able  to  be  thus  said.  This
multitude  scattered  again  from  this  sacred  spot  to  their  homes  over  wide  stretches  of
their  country,  what  sermons  they  would  take  with  them,  and  what  memories  would
again  and  again  warm  up  in  their  hearts  I  And  yet  again,  the  occasion  was  one  of
special  import  for  the  small  circle  of  disciples.  Philip,  for  one,  was  "  proved,"  and  We
need  not  doubt  that  all  the  other  disciples  were  both  proved  and  reproved,  when  they
learned  the  truth  to  very  reality  of  that  word, "  They  need  not  depart ;  give  ye  them  to
eat."  And  forthwith,  after  the  commission,  were  furnished  with  the  means  to  execute
it,  and  did  execute  it,  and  distributed  that  true  shadow  of  a  sacrament,  to  say  the  least
of  it,  from  the  very  fingers  of  the  Lord  of  all  sacraments.

IL  The  uibaole  itself.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  every  miracle  is  not  merely  a
wonder  of  power,  but  an  inscrutable  wonder  of  power.  We  cannot  pass  from  the  limited
finite  power,  over  the  border  into  the  unlimited,  without  confessing  that,  though  we  gaze
at  or  gaze  into  the  unbridged  abyss,  it  is  an  abyss,  and  we  can  nothing  else  than  only
gaze  I  But  the  character  of  some  miracles  lends  itself  to  help  our  imagination,  to  guide
•nd  give  strength  to  our  weak  power  of  thought.     And  we  say  within  ourselves  that  a


OH.  XIV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  79

ferer  stayed  by  a  word,  palsy  and  paralysis  cured,  a  blind  eye,  a  deaf  ear,  a  dumb  tongue
re-energized,  and  even  water  converted  into  wine,  are  wonders  of  power  more  easy  to
track  than  that  a  solitary  loaf  of  bread  find  another  at  its  side  by  an  absolute  fretih  act
of  creation  in  a  moment  and  by  a  word.  This  once  seen  through,  the  multiplication  may
seem  to  follow  more  easily  on  the  level  of  some  other  miracles.  But  this  is  not  to  be
"  once  seen  through."  Notice,  again,  of  this  miracle,  that  it  was  neither  one  of  the
absolute  necessity  of  the  heart  of  mercy  allied  with  the  hand  of  might,  nor  one  of  such
very  secondary  character  of  kindness  and  goodness  (it  is  said  with  all  perfect  reverence)
as  when  for  the  purposes  of  a  marriage  feast  water  was  made  wine.  Christ  divinely  and
humanly  pitied  the  fainting  hunger  of  the  men  who  had  long  lingered  around  him,
and  of  their  women  and  children ;  but  when  he  made  the  water  into  wine  we  cannot
say  it  was  similar  pity.  Again,  we  are  not  told  at  what  point  the  miraculous  multi-
plication of  the  bread  took  effect — under  the  "  blessing,"  and  at  the  "  breaking"  of  the
five  loaves  and  two  fishes  in  the  hands  of  Christ,  or  as  the  disciples  distributed,  or  as
(he  people  ate.  Though  we  are  not  told  it,  tMt  is  one  of  the  untold  things  that  we
can  scarcely  find  difBculty  in  supplying ;  and  this  without  charge,  or  any  se^-charge
even,  of  presumptuousness.  We  need  not  suppose  unnecessary  wonders,  such  as  that
the  little  original  store  and  stock  of  material  could  be  handled  by  those  who  distributed,
when  parted  into  several  thousand  minute  portions.  Even  this  would  point  to  the
increase  as  takiug  place  in  the  blessing  and  under  the  manual  acts  of  Cbnst.  Again,
we  are  not  told  of  any  expression  either  of  surprise  or  of  any  other  kind  upon  this
subject,  as  made  by  any  of  the  multitude  either  at  the  time  or  subsequently,  or  by  any
disciple,  such  as  might  give  us  a  suggestion,  or  throw  light  upon  it.  Again,  we  are
not  told  what  time  it  took,  or  what  sort  of  difficulty,  if  any,  the  disciples  encountered  in
their  work  of  distributing  to  some  hundred  companies  of  those  set  down,  in  parties  of
fifty  each.  That  the  large  multitude  were  thus  arranged  speaks  design  of  itself,  and  we
can  see  the  disciples  threading  their  way  with  their  distributing  baskets,  by  aid  of  the
passages,  and,  so  to  say,  the  aisles  left.  There  were  some  eight  hundred  to  be  ministered
to  by  each  of  the  twelve  disciples.  Nor  have  we  any  statement  as  to  how  and  where
the  "women  and  children"  got  fheir  portions;  the  suggestion  of  our  vers.  19 — 21,
nevertheless,  would  leave  us  ia  no  practical  doubt  that  they  were  grouped  in  the  coin-
panics  of  the  fifties  and  hundreds  (St,  Mark).  With  all  these  things  untold,,the  miracle
itself  stands  confessed  in  its  simplest  grandeur,  in  its  irrefragable  evidence,  and  for  its
welcome  satisfyingness — some  through  it  to  acknowledge  "  that  Prophet  that  should
come  into  the  world ; "  some  to  show  to-morrow  that  they  were  thankless  for  the  moral
feast,  even  if  they  hsid  eagerly  partaken  of  the  literal  one ;  but  some  also,  we  cannot
doubt  it,  and  we  know  not  how  many,  to  remember  it  for  days  and  years  to  come,  and  to
speak  of  it  far  and  wide  with  grateful  heart  and  tongue.

III.  The  udltifobu  fabablb  that  is  inoobpobate  with  this  mibaols.  1.  It  is
a  parable  of  Christ  feeding  the  wide  world.  2.  It  is  a  parable  of  Christ  feeding  that
world  by  the  human  instrumentality  of  his  servants,  his  disciples,  his  apostles,  those
some  certain  called  from  the  mass,  and  called  by  him,  and  "  sent  forth  "  by  him.  3.
It  is  a  parable  of  what  effect  Christ's  "  blessing  "  can  have  and  shall  have  on  his  own
appointments,  his  own  appointed  provision,  his  own  appointed  "  means  of  grace,"  bis
own  appointed  methods  of  distribution,  and  his  own  ordering  of  his  Church  and  its
ministers.  4.  To  devout,  thoughtful,  reverent  faith,  surely  it  constitutes  itself,  it
welcomely  forces  itself,  into  a  parable  of  a  sacrament — the  sacrament  in  "  one  kind  "
for  the  fulness  of  time  was  not  yet  come — the  sacrament  of  the  food  of  the  blessed
body  of  the  Lord  himself]  How  many  a  time  has  the  individual,  humble,  and  praying
believer  lighted  on  what  should  seem  some  small  morsel  of  Divine  truth,  and  of  the
Divine  Word,  and  as  he  meditated,  how  it  opened,  how  it  refreshed  his  fainting  state,
how  it  filled  his  eye,  and  feasted  his  highest  powers  of  feeling  and  of  imagination  I  And
how  many  a  time  have  the  true  ministers  of  Christ,  the  bishops  and  pastors  of  the
flock  of  God,  begun  to  think  and  begun  to  speak  upon  what  seemed  a  word,  a  sentence,
a  verse,  but  it  lias  increased  under  meditation,  imder  prayer,  under  the  familiar,  common,
sometimes  despised  **  preaching  "  of  Christ's  last  charge  and  commission,  and  imder  the
realization  of  the  priceless  "  bjessing"  of  his  last  promise,  while  multitudes  have  listened,
been  divinely  fed,  learned  to  love  and  to  adore  and  to  live  a  new  life,  and  the  human
bsder  and  ^«  fed  all  been  satisfied  1 — ^&


80  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1—36.

Vers.  22 — 33  (see  also  Mark  vi.  45 — 52 ;  John  vi.  16 — 21). — A  contention  of  lente  and
faith.  The  last  miracle  was  one  the  teaching  of  which  was  certainly  good  for  all,  alike
for  the  disciples  and  the  multitude ;  and  of  the  two  for  obvious  and  natural  reasons,  per-
haps more  so  for  the  former  than  for  the  latter.  But,  letting  alone  the  teaching  force  of  it,
that  foregoing  miracle  had  for  its  practical  object  the  benefit  of  the  five  thousand  with
women  and  children,  allaying  their  hunger  and  bringing  home  to  their  hearts — of  what-
ever character  those  hearts— some  sense  of  and  some  persuasion  of  the  ihougl  tfal  con-
sideration of  the  Lord.  For  the  small  number  of  the  twelve  disciples  there  was  nevej
any  great  difficulty — probably  never  any  at  all — in  supplying  "  all  their  need."  But  the
present  miracle  was  one  for  the  disciples  themselves.  It  was  good  alike  for  their  body
and  soul.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  said  to  have  been  in  higher  kind  also,  even  as  limb  and
life  are  ever  of  more  import  than  the  satisfying  of  hunger,  though  this  may  be  intense.
Though  we  are  not  at  all  bound  to  find  herein  the  reason  of  its  following  so  distinctly
in  each  account  upon  the  other,  yet  the  link  of  thought  may  be  helpM.  And  far  is  it
from  being  out  of  analogy  with  the  truth,  that  he  who  so  cares  for  the  vast  flouks
scattered,  needy,  distracted  with  fear,  or  calloi»  with  indifference,  shows  no  small  pro-
portion of  that  care  in  also  caring  Tor  the  shepkerds  and  bishops  and  pasters  of  the  floch,
whom  he  has  set,  and  whom  lie  ever  still  is  setting,  over  them.  It  certainly  is  so  in  the
history  now  before  us.    Notice  here —

I.  An  instance  of  Chbist  sending  his  bbevakts  to  tut  theib  wat  eefobe  him  ;

TO  FEEL  AND  TO  TEST  THEIR  OWN  QUANTUM  OF  BTKBNGTH  AND  BESOUUCBB  ;  AND  OF
HOW,  THEN,  IN   SUCH   CASES    HE    IS    WITH   THEM,   AND  OVERTAKES    THEM  TO   THE    VBBT

MOMENT  OF  THEIR  REAL  NEED.  Distinguish  with  emphasis  such  cases  from  those  in
which  forwardness  and  self-coufldence  and  unsafe  zeal  lead  the  way.  And  notice  what
room  there  is  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Sjiirit  for  full  account  to  be  taken  of  this  prin-
ciple. How  needful  it  is,  how  desirable  it  is,  for  ua  often  to  feel  that  there  is  One  who
trusts  us  to  go  onward  awhile,  and  apparently  as  though  by  ourselves,  but  whose  ey«
and  whose  love  are  none  the  less  ever  near  to  us  1  And  notice,  further,  that  these  sttt
not  for  a  moment  to  be  counted  artificial  devices  of  the  vast  and  infinitely  wise  super-
intending Providence,  even  though  for  wise  and  high  ends.  There  were  reasons  why
the  disciples  were  sent  onward  before  Christ.

II.  An  instance  of  a  certain  apparent  conspiracy  AND  ACCUMULATION  OF  TKK
DIFFICULTIES  OF  NATURE  CONTENDED  WITH,  BY  THE  INCEEA8E  OF  CONSCIOUS  HUHAX
EFFORT  AND  TOIL  ;    AND  YET  WITHOUT  AVAIL,  OR  WITH  VBBY  LITTLE  AVAIL.      DarkueSS,

wind,  and  stormy  waves  were  all  "contrary  "  to  the  disciples;  but  they  rowed  wheie
sails  would  not  serve ;  and  they  toiled ;  and  yet  there  came  the  hour  when  the  most
that  they  could  say  for  themselves  and  their  effort  was  that  they  did  not  retreat,  that
ihey  could  just  hold  their  way.     But  this  v;as  much  to  be  able  to  say.

III.  An  INSTANCE  or  THE  FIRST  APPEARANCE  OF  HELP  BEING  JUDGED  TO  BE  EITBEB  AN
EMPTY  FORM,  OR  A    FORM,  IF  NOT  EMPTY,  CHARGED  WITH    SOME   SPEOUtS  of  ADDITIONAL

FBARFULNESB.  Bemark  that  the  version,  "a  spirit,"  is  not  most  correct  to  the  woii
used^  or  probably  to  the  real  description  of  the  alarm  excited  in  the  minds  of  the
disciples.  Nor  can  any  justification  be  adduced  from  the  passage  of  any  scriptural  warrant
for  belief  in  certain  superstitions.  It  may  be  said  to  be  Scripture,  on  the  other  hand,  which
defines  spirit,  and  determines  the  reality  of  spirits,  and  does  not  deny,  indeed,  that  spirits
may  take  "  phantom"  appearances,  but  in  this  place  certainly  does  not  state  it.  The  word
is  not  the  same  as  that  used,  e.g.  in  Acts  xii.  16,  nor  does  it  point  in  the  same  direction,

IV.  An  instanok  of  the  boundless  gentleness  of  the  pity,  "  LIKE  AB  A  father's,"

WITH  WHICH  THE  LoBD  DISPELS  HIS  SERVANTS*  FEAR,  AND  BBPLA0B8  IT  WITH  ALL  THS
EXULTATION   OF  AN   UNEXPECTED  EXPERIENCE  OF  OOMFOET  AND  REPOSlt,

V.  An  INSTANCE  OF  A  GLORIOUS  EPISODE  OF  FAITH,  AND  THE    FAITH  THAT  BIGHTS

IMITATION  AND  LIKENESS.  Faith  is  the  Very  father  ol  great  thought  and  great  enterprise
for  some  ;  for  others  it  is  patient  endurance  of  llie  storms,  and  the  vanquisher  of  fears,
and  exquisite  rest  from  anxiety.  But  in  its  noblest  attempts,  it  knows  no  measure  and
owns  no  limit,  while  it  keeps  its  firm  look  on  its  Lord.  It  partakes  of  the  omnipotence
of  its  unseen  object.

VI.  An  ikstanoe  of  an  inglobioub  lapse  or  faith.  The  o«uae  of  tkia  very
plainly  marked  here — the  eye  turned  away  from  its  great  object,  and  confuied  W  the
diilkultiea  of  wnse.


ea.  xiT.  1— 36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  81

VII.  Ah  inbtanob  of  a  veritable  Sobipturk  photoqbaph  of  the  Chttroh  of  the

LOED  JeSCB   CbKIST  in   the  TDMDLT,  the  DABKNEBS,  the   storm   op  THK  world BUT

SAFE ;  Chbibt  neab  it,  the  ete  of  Chbibt  on  it,  Chbibt  himself  in  it,  and  itself
at  last  with  him  in  the  bateh. — B.

Vers.  1 — 12. — John's  death.  Herod  Antipas  is  a  character  not  quite  easy  to  under-
stand, but  possibly  on  that  account  all  the  more  worth  understanding.  Weak  men  are
always  difficult  to  underetatid,  no  principle  you  can  calculate  ou  giiidiug  their  conduct.
Herod  was  not  a  bloody  man  like  his  father,  but,  like  Ahab,  his  irresolution  was  used
Ijy  the  resolution  of  his  wife.  Before  his  doubly  unlawful  marriage  much  hope  might
have  been  entertained  for  him,  with  men  like  the  apostles  among  his  peasantry,  not
without  good  influences  in  his  own  palace  and  family,  and  even  himself  showing  an
interest  in  the  spiritual  movements  of  his  time.  But  this  miserable  woman  spoilt  his
life.  What  could  ho  do  in  compliance  with  John's  requirements  when  he  unJerstood
her  fierce,  unscrupulous,  vindictive  temper  so  well  as  to  feel  quite  helpless  in  her
hands?  What  we  learn  from  this  act  of  Herod's  is :  1.  That  wherever  a  person  forms
connection  with  one  las  scrupulous  than  himself,  he  puts  himself  at  a  great  disadvantaye
for  living  righteously.  This  pressure  becomes  extreme  when  the  connection  is  so  close
as  that  of  marriage.  And  many  a  marriage  of  this  kind  involves  the  parties  in  diffi-
culties as  trying  if  not  as  tragic  as  those  which  now  involved  Herod.  2.  Again,  we  see
the  tendency  of  sin  to  spread  and  injure  many.  The  sensualist  often  lays  the  flatter-
ing unction  to  his  soul  that,  however  vile  his  sin  may  be,  he  at  least  injures  only  him-
self. When  Herod  laid  aside  his  self-respect  and  allowed  his  passions  to  be  inflamed
by  the  dancing  of  a  wanton,  he  was  not  conscious  of  injuring  any  one.  But  before  the
sun  was  set  his  coarse  profligacy  bad  suddenly  thrust  itself  into  the  most  sacred  life,
and  carried  ruin  with  it.  And  in  a  thousand  ways  do  sins  of  the  flesh,  which  we  flatter
ourselves  shall  hurt  nubody  but  ourselves,  make  us  much  wickeder  than  we  wish,  and
carry  us  to  consequences  disastrous  to  others  as  well  as  to  ourselves.  3.  It  is  in
our  Lord's  treatment  of  Herod  that  we  see  the  full  result  of  this  passage  in  his  history.
When  brought  before  his  judgment-seat  he  would  not  vouchsafe  a  word  to  his  judge.
By  his  treatment  of  John,  Herod  had  Ibrfeited  his  right  to  judge  our  Lord.  Any  interest
he  now  professed  in  Jesus  was  false.  He  played  round  the  margin  of  higher  things,
and  flattered  himself  he  would  one  day  take  the  plange ;  but  this  trifling  only  hardened
his  heart,  and  had  made  him  incapable  of  understanding  the  gravity  and  importance  of
the  matters  that  were  brought  bclure  him.  This  is  no  unusual  experience.  Many  men
deal  so  shiftily  with  conscience,  and  constantly  make  enjoyment  their  real  end  in  life,
that  there  is  left  in  them  no  capacity  for  earnest  spiritual  thought  and  feeling.  Had
Herod  saved  John's  life  and  braved  the  anger  of  Herodias,  he  would  probably  have
saved  the  life  of  Jesus  also.  But  since  that  first  opportunity  of  playing  the  man,  he
had  steadily  fallen,  till  he  not  only  sacrificed  a  greater  than  John,  but  was  unconscious  of
the  enormity  of  his  guilt.  To  such  a  man  what  could  our  Lord  have  to  say  ?  Here
we  may  discern  the  reason  why  many  men  who  seem  to  he  inquirers  after  truth  are  left
in  darkness.  They  omit  the  preliminaries.  Like  Herod,  who  said  nothing  about  John's
death,  they  neglect  to  do  the  obvious  duties  that  daily  call  them.  They  do  not  act  on
the  light  they  have,  and  therefore  they  get  no  more.  By  trifling  with  former  convic-
tions and  dealing  insincerely  with  conscience,  they  reach  that  most  appalling  of  human
conditions,  in  which  they  cannot  receive  help  even  from  him  who  is  the  Way,  the
Truth,  and  the  Life.

Turning  now  to  the  heroic  figure  in  this  tragedy,  we  are  struck  first  with  the  com-
pleteniss  given  to  John's  character  both  by  his  rebuke  of  Herod  and  by  his  death.
All  Jews  were  more  or  less  scandalized  by  the  conduct  of  the  king ;  but,  so  far  as  history
informs  us,  none  were  honest  enough  or  bold  enough  to  tell  him  how  his  conduct  stood
related  to  the  Law.  (Compare  conduct  of  courtiers  of  Henry  VIII.  w  hen  asked  if  his
divorce  were  lawful.)  Such  freedom  from  fear  and  favour  as  John's  is  rarely  attained,
and  attained  only  by  those  whom  the  truth  makes  free — by  those  who  are  themselves
living  so  true  a  life  that  all  personal  interests  are  eclipsed  by  the  steady  shining  of  the
truth.  That  must  shine  whatever  else  goes  out.  We  may  be  tempted  to  ask — What
good  did  John  do  by  his  boldness  ?  Ho  did  not  make  Herod  repent,  and  he  only  made
things  look  more  hopeleu  for  the  righteous.     And  so  with  ourselves,  tiie  good  we

MATTHEW — IL  9


82  THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDING  TO  8T.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1— 36.

attempt  is  not  done,  and  we  oarBelres  are  permanently  injured.  Were  it  not  better  for
U8  to  turn  for  ever  away  from  those  unattainable  heights  which  only  heroes  can  climb  ?
But :  1.  John  could  not  have  helped  rebuking  Herod.  He  was  sent  to  turn  people  to
repentance.  Herod  invited  him,  and  he  must  speak.  2.  Are  we  sure  John's  conduct
was  fruitless  ?  It  is  by  admiration  of  such  heroic  acts  that  men  are  practically  brought
within  sight  of  a  spiritual  world,  in  presence  of  which  all  earthly  glory  and  gain  seem
poor  and  tarnished.  It  is  through  such  acts  that  we  are  enabled  to  belieTe  in  the
righteousness  of  God.  Righteousness  becomes  a  new  thing  when  it  assimies  a  visible
form  upon  earth,  and  condemns  our  unrighteousness  with  irresistible  force.  Lastly,  it
is  true  direct  success  did  not  attend  John's  efforts ;  and  if  we  are  to  act  righteously  and
courageously,  we  must  not  do  so  in  expectation  that  such  conduct  will  always  bring
us  in  this  life  outward  comfort  and  personal  safety.  But  let  no  one  think  of  his  own
life  as  so  commonplace,  so  padded  round  with  social  safeguards  and  comforts,  that  no
act  of  heroism  can  ever  be  required  of  him.  Acts  requiring  true  moral  courage  and
absolute  self-sacrifice  are  called  for  every  day,  and  your  day  and  opportunity  will  no
doubt  also  come.  And  out  of  very  feeble  and  commonplace  material  heroes  are  made  by
John's  fundamental  quality,  fidelity  to  Christ.  It  is  knowledge  of  Christ  and  sympathy
with  him,  loyalty  to  him  and  genuine  love  for  him,  which  carry  the  soul  forward  tc
greater  things  than  otherwise  it  could  dare.^D.

▼ers.  22 — ii.— Peter  walking  on  the  sea.  This  time  was  a  crisis  in  the  life  of  our
Lord.  Thousands  of  people  had  followed  him  into  a  secluded  part  of  the  country,  and
insisted  that  he  should  proclaim  himself  King.  It  would  have  been  a  lesson  to  leaders
of  men  to  have  seen  how  he  induced  the  huge  mob  quietly  to  disperse.  But  the  strain
was  tremendous.  He  had  to  control  not  merely  the  clamouring,  infatuated  thousands,
but  himself  also.  What  more  seductive  to  the  human  spirit  than  the  being  carried  by
acclamation  to  the  place  of  faighest  influence,  entrusted  with  power  to  work  out  one's
own  ideas  of  what  is  for  the  welfare  of  men?  Feeling,  therefore,  the  difficulty  of  the
conflict,  he  gave  himself,  as  soon  as  the  victory  was  gained,  to  prayer.  He  spent  the
night  calming,  steaJying,  fortifying  his  spirit  by  fellowship  with  the  Father.  Thus
prepared,  he  went  to  seek  his  disciples.  Why  did  our  Lord  adopt  at  this  time  bo
extremely  unusual  a  mode  of  action  r  He  never  did  singular  things,  although  be  bad
power  to  do  anything.  His  power  was  infinite,  so  were  his  sobriety  of  mind  and  self-
control.  His  motive  probably  was  the  desire  to  rescue  his  disciples  from  difficulties
into  which  he  himself  had  brought  them.  For  consider  their  probable  state  of  mind.
They  had  first  met  with  the  deep  disappointment  of  hearing  our  Lord  distinctly  decline
a  crown ;  they  had  been  made  conscious  that,  so  far  from  helping  their  Master,  they
were  sometimes  encumbrances  to  him.  But,  worst  of  all,  they  had  been  compelled,
against  their  own  will  and  judgment,  to  embark.  They  seemed  to  have  very  good
reason  for  murmuring  at  their  Master,  and  yet  here  on  their  own  lake,  in  their  owu
boat,  they  do  his  bidding.  And  they  had  their  reward.  They  kept  on  as  he  had  tuld
them,  and  therefore  they  were  overtaken  by  his  presence  and  help.  The  disci  pies,  then,
could  not  fail  to  be  impressed  chiefly  with  Christ's  mindfulness  of  them.  His  appear-
ance showed  them  that  no  interests  of  his  own,  however  distracting,  could  make  him
oblivious  of  them  and  their  necessities ;  it  showed  them  also  that  nothing  could  prevent
him  from  bringing  them  the  aid  they  required.  Is  it  not  likely  that  a  great  part  etf  his
prayer  through  the  night  was  occupied  with  them  and  their  individual  temptations  to
deny  him  and  go  with  the  multitude  ?  And  it  were  well  if  we  could  attain  to  the
knowledge  they  now  acquired  regarding  Christ's  mindfulness.  We  seem  at  times  to
be  so  entirely  delivered  over  to  unsympathetic  and  almost  unintelligent  agents  and
influences,  that  it  seems  impossible  the  help  of  one  so  spiritual  can  penetrate  to  us  or
avail  us  aught ;  but  he  can  make  himself  understood  by  the  dullest  forces  of  nature,
and  can  find  his  way  to  us  through  the  wildest  turmoil.  The  men  who  had  taken  the
wild  fury  of  wind  and  sea  as  a  part  of  the  day's  work,  and  had  without  any  quickening
of  pulse  faced  the  dangers  they  were  professionally  familiar  with,  are  appalled  at  once
and  together  by  the  single  Figure  that  approaches  them  without  menace  or  noise.
They  saw  in  it  a  whole  world  of  unconceived  possibilities,  and  coming  at  that  hour  when
already  they  were  bard  pressed,  they  concluded  it  came  as  the  herald  of  doom.  God's
way  of  helping  us  is  often  so  different  from  the  one  we  have  planned,  that  when  it  comes


OH.  XIV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORUINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  83

we  murmur  instead  of  lieiog  grateful.  The  transport  of  reaction  finds  expression,  as
usual,  through  Peter.  We  need  not  try  to  account  for  the  extraordinary  request  he
now  made,  further  than  by  saying  that  it  was  due  to  the  sudden  joy  of  meeting  the
Friend  in  whom  was  all  safety,  after  a  night  of  such  tension  and  toil  and  disturbance
of  thought.  And  the  Lord  approved  Peter's  impulse,  else  he  would  not  have  bid  him
come,  and  eventually  does  not  rebuke  him  for  attempting  the  thing,  but  for  not  succeed-
ing. Impulse  has  its  fit  place,  only  it  needs  to  be  strongly  backed.  There  are  things
now  that  need  to  be  done,  but  which  will  seem  as  impossible  as  walking  on  the  sea
except  to  the  eye  of  warm  feeling.  This  unreasoning  impulse  of  Peter's,  too,  penetrated
more  deeply  into  the  nature  of  miracle  than  a  good  deal  of  our  would-be  wisdom  pene-
trates. For  it  saw  no  reason  why  the  miracle  should  not  be  evinced  in  Peter's  person
as  well  as  in  Jesus*.  And  our  Lord,  by  ascribing  Peter's  failure  solely  to  lack  of  faith,
implies  that  any  one  with  faith  enough  could  walk  on  the  sea  just  as  he  himself  did.
He  himself  did  it  by  faith.  But  did  our  Lord  mean  that  if  only  a  man  believed  he
could  walk  on  the  water,  this  would  give  him  power  to  do  so?  Certainly  not.  Faith
is  needed,  but  a  legitimate  occasion  is  also  needed.  It  is  harmony,  identification  with
God  and  his  will,  that  give  power  to  work  miracle.  The  miracles  of  our  Lord  are,
therefore,  a  great  promise  to  human  nature ;  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  it  was  shown  what
that  nature  is  capable  of  when  in  its  right  and  normal  relation  to  God.  But  the  results
of  faith  did  not  last  one  moment  beyond  the  faith  itself.  Peter's  fear  for  one  moment
excluded  faith ;  the  waves  shut  him  off  from  QoA,  and  at  once  he  sank.  We  do  not  by
once  believing  receive  the  Spirit  in  retention  as  our  own ;  the  Spirit  proceedeth  from
the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  only  while  connected  with  the  Son  does  the  Spirit  flow
from  him  to  us.  We  fail  and  sink  as  soon  as  we  separate  ourselves  and  begin  to  live  by
ourselves  and  for  ourselves.  We  are  strong  with  a  strength  far  beyond  our  own  when
we  live  in  God,  with  his  will  at  heart  and  intending  to  work  as  his  hand  in  the  world.
But  that  is  the  perfect  human  condition,  habitually  realized  by  our  Lord  alone.  There
is  a  lower  condition  consistent  with  salvation — the  condition  in  which  Peter,  conscious
of  his  weakness  and  seeing  his  danger,  cries,  "  Lord,  save  me ! "  Is  there  any  part  of
your  life,  any  matter  of  thought  or  conduct  in  regard  to  which  you  feel  that  you  are
Binking,  and  must  shortly  be  overwhelmed  altogether?  then  consider  the  prompt,  will-
ing, efficient  help  that  answers  the  cry.  The  lasting  result  of  this  incident  on  the
disciples  was  their  deepened  conviction  of  our  Lord's  Divinity.  How  are  we  to  arrive
at  that  conviction ;  to  feel  that  our  proper  attitude  is  one  of  worship,  and  that  in  his
presence  we  are  secure  against  all  calamity ;  that  for  rest  of  mind  and  spirit,  for  educa-
tion of  conscience,  for  fulness  of  help  in  all  for  which  we  are  insufficient,  we  need  go  no
further  than  him  ?  I  do  not  suppose  that  this  one  miracle  would  have  convinced  that
boat's  crew ;  but  their  minds  had  been  gradually  accumulating  material  for  under-
■tanding  him,  and  this  incident  was  but  a  more  brilliant  light  set  in  front  of  that
material,  and  which  gave  the  right  reading  of  it.  The  same  material,  or  nearly  the
same,  is  available  for  us.  Let  us  be  patient,  sincere,  and  hopeful.  These  men  who  were
with  him  from  day  to  day  did  not  all  at  once  reach  the  joy  of  recognizing  in  the  Friend
they  had  learned  to  love  their  God  and  Saviour ;  but  their  experience  of  his  love,  his
truth,  his  wisdom,  his  power,  gradually  separated  him  in  their  thoughts  from  all  others
and  gave  him  the  highest  place. — D.

Vers.  1 — 12. — 2%e  moralt  of  a  tragedy.  Here  we  have  a  tragedy  in  which  the  prin-
cipal actors  are,  on  the  one  side  Jesus  and  John  the  Baptist,  and  on  the  other  Herod,
Herodias,  and  Salome.     We  propose  to  bring  out  some  of  its  lessons.     Learn,  then —

I.  That  thb  haughtiest  despot  is  himself  bulbd  by  the  meanest  things.  1.
What  is  meaner  than  vUe  passion  t  (1)  Capricious  lust  ruled  the  destinies  of  Herod.
The  king  is  ruled  by  the  beast.  The  beast  excites  the  murderer.  The  man  is  bedevUied.
(2)  "  He  that  ruleth  his  heart  is  greater  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  Brute  force  may
take  the  city.  Brute  force  may'imprison  the  saint.  Moral  force  i-ules  the  heart.  It
vanquishes  sin.  It  vanquishes  Satan.  2.  What  is  meaner  than  the  pander  of  vile
passion  f  (1)  This  Herodias  was.  A  despicable  woman,  who  could  abandon  lier  living
husband  to  consort  with  his  brother.  (2)  The  tetrarch  was  the  creature  of  that  wretch.
He  consented  to  her  stipulation  that  he  should  divorce  his  lawful  wife.  He  became  a
murderer  to  please  her.    (3)  How  much  lower  can  the  despot  sink  ?    Let  those  who


U  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xnr.  1— 86.


would  be  honourable  eschew  deBpotism.  Be  admonished  by  the  "  dog  in  ofiBce ; "  by  the
"  beggar  on  horseback."

II.  That  the  diveksions  of  thb  wobld  are  couhon  oooa8ion8  of  sin.  1.
Feasting.  (1)  This  in  the  abstract  is  innocent.  There  are  religious  festivals.  (2)
Excesses  have  to  be  avoided  (see  Prov.  xxiii.  31 — 38).  (3)  The  folly  of  the  fool  comes
out  of  his  merry  heart.  "  There  cannot  be  a  better  glass,  wherein  to  discern  the  face
of  our  hearts,  than  our  pleasures  j  such  as  they  are,  such  are  we  "  (Bishop  Hall ;  see
Prov.  X.  23;  Hoa.  vii.  5).  2.  Dancing.  (1)  This  may  evince  a  holy  excitement,  as
when  David  danced  before  the  ark.  His  dancing  would  be  the  hilarious  stepping  of  a
soul  full  of  holy  triumph.  (2)  The  dancing  of  Salome  was  of  another  kind.  The
dancing  of  the  ball-room  is  a  pernicious  invention  to  excite  criminal  passion.  It  has
often  led  to  the  sacrilice  of  chastity,  and  to  murder  afterwards  to  conceal  shame.  (3)
Christian  mothers  who  send  their  daughters  to  the  dancing-school  should  remember
the  mother  of  Salome  (cf.  2  Ohron.  xxii.  3).  3.  Company.  (1)  The  company  of  the
good  is  from  the  Lord.  It  was  none  the  less  edifying  to  the  disciples  of  John  because
a  prison  was  the  place  of  meeting.  (2)  The  company  of  the  wicked  is  from  the  devil
It  is  none  the  less  demoralizing  when  the  meeting-place  is  in  a  palace.  (3)  Tyrants
will  have  flatterers  for  their  courtiers.  They  hate  reprovers.  John's  words  were  rough
like  his  raiment  (see  1  Kings  xxii,  8 ;  Prov.  ix.  8 ;  xv.  10 — 12).  The  prisoner  is  not
bidden  to  the  feast,  (4)  Unlike  the  princes  of  Jehoiakim  (see  Jer.  xxxvi.  2S),  the
guests  of  Antipas  had  not  the  spirit  to  protest  against  the  oaths  or  the  murder,  and  so
they  became  accomplices  ir  both.  To  their  notions  of  honour  the  Baptist's  head  must
be  sacrificed.

III.  That  a  pabtial  j<\/it,siiEB,  to  tbdth  is  ko  becubitt  aoainst  cobbuttion.
1,  Herod  for  tome  time  spared  John's  life.  (1)  In  the  first  flush  of  his  resentment  for
John's  reproof,  he  was  minded  to  put  John  to  death.  In  this,  too,  he  was  encouraged
by  Herodias.  But  he  was  restrained  by  his  fear  of  the  multitude,  "  because  they
counted  John  as  a  prophet."  (2)  The  fear  of  man  is  to  the  wicked  a  greater  restraint
than  the  fear  of  God.  Men  fear  to  he  hanged  for  what  they  fear  not  to  be  damned
(see  Eccles.  vii.  17).  The  fear  of  man  restrains  j  the  fear  of  God  constrains.  2.  He  even
listened  to  John's  sermcms.  (1)  The  consequence  was  that  he  hud  a  new  motive  for
sparing  John's  life,  which  was  still  coveted  by  Herodias.  He  now  "  feaied  John, know-
ing that  he  was  a  righteous  man  and  a  holy,  and  kept  him  safe."  (2)  He  heard  John
with  a  conviction  which  "  much  perplexed  him ;  and  he  heard  him  gladly."  Wicked
men  are  not  insensible  to  the  beauty  and  power  of  great  principles.  Many  such  listen
gladly  to  faithful  gosj)el  preaching.  (3)  He  went  further;  "lie  did  many  things  "at
the  instance  of  John.  3.  But  he  did  not  forsake  all  his  sins.  (1)  He  retained  Herodiai.
How  many  things  in  the  way  of  reformation  will  men  do  wliile  they  hold  to  the  sin
that  easily  besets  them!  (2)  He  detained  the  Baptist  in  prison.  There  he  lay  for
eighteen  months — a  term  equal  to  that  of  his  public  ministry.  Thus  was  the  tyrant
responsible  for  the  crime  the  public  ministry  of  that  great  man  might  have  prevented.
(3)  The  sequel  was  that,  though  "  the  king  was  sorry,"  yet  he  murdered  his  monitor
to  gratify  his  mistress.

IV.  That  the  wiokbd  have  to  dbead  BETBiBUTrvB  besubbeotions.  1.  Grime
distorts  the  conscience.  (1)  "  'I'he  king  was  sorry."  (o)  Sorry  at  his  banquet.  Note :
Sorrow  accompanies  the  joys  of  earth,  (b)  Sorry  that  he  had  pledged  his  oath  to  the
damsel  when  he  saw  the  consequence.  "  How  human  passion  contradicts  itself  1  Now
war  is  waged  for  an  inch  of  land ;  now  half  a  kingdom  is  sacrificed  to  the  will  of  a
young  coquette  I  "  (Quesnel).  (2)  But  his  honour  was  at  stake.  "  Herod  had  so  much
religion  as  to  make  scruple  of  an  oath — not  so  much  as  to  make  scruple  of  a  murder"
(Bishop  Hall).  Can  a  wicked  oath  justify  a  wicked  deed  ?  (3)  "  For  the  sake  of  them
that  sat  at  meat  with  him"  (cf.  Mark  vi.  21).  The  law  of  honour  would  condemn
Herod  as  a  coward  if  he  did  not  keep  his  oath.  Yet  was  he  such  a  coward  that  he
would  rather  brave  the  anger  of  God  than  the  contempt  of  vaiu'men.  So  he  murdered
a  great  prophet  for  very  tenderness  of  conscience  I  (4)  "  The  king  was  sorry."  Men
enter  on  a  new  stage  of  crime  when  the  restraints  of  fear  yield  to  self-indulgence.  A
new  step  in  sin  is  seldom  made  without  compunction.  A  guilty  man  is  ever  miserable
under  the  power  of  self-accusation,  reproach,  and  remorse.  2.  Phantoms  arise  from
the  diitortion.    (1)  Christ  had  been  now  preaching  and  working  miracles  about  two


OH.  XIV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  8S

years,  yet  Herod  had  not  heard  of  him.  The  fame  of  the  good  moves  slowly  to  the
great  (of.  1  Cor.  i.  26;  iL  8).  (2)  The  guilty  conscience  is  quick  in  its  conclusions.
Herod  saw  in  the  miracle-worker  John  the  Baptist  whom  he  had  beheaded  risen  from
the  dead.  Blood  cries  from  the  conscience  of  the  murderer.  He  cannot  rid  himself  of
that  gory  visage.  (3)  Where  now  is  the  Sadducee  ?  The  "  leaven  of  Herod"  is  under-
stood to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Sadducees  (c£  ch.  xvi.  6 ;  Mark  viii.  16).  They  denied
the  resurrection  (see  Acts  xsuii.  8).  But  Sadduceeism  staggers  when  conscience  is
awake.  (4)  The  resurrections  of  the  conscience,  however,  are  premonitory  of  those  of
the  last  day.    John  will  yet  in  verity  confront  Herod  before  the  bar  of  God. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  13 — 21. — The  table  tn  the  wtldemets.  Jesus  had  several  reasons  for  his  cross-
ing the  lake  to  the  desert  of  Bethsaida.  1.  He  was  there  out  of  the  jurisdiction  of
Herod.  (1)  Antipas,  instigated  by  Herodias,  had  recently  beheaded  the  Baptist,  and
might  have  been  moved  to  proceed  against  Jesus,  who  he  suspected  was  his  victim
risen  from  the  dead  (see  vers.  1,  2).  Jesus  could  have  secured  himself  by  Divine
power,  but,  as  our  Exemplar,  he  chose  to  do  so  by  human  prudence.  It  is  lawful  in
times  of  peril  to  fly  from  persecution  when  we  have  no  special  call  of  God  to  expose
ourselves  to  it.  (2)  Herod  desired  to  see  Jesus,  but  was  unworthy  of  that  honour.  So,
when  afterwards  they  came  face  to  face,  "Jesus  answered  him  nothing  "  (cf.  Luke  ix.
9  ;  xxiii.  8,  9  ;  cf.  abo  the  case  of  Saul  and  Samuel,  1  Sam.  xv.  35 ;  xx.  24).  2.  He
avoided  the  pressure  of  the  people  and  g^ftned  some  leisure  to  converse  with  his  disciples
newly  returned  from  their  progress  (cf.  Mark  vi.  31,  32 ;  Luke  ix.  10).  3.  He  intended
to  spread  before  the  multitude  a  table  in  the  wilderness.  He  knew  that  the  people
would  foUow  him.  Note :  Jesas  sometimes  leaves  us  that  we  may  follow  him.  He
lures  us  into  spiritual  solitudes  to  show  us  there  the  wonders  of  his  compassion  and
goodness.    The  scene  is  before  us.

I.  There  aeb  the  oitests.  1.  They  are  many.  (1)  Seldom  do  we  hear  of  a  ban-
quet spread  for  ten  thousand.  There  were  "  about  five  thousand  men."  They  were
easily  reckoned,  for  they  were  ranged  in  companies  of  fifty.  "  Beside  "  these  were  the
"women  and  children."  (2)  Yet  these  thousands  were  only  representative  of  the
thousands  of  millions  who  are  daily  feasted  upon  the  bounty  of  Divine  providence.
Also  countless  millions  of  animated  organisms.  "Thou  openest  thine  hand,  and
satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  living  thing."  (3)  They  were  also  representative  of  the
host  for  whom  God  has  provided  the  boimties  of  his  grace.  From  these  none  are
excluded  who  have  not  excluded  themselves.  2.  They  are  earnest.  (1)  Their  interest
is  excited  by  the  "  signs  which  Jesus  did  on  them  that  were  sick  "  (see  John  vi.  2).  They
travelled  round  the  lake  on  foot,  many  of  them  a  distance  of  about  four  miles.  (2)
They  brought  with  them  their  sick  to  be  healed.  Perhaps,  in  some  cases,  sought  his
healing  for  those  at  their  homes  too  invalided  to  be  carried.  Certain  it  is  that  Jesus
required  faith  for  healing.  It  is  equally  certain  that  "  he  had  compassion  on  these,  and
healed  their  sick."  He  "  healed  them  that  had  need  of  healing "  (yet.  14 ;  Luk6
ix.  11).  (3)  They  are  earnest  in  attention  to  his  teaching.  Luke  tells  us  that  Jesik'*
"  received  them,  and  spake  unto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Luke  ix.  11).  From'
the  texts  of  his  power  he  unfolded  his  wisdom.  Such  is  the  effect  that  they  are  scarce
restrained  from  proclaiming  him  king  (see  John  ix.  14, 16).  3.  They  a/re  needy.  (1}
This  fact  is  recognized  in  the  prudence  of  the  disciples  (ver.  16).  Note :  Disciples
are  often  more  apt  to  show  discretion  than  faith.  (2)  If  they  need  the  bread  that
perieheth,  how  much  more  do  they  need  that  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life!
Jesus  "  had  compassion  on  them,  because  they  were  as  sheep  not  having  a  shepherd  "
(Mark  vi.  34).  The  poor  people  were  woefully  neglected  by  the  Pharisees  and  scribes.
(3)  "  They  have  no  need  to  go  away."  In  their  eagerness  after  Jesus  they  had  for-
gotten theu'  ordinary  food ;  but  Jesus  had  not  forgotten  them.  "  Seek  ye  first  his
kingdom,  and  his  righteousness ;  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  imto  you."

II.  Thbkb  is  the  table.  1.  It  is  spread  in  the  wUdemess.  (1)  The  disciples  did
not  yet  properly  estimate  the  resources  of  their  Lord.  Instead  of  looking  to  him  for
the  supply  of  their  wants,  like  Israel  in  the  desert,  they  were  for  returning  to  Egypt.
Are  there  now  no  disciples  in  that  prudent  apostolical  succession?  (2)  When  the
Lord  said,  "  Give  ye  them  to  eat,"  stUl  they  did  not  properly  consider  who  it  was  that
spake   to  them.    They  now  looked  to  their  own  resources  and  found  them  utterly


8«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xiv.  1— 36.


inadequate.  In  this  error  also  the  disciples  have  many  successors.  (3)  Soon,  however,
they  discovered  that  the  God  of  Israel  was  among  them.  The  five  loaves  and  two
fishes  were  so  multiplied  that  the  thousands  were  satisfied,  and  the  fragments  left  were
greatly  in  excess  of  the  original  store.  Hallelujah  I  2.  This  recalls  am,  earlier  scene.
(1)  Every  reflective  person  in  that  company  would  be  reminded  of  the  earlier  miracle
when  their  fathers  in  the  wilderness  were  fed  from  heaven  with  manna.  Even  the
desert  was  suggestive.  Moreover,  "  the  Passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh  "  (see
John  vi.  4),  and  many  in  this  company  were  on  their  way  to  Jerusalem  to  celebrate
that  feast,  so  significantly  recalling  the  history  of  the  Exodus.  (2)  Who,  then,  but  the
same  God  of  Israel,  who  fed  the  fathers  with  that  heavenly  bread,  is  this  Jesus  who
now  feeds  their  children  no  less  miraculously  ?  3.  This  also  anticipates  a  later  scene.
(1)  This  broken  bread  was  a  type  of  the  Bread  of  life,  to  be  broken  for  the  spiritual
nourishment  of  believers  (see  John  vi.  26,  27).  "By  it"  Jesus  "proclaimed  himself
the  Bread  of  the  world,  the  Source  of  all  life,  of  which  there  shall  be  enough  and  to
spare  for  all  evermore  "  (Trench).  (2)  The  Lord  gave  the  bread  to  denote  the  life  we
have  in  communion  with  him.  The  identity  of  the  teaching  in  the  argument  of  Jesus
upon  this  miracle  (see  John  vi.),  with  the  teaching  of  the  Eucharist,  cannot  be  missed.
(3)  This,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  invests  with  new  interest  the  corresponding  miracle
of  the  multiplication  of  the  wine  at  the  marriage  (see  John  ii.  1 — 11).  The  communion
of  Christ  is  the  cheer  of  our  joy  as  well  as  the  food  for  our  need.

IIL  Theee  is  the  service.  1.  The  King  heads  Us  table.  (1)  "We  have  here  but
five  loaves,  and  two  fishes."  God  often  permits  his  servants  to  be  brought  low  that  they
may  have  the  more  frequent  opportunities  of  trusting  him.  (2)  "  Bring  them  hither
to  me."  If  we  bring  our  frugal  fare  to  Jesus  for  his  blessing,  he  will  make  it  a  sufficiency
for  the  body  and  a  sacrament  to  the  soul  (cf.  Ps.  xxxviL  19 ;  Hag.  L  9).  He  clothes
himself  with  a  body  that  he  may  encourage  ub  to  depend  upon  him  for  the  supply  of
our  bodily  wants.  He  takes  special  care  of  the  bodies  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  his
service.  (3)  "  Looking  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed,  and  brake."  God's  creatures  must  be
received  with  thanksgiving  (see  1  Sam.  ix.  13 ;  Acts  ii.  46,  47 ;  xxvii.  35 ;  1  Tim.  iv.
4).  But  the  blessing  of  Jesus  was  more  than  a  thanksgiving.  (4)  The  presence  of
Christ  can  turn  a  wilderness  into  a  paradise  (of.  Isa.xli.  19,  20 ;  Ii.  3).  2.  The  disciples
are  the  servitors.  (I)  They  are  commissioned  to  order  the  multitude  into  companies
(see  Luke  ix.  14).  These  fifties  are  representative  of  the  Churches  of  Christendom,
which  are  presided  over  by  the  ministers  of  Christ.  Wliat  Christ  designed  for  his
Churches  he  signified  by  his  servant  John  (Rev.  i.  1—4).  (2)  They  were  commissioned
to  give  the  loaves  to  the  multitude.  Receiving  the  bread  of  life  themselves,  they  are
strengthened  to  minister  it  to  others.  Through  their  hands  the  multitudes  are  to
receive  it  from  the  Lord  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  45;  2  Cor.  v.  20;  vi.  1).  (3)  The  bread
multiplies  in  their  hands.  Herein  the  Word  of  God  proves  itself  to  be  the  living
bread.  So  it  is  like  seed.  The  living  Word  is  the  life  of  the  word  preached.  As  seed
is  multiplied,  not  by  hoarding,  but  by  sowing,  so  is  the  Word.  "There  is  that
scattereth,  and  yet  increaseth."  Note :  What  we  give  in  charity  should  first  be  given
to  Christ,  that  his  blessing  may  multiply  its  benefit.  They  that  have  little  must
relieve  others  out  of  that  little,  that  they  may  have  more.  (4)  They  are  instructed  to
"  gather  up  the  broken  pieces  which  remain  over,  that  nothing  be  lost"  (John  vi.  12).
What  they  gave  they  received  back  manifold.  There  were  "  five  loaves,"  one  for  every
thousand  men  ;  they  gathered  up  twelve  hand-baskets  full,  one  for  each  apostle.  They
had  also  fragments  over  from  the  fishes  (see  Mark  vi.  43 ;  Luke  xv.  17).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  22 — 33. — Lessons  of  the  storm.  The  wonderful  narrative  before  lu  suggests
many  lessons,  amongst  which  the  following  may  be  noted,  viz. —

I.  That  Jesus  is  a  Party  to  the  tboubles  of  hib  oisoipleb.  1.  These  are  often
induced  by  their  awn  folly.  (1)  After  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  the  multitudes  were
eager  to  proclaim  Jesus  as  their  national  King.  From  what  we  learn  from  John  (vi.
15),  it  would  seem  the  disciples  were  more  disposed  to  second  their  wishes  than  to  aid
their  Master  in  his  efforts  to  send  the  people  away.  In  this  they  were  moved  by  the
ignorant  prejudices  of  the  times.  Note :  The  ignorance  of  his  disciples  has  ever  been
a  trouble  to  Christ.  (2)  This  wa;:  the  occasion  of  their  having  to  embark  and  put  to
sea,  and  consequently  of  thei'  having  to  encounter  a  terrific  storm.    Note :  We  may


cB.xiT.1-86.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW  87

expect  to  encounter  afflictions  and  perplexities  when,  from  whatever  motives,  we  are  sn
foolish  as  to  oppose  the  will  of  Christ.  2.  Satan  has  a  malignant  hand  in  them.  (1)
Evil  Bpirits  are  concerned  in  the  mischief  of  destructive  storms.  The  history  oK  Job
shows  what  power  Satan  has  over  the  elements  when  he  is  permitted  to  use  it.  When
our  Lord,  in  another  storm,  "reiuked  the  winds  and  the  sea"  (see  ch.  viii.  26),  did  he
not  recognize  blameworthy  intelligence  as  working  hehind  these  elements  ?  (2)  The
closing  petitions  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  "  And  bring  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver
us  from  the  evil  one,"  show  that  not  only  is  Satan,  in  some  of  his  agencies,  concerned
in  every  mischief,  but  that  he  is  so  of  set  malignant  purpose.  It  shows,  moreover,  that
our  defence  is  prayer.  3.  Jesus  has  a  henevolent  hand  in  them.  (1)  He  constrained
his  disciples  to  enter  the  boat  and  put  to  sea.  This  was  to  relieve  himself  from  their
embarrassing  sympathy  with  the  prejudices  of  the  multitude.  This  in  itself  was  a
benevolence.  It  put  them  out  of  the  way  of  working  further  mischief.  (2)  He  knew,
when  he  constrained  them  to  enter  that  boat,  that  they  would  have  to  encounter  the
storm.  He  permitted  the  evil  spirits  to  exert  their  power  upon  the  elements,  or,  other-
wise, commissioned  those  elements  to  war.  But  his  design  here  also  was  benevolent,
ft,  taught  the  disciples :  (a)  That  those  who  will  not  submit  to  the  ruling  of  Christ's
wisdom  will  have  to  sail  without  him  in  the  voyage  of  life.  (6)  That  in  voyaginu;
without  Christ  the  way  is  difBcult  and  perilous,  (c)  That  the  policy  of  their  ignorant
prejudice  in  making  Christ  a  civil  Ruler,  if  carried  out,  would,  instead  of  bringing  the
tranquillity  they  pictured  to  themselves,  bring  them  into  a  political  hurricane.  (3)  If,
then,  Jesus  is  a  party  to  the  troubles  of  his  disciples,  and  that  his  hand  in  those
troubles  is  benevolent,  let  us  bless  him  for  them.  Let  us  also  be  quick  to  learn  the
lessons  they  are  intended  to  teach.

n.  That  Jesus  ib  present  with  his  disciples  in  theik  tboubles.  1.  He  is
present  in  spirit  when  invisible.  (1)  When  he  had  dispersed  the  multitudes  "he
went  up  into  the  mountain  apart  to  pray."  He  knew  the  temper  in  which  his  disciples
had  sailed ;  he  foresaw  the  coming  storm ;  he  remembers  them  in  prayer.  By  that
intercession  the  malignity  of  Satan  is  restrained,  and  the  fury  of  the  winds  and  waves
so  moderated  that  the  lives  are  preserved.  (2)  And  if  Jesus  from  that  mountain-height
could  see  and  sympathize  with  his  disciples  in  that  tempest,  so  does  he  still,  from  the
height  of  heaven,  see  and  sympathize  with  his  followers  in  every  trouble  of  their  lives.
2.  He  is  present,  moreover,  in  power.  (1)  In  the  crisis  of  extremity  that  power  is  seen.
The  disciples  were  now  "  about  five  and  twenty  furlongs"  from  the  shore,  in  the  centre
of  the  inland  sea,  and  the  storm  most  distressing.  Just  then  Jesus  "came unto  them,
walking  upon  the  sea."  (2)  That  blessed  presence  is  as  powerful  as  it  is  timely.  The
Kgyptian  hieroglyphic  for  impossibility  was  a  man's  feet  walking  on  the  sea.  Things
impossible  to  men  are  possible  with  God  (of.  Job  ix.  8).  In  this  miracle  the  law  of
gravitation  is  inverted,  and  the  liquid  waves  are  converted  into  an  adamantine  way.
(3)  Now  he  enters  the  boat.     Behold,  instantly,  all  is  calm !

lEL  That  oebdulitt  is  the  companion  of  unbelief.  1.  The  heart  is  slow  to  dis-
cern Christ.  (1)  There  he  is  walking  upon  the  sea,  yet  is  he  not  identified  even  by
his  own  disciples.  Why  did  they  not  recognize  him  instantly  ?  Who  else  could  it
possibly  be  ?  (2)  But  they  deemed  this  too  wonderful  to  "be  Christ.  What,  too
wonderful  for  that  Blessed  One  who  in  this  very  lake  district — at  Chorazin,  Bethsaida,
Capernaum — had  wrought  so  many  miracles !  Who  on  this  very  sea  had  stiUed  a
tempest  with  a  word !  Who  but  a  few  hours  earlier  had  feasted  ten  thousand  upon
five  barley  cakes !  Yet  such  was  the  fact  (see  Mark  vi.  52).  (3)  Are  we  more  quick
to  discern  Christ  in  the  wonders  of  providence  than  the  apostles  were  to  recognize  his
presence  in  the  wonders  of  this  history  ?  How  seldom  do  we  see  deeper  than  the  second
causes  of  things !  2.  It  mistakes  him  for  a  phantom.  (1)  "  And  when  the  disciples
saw  him  walking  on  the  sea,  they  were  troubled,  saying,  It  is  an  apparition ;  and
they  cried  out  for  fear  "  (cf.  Acts  xii.  15).  (2)  This  "  fear  "  suggests  that  they  even
mistook  Jesus  for  a  demon  or  evil  spirit.  How  frightful  are  the  distortions  of  the
credulity  of  unbelief!  (3)  The  disciples  were  terrified  at  an  apparition  which  was
designed  for  their  salvation.  When  in  their  extremity  they  "  cried  out  for  fear,"  then
came  their  relief.  By  a  word,  "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid,"  the  deepest  fear  is  turned  into
the  highest  joy  (cf.  Ps.  cxii.  4).    The  calm  now  succeeds  the  storm  m  the  soui.

IV.  That  natubal  besoubces  abe  useless  in  spibitual  oonfuots.    1.  Seaman-


88  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cb. -nr.  1—S6,


ship  failed  in  Mb  storm.  (1)  Several  of  the  disciples  were  brought  up  as  fishermen,
and  knew  how  to  handle  the  oar  (Mark  vi.  48).  But  here  they  weru  at  their  wits'  end,
BO  furiously  was  the  sea  working  in  the  storm.  This  was  not  purely  an  elemental  strife ;
it  was  a  spiritual  conflict,  brought  about  for  spiritual  purposes.  (2)  Their  salvation
was  of  the  Lord.  He  laid  the  storm.  We  too  shall  exclaim,  "  Of  a  truth  thou  art
the  Son  of  God,"  when  he  tranquillizes  the  mind  which  the  prince  of  the  powers  of  the
air  had  disturbed  and  troubled.  Only  in  so  far  as  the  love  of  Christ  is  in  us  can  we
worship  him  aa  Love.  2,  The  twimming  art  failed  in  these  waves.  (1)  Peter's  fault
was  not  his  courage  when  he  said,  "  Lord,  if  it  be  thou  " — -ince  it  is  thou — "  bid  me
come  unto  thee  upon  the  waters."  Courage  is  fearlessness,  and  intelligent  fearlessness
';<i  faith.  Faith  is  the  opposite  of  doubt  and  fear  (cf.  Mark  v,  36 ;  Kom.  xiv.  23 ;  Jas.
i.  6).  (2)  The  Lord  permits  us  to  try  our  strength  that  we  may  discover  our  weak-
ness. I'eter  in  the  ship  was  bold  ;  timid  on  the  angry  sea.  Men  are  often  confident
in  speculation,  diffident  in  practice.  (3)  Peter  was  borne  up  on  the  water  in  propor-
tion to  his  faith,  as  the  children  of  Israel  were  victorious  as  the  hands  of  Moses  were
held  up  (Exod.  xvii.  11).  "The  true  position  of  every  disciple  is  this:  So  to  see  the
deep  that  is  beneath  him  as  to  lose  all  confidence  in  himself,  and  so  to  see  the  Saviour
that  is  near  him  as  to  lose  all  terror  of  the  billows  "  (Anon.).  (4)  Peter  was  a  good
swimmer  (see  John  xxi.  7),  but  he  trusts  not  to  his  swimming  in  this  peril.  Those
who  rely  on  grace  lose  confidence  in  nature.  Christ  is  the  Bufiicient  confidence  of  his
saints.— -J.  A.  M.

Vers.  34 — 86. — Philanthropy.  After  Jesus  had  come  to  his  distressed  disciples
walking  on  the  sea,  and  calmed  for  them  the  fury  of  the  storm,  with  their  Master  now
in  their  company,  they  had  a  pleasant  run  to  the  land  of  Gennesaret.  Behold  now
another  scene  of  wonder,  "  When  the  men  of  that  place  knew  him,"  etc.  Here  we
have  a  fine  example  of  philanthropy,  in  which  there  is —

I.  A  TRUE  SYMPATHY  WITH  HUMANITY.  The  evidences  of  this  are  :  1.  A  knowledge
of  what  it  is.  This  is  expressed  in  the  single  word  "  sick."  And  this  implies :  (1)
Disorganization  j  (a)  physical ;  (6)  intellectual ;  (c)  moral.  (2)  Disability,  viz.  in
every  part  of  our  nature.  (3)  Suffering.  (4)  Death.  2.  An  estimate  of  what  it  ought
to  he.     This  also  may  be  expressed  in  the  single  word  "  healthy."     And  this  implies  :

(1)  That  the  elements  of  our  nature  work  together  harmoniously,  (a)  As  to  the  organs
of  the  body ;  (6) as  to  the  faculties  of  the  intellect;  (c)  as  to  the  will  and  the  affecticns
of  the  heart.  (2)  That  consequently  there  is  strength  and  competence  in  all  oui
powers.  (3)  Moreover  that  there  is  happiness,  (o)  The  sense  of  immunity  from  pain ,
(V)  the  sense  of  vigour.  (4)  And  there  is  life.  This  is  more  than  existence.  Physically,
it  is  existence  under  the  best  conditions.  So,  morally,  it  is  union  with  God.  3.  A
yearning  for  its  regeneration.  This  is  the  crucial  point.  'J'here  are  theorists  who  have
noble  conceptions  of  what  men  ought  to  be,  who  do  not  endeavour  to  exemplify  theii
ideal,  nor  to  induce  others  to  do  so.     Such  a  theorist  may  be  a  devil.

n.  An  active  public  bpibit.  This  is  evinced  in  :  1.  The  quick  discernment  of  tkt
presence  of  the  Healer,  (1)  The  men  of  Gennesaret  recognized  Jesus  as  soon  as  he
landed  on  their  shore.  He  had  been  amongst  them  before.  Gennesaret,  the  ancient
Chinnereth  (s(-e  Deut.  iiL  17 ;  Josh.  xix.  35),  the  district  in  Lower  Galilee  in  which
Capernaum  was  situate  (cf.  Mark  vi.  63 ;  John  vi.  22 — 25).  Probably  they  had  been
amongst  those  who  witnessed  the  miracle  of  the  loaves  on  the  preceding  day,  (2)
They  wore  more  noble  than  their  neighbours,  the  Gergesenes,  who  "  besought  Jesus
that  he  would  depart  out  of  their  coasts,"  for  they  welcomed  him  among  them.  Note :
If  Christ  were  better  known  he  would  be  better  trusted,  and  not  rejected  as  he  is  too
often,  (3)  The  discernment  of  the  day  of  opportunity  is  an  important  step  towards
its  improvement  (cf.  Luke  xix.  24;  John  i.  10).  It  is  better  to  know  that  there  is
a  prophet  amongst  us  than  that  there  has  been  one  (see  Ezek.  ii.  5),  2.  The  prompt
gathering  into  that  presence  of  the  sick.  (1)  The  men  of  Gennesaret  lost  no  time,  but
sent  instantly  messengers  through  all  parts  of  the  surrounding  country  to  advise  th*
sick  that  the  Healer  had  arrived.     Note :  Those  who  know  Christ  should  preach  him.

(2)  If  these  men  of  Gennesaret  had  tasted  of  the  loaves,  and  that  this  zeal  was  an
effect  of  the  miracle  upon  them,  this  lesson  is  suggested,  viz.  that  the  inward  reception
of  the  truth  will  create  a  desire  for  the  removal  of  outward  evil.     When  the  word


OH.  XIV.  1— 36  ]       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  89

conies  into  the  heart  it  ■will  renovate  the  life.  (3)  The  zeal  of  the  men  of  Gennesaret
■was  trausfused  into  theirmeasengers.  Mark  gives  a  graphic  description  of  their  activ-
ity (see  Mark  vi.  53 — 56).  3.  T!ie  em-nest  supplication  of  the  Divine  blessing.  (1)  The
religious  is  the  truest  philanthropy,  {a)  Religion  benefits  the  body.  Its  precepts
conduce  to  health.  Their  violation  is  the  chief  cause  of  disease.  (6)  Religion  benefits
the  soul.  The  soul  is  the  grander  part.  The  philanthropy  which  terminates  in  the
body  is  imperfect.  (3)  It  is  prayerful.  "  They,"  the  men  of  Gennesaret,  "  besouglit
Jesusthat  they,"  the  sick,"  might  only  touch  the  border  of  his  garment."  Note :  (a)
The  prayer  was  importunate.  "Besought  him."  (J)  It  was  mixed  with  faith.  "That
they  might  only  touch."  The  virtue  was  not  in  the  garnn  nt,  but  in  the  touch,  which,
as  an  act  of  faith,  was  to  be  rewarded,  (e)  It  was  mixed  with  gratitude.  Eastern
people  show  respect  to  their  princes  by  kissing  their  sleeve  or  skirt.  (8)  They  were
evidently  influenced  by  the  example  of  their  countrywoman.  For  she  was  of  Caper-
naum who  introduced,  this  idea  of  touching  the  hem  of  the  garment  (see  ch.  ix.  20-'  3).
The  precious  ointment  which  was  upon  the  head  of  Jesus  ran  down  to  the  skirts  of  his
garment  (Ps,  cxxxiii.  3).  (4)  ' '  As  many  as  touched  were  made  whole."  If  ministers
could  cure  bodily  diseases  they  would  have  many  clients ;  for,  unhappily,  men  are
commonly  more  concerned  about  the  body  than  about  the  souL  The  cure  of  disease,'
morally  considered,  is  the  removal  of  evils  and  errors,  by  which  the  faculties  recover
their  true  tone  and  balance,  and  the  mind  becomes  enriched  with  truth  and  goodness. —
J.A.M.

Ver.  4. — John'i  rugged  faitlifulntst.  How  John  came  into  contact  with  Herod,  or
how  he  was  called  to  administer  such  a  public  reproof,  we  are  not  informecL  It  is
quite  possible  that,  in  the  Divine  inspiration,  he  had  done  somewhat  as  Elijah  had
done  before  him — suddenly  appeared  at  court, — a  strange  weird  figure  before  which  the
soldiers  shrank  back, — marched  straight  into  the  presence  of  Herod,  and  with  no  pre-
amble or  apology,  declared,  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her."  It  is,  however,
quite  possible  that  Herod  may  have  sent  for  him,  hoping  to  get  his  conscience  eased
by  securing  the  prophet's  approval  of  his  act;  and  no  doubt  Herod  had  some  fine
excuses  and  explanations  to  offer.  Men  always  have  when  they  have  resolved  to  satisfy
their  own  fancies  and  vices.  And  at  Eastern  courts  there  are  always  people  willing
enough  to  flatter  their  king,  and  encourage  him  in  his  vices.  John-  stands  out  in
strong  contrast  with  all  such.

L  A  MAN  ■WHO  KNBW  THE  BiQHT.  We  are  often  confused  because,  though  we  may
know  the  right,  there  are  special  circumstances  in  each  particular  case  which  disturb,
oar  judgment.  We  can  see  the  abstract  right,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  the  right  iujiist
this  case.  It  cannot  be  right  that  a  man  should  have  his  brother's  wife.  And  yet
advisers  at  court  may  make  out  that  high  policy  makes  that  necessary  in  this  case.
Compare  Cranmer  helping  Henry  VIII.  to  secure  his  shameless  divorce.  John  the
Baptist  listened  to  no  excuses  of  policy,  which  were  but  excuses  of  passion.     He  knew

II.  A  MAS  WHO  8P0KB  OUT  THE  BIGHT  HE  KNEW.  So  ofteu  wc  "  keep  sileuoe  in
the  evil  time."  We  think  we  can  do  no  good  by  speaking  out,  and  may  only  bring
trouble  on  ourselves.  Tlie  men  who  have  influenced  the  generations  are  the  men  of
strong  convictions,  who  could  not  keep  silence.  John,  on  this  occasion,  might  have
been  cautious;  he  might  have  spoken  like  a  courtier,  eased  his  message,  spoken  care-
fully and  taken  care  not  to  offend.  His  mission  was  to  the  conscience  of  the  wicked
king.'  There  shall  ho  no  trimming  in  his  message ;  it  shall  smite  right  home.  It  is
bald.  bare,  strong,  uncompromising.  "  It  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  have  her.  People
are  sometinies  what  they  call  "  laithful,"  but  they  are  only  irritating  and  humiliating.
True  faithfulness  is  conscience-rousing.  x  xv    u    j

in.  A  MAN  WHO  SUFFERED  FOB  THE  EIGHT  HE  8P0KB.  Not  really  at  the  nanas
of  Herod  Really  at  the  hands  of  Herodias,  the  unscrupulous  woman  who  was  the
Jezebel  to  this  Ahab.  A  man  who  feare  the  personal  consequences  of  witnessing  to
the  right,  or  doing  the  right,  wiU  never  stand  beside  rugged,  faithful  John  in  the
Divine  approvaL — R.  T.

Ver.  l.—The/oolishntM  o/  mUmited  promitn.    "  He  promised  with  an  oath  to  give


90  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xnr.  1—36

her  whatsoever  she  would  ask."  We  are  sometimes  invited  to  promise  before  we  ai  t
told  what  is  to  be  asked.  It  should  never  be  done.  No  man  can  tell  whether  it  i."
right  to  promise  until  he  knows  what  is  to  be  promised.  In  the  case  now  before  us,
we  find  a  man  excited  with  wine  and  company,  and  not  really  himself.  It  is  necessary
to  realize  the  gay  but  degrading  scene,  and  the  skilfulness  of  the  wicked  scheme  carried
through  by  Herodias.  To  us  dancing  is  a  modest  and  beautiful  amusement,  whatevei
may  be  thought  of  its  relation  to  religious  people.  But  at  Eastern  feasts,  girls  of  bad
character  were  often  introduced,  who  amused  the  guests,  and  excited  evil  passions,  b}
rude  movements  and  antics,  and  dancing  in  filmy  garments.  "  Herodias  knew  the
letrarch's  weak  point  as  well  as  Madame  du  Barry  knew  that  of  Louis  XV.  of  Prance,
and  sought  to  bend  him  to  her  will,  even  though  it  were  by  the  sacrifice  of  hei
daughter's  modesty."  She  made  Salome  act  before  these  guests  as  if  she  were  an
Almeh-dancer.     Herod  loses  all  self-control,  and  foolishly  promises  her  anything.

I.  A  suRBENDEB  OF  JUDGUEilT.  A  man  should  always  consider  and  decide  before
he  promises.  A  man  may  surrender  his  judgment  to  God.  He  may  yield  his  judg-
ment in  discussion  with  his  fellow-men,  because  a  better  judgment  may  be  given.  But
he  may  never  give  away  his  judgment,  and  let  some  one  else  judge  for  him.  Then  a
man  is  weak,  unmanly.  By  unlimited  promise  Herod  surrendered  his  manhood,  his
right  to  control  his  conduct.

II.  Ay  oppoKTUNiTT  FOB  THB  UNSCRUPULOUS.  Their  trouble  alwayi  is  that  their
plans  may  be  considered,  weighed,  judged.  So  their  scheme  always  is  to  get  things
carried  through  before  they  can  be  thought  about.  "To-morrow"is  the  weakness  of  the
undecided,  and  the  ruin  of  the  unscrupulous.  If  Herod  had  said,  "  We  will  see  about
ihe  promise  to-morrow,"  John  Baptist  would  not  have  lost  his  head.  That  unlimited
promise  broke  the  barriers  down ;  and  unscrupulous  Herodias  pressed  her  opportunity.

III.  A  CURSE   ALIKE   FOR   THOSE   WHO  GUT    AND    THOSE   WHO   GIVE.      Is    it    possible

for  us  to  estimate  the  moral  effect  of  this  abominable  transaction  on  Herodias  and
Salome?  The  worst  thing  that  can  ever  happen  to  us  is  to  be  successful  in  some
shameless  enterprise.  Salome's  life  was  a  horror,  almost  worse  than  that  of  Herodias.
Then  estimate  the  misery  of  Herod.  His  conscience  that  ever  reminded  him  of  the
head  in  the  charger.  His  dreadful  fears  that  John  had  risen  from  the  dead.  Never
promise  without  knowing  what  you  promise. — R.  T.

Ver.  9. —  Vain  regrets.  "And  the  king  was  sorry."  But  no  good  came  of  his
sorrow.  It  was  too  late.  He  had  lost  his  opportunity.  He  had  put  his  foot  upon  a
'  slide,  and  down  he  had  to  go.  Plumptre  says,  "  It  was  the  last  struggle  of  conscience.
In  that  moment  there  must  have  come  before  his  mind  his  past  reverence  for  the
prophet,'  the  joy  which  had  for  a  time  accompanied  the  strivings  of  a  better  life,
possibly  the  counsels  of  his  foster-brother  Manaen."  Every  man  must  have  his
regrets.  Things  done  in  all  good  faith  turn  out  very  different  to  our  expectations,  and
we  regret  that  we  did  them.  But,  if  we  are  strong  men,  we  work  at  the  correction  or
the  remedying  of  our  unintended  evil.  And  regret  sometimes  is  an  important  element
in  repentance.  Eegret  concerns  the  result  of  action.  Repentance  concerns  the  wrong
of  action.

I.  Regrets  are  vain  when  character  is  weak.  Undisciplined  people  are  always
full  of  regrets ;  but  they  do  them  little  or  no  good.  Herod  was  sorry  that  he  had  made
that  unconditional  promise.  But  he  was  too  weak  to  refuse  to  do  the  wrong  to  which
it  led.  The  weak  fear  of  man  extracted  the  order  for  the  beheading ;  he  was  ashamed
before  that  assembly  to  recall  his  too-hasty  promise.  "  Like  most  weak  men,  Herod
feared  to  be  thought  weak.  It  was  not  so  much  his  regard  for  the  oath  whicii  he  had
taken,  but  his  shrinking  from  the  taunt,  or  whispered  jest,  or  contemptuous  gesture  of
the  assembled  guests,  if  they  should  see  him  draw  back  from  his  plighted  word."
When  the  character  is  weak  it  is  (1)  always  sensitive  to  public  opinion;  (2)  it  is
always  subject  to  the  sway  of  stronger  characters.  Herod  may  be  as  sorry  as  he
pleases,  but  his  regret  is  helpless  and  vain.  Public  opinion  will  drag  him  on  into
crime,  and  so  will  the  shameless  companion  of  his  sins.

II.  Eegrets  are  vain  when  cibcumstanobs  ABE  MASTERFUL.  A  man  may  be
sorry,  and  may  even  try  to  put  right  his  wrong,  yet  find  all  his  efforts  in  vain.  The
man  who  plays  with  the  fates  will  be  dragged  on  to  his  doom  by  them.     It  is  easy  to


CH.  XIV.  1—36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  91

set  going  a  train  of  circumstances,  but  even  the  strong  man  vainly  tries  to  check  their
unfoldings ;  they  become  masterful ;  and  he  must  see  the  misery  he  has  made,  and  be
punished  by  seeing  it.  Our  life  is  so  ordered  that  good,  sooner  or  later,  inevitably
unfolds  good ;  and  evil,  sooner  or  later,  inevitably  unfolds  misery.  Let  a  man  do  the
prudent,  the  thoughtful,  the  self-restrained,  the  good,  and  he  will  never  know  the
misery  of  vain  regrets. — ^E.  T.

Ver.  13. — The  first  impulse  of  the  sorrow-stricken.  There  may  have  been  more  than
one  reason  for  our  Lord's  retirement  on  this  occasion.  He  may  have  designed  to  secure
a  time  of  close  personal  intercourse  with  the  apostles.  They  had  just  returned  from
their  trial-mission ;  they  were  in  a  very  excited  frame  of  mind,  and  sorely  needed  a
time  of  quiet  guidance  and  teaching.  He  may  also  have  felt  that  the  violent  death
of  John  the  Baptist,  of  which  very  imperfect  accounts  must  have  reached  him,  put  his
own  life  in  peril,  and  made  it  advisable  to  remove  from  more  public  scenes  for  a  while.
But  the  accounts  leave  on  us  the  impression  that  our  Lord  was  specially  affected  by
the  news  of  John's  death,  and  felt  the  longing  for  quietness  and  seclusion,  which  is  the
first  impulse  of  the  sorrow-stricken ;  in  this  showing  himself  tempted  and  tried  even
as  we  are,  and  so  having  a  "  fellow-feeling  of  our  infirmities."  The  point  on  which  we
dwell  is  that  the  first  desire  of  the  sorrow-stricken  is  a  mixed  one.  He  both  seeks
quietude  and  he  seeks  company ;  and  often  he  restlessly  changes  from  the  one  to  the
other.    This  peculiarity  we  find  in  Jesus,  in  "the  Man  Christ  Jesus."

I.  The  mPDLSB  to  seek  loneliness.  This  perhaps  always  comes  first.  Sorrow
sends  us  into  retirement.  The. stricken  care  to  see  nobody.  Leave  them  alone  in  their
grief.  This  is  illustrated  in  two  scenes  of  Christ's  life,  1.  In  the  case  before  us,  when
Jesus  received  the  sad  news  of  the  violent  death  of  a  friend  and  fellow-worker.  He
wanted  to  be  alone.  He  went  into  quietude.  He  passed  across  the  lake,  to  the  lonely
eastern  side,  away  from  the  pressure  of  the  crowds.  Silence,  separation,  are  the  felt
needs  of  such  an  hour.  2.  In  the  case  of  Gethsemane,  when  Jesus  was  in  immediate
anticipation  of  calamity,  and  overwhelmed  with  mental  distress.  Then  he  sought  the
quiet  of  the  garden,  the  shade  of  the  olives,  and  even  separation  from  the  trusted
three.  None  may  see  the  Man  in  his  sublime  soul-wrestlings.  He  must  be
alone.

II.  The  impulse  to  seek  company.  This  is  quite  as  marked.  The  stricken  maii
wants  to  be  alone,  and  yet  cannot  hear  to  be  alone.  He  wants  to  feel  that  friends  are
near ;  that  he  can  reach  them.  He  must  sometimes  speak  out  the  woe  to  them,  or  it
would  grow  unendurable.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  same  two  scenes  of  Christ's  life.
In  the  first,  our  Lord  must  have  the  apostolic  company  with  him.  "  Come  ye  into  a
desert  place,  and  rest  a  while."  In  the  second,  he  must  feel  that  the  chosen  three  were
close  at  hand.     Truly  a  "  fellow-feeling  of  our  infirmities." — E.  T.

Ver.  22. — The  necessity  for  constraint.  Thomson  puts  together  the  narrative  so  as
to  bring  out  the  reason  for  Christ's  constraining  the  disciples ;  or,  rather,  a  first  and
external  reason  which  prepares  for  the  discernment  of  the  deeper  reason.

I.  The  evidbnt  necessity  foe  the  consteaint.  "As  the  evening  was  coming
on,  Jesus  commanded  the  disciples  to  return  home  to  Capernaum,  while  he  sent  the
people  away.  They  were  reluctant  to  go  and  leave  him  alone  in  that  desert  place ;
probably  remonstrated  against  his  exposing  himself  to  the  coming  stoim  and  the  cold
night  air,  and  reminded  him  that  he  would  have  many  miles  to  walk  round  the  head
of  the  lake,  and  must  cross  the  Jordan  at  Bethsaida  before  he  could  reach  home.  To
quiet  their  minds,  he  may  have  then  told  them  to  go  on  toward  Bethsaida,  while  he
dismissed  the  crowd,  promising  to  join  them  in  the  night,  which  he  intended  to  do,
and  actually  did,  though  in  a  manner  very  different  from  what  they  expected.  Still
they  were  reluctant  to  leave  him,  and  had  to  be  constrained  to  set  sail.  In  this  state
of  anxiety,  they  endeavoured  to  keep  near  the  shore  between  this  and  Bethsaida,
hoping,  no  doubt,  to  take  in  their  beloved  Master  at  some  point  along  the  coast.  But
a  violent  wind  beat  off  the  boat,  so  that  they  were  not  able  to  make  Bethsaida,  nor
even  Capernaum,  but  were  driven  past  both;  and  when  near  the  Plain  of  Oennesaret,
.at  the  north-west  corner  of  the  lake,  Jesus  came  to  them  walking  on  the  sea."  This
illustrates  well  the  surface-explanation  of  these  events;  but  it  does  not  satisfy,  because


9a  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xiv.  1— «6.

It  doei  not  give  any  reason  for  our  Lord  sending  the  disciples  away.  Why  did  he  not
keep  them  to  help  him  in  dismissing  the  crowd  ?

IL  The  real  necessity  fob  the  constbaint.  We  must  look  below  the  surface,
and  then  some  interesting  things  come  to  view.  The  miracle  of  feeding  the  thousands
excited  the  people,  and  led  them  to  regard  Jesus  as  the  delivering  Messiah,  and  there
and  then  proclaim  him  as  the  expected  King.  And  our  Lord's  disciples,  instead  of
repressing  this  excitement,  were  carried  away  by  it,  and  would  have  joined  in  this
mistaken  acclamation.  Herein  lies  the  explanation  of  the  following  things.  L  Their
uselesssess  as  helpers  in  dismissing  the  excited  crowd,  seeing  they  were  themselves
excited.  2.  Christ's  determination  to  get  them  out  of  the  way.  3.  Their  unwilling-
ness to  go.  4.  Our  Lord's  constraint.  6.  The  revelation  of  his  mystery  and  spiritu-
ality, in  the  walking  on  the  sea,  as  corrective  of  the  material  notions  to  which  they
were  giving  room. — B.  T.

Ver.  23. — The  soothing  power  of  prayer.  Earnest  effort  should  be  made  to  realize
the  strain,  and  excitement,  and  fatigue,  and  distress  of  that  day  to  Christ.  In  some
senses  it  was  the  very  hardest  day  of  his  active  ministry.  Appraise  carefully  the
sjnritual,  and  even  physical,  influence  of  the  following  things.  1.  Anxiety  concerning
the  excitement  of  his  disciples  because  the  devils  had  been  subject  to  them  on  their
first  mission.  2.  Distress  on  hearing  of  the  violent  death  of  John.  3.  Effort  to  put
personal  feeling  aside  in  order  to  teach  and  heal  the  crowds  who  gathered  at  his  land-
ing-place. 4.  The  spiritual  strain  of  expending  miraculous  force  in  multiplying  the
few  loaves.  6.  Excitement  at  the  dangerous  intentions  of  the  people  to  make  him
king.  6.  Annoyance  at  his  disciples  when  they  would  take  part  with  the  people.  7.
Necessity  for  acting  promptly  and  vigorously  in  checking  the  beginnings  of  mischief.
8.  Pain  to  find  bis  disciples  still  imprisoned  in  material  conceptions  of  him  and  of  his
mission.  Surely  when  all  was  over,  the  disciples  were  on  the  lake,  and  the  last
lingerer  of  the  crowd  well  out  of  sight,  Jesus  must  have  been  utterly  exhausted,  and
needed  some  soothing,  healing  balm.  Where  could  he  get  it?  He  knew.  He  shows
us  the  place  of  soothing.    It  is  the  place  of  prayer.

L  Pbateb  soothes  bt  enablino  us  TO  CAST  ouB  OABB  ON  GoD.  The  simple
soothing  mission  of  prayer  is  not  often  dwelt  on.  It  is  too  much  treated  as  a  means
of  getting  something.  Its  best  blessings  may  be  said  to  be  the  good  things  it  does  for
us,  rather  than  the  good  things  it  obtains  for  us.  Prayer  allays  excitement.  Prayer
soothes  the  worried.  Prayer  quiets  the  restless.  Prayer  stills  our  atmospheres.  And
all  because  it  just  means  Ming  Qod.  If  we  legin  to  tell  excitedly  we  soon  fall  into
the  deep  peace  which  his  presence  and  sympathy  always  breathe.

IL   PbAYEB    soothes    BV    ASSUBINO  US    THAT    60D    OABES  FOB    US.      And    that,  of

necessity,  means  the  mastery  of  the  circumstances  that  trouble  us.  We  are  in  the
midst  of  difSculties,  and  they  worry ;  they  seem  to  be  masterful.  We  go  to  God  iu
prayer,  and  feel  that  he  is  in  the  midst  of  them,  ruling  and  overruling ;  and  we  aie
calmed  and  rested.  There  are  no  real  difficulties.  "  Greater  is  he  who  is  for  us  than
all  who  can  be  against  us." — B.  T.

Ver.  26. — A  first  lesson  on  the  spiritual  presence.  The  answer  of  the  disciples  to  the
sight  of  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea  revealed  the  fact  that  they  shared  the  superstitious
sentiments  of  theu-  age.  They  said,  "  It  is  a  spirit,"  "  Orientals  continue  to  believe,
as  of  old,  in  supernatural  agencies,  not  only  in  the  all-pervading  and  all-controlling
providence  and  personal  influence  of  the  Deity,  which  they  have  ever  pushed  to  extreme
fatalism,  but  also  iu  the  existence  and  activity,  either  for  good  or  for  evil,  of  spirits  and
invisible  beings,  who  people  the  air."  Our  Lord  desired  to  guide  hb  disciples  to
worthier  apprehensions  of  spiritual  things,  through  the  proper  apprehension  of  himself
as  a  spiritual  Being  and  a  spiritual  Messiah.  Our  Lord  had  wrought  many  miracles
which  displayed  his  power,  and  revealed  him  as  (1)  Lord  of  Nature  iu  all  her  moods ;
(2)  of  death  in  all  i!ts  stages;  (3)  of  devils  in  all  their  forms  of  mischief;  (4)  of  souls
in  all  their  spiritual  needs.  Now,  by  this  walking  on  the  sea,  he  would  reveal  to  them
something  of  the  mystery  which  belonged  to  his  own  Person.  And  this  particular
revelation  was  called  for  by  the  fact  that  the  disciples  had  encouraged  the  attempt  of
the  people  to  make  their  Master  a  merely  eartMn  king  (John  vL  16).


OH.  xiT.  1— 86.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  9S

L  Chbibt's  bodily  pbesenok  did  but  illubtbatk  hib  bfibitual  pbbbbnob.  It
should  be  clearly  seen  that  our  Lord  was  with  his  disciples  in  a  double  sense.  He  was
with  them  spiritually,  just  as  he  is  Btill  with  tts ;  but,  besides  that,  be  was  with  them
in  bodily  relations,  in  ways  that  could  be  appvehended  by  their  senses.  That  bodily
presence  was  given  to  teach  them  what  the  spiritual  presence  is  and  involves.  The
record  of  that  bodily  presence  is  preserved  tliat  it  might  do  the  same  thing  for  us.
Christ,  by  coming  on  the  sea,  taught  the  disoiples  two  things.  1.  That  he  would  be
with  them  when  they  could  not  see  him.  2.  That  they  must  not  wonder  if  he  came
to  them  in  strange  forms  and  manifestations.  He  was  teaching  them  how  to  use  their
wings  in  the  spiritual  atmosphere,  as  the  mother>bird  teaches  her  fledgelings.

IL  Christ's  bodily  presence  was  presently  to  pabb  into  a  spiritual  presence.
The  first  suggestiou  was  the  loss  of  bodyweight  which  enabled  Jesus  to  walk  on  tlie
water.  The  second  suggestion  was  the  passing  of  the  bodily  into  the  spiritual  at  the
Besurrection,  The  third  was  the  passing  of  the  spiritual  body  beyund  the  apprehension
of  the  senses  at  the  Ascension.  The  illustrative  bodily  presence  has  gone  now,  and
gone  for  ever ;  the  reality  of  the  spiritual  presence  of  Christ  is  the  possession  and  the
glory  of  his  Church  to-day.-^R.  T.

Vers.  29,  80. — The  lack  of  staying  power.  "  But  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,
he  was  afraid,"  It  is  the  weakness  of  the  impulsive  man  that  he  has  no  staying
power,  and  is  only  good  for  the  little  while  that  the  fit  is  on  him.  It  is  the  weakness
of  impulsive,  excitable  nations,  that  while  they  are  splendid  at  a  dash,  they  have  none
of  the  persistency  that  holds  on  until  the  end  is  fully  secured.  St.  Peter  often  spoke
and  acted  before  ho  thought.  Behind  him  was  impulse  rather  than  resolve.  So
difBoulties  created  at  once  a  new  and  opposing  impulue.  He  failed  as  quickly  and  as
unreasonably  as  he  acted.  The  men  who  succeed  in  life  are  the  men  who  can  hold
on.  St.  Peter  might  have  safely  wallsed  the  water  if  he  had  held  on  the  faith  with
which  he  started  from  the  boat,  and  which  had  received  the  Master's  approval.

I.  St.  Peter  attempted  an  impossibility.  There  is  nothing  that  men  regard
as  so  impossible  as  "  walking  on  the  sea."  Men  can  walk  on  the  narrowest  ledges  of
the  loftiest  cliffs,  or  on  the  thinnest  ropes,  but  not  on  the  water.  The  Egyptians,  in
their  hieroglyphics,  were  wont  to  represent  an  impossibility  by  painting  the  figure  of
a  man  with  his  feet  walking  upon  the  sea.  St.  Peter  saw  this  iibpossibility  overcome
by  his  Master.  A  sudden  thought  seized  him.  He  should  like  to  do  what  his  Master
did.  It  was  a  child's  wiBh;  but  it  showed  love  and  trust.  He  spoke  it  out.  The
Master  said  "  Come,"  a&d  he  tried  to  do  the  impossible.  A  nobler  man  than  those
who  never  had  such  thoughts,  and  never  made  such  attempts.

II.  St.  Peter  began  to  succeed  with  his  impossibility.  A  man  can  Walk
steadily  along  a  very  dangerous  place  if  he  looks  up  at  the  steadfast  sky.  He  will  be
giddy  if  he  ventures  to  look  around  or  to  look  down.  It  is  thus  always  in  the  spiritual
spheres.  St.  Peters  can  always  walk  safely,  even  on  the  treacherous  waters,  so  long  as
they  look  up  and  away  to  the  steadfast  Christ.  They  will  fail  and  fall  as  soon  as  they
Look  around,  or  down,  or  within.  And  the  reason  Is  that  man  is  strong  when  he  leans
on  another,  but  weak  when  he  trusts  to  himself.  The  impulsive  man  leans  for  a
minute  and  is  strong ;  then  impulse  fails,  and  he  is,  like  Samson,  weak  as  other  men,

III.  St.  Peteb  soon  failed  with  his  impossibility.  If  he  could  have  kept  bis
eye  and  mind  fixed  on  Jesus  he  would  have  succeeded.  But  he  thought  of  the  wind  ;
and  the  wind  took  the  place  of  Jesus.  Jesus  quickened  faith ;  the  wind  quickened
fear.  Faith  makes  a  man  strong.  Fear  wholly  unnerves.  What  St.  Peter  needed  for
success  was  "  stayitig  power  of  faith."  Keeping  on  trusti^.  Keeping  on  "  looking
off  unto  Jesus ; "  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.'' — B,  T.

Ver.  33. — The  name  which  disciples  found  for  Jesus.  In  a  previous  homily  attention
has  been  given  to  the  name  which  Jesus  found  for  himself,  "  The  Son  of  man."  Here
we  have  the  name  for  the  highest  thoughts  which  disciples  could  reach  concerning
him,  "The  Sou  of  Qtxl."  Much  interest  may  be  found  in  comparing  the  leading
names  given  to  Christ.  God's  name  for  hitu.  His  own  name  for  himself.  His
disciples'  name  for  him.  The  name  he  was  to  have.  The  name  he  wished  to  hare.
The  natne  he  came  to  have     "Emmanuel:"  "Son  of  man;"  "Son  of  God."    Thp


H


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xv.  1—39,


disciples'  confession  was  made  in  k  moment  of  wonder  at  their  Lord's  walking  on  the
sea,  which  convinced  them  that  he  was  more  than  man.  We  need  not  suppose  that
they  put  into  the  term  that  full  meaning  which  we  associate  with  it ;  but  they  said  it
to  Christ  in  a  spirit  of  true  reverence,  offering  to  him  the  worship  due  only  to  a  Divine
Being.

L  The  name  "Son  of  God"  does  not  ebprbsent  dub  fibst  appeehension  of
Chbist.  It  is  intended  that  the  humanity  of  Christ  should  make  the  first  impression
upon  us.  At  first  sight  he  is  the  "Man  Christ  Jesus."  St.  John  is  even  supremely
jealous  of  the  truth  that  "Jesus  is  come  in  the  flesh."  It  may  be  doubted  whether
any  arguments  for  the  Divinity  of  Christ  can  be  effective  until  the  truth  of  hii
humanity  has  been  fully  apprehended.  What  requires  to  be  seen  clearly  is  that  the
humanity  of  Christ  cannot  be  fully  and  adequately  set  forth  without  producing  the
conviction  that  he  was  more  than  human.  What  the  orthodox  party  needs  to  secure
is  a  complete  representation  of  our  Lord's  humanity.  Imperfect  representations  have
laid  the  bnsis  of  erroneous  doctrines  concerning  our  Lord's  Person.  We  begin  with  his
ful)  humanity.

U.  Tbh  naue  "Son  of  God"  bepbebentb  advanced  Christian  attainment.
Hardly  in  the  instance  now  before  ns,  which  is  better  regarded  as  an  anticipative
exclamation  of  what  would  be  more  intelligently  and  more  considerately  stated  by-and-
by.  We  have  also  to  remember  that  the  Jews  commonly  spoke  of  tradesmen  as  "son
of  the  trade,"  and  these  disciples  may  but  have  intended  a  figure  for  the  good  man,
the  "  Son  of  God."  But  the  term  was  subsequently  used  with  its  fullest  meaning.  It
represents  the  advanced  spiritual  apprehension  of  Christ.  He  is  "  the  Son  of  God  with
power."  The  conviction  of  the  Divinity,  or  Deity,  of  Christ  is  seldom  or  ever  reached
by  arguments.  It  is  the  conviction  which  comes  to  men  by  personal  dealings  with
Christ;  personal  experiences  of  his  power.  At  first  we  know  him  as  our  Saviour}  by-
and-by  we  know  him  as  our  Ood. — B.  T.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTBB  XV.


Vers.  1 — 20. — Discourse  concerning  cere-
monial pollution.    (Mark  viL  1 — 28.)

Ver.  1.— Then,  This  is  after  the  third  Pass-
over, which  whether  our  Liord  attended  or
not,  has  been  a  matter  of  some  dispute.  Moral
considerations  would  make  us  infer  that
he  was  present,  fulfilling  all  righteousness,
though  there  is  no  direct  statement  in  our
narratives  on  the  subject.  Came  to  Jesus
scribes  and  Pharisees,  which  were  of  Jeru-
salem, saying.  The  Sinaitio,  B,  and  some
other  manuscripts  read,  Came  to  Jesun  from
Jerusalem  scribes  and  Pharisees.  This,  which
is  virtually  the  reading  of  the  Bevised
Version,  whether  original  or  not,  seems  to
represent  the  fact  correctly.  The  bigoted
rabbis  of  the  capital,  aroused  to  fresh  action
by  the  news  of  Christ's  success  in  Galilee,
send  emissaries  from  Jerusalem  to  see  if
they  cannot  find  some  canse  of  offence  in
the  words  or  actions  of  tliis  rash  Innovator
which  may  give  the  desired  opportunity  of
crushing  him.  An  occasion  offered  itself,
and  was  immediately  seized.

Ver.  2.— Thy  diseiples.  They  had  watched
oui  Lord  and  his  followers  partaking  of
some  meal,  and  doubtless  Christ  had  acted


in  the  same  manner  as  his  disoiplei.  Open
honses  and  food  partaken  of  in  public
allowed  this  close  observation  without  any
infringement  of  Eastern  courtesy.  They
come  to  Christ  with  the  insidious  question,
because  they  consider  him  answerable  for
his  disciples'  doings(comp.  oh.  ix.  14;  xii.  2),
They  imply  that  his  teaching  has  led  to  the
transgression  on  which  they  animadvert.
Doubtless  the  apostles,  from  Christ's  in-
struction and  example,  were  learning  to  free
themselves  from  the  endless  rules  and  re-
strictions which  were  no  help  to  religion,
and  to  attend  more  to  the  great  realities  of
vital  piety  and  holiness.  The  omission  of
the  outward  acts,  rabhinioally  enjoined,  was
readily  marked  and  censured.  The  tradition.
This  formed  a  vast  collection  of  additions,
explanations,  etc.,  of  the  original  Law,
partly,  as  was  a£Srmed,  delivered  orally  by
Moses,  and  handed  down  from  generation
to  generation;  and  partly  accumulated  by
successive  expounders,  St.  Paul  refers  to
this  when  he  speaks  of  himself  before  his
conversion  as  being  "exceedingly  jealous
for  the  tradition  of  my  fathers  "  (Gal.  i.  14).
From  it,  in  the  course  of  time,  was  formed
the  Talmud,  with  its  text  (Mishna)  and
Its  commentary  (Gemaia).  It  was  not  put
into    writing    till   after   our   Lord'*  time


OH.  XV.  1—39.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


96


(hence  called  typapos  SiSa<rKd\ia),  but  was
taught  authoritatively  by  accredited  teachers,
who,  while  retaining  the  letter  of  the  Law,
abrogated  its  spirit,  nullifying  the  broad
line  of  God's  commandments  by  enforcing
minute  observances  and  puerile  restrictions,
which  were  a  burden  and  impediment  to
purity  and  devotion,  rather  than  an  aid  and
oncouragemeut.  The  elders  (Tav  irpeo-jSure-
pav) ;  tlie  ancients.  The  older  expositors  and
rabbis,  whose  commentaries  had  been  orally
handed  down.  Such  traditions  were  re-
garded with  more  respect  than  the  letter
of  Scripture,  and  the  latter  had  to  give  way
when  it  seemed  to  be  antagonistic  to  the
former.  Wash  not  their  hands  when  they
eat  bread.  To  eat  bread  means  to  take  food
of  any  kind.  The  fear  of  legal  defilement
led  to  a  multitude  of  rabbinical  rules  of
the  most  vexatious  and  troublesome  nature,
the  infringement  of  any  of  which  endangered
a  man's  ceremonial  purity  (see  Hark  vii.  3,
4).  These  frivolous  regulations  had  been
built  upon  the  plain  Mosaical  enactments
of  Lev.  xi.,  etc.  St.  Matthew,  writing  for
those  who  were  well  acquainted  with  these
glosses,  enters  into  no  details;  St.  Mark  is
more  explicit.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that
the  Pharisees  were  extending  and  enforcing
these  traditions  just  when  the  Law  was  to
be  superseded  by  something  more  spiritual,
and  doing  so  in  spite  of  the  interdiction.
"  Ye  shall  not  add  unto  the  word  which  I
command  you  "  (Deut.  iv.  2).

Ver.  3. — He  answered.  Christ  does  not
formally  defend  his  disciples,  nor  condemn
the  Pharisees  for  their  ceremonial  ablntions,
but  he  turns  to  a  matter  of  more  importance,
even  a  plain  breach  or  evasion  of  a  plain
commandment.  Ye  also.  If  my  disciples
transgress  a  tradition  of  the  ancients,  ye
too  transgress,  and  that  the  commandment
of  God — an  error  of  far  graver  character.  His
non-observance  of  these  minutiis  showed
their  unimportance,  and  called  attention  to
the  inward  purity  which  they  typified,  and
which  could  be  maintained  without  these
external  ceremonies.  At  the  same  time,
Jesus  does  not  condemn  such  symbolical
acts,  even  as  he  himself  washed  the  disciples'
feet  before  the  last  Supper.  The  evil  in
.  rabbinical  teachings  was  that  it  superseded
the  spiritual  view,  and  placed  outward
cleansing  on  a  higher  level  than  inward
holiness.  By  (Sid  with  accusative);  on
account  of,  in  order  to  maintain.  Your
tradition.  Tradition  which  is  emphatically
yours  and  not  God's,  a  human  gloss,  not
a  revealed  command.  Jesus  does  not  accept
the  assertion  that  these  traditions  are  derived
from  the  ancients ;  he  gives  them  a  more
modem  origin.

Ver.  1. — Ohrist  proceeds  to  give  an  in-
stance of  the  evacuation  of  the  Law  by


means  of  tradition,  God  oommanded.  Mark,
in  the  parallel  passage,  has,  "  Moses  said,"
which  may  be  taken,  in  conjunction  with
our  text,  as  conveying  our  Lord's  testimony
to  the  Divine  origin  of  the  Mosaic  code.
Christ  cites  the  fifth  commandment,  because
it  more  especially  appealed  to  the  conscience
of  every  one,  and  was  emphasized  by  the
solemn  enactment  of  death  as  the  penalty
of  its  infringement  (Exod.  zx.  12;  xxL  17).
Honour  (rl/ia).  This  term  inclades  the
idea  of  succour  and  support,  as  in  1  Tim.
V.  3,  "Honour  widows  that  are  widows
indeed;"  and  in  1  Tim.  v.  17,  where  Ti/t);
means  "  stipend."  In  Ecclus.  xxxviii.  1,
"  Honour  a  physician  with  the  honours  due
unto  him,"  the  expression  has  reference  to
his  proper  fees,  tlie  honorarium  paid  for  his
services.  In  God's  view  honour  to  parents
is  not  shown  only  in  outward  salutations,
obedience,  and  respect,  but  also  in  material
assistance,  help  provided  for  their  needs,
alms  freely  bestowed  when  necessary.  This
well-known  signification  makes  the  tradition
next  given  more  inexcusable.  Die  the
death.  An  Hebraism,  equivalent  to  "  shall
surely  be  put  to  death  "  (comp.  Gen.  iL  17,
margin).  If  words  against  parents  are  thus
punished,  shall  not  deeds  be  visited  7

Yer.  5. — Bat  ye  say.  .  In  direct  contradic-
tion to  what "  God  commanded."  It  is  a  gift,
etc.  This  is  better  rendered.  That  wherewith
thou  mightest  have  been  benefited  by  me  is
Corban ;  i.e.  is  given,  dedicated  to  God.  The
vow  to  consecrate  his  savings,  even  at  death,
to  the  temple  absolved  a  man  from  the  duty
of  succouring  his  parents.  It  was  further
ruled  that  if  a  son,  from  any  motive  what-
ever, pronounced  any  aid  to  his  parents  to
be  corban,  he  was  thenceforward  precluded
from  affording  them  help,  the  claims  of  the
commandment  and  of  natural  affection  and
charity  being  superseded  by  the  vow.  He
seems  to  have  been  allowed  to  expend  the
money  thus  saved  on  himself  or  any  other
object  except  his  father  and  mother.  So
gross  an  evasion  of  a  common  duty  could
not  be  placed  in  the  same  category  as  the
omission  of  nnnecessary  washings.

Ver.  6. — ^And  hononr  not  his  father  or  his
mother,  he  shall  he  free.  The  last  clause
is  not  in  the  Greek ;  it  is  supplied  by  our
translators,  as  it  was  in  Coverdale's  version,
to  complete  the  apodosis.  There  are  various
methods  of  translating  the  passage.  Be-
taining  wal  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,
some  make  these  words  the  continuation  of
the  gloss,  "  Whosoever  shall  say,"  etc.,  the
apodosis  being  found  in  the  sentence  follow-
ing. Others  conceive  an  aposiopesis  after
**  be  profited  by  me,"  as  if  Christ  re&ained
from  pronooncing  ike  hypocritical  and  in-
deed blasphemons  words  which  completed
the  gloii.    In  this  case  the  apodosis  follows


S6


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [ch.  xv.  1—39.


in  ver.  6,  ical,  then  luch  a  one  witt  not  honour
(ri/t^o-ei,  not  rifi^o-p),  etc.  The  words  are
best  taken  as  put  iuto  the  PhariBees'  mouth
in  the  sense,  "  The  man  under  those  oiroum-
stanoes  shail  not  honour,"  etc.;  he  is  free
from  the  obligation  of  helping  his  parents.
The  form  of  the  senteuoe  (ou  /njj  with  the
future  verb)  is  prohibitory  rather  than  pre-
dictive, and  implies,  "he  is  forbidden  to
honour."  Clirist  thus  sharply  emphasizes
the  contradiction  between  Ood's  Law  and
man's  perversion  thereof.  St.  Mark  has,
"  Ye  no  longer  suffer  him  to  do  aught  for
his  father."  Thus;  ha!  in  the  apodosis,
removing  the  full  stop  before  it  in  the
Authorized  Version.  This  is  our  Lord's
own  saying.  Hade  .  .  >  of  none  effect.
Evacuated  its  real  force  and  spirit.  By;
owing  to,  for  the  sake  of,  as  St.  Mark  says,
"that  ye  may  keep  your  tradition."  Our
translators  often  mistake  the  meaning  of
the  preposition  Si^  with  the  accosatiTe,
which  never  signifies  "  by  means  of."

Ver.  7. — Ye  hypocrites.  He  called  them
by  this  name  because,  while  they  pretended
that  zeal  for  God's  glory  led  them  to  these
explanations  and  amplifications  of  the  Law,
they  were  really  influenced  by  oovetousness
and  avarice,  and  virtually  despised  thiit
which  they  professed  to  uphold.  A  Jewisli
proverb  said  that  if  hypocrites  were  diviUeil
into  ten  parties,  nine  of  them  would  be  found
in  Jerusalem,  and  one  in  the  rest  of  the
world.  Well  did  Esaias  prophesy  of  you
(Isa.  xxix,  13).  That  is,  their  conduct
fulfilled  the  saying  of  the  prophet,  as  ch.
xiii.  14.  Such  "prophecies"  were  for  all
time,  aud  were  suitable  for  various  circum-
stances, characters,  and  events.  Christ  is
wont  to  fortify  his  arguments  by  the  autliority
of  Scripture,  often  rather  explaining  the
mind  of  the  Spirit  thau  quoting  the  exact
wordd.

Ver.  8. — The  quotation  is  from  the  Beptua-
gint  Version,  with  a  slight  variation  from
the  text  at  the  end.  The  Hebrew  also
differs  a  little;  but  the  general  meaning  is
not  affected.  With  their  mouth.  They
use  the  proscribed  forms  of  worship,  guard
with  much  care  the  letter  of  Scripture,
observe  its  legal  and  ceremonial  enact-
ments, are  strict  in  the  practice  of  ail
outward  formalities.  But  thoir  heart,
This  is  what  the  prophets  so  constantly
object.  Prayers,  sacrifices,  etc.,  are  alto-
gether unacceptable  unless  inspired  by  in-
ward devotion,  and  acoompanied  by  purity
of  heart.

Ver.  9. — But  in  vain,  etc.  The  Hebrew
gives,  "  And  their  fear  of  me  is  a  command-
ment of  men  which  hath  been  taught  them,"
or  "learned  by  rote"  (Revised  Version).
Septuagint,  "In  vain  do  they  worship  me,
teaching  men's   eommandments  and  doc-


trines." Their  worship  is  vitiated  at  its
very  root.  Commandments  of  men.  This  is
Christ's  designation  of  rabbinical  traditions
(oomp.  Col.  ii.  22).

Ver.  10. — He  called  the  multitude.  Jesus
had  now  finally  broken  with  the  Pharisaical
party ;  he  had  carried  the  war  into  their
camp.  It  wai  necessary  that  those  who  had
followed  these  false  teachers  should  know,
on  the  one  hand,  to  what  irreligion,  immo-
rality, and  profanity  their  doctrines  led,  aud,
on  the  other,  9hould  learn  the  unadulterated
truth,  "  pure  religion  and  undefiled  before
our  God  and  Father."  So  he  calls  around
him  the  crowd  of  common  people,  who  from
respect  had  stood  aloof  during  the  previous
controversy,  and  teaches  them  a  great  moral
truth  which  concorns  every  human  being.
Hear,  and  understand.  The  distinction
which  he  was  about  to  enunciate  was  diiE-
cnlt  for  persons  trained  in  Pharisaical
dogmas  to  receive  and  understand;  he
therefore  calls  special  attention  to  hia
coming  words.  The  depreciation  of  cere-
monial cleansings  miglit  easily  be  misunder-
stood. Jesus  would  say — There  is  indeed
cleansing  necessary  for  all  men ;  but  it  doei
not  consist  in  outward  washings,  but  in
inward  holiness.  In  what  follows,  our  Lord
says  nothing  definitely  about  the  Jistinotion
between  clean  and  unclean  meats  laid  down
in  the  Mosaic  Law ;  he  would  only  show
that  impurity  in  the  moral  sense  oame  from
within.  This  is  leading  up  to  the  principle
enunciated  by  the  apostle,  "  Every  oieature
'  of  God  is  good,  and  nothing  is  to  be  rejected,
if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving;  for  it
is  sanctified  through  the  Word  of  God  and
prayer"  (1  Tim,  iv.  4,  5).

Ver.  II. — Not  that  which  goeth  into  the
month  defilflth  a  man.  The  word  rendered
"deflleth"  ((coiyoi)  means  "  renders  common,"
in  opposition  to  kyid^fiv,  "  to  separate  "  fbr
God's  use ;  hence  the  verb,  ethically  applied,
signifies  "to  contract  guilt."  The  rabbis
taught  that  certain  meaU  of  themselves  pol-
luted the  soul,  made  it  abominable  in  God's
siglit.  Tills wasaperversion of thelawrespecl-
ing  clean  and  unclean  food.  The  pollution  or
guilt  arose,  not  from  the  nature  of  the  meat,
but  from  the  eating  of  it  in  contravention
of  a  positive  command.  It  was  the  dis-
obedience, not  the  food,  which  affected  the
soul.  It  is  remnrkable  that  these  distinctions
of  meats  still  obtain  among  half  the  civilized
innabitauts  of  the  world — Buddhists,  Hin-
doos, Mohammedans — and  that  one  of 'the
hardest  tasks  of  Christian  missionaries  is  to
make  men  undersland  the  non-importance
of  these  dlfDerenoes.  We  do  not  see  that
Christ  here  abrogated  the  Levitical  Law,
but  he  certainly  prepared  the  way  for  its
supersession  and  transformation.  But  he
made  no  sudden  aud  Violent  Ohange  in  th«


OH.  iv.  1—89.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORmNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


»i


constituted  order  of  things.  Indeed,  some
distinctions  were  maintained  in  apostolical
times,  as  we  read  in  Acts  x.  14 ;  xt.  20,  29  ;
and  it  was  only  gradually,  and  as  oircnm-
stances  made  their  observation  impossible,
that  such  ceremonial  obligations  were  re-
garded as  obsolete.  It  is,  perliaps,  with  the
view  of  not  shocking  inveterate  prejudice,
that  he  does  not  say,  "Xo  food  whatever
defileth,"  but "  That  which  goeth  into  the
mouth  "  defileth  not,  referring  especially  to
the  notion  above  reprehended,  that  eating
with  uuwashen  hands  polluted  the  food
taken  and  the  soul  of  the  person  who  con-
sumed it.  Our  Lord  says  nothing  of  excess,
e.g.  gluttony  and  drunkenness,  which,  of
course,  has  a  polluting  and  deteriorating
effect  on  the  moral  nature  (see  Luke  xxi.
31).  But  that  which  cometh  out  of  the
month.  In  the  former  sentence  the  mouth
is  regarded  simply  as  the  instrument  for
receiving  food  and  preparing  it  for  diges-
tion; in  this  sentence  it  is  considered  as
the  organ  of  the  heart,  that  which  gives
outward  expression  to  inward  thoughts  and
conceptions.  Fillion  distinguishes  them  as
"  la  bouche  physique,  et  la  bouohe  morale."
Philo  has  well  said,  "  The  mouth  is  that  by
which,  as  Plato  puts  it,  mortal  things  enter,
and  whence  immortal  things  issue.  For
therein  pass  meat  and  drink,  the  perishable
food  of  a  perishable  body ;  but  from  it  pro-
ceed words,  immortal  laws  of  an  immortal
soul,  by  which  the  rational  life  is  directed
and  governed  "  ('  De  Mundi  Opif.,'  §  40).
Defileth  a  man.  Pollutes  his  soul,  not  with
merely  ceremonial  defilement,  but  intrinsi-
cally and  morally.  Of  coarse,  out  Lord  is
referring  to  evil  words,  eto.,  as  he  explains
ill  ver.  19.  For  the  mouth  may  give  utter-
(inoe  to  God's  praise,  words  of  love,  sym-
pathy, edification.  But  the  evil  in  a  man's
heart  will  show  itself  in  his  month;  and
the  open  expression  will  react  on  the  wicked
thought,  and  make  it  more  substantial,
deadly,  and  operative.

Ver.  12. — Then  came  his  disciples.  Jesus
had  been  speaking  in  some  open  spot ;  he
now  leaves  the  crowd,  and,  entering  a  bouse
with  his  disciples,  instructs  them  further
in  private  (Mark  vii.  17).  These  had  been
greatly  alarmed  at  their  Master's  antago-
nism to  the  popular  party,  and,  on  the  first
occasion  that  presented  itself,  expostulated
with  him  on  the  danger  incurred  by  this
hostile  attitude.  This  saying  (rir  A^70i<) ;
the  word.  What  he  had  said  to  the  multitude
(ver.  11).  The  Pharisees  had  cared  less  for
the  denunciation  addressed  to  themselves
(vers.  S — 9),  but  when  he  interfered  with
their  doctrinal  supremacy  over  the  people,

,  they  were  offended,  they  took  exception  to
the  teaching,  believing  that  they  detected

there!]'  an  insidious  attack  on  the  Law.   In
H&TTHGW — n.


their  view,  spiritualization  of  any  of  Its
enactments  was  equivalent  to  its  subver-
sion. But,  as  St.  Gregory  observes,  "II
offence  arises  from  the  statement  of  the
truth,  it  is  more  expedient  that  offence  be
permitted  to  arise  than  that  the  truth
should  be  abandoned "  ('  Horn,  vli,  in
Ezek.').

Ver.  13. — Every  plant,  eto.  The  answer
of  Christ  signifies — Do  not  be  alarmed  by
the  displeasure  of  the  Pharisees,  and  at  my
opposition  to  their  teaching;  the  system
which  they  support  is  ungodly  and  shall
be  soon  destroyed,  Christ,  as  often,  puts
the  statement  in  a  parabolic  form,  using
two  images,  one  derived  from  the  vegetable
kingdom  in  this  verse,  and  one  from  human
life  in  ver.  14.  Plant  ((puTeta) ;  plimtation.
The  act  of  planting,  and  then  by  metonymy
the  thing  planted.  It  here  signifies  the
sect  and  doctrine  of  the  Pharisees,  the
persons  themselves,  and  that  which  they
taught.  The  comparison  of  men  nnd  trees,
plant  and  doctrine,  is  a  common  biblical
metaphor  (comp.  Ps,  1. ;  Isa.  v.  7 ;  oh.  vii.
16—20;  Luke  vi.  43,44,  etc.).  The  tradi-
tions of  the  rabbis  were  plants  which  my
heavenly  Father  hath  act  planted.  They
were  of  human,  not  Divine,  growth;  and
the  men  themselves,  even  though  originally
pliiiited  in  holy  soil,  had  degenerated,  and
become  not  only  unfruitful,  but  pernicious.
So  the  Lord  speaks  by  Jeremiah  (ii.
21),  "I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,
wholly  a  right  seed :  how  then  art  thou
turned  into  the  degenerate  plantof  a  strange
vine  unto  me?"  Shall  be  rooted  up.  Onr
Lord  is  not  referring  to  the  judgment  of  the
lust  day  (oh.  ili.  10),  nor  to  any  forcible
destruction  effected  by  human  agency ;  he
means  that  the  system  must  pass  away
entirely  to  make  room  for  a  better  growth,
even  the  gospel.  The  Jews  would  not  see
that  the  Law  was  a  schoolmaster  to  bring
men  to  Christ ;  they  deemed  that  their
oeremonies  and  rites  were  to  be  permanent
and  universal ;  and  this,  more  than  any-
thing, impeded  the  reception  of  Christ's
claims,  and  made  men  utterly  averse  from
his  teaching.  It  was  in  vain  that  Jesus
proclaimed, "  If  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would
believe  me ;  for  he  wrote  of  nie  "  (John  v.
48).  The  very  Law,  as  handled  and  ob-
scured by  the  Pharisees,  was  made  an
obstacle  to  the  truth,

Ver,  14. — Let  them  alone.  Do  not  trouble
yourselves  about  them ;  let  them  be  offended,
if  they  will  Blind  leaders  of  the  blind,
Biith  teachers  and  taught  are  alike  ignorant
of  the  truth.  The  people  had  no  spiritual
light,  and,  applying  to  their  appointed
pastors^,  they  learned  nothing  profitable  from
them ;  for  these  were  as  much  in  the  dark  as
themselves.     It  was  evident  then,  that  the


«8


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh,  xv.  1—39.


rabbis  ought  not  to  be  followed  unreservedly.
If  the  blind.  A  proverbial  Baying.  Comp.
Horat,  ♦  Epp.,'  I.  xvii.  3 —

"...  nt  si
Oaecns  iter  monstrare  velit."

And  the  Greek  adage,  M^tc  Tv(p\hv  SSriySv,
/i^Tc  iKv6iiiToi>  aiiifiov\ov.  Nos<;en  calls
attention  to  the  order  of  the  vrords,  Tv4>x6s
a  TU(p\hy  ihy  dSriy^,  "  Blind  blind  if  he
lead,"  which,  while  it  substantiates  the
advice, "  Let  them  alone,"  forcibly  expresses
the  fatal  result  of  this  guidance.  The  ditch
{$6evyoi>);  a  pitfall  (comp.  Isa.  zxiv.  17,
18,  Septnagint,  where  it  is  used  as  the
translation  of  the  Hebrew  pachath,  a  pit  in
which  wild  animals  are  taken).  The  "  ditch  "
in  one  sense  is  unbelief  in  Christ,  to  which
rabbinical  teaching  undoubtedly  led.  In
another  sense  it  adumbrates  the  ruin  in
which  these  false  principles  would  involve
the  Jewish  polity  and  people.  It  is  obvious
that  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  drew
down  the  punishment  which  has  made  the
Hebrew  nation  an  astonishment  to  all  the
world.

Ver.  15.— Then  answered  Peter.  The
disciples  could  not  understand  the  apparent
depreciation  of  the  external  in  religion;
they  did  not  see  the  meaning  of  what  Christ
had  said.  Peter,  as  their  mouthpiece,  asked
for  further  explanation.  Declare ;  ippda-ov :
ediesere.  Explain.  Parable.  The  word  in
an  extended  sense  is  used  of  any  hard,
enigmatical  saying  or  figurative  expression.
The  term  here  is  applied  to  the  statement
in  ver.  11.  The  apostles  did  not  compre-
hend the  minimizing  of  the  rules  con-
cerning purification,  and  the  possibility  of
a  man  being  defiled  by  what  proceeded
&om  his  mouth.  Inveterate  prejudices  die
hard,  and  it  is  difficult  to  emancipate  one'l
self  from  old  modes  of  thought.

Ver.  16. — Are  ye  also  yet  without  under-
standing? Even  yet;  iv/t^v:  adhue.  In
spite  of  all  that  has  passed — my  teaching,
my  life,  my  miracles — do  you  not  understand
in  what  real  purity  consists?  Often  had
Jesus  to  complain  of  the  dulness  of  his  dis-
ciples' intelligence,  the  slow  appreciation
of  his  meaning,  the  indifference  to  the
spiritual  side  of  his  acts  and  doctrine.  Up
to  the  very  last  they  failed  to  apprehend  his
mission ;  nor  was  it  till  the  Day  of  Pente-
cost, when  the  Holy  Spirit  was  poured  upon
them,  that  they  really  and  in  fulness  under-
stood the  Lord's  teaching  and  their  own
duties  and  powers.

Ver.  17. — Whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the
mouth,  etc.  Food  taken  into  the  mouth
goes  into  the  stomach,  is  assimilated  into
the  bodily  system,  and  its  refuse  passes
away  to  the  draught  (iipfSp&ya),  the  neces-
aary  hooae.    It  has  nothing  to  do  with  th«


heart  or  the  moral  being ;  it  affects  only  the
material  organization,  and  has  no  connec-
tion with  the  spiritual.  Christ  does  not  con-
cern himself  with  questions,  which  modern
philosophers  would  attempt  to  solve,  con-
cerning the  mutual  influence  of  soul  and
body,  the  animal  and  spiritual  nature ;  he
puts  forth  an  argument  which  every  one
could  receive,  plain  even  to  those  '"with-
out understanding."  This  is  the  elucida-
tion of  the  first  part  of  ver.  1 1.  The  further
explanation  follows  in  vers.  18,  19.

Ver.  18. — Those  things.  He  does  not
assert  that  everything  which  issues  from  a
man's  mouth  defiles  him ;  for,  as  was  said
above  on  ver.  11,  many  good  things  may
come  from  a  man's  mouth;  but  he  means
that  the  evil  to  which  he  gives  utterance  is
fraught  with  pollution  to  his  moral  nature.
Prom  the  heart.  The  heart  stands  for  soul,
mind,  spirit,  will,  the  whole  inner  man,  that
which  makes  him  what  he  is,  a  conscious,
intelligent,  responsible  being.  Hence  are
attributed  to  it  not  ouly  words,  but  acts,
conceptions  which  issue  in  external  ac-
tions, and  the  consequences  which  these
involve.

Ver.  19.— Out  of  the  heart  proceed.  The
shameful  catalogue  which  follows  is  less  full
than  that  in  St.  Mark,  which  contains
thirteen  items,  while  this  consists  of  seven
only.  These  are  produced  or  created  by  the
human  will,  of  which  the  heart  is  the  sym-
bol. Evil  thoughts  {BioKoyitTfiol  voyrjpoC).
Some  would  translate  the  words,  "evU
machinations."  But  there  is  no  need  to
change  the  usual  rendering,  which  is  very
appropriate  here.  Evil  thoughts  are  the
preparation  of  all  other  sins,  and  have  a
pernicious  infiuence  on  the  character.  Wu
are  very  much  what  we  think.  That  on
which  our  minds  are  fixed,  that  which  is
the  chief  object  presented  to  our  inward
sight,  shapes  our  disposition  and  life.  High
and  noble  thoughts  elevate  and  purify ;  low
and  mean  thoughts  debase  and  pollute.  The
wickedness  in  a  man  springs  from  within ;
he  is  guilty  of  it.  If  he  admits  the  tempter,
succumbs  to  his  seductions,  it  is  his  own
will  that_  is  in  fault,  encouraging  the  evil
imagination,  and  not  at  once  resisting,  ab-
horring, and  repelling  it  Well  may  we
pray,  "Create  in  me  a -clean  heart,  O  God;
and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me"  (Ps.  li.
10);  and  remember  the  wise  man's  injunc-
tion, "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence ;
for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life  "  (Prov,  iv.
23).  The  enumeration  follows  more  or  less
closely  the  second  table  of  the  Decalogue.

Ver.  20.— Thus  Jesus  sums  up  what  has
been  said,  and  recalls  the  circumstance
which  led  to  the  discourse,  emphatically
repeating  his  judgment  on  the  Phatrisaical
glow,


OH.  XY.  1-39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  &T.  MATTHEW.


Vera.  21 — 28. — Healing  of  the  daughter  of
ihe  Canaanitish  woman.   (Mark  vii.  21 — 30.)

Ver.  21. — Went  thenoe.  Jesna  left  the
place,  probably  Capernaum,  where  the  above
discourse  had  been  held,  and  where  it  was
no  longer  safe  for  him  to  remain.  He  had
grievously  offended  the  dominant  party  by
his  outspoken  words  concerning  purity  and
defilement ;  therefore,  to  escape  any  prema-
ture violence,  he  departed  to  a  more  secure
quarter.  Into  the  ooasts  (rk  iiipri,  "the
parts")  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  The  word
"  coasts  "  here,  ver.  22,  and  elsewhere,  does
not  mean  "  sea-coasts,"  but  "  borders."  The
Authorized  Version  conveys  a  wrong  im-
pression by  its  use  of  the  word.  These  two
cities  lay  on  the  coast  of  Galilee,  and
had  never  been  really  conquered  by  the
laraelites,  though  allotted  to  the  tribe  of
Asher,  There  was  no  very  exact  limitation
of  territory  between  Phcenician  (of  which
they  were  the  capitals)  and  Jewish  land,  but
there  was  a  great  moral  distinction.  The
Fhcenicians  weie  sunk  in  the  grossest  ido-
latry ;  the  worship  of  Baal  and  Ashtaroth
reigned  among  them  with  all  its  depravity
and  pollution.  Whether  our  Lord  actually
entered  this  district,  or  only  approached  its
confines,  is  a  matter  of  dispute.  The  lan-
guage in  the  two  extant  accounts  is  am-
biguous, and  might  be  taken  to  imply  either
proceeding.  But  we  cannot  suppose  that
Christ  betook  himself  to  the  close  neighbour-
hood of  those  evil  towns.  His  injunction  to
the  apostles,  when  he  sent  them  on  their
missionary  tour,  to  abstain  from  going  into
any  way  of  the  Gentiles  or  entering  any
Samaritan  city  (ch.  x.  5),  and  hia  own  decla-
ration which  shortly  follows,  that  he  was  sent
to  the  house  of  Israel,  alike  preclude  the
idea  that  he  ever  passed  beyond  the  bound-
aries of  the  Holy  Land.  The  woman,  too,
who  appealed  to  him  is  said  to  have  "  come
out  away  from  those  borders" — an  expression
which  could  hardly  have  been  used  if  Christ
had  at  this  time  been  within  them.  And
that  he  did  no  mighty  work  in  these  Phoe-
nician cities  may  be  gathered  from  his  de-
nunciation of  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida  for.
cot  showing  the  appreciation  of  his  power
and  mercy  which  these  centres  of  heathen-
dom would  have  exhibited  had  they  been
equally  favoured  (see  ch.  xi.  21 ;  Lnke  x.
13).  If,  as  Chryaostom  suggests,  Jesus,  by
going  to  these  partly  Gentile  districts,
wished  to  give  a  practical  commentary  on
the  abrogation  of  the  distinction  between
clean  and  unclean  (breaking  down  the  wall
of  partition  between  Jew  and  Gentile),  this
lesson  was  given  equally  well  by  the  act
oeptance  and  commendation  of  the  Gentile
woman's  faith,  even  though  Christ  himself
^M  ontside  of  pagan  territory.


Ver.  22.— Behold.  The  word  marks  the
Budden  and  unexpected  character  of  the
incident.  A  woman  of  Canaan.  She  be-
longed to  the  accursed  race  of  Canaan,  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  the  land,  doomed,
indeed,  to  destruction,  but  never  thoroughly
extirpated.  St  Mark  calls  her  "  a  Greek,'*
t.e.  a  Gentile,  and  "a  Syro-Phoenician,"
which  explains  her  proper  nationality.  Out
of  the  same  ooasts.  Some  join  these  words
with  "  a  woman ; "  but  came  out  would  still
Imply  that  she  left  her  own  territory  to  meet
Christ.  Have  mercy  on  me.  She  speaks  as
though  she  herself  were  the  one  that  needed
healing,  identifying  herself  with  her  dia-
eased  daughter,  as  though  the  horrible  in-
cubus lay  upon  her  own  spirit  and  could  not
be  relieved  without  the  cure  of  the  suffering
girl.  0  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David.  Living
among  a  mixed  population  of  Jews  and  Gen-
tiles, she  had  heard  this  title  applied  to
Jesus ;  she  knew  something  of  the  hopes  of
the  Hebrew  nation,  that  they  were  expect-
ing a  Messiah,  son  of  the  great  King  David,
who  should  preach  to  the  poor  and  heal  the
sick,  as  she  heard  that  Jesus  had  done.  We
know  that  the  reputation  of  Jesus  had  spread
into  these  parts,  and  that  persons  fiom  this
country  had  come  to  him  to  be  healed  (Mark
iii.  8 ;  Luke  vl  17).  There  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  woman  was  a  proselyte ;
but  evidently  she  was  of  a  humble  and  re-
ligious spirit,  open  tu  conviction,  and  of  an
enlightened  understanding,  which  needed
only  grace  and  instruction  to  ripen  into
faith.  At  present  she  saw  in  Christ  only  a
merciful  Wonder-worker — an  error  which
he  often  combated,  and  which  now  by  his
conduct  he  corrected.  My  daughter  ia
grievously  vexed  with  a  devil.  She  must
have  learned  from  her  Hebrew  neighbours
to  attribute  her  child's  malady  to  demoniacal
influence,  as  suoh  an  idea  would  not  have
naturally  occurred  to  a  heathen  Greek.  The
power  of  the  devil  was  shown  more  openly
in  heathen  localities.  We  do  not  read  of
many  bad  cases  of  possession  in  strictly
Jewish  districts.  It  ia  in  Gentile  or  semi-
Gentile  regions  that  the  worst  instances
occur ;  and  while  the  pagan  inhabitants  at-
tributed the  mysterious  maladies  to  natural
causes,  the  truer  insight  of  believers  assigned
them,  and  often  most  justly,  to  spiritual
agencies.  In  the  present  case,  the  possea-
sion  must  have  been  unconnected  with  any
ethical  relat.ons.  It.  was  not  that  the  child,
by  any  act  of  her  own,  had  put  herself  into
the  demon's  power.  We  must  regard  it,  like
the  sufferings  of  innocent  infants,  as  a  pro-
vidential arrangement  which  God  for  wise
purposes  allows.

Ver.  23. — Answered  her  not  a  word.  The
woman  made  no  speoifio  request;  she  had
nfi  brought   the   sufferer    with    her,  am]


100  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xv.  1—89.


entreated  Christ  t"  exorpiap  the  evil  influ-
ence ;  slie  dirt  not  urge  Uim  to  go  to  her
liouae,  ami  by  bis  graoiona  presence  irork
a  cure.  Simply  she  iella  her  affliction,
and  lets  the  woeful  tale  plead  for  itself.
Gut  there  was  no  response.  Tlie  Merciful
is  obdurate;  the  Physician  withholds  his
aid ;  in  the  face  of  misery,  to  the  voice  of
>ntreaty,  the  Lord  is  silent.  It  is  the
discipline  of  love;  he  acts  as  though  he
iiears  not,  that  he  may  bring  forth  per-
severance and  faith.  Bend  her  away.  There
is  some  doubt  concerning  the  feeling  of  the
npnstles  in  thus  addressing  Christ.  Did
tUey  viBh  him  to  grant  lier  virtual  petition
or  nqt?  On  the  one  baitd,  it  is  urged  that
iliey  were  thoroughly  annoyed  at  her^im-
portnnity.  They  had  sought  for  quiet  and
privacy,  and  now  this  woman  was  bringing
a  pro\rd  around  th@m,  and  occasioning  the
very  notoriety  which  they  wished  to  avoid.
Their  Jewish  prejudices,  too,  were  aroused
by  this  appeal  from  a  Oanaanite;  they
could  not  endure  the  idea  tliat  favour  should
be  este^ded  to  this  Gentile  of  an  abhorred
race;  h^noe  they  desire  Christ  to  dismiss
her  at  once,  give  her  a  decided  rejection.
On  the  qther  hand,  the  answer  of  Christ  to
their  request  leads  to  another  explanation,
as  if  he  understood  them  to  be  asking  him
to  grant  her  prayer.  And  this  is  undoubtedly
what  they  did  want,  though  they  did  not
presume  to  prescribe  the  manner  or  to  beg
for  a  miracle.  They  range  themselves  on
the  woman'i  side,  not  from  any  genuine
compassion,  but  from  mere  selfishness.  The
ground  of  their  appeal  is,  She  crieth  after
us.  The  appeal  had  been  first  made  in  the
open  street,  and  the  Oanaanite  had  followed
them,  as  they  moved,  continuing  her  piteous
cry,  and  ihus  attracting  attention  to  them
and  defipating  their  hope  of  retirement  and
rest.  So  they,  for  their  own  peace  and
comfort,  ask  Christ  to  grant  the  prayer  of
this  obstinate  suppliant:  "Give  her  what
iuhe  wants,  and  have  done  with  her."  '  '

Yer.  24. — I  am  (wo*)  not  sent  but  unto
tne  lost  sheep  of  the  bonpe  of  Israel.  Doubt-
less the  woman  hitd  listened  to  the  apostles'
intercession,  and  thought  her  cause  won;
but  the  repulse  is  only  repeated;  this
Gentile  is  beypiid  the  sphere  of  his  mission ;
h6  cannot  help  her  without  departing  from
tlie  rule  which  he  had  sot  himself.  Jesus
gays  nothing  here  about  the  rejection  of  the
Jews  and  the  future  ingathering  of  the
Gentiles;  he  states  merely  that  his  personal
mission  while  he  was  on  earth  was  confined
to  the  Hebrew  nfition.  He  was,  as  St  Paul
oalls  him  (Bom.  it.  8),  "  a  Minister  of  the
olroumoision."  Later,  he  would  send  others
to  evapgellm  thoM  who  were  now  aliens
from  the  oboMn  oommonwealth ;  at  present
))•  hM  wiM  ante   Ua  «in>   poife^slons.


Lost  sheep.  There  Is  a  tenderness  in  this
expre.'sion  natural  from  the  mouth  of  the
good  Shepherd.  He  had  used  it  when  he
sent  forth  the  twelve  on  their  apostolical
journuy  (ch.  x.  6);  the  metaphor  is  found
in  the  Old  Testament  (see  Jer.  1.  6,  eto.).
It  is  appropriate  here,  where  he  ia  em-
phasizing his  attitude  towards  the  chosen
people,  and  teaching  theCanaanitisli  woman
the  relative  position  of  JbW  and  Gentile.

Ver.  25. — Came  she  and  worshipped  him,
Meantime,  as  we  learn  from  St.  Mark,  Jeaus
had  left  the  street  and  entered  intoahonse.
The  woman,  nothing  daunted  by  her  rebuff
and  the  disregard  witti  which  her  appaal
was  reoei«<id,  followed  him  persistently,  and,
growing  bolder  in  her  importunity,  fell  as  a
suppliant  at  his  feet.  Wliile  he  still  seemed
to  repulse  her,  she  was  learning  fresh  fbith
and  hope.  Lord,  help  me.  She  does  not
now  call  him  "  Son  of  David."  She  begins
to  feel  that  she  has  little  claim  upon  him
as  the  Jewish  Messiah;  she  appeals  rather
to  his  mercy  and  his  power.  Still,  she
identifies  herself,  as  at  first,  with  her
daughter ;  the  only  boon  she  wants  for  her-
self is  her  child's  relief.  "  For  she  indeed
(my  daughter)  is  insensible  of  her  disease,
but  it  is  I  that  sufier  her  innumerable  woes ;
my  disease  is  with  consciousness,  my  mad-
ness with  perception  of  itself"  (St.
Chrysostom, '  Horn,  lii,  in  S.  Matt').

Yer.  26. — Bnt  he  answered  and  said.  At
length  Jesus  spoke  directly  to  her ;  but  hii
words  were  rough  in  sound,  still  enforcing
the  previous  repulse.  It  is  not  meet;  obn
ecTTi  KfiXiy  t  non  ent  honum  (Yulgate).
Another  reading  of  less  authority  is  tin
IJeffTiv, "  it  is  not  lawful."  The  question  is
rather  of  fairness  and  expediency  than  of
lawfulness.  To  take  the  ohildren's  bread.
"  The  children  "  are  the  chosen  people,  "  the
children  of  the  kingdom "  (oh.  viii.  12),
who  held  this  high  position  by  eleotlon,
however  individuals  might  forfeit  it  by  an
f'  unworthy  use  of  privileges.  "  Bread"  ii
meant  to  signify  the  graces  and  fhvonn
bestowed  by  God  in  Christ  To  oaet  it.  An
homiliating  term ;  not  to  give  it,  as  yon
would  to  your  children,  but  to  throw  it  away
as  valueless,  fit  only  for  animals.  Dogs
(^KvvapUts).  A  contemptuous  diminutive,
rendered  by  Wioklifife,  "whelpies,"  or,  as
we  might  say,  "ours."  This  was  the  t»rm
applied  by  the  Jews  to  the  Gentiles,  even
as  Turks  nowadays  talk  of  "  dogs  of  Chris-
tians," and  as  in  later  times,  by  a  curious
inversion,  the  Jews  themselves  were
generally  saluted  with  the  opprobrious  name
of  "  dogs."  Some  have  seen  a  term  of  en-
deanuent  in  the  diminutive  "  little  dogs,"  as
thongh  Christ  desired  to  soften  the  harsh-
new  of  the  expression  bjr  referring,  not  to
ths  prowling,  unowned  anlnudi  Ibat  set


t-H.  XV.  1— M]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


101


as  Boavengers  in  Oriental  towns,  but  to  the
petted  inmates  of  the  master's  house.  Bnt
Scriptnie  g^iv^B  no  warrant  for  thinking
that  the  llebrewe  ever  kept  dogs  as  friends
and  companions,  in  our  modern  flishion;
and  our  Lord  adopts  the  language  of  his
conntrymeri,  to  put  the  woman  in  her  right
position^  as  one  with  whom  Jews  could  have
uo  fellowship.  To  take  the  blessings  from
the  Church  of  Israel  in  order  to  give  them
to  aliens  was  to  tiirow  tliem  away  on  un-
worthy recipients.

Ver.  27. — And  she  said,  Truth,  Lprd;  or
better,  but  she  said,  Yea.  Lord  (Bovised
Version).  Christ's  answer  might  liave
seemed  the  climax  of  rejection,  and  to  have
at  once  closed  the  matter  for  ever.  But  her
lovefor  her  daughter,  and  her  growing  faith
in  Jesus,  overcame  all  seeming  hindrances.
With  a  womau's  ready  wit,  quickeued  by
urgency  and  affeotinn,  she  seizes  the  oppor-
tunity, and  turns  Christ's  own  words  against
himself.  Thou  sayest  truth,  she  means  ;
the  Jews  are  the  cliilJren ;  we  are  the  dogs ;
and  as  dogs  we  claim  our  portion.  This
we  can  receive  without  defrauding  the
children  of  any  of  their  fuod.  Yet;  kr!,  or
Kal  yap,  /or  even ;  nam  et  (Vulgate).  The
Authorized  Version  injures  the  significance
of  the  mother's  reply,  as  if  there  were  some-
thing adversative  in  the  particles,  which
really  introduce  the  confirmation  of  her
assent.  The  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs,  etc.
Dogs  in  the  East  have  access  to  the  rooms,
and  live  on  what  they  can  pick  up  or  on
what  is  thrown  to  them.  The  fragments
at  meals  were  naturally  numerous,  the
abundance  being  occasioned  by  the  nature
of  Ihe  food,  the  use  of  fingers  instead  of
spoons  and  forks,  and  the  employment  of
pieces  of  bread  as  platters  and  napkins.
We  may  paraphrase  the  Canaanite's  reply
thus :  By  calling  us  duga,  you  virtually
grant  what  I  desire.  You  can  do  what  I
wish  without  Infringing  your  rule,  in  the
j  ;f  tico  of  which  I  humbly  acquiesce.  I
cittirn  nothing  as  a  daughter  of  Abraham)
I  look  only  for  unoovenanted  mercies;  1
ask  only  for  that  portion  whiah  falls  to  the
lot  of  the  creatines  which  hold  the  lowest
place  in  the  houseliold,  and  the  loss  of
which  will  never  be  felt.  Truly  by
humbling  her  Jesus  educated  her,  taught
her  that  her  real  plea  was  her  un worthiness,
that  in  acknowledgment  of  her  degrada^
tion  lay  the  force  of  her  appeal.  And  in
asking  for  this  one  act  of  mercy  she  is
doing  no  wrong  to  the  sons  of  the  house.

Ver.  28.^0  woman,  great  is  thy  fftith.
Jesus  had  often  to  complain  of  unbelief  in
his  hearers;  at  no  man's  faith  did  he  ev"
express  surprise,  except  in  the  case  ot
another  Gentile,  the  centurion  of  Capernaum
(oh.  vUi.  10).    B»  it  vaW  ""^"^  «ven  ai


thou  wilt.  She  had  conquered  ;  she  gained
her  wish.  But  we  must  not  think  that
Christ  consented  because  his  human  feelings
were  oveieome  by  hor  importunity,  like  the
unjust  judge  in  the  parable,  tliough  the
prinoiple  and  teaching  of  that  parable  were
here  beautifully  illustrated.  He  acted  all
the  time  as  God,  who  foreknew  what  he
would  dn.  He  had  been  leading  her  up  to
this  climax;  he  had  willed  to  give  her  an
opportunity  of  exhibiting  this  trust  and
self-command  and  unfailing  confidence,  and
now  he  crowns  her  with  his  mighty  eulogium,
and  grants  her  request,  rewarding  her  great
faith  by  a  great  mercy.  Her  daughter  was
made  whole.  St.  Mark  reports  the  words
of  Christ,  "  For  this  saying  go  thy  way ;
the  devil  is  gone  out  of  thy  daughter."  He
does  not  say,  "  I  will  come  and  heal  her ; "  he
tells  her  that  the  cure  is  alri:ady  effected.
Without  personal  contact  with  the  sufferer,
without  any  command  uttered  to  the
possessing  demon,  by  liis  silent  will  alone
the  wonder  comes  to  pass.  This  blessing
for  the  child  was  won  by  the  mother's  faith.
The  two  points  to  be  remarked  in  this
marvellous  history  are — Christ's  abnormal
treatment  of  a  suppliant,  and  that  suppliant's
astonishing  faith  and  perseverance.  Both
of  these  subjects  have  been  noticed  in  the
course  of  the  Exposition,

Vers.  29 — 39. — Healing  of  the  si^k,  and
feed,ing  of  the  four  thousartd.  (Mark  vil  31 ;
viii.  I— 10,)

Ver.  29.^From  thence.  From  the  borders
of  'Tyre  and  Sidon.  We  learn  from  St.
Mark  that  Jesus,  making  a  considerable
circuit,  traversed  the  territory  of  the  ten
free  cities  called  Decapolis,  situated  ohiefly
on  the  east  and  south  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.
A  mouutaiu  (rh  Spos);  the  mountain  (as
oh.  xiv.  23).  The  range  of  hills  by  which  Uie
lake  is  bounded  on  the  east  and  north-east.
No  particular  hill  seems  to  be  indicated.
Sat  down  there.  Bested  awhile  after  his
journeyings  and  labours.

Ver.  SO.^The  incidents  in  this  and  the
following  verse  are  mentioned  only  by  St.
Matthew.  Great  multitudes.  The  fame  of
Jesus  attracted  the  Jews  settled  in  this
semi-Gentile  district,  and  cut  short  the
privacy  which  he  had  lately  been  enjoying
in  his  apostles'  company.  The  people
seized  the  oppoitunity  of  listening  to  his
teaching  and  profiting  by  his  superhuman
power.  Having  with  them.  The  catalogue
of  sufferers  that  follows  represents  accurately
the  sight  that  meets  one  in  Oriental  towns
and  villages,  where  the  absence  of  medical
appliances  and  the  general  want  of  surgical
treatment  render  slight  maladies  or  injuries
chronic  aud  inveterate,  and  fill  the  streets
with    persons   in   all    stagei   of    disease.


102


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  Xv.  1—39.


Uaimed;  Kv\s.ois:  debilet  (Vulgate).  In
ch.  xviii.  8  the  word  means  "'dt:privod  of
»  member;"  but  it  has  been  doubted
whether  our  Lord  ever  exerted  his  creative
power  to  replace  an  absent  limb.  In  the
case  of  Malchus  tlie  ear  probably  was  not
wholly  severed  from  the  skull,  but  was  still
attached  thereto  by  a  fragment  of  flesh  or
skin,  and  no  fresh  creation  was  needed.
We  may  well  understand  tlie  word  to  signify
"  deformed,"  or  deprived  of  tlie  use  of  hand
or  foot.  The  Arabic  Version  renders  it
"  dried  up,"  or  "  withered."  Cast  them
down.  The  expression  implies  the  pre-
cipitancy with  which  their  friends  offered
the  sufferers  to  Christ's  notice,  appealing
to  his  mercy  and  relying  on  his  power — not
with  careless  abandonment,  but  with  an
earnest  rivalry  to  be  first  attended  to.

Ver.  31. — The  maimed  to  be  whole.  This
clause  is  omitted  by  ^s  and  some  other
manuscripts,  the  Vulgate  and  other  versions,
and  Eome  modem  editors.  Probably  the
diCSciilty  mentioned  above  led  to  its  being
Srot  obelizi-'d  and  then  rejected.  The  God
of  Israel.  Jehovah,  whose  covenanted
mercies  they  were  enjoying.  St.  Matthew-
is  careful  on  all  occasions  to  exhibit  Jesus
as  the  Messenger  and  Representative  of  the
God  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  apostles,
as  Alford  suggests,  might  joyfully  contrast
this  abundance  of  acts  of  mercy  with  the
!<reat  difficulty  with  which  a  Grentile's  faith
had  lately  obtained  help.  "  Seest  thou,"
says  St.  Chrysostom,  "how  the  woman
indeed  he  healed  with  so  much  delay,  but
these  immediately?  not  because  these  are
better  than  she  is,  but  because  she  is  more
faithful  than  they.  Therefore,  while  in  her
case  he  defers  and  delays,  to  manifest  her
constancy,  on  these  he  bestows  the  gift
Immediately,  stopping  the  mouths  of  tiie
unbelieving  Jews,  and  cutting  away  from
them  every  plea.  For  the  greater  favour
one  hath  received,  so  much  more  is  he  liable
to  punishment,  if  he  be  insensible,  and  the
very  honour  makes  him  no  better."

Ver.  32. — Called  his  disciples  unto  him.
Seeing  the  necessities  of  the  multitude,
Jesus,  as  it  were,  takes  his  disciples  into
council,  treating  them  not  as  servants,  but
as  friends.  They  were  doubtless  dispersed
among  the  crowd,  and  Jesus  summons  them
around  him,  and  puts  before  ttiem  the
special  point  to  wliich  his  attention  is
turned.  Thus  he  tries  their  faith,  and
shows  that  there  were  no  human  means
available  for  feeding  these  famishing  people.
Thus  Ood,  so  to  speak,  takes  Abraham  into
his  confidence  before  visiting  the  iniquity
of  Sodom:  "Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham
that  thing  which  I  do?"  (Gen.  xviii.  17).
I  have  compassion  (irirA.a7x>'iC<>/iiiO  on  the
multitnde.    The  human  heart  of  Jesue  telt


for  these  distressed  followers;  his  perfect
sympathy  was  aroused  in  their  behalf.  We
observe  references  to  this  tender  feeling  in
many  other  instances  (see  ch.  ix.  36;
xiv.  14 ;  XX.  34 ;  Mark  i.  41 ;  v.  19 ;  Luke
vii.  13.  And  in  the  Old  Testament,  e.g.
Isa.  xlix.  15;  Jer.  xii.  15;  Micah  vii.  19).
They  continue  with  me  now  three  days.
The  verb  used  here  (vpoaiiei/eiv)  implies
close  attendance  persevered  in  against
obstacles;  it  is  used  in  Acts  xi.  23  in  a
spiritual  sense,  "  He  exhorted  them  all  that
with  purpose  of  heart  they  would  cleave
(irpoffitei/civ)  unto  the  Lord."  The  three
days,  according  to  the  Hebrew  formula  of
computation,  would  consist  of  one  whole
diiy  and  parts  of  two  others.  Thus  con
stantly  employed  in  healing  and  teaching,
Jesus  thinks  not  of  himself;  bis  whole  care
is  centred  on  the  people  who,  in  their
anxiety  to  see  and  hear  him,  forget  their
own  necessities.  There  would  be  nothing
strange  in  the  people  camping  out  for  a
night  in  Palestine.  Men  and  women  ordi-
narily lie  down  to  rest  in  the  clothes  which
they  have  worn  during  the  day,  and  need
no  special  preparation  for  sleeping.  Thus
a  man  covers  himself  with  his  heavy  oater
garment,  lies  on  the  dry  ground,  like  Jacob
at  Bethel,  with  a  stone  or  his  arm  for  a
pillow,  and  sleeps  comfortably  and  safely
till  awakened  by  the  morning  snn.  I  will
not  send  them  away  fasting.  Like  a  good
master  of  a  household,  in  his  tender  pity,
Christ  takes  the  circumstances  of  the  multi-
tude into  consideration,  and  cannot  endure
the  idea  of  dismissing  them  wearied  and
unfed  to  find  their  way  to  their  own  homes,
which,  as  St.  Mark  adds,  were,  in  the  case
of  many  of  them,  at  a  long  distance.  Faint.
Travellers  tell  us  that  out  of  the  motley
crowd  of  pilgrims  that  flock  to  Jerusalem
at  Easter- tide,  many  run  short  of  provisions
and  perish  on  the  road.  Christ's  thought-
ful care  regards  the  possibility  of  such
disaster,  and  prepares  the  remedy.  He  had
treated  the  sicknesses  of  the  multitude ;  he
had  instructed  their  ignorance ;  now  he  will
feed  their  bodies.  They  had  sought  nothing
from  him,  nor  begged  for  food;  probably
they  had  no  idea  of  looking  to  him  to  supply
their  want.  But  they  who  follow  Jesus
shall  never  lack.  They  were  seeking  first
the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,
and  tempurul  blessings  were  added  to  them.
Ver.  33.  —Whence  should  we  have  so  much
bread,  etc.  ?  Christ  had  said  nothing  to  his
distdples  concerning  his  design  of  feeding
the  people,  but  his  remarks  pointed  to  (he
possibility  of  such  a  design,  and  the  apostles
at  once  throw  cold  water  npon  the  project.
They  do  not  indeed,  as  they  did  before
urge  him  to  send  the  multitude  away,  that
they  may  supply   their  own   needs,  but


ca.  xf,  1-59.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


103


they  emphasize  the  impossibility  of  carry-
ing out  the  idea  of  feeding  them.    Their
answer  bristles  with  objections.    The  phxce
is  uninhabited ;    the  multitude  is   nume-
rous ;  the  quantity  of  food  required  is  enor-
mous;  and  how  can  we,  poor  and  needy
as  we  are,  help  them  ?   It  seems  to  us  in-
credible that  they  could  return  this  answer,
after  having,  not  very  long  before,  experienced
the  miracle  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thou-
sand.   They  seemed  now  to  have  forgotten
the  earlier  marvel,  and  to  be  in  utter  doubt
how  the  necessary  food  was  to  be  provided
on  the  present  occasion.    That  Christ  would
display  his  miraculous  powers  appears  not  to
have  crossed  their  minds.     Such  suprising
forgetfulness  and  slowness  of  faith  have
seemed  to  some  critics  so  unlikely  and  un-
usual, that  they  have  regarded  the  apostles'
attitude  as  confirming  their  assumption  of
the  identity  of  the  two  miraules  of  feeding.
But  really  such  conduct  is  true  to  human
nature.  Calvin,  while  he  condemns  in  vehe-
ment terms  the  disciples'  dulness — "  nimis
brutum  produnt  stuporem" — is  careful  to
add  that  men  are  always  liable  to  a  similar
insensibility,  prone  to  forget  past  deliver-
ance in  the  face  of  present  difSculty.    Im-
mediately after  the  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea,
the  people  feared  that  they  would  perish  of
thirst  in  the  wilderness ;  and  when  God
promised  to  give  them  flesh  to  eat,  even
Moses  doubted  the  possibility  of  the  supply,
and  asked  whence  it  could  be   provided
(Exod.   xvU.  1,  etc.;   Niunb.  xi.  21,  etc.).
How  often  did  Jesus  speak  of  his  sufferings,
death,  and  resurrection  I    And  yet  these
events  came  upon  believers  as  a  surprise  for
which    they  were  altogether    unprepared.
Continually  the  disciples  forgot  what  they
ouglit  to  have  remembered,  drew  no  proper
inferences  from  what  they  had  seen  and
experienced,  and  had  to  be  taught  the  same
lessons  repeatedly  under  different  circum-
stances.    Since  the  first  miraculous  meal
many  events  had  happened ;  often  possibly
they  had  been  in  want  of  food,  as  when  on
the  sabbath  day  they  appeased  their  hunger
with  ears  of  corn  plucked  by  the  way,  and
Christ  had  worked  no  miracle  for  their  relief.
It  did  not  immediately  suggest  itself  to
Ihcm  to  have  recourse  to  their  Master  in  the
emergency ;  they  were  very  far  from  ex-
pecting Divine  interposition  at  every  turn.
If  they  thought  at  all  of  the  former  miracle,
they  may  have  looked  upon  it  as  the  out-
come of  an  intermittent  power,  not  always
at  command,  or  at  any  rate  not  likely  to  be
exercised  on  the  present  occasion.     They
were    slow  to    apprehend  Christ's  Divine
mission  and  character.    The  acknowledg-
ment of  his  Messiahship  did  not  necessarily
conaote  the  realization  of  his  Godhead.     In
the  wiitingg  of  this  v^  the  immediately


preceding  period  we  see  that  the  great  Pro-
phet, Prince,  Conqueror,  who  is  to  appear,
is  not  God,  but  one  commissioned  by  God,
and  at  most  a  God-insj}ired  man  or  angel.
So  the  apostles  were  only  in  unison  with  the
best  of  their  contemporaries  when  at  present
they  hesitated  to  believe  in,  and  were  incap-
able of  apprehending,  the  Divine  nature  of
Christ.

Ver.  34. — How  many  loaves  have  ye  I
Jesus  gives  no  formal  answer  to  the  apostles'
hesitating  question,  but  by  a  now  interroga-
tion leads  them  to  expect  his  interposition.
This  was  the  prelude  to  the  miracle.  Seven,
and  a  few  little  fishes.  They  do  not  add,  as
on  the  former  occasion,  "  But  what  are  they
among  so  many  ?  "  They  have  learned  some-
thing from  wliat  had  previously  occurred.
Whether  this  little  store  was  what  remained
of  their  own  supplies,  or  whether  it  was
all  they  could  find  among  the  multitude,
does  not  appear.  From  the  indeterminate
mention  of  the  fish,  we  stiould  suppose  the
latter  to  have  been  the  case,  as  tliey  would
probably  have  mentioned  the  number  of  the
fishes  had  tliey  been  their  own.  There  may
have  been  some  contempt  implied  in  the
diminutive  ixivSta,  "  little  fishes,"  as  though
these  were  scarcely  worthy  of  notice.  Dried
fish  was  a  staple  commodity  in  the  region.

Ver.  35. — lo  sit  down  (avaTrea-eiv)  on  the
ground.  At  this  time  there  was  not  "  much
grass  in  the  place,"  the  season  being  no
longer  early  spring.  Their  seat  was  the
bare  ground,  their  meal  of  the  i  lainest  cha-
racter. He  who  as  man  had  pitied  them
was  now  feeding  them  as  God,  yet  not  with
luxuries  or  dainties,  but  with  food  sufficient
for  their  needs.

Ver.  36. — He  took.  The  account  differs
little  from  that  on  the  former  occasion.
Gave  thanks  (euxapio-T^o-as).  This  repre-
sents the  blessing  of  the  viands.  Thanks-
giving was  a  specially  enjoined  accompaui-
ment  of  meals.  The  Talmud  said, "  He  that
enjoys  anything  without  an  act  of  thanks-
giving is  as  one  that  robs  the  Almighty."
The  blessing  here  was  the  efficient  cause  of
the  multiplication  of  the  food.  Without
any  fresh  creation  Jesus  used  the  materials
ready  to  his  hands,  and  only  increased  them
by  his  Almighty  power.  Brake  them,  and
gave  (IxXaffi  Ka\  ISfSou).  Looking  to  the
tenses  used,  we  should  say  that  Jesus  brake
the  viands  once,  and  tlien  kept  continually
giving  of  them  to  the  twelve  for  the  purpose
of  distribution.  We  do  not  read  how  the
multitude  was  arranged  in  the  present  case.
Possibly  the  locality  did  not  admit  of  me-
thodical division  into  ranks  and  companies,
or,  on  the  other  hand,  its  natural  terraces
may  have  obviated  the  necessity  for  any  such
formal  arrangement,  the  company  &lling
naturally  into  convenient  sections.


m


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORBINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  *▼•  1— SO.


Ver.  87. — Baskets  (irirupfSas);  pannien.
Large  wicker  receptacles,  which  were  some-
times of  such  size  as  to  hold  a  man.  It  was
in  such  a  basket  that  St.  Paul  was  let  down
from  the  walls  of  Damascus  (Acta  ix.  25).
The  number  of  the  basketfuls  corresponded
to  the  original  number  of  loaves ;  the  in-
crease of  substance  must  therefore  have  been
enormous.

Ver.  38. — ^The  computation  is  made  in  the
same  way  as  in  ch,  xiv.  21,  the  greatness  of
the  miracle  being  thus  enhanced.

Ver.  39. — Sent  away  the  multitude.  Having
supplied  their  spiritual  and  material  wants.
He  wished  to  avoid  all  disturbance  or  col-
lision with  constituted  autliorities;  and  the
people  dispersed  quietly,  being  less  ex-
citable than  the  inhabitants  of  Bethsaida,
and  not  so  well  acquainted  with  the  Mes-
sianic claims.  The  number  thus  dismissed
was  less  tlian  on  the  previous  occasion,  though
theprovision  n  as  greater — a  difiference  which
distinguishes  one  incident  from  the  other,
and  which  no  forger  would  have  introduced,
it  being  much  more  natural  to  make  the
second  wonder  transcend,  instead  of  falling
short  of,  the  previous  one.  We  mention  this
here,  because  some  critics  have  assnmed  that
the  present  is  only  an  imperfectly  remem-
bered account  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thou-
sand already  narrated.  There  are,  of  course,
many  points  of  limilarity  in  the  two  inoi-
dento.    Being  of  identical  character,  they


must  naturally  present  the  same  general
features.  But  careful  survey  of  the  two
narratives  discloses  many  differences,  which
quite  preclude  the  notion  that  the  latter  is
a  traditional  reproduction  of  the  former.  To
one  who  believes  in  tlie  honesty  and  g«>od
faith  of  the  evangelists,  the  allusion  which
Ohrist  makes  to  the  two  miracles  is  a  suffi-
cient argument  for  their  separation.  Our
Lord  pointedly  calls  to  mind  the  two  ocoa
sions  when  be  multiplied  food,  and  rebukes
the  apostles  for  their  lack  of  apprehension
in  the  face  of  these  marvels.  "  Do  ye  not
yet  perceive,  neither  remember  the  five
loaves  of  the  five  thousand,  and  how  many
baskets- (K(K^(yoi/i)  ye  took  up?  Neither  the
seven  loaves  of  the  four  thousand,  and  how
many  baskets  (irirupttoj)  ye  took  np?"  (ch.
xvi.  9,  10;  Mark  viii.  19—21).  Many  of  the
essential  points  of  difference  between  the
two  accounts  are  noticed  in  the  Exposition,
and  they  will  be  seen  to  dispart  wherever
divergence  was  possible,  in  time,  scene,  and
detail.  Uagdala.  The  right  reading  is
most  probably  Magadan,  or  Magedan  (Vul-
gate), the  better  known  Magdala  having  at
an  early  date  been  sul  fltituted  for  it.  Conder
identifies  one  of  the  two  with  a  mud  and
stone  village  called  El  Mejdel,  a  little  north
of  Tiberias,  a  poor  place  without  any  gar-
dens, situated  in  a  plain  of  partially  arable
■oil,


HOMILETIOS.

Vers.  1 — 20. —  Vhuxuhen  }uinds.  I.  Controvbrst  with  scrides  and  Pharisees.
1.  They  were  of  Jerwalem.  It  seems  that  a  deputation  had  been  sent  by  the  leading
men  in  Jerusalem.  The  great  discourse  related  in  John  vi.  had  probably  been  reported  to
them ;  they  had  heard  that  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  of  G-alilee  were  unable  to  cope  with
out  Lord;  and  they  now  sent  some  of  their  own  body  to  watch  him  and  to  find  oppor-
tunity for  accusing  him.  Mark  the  reception  which  he  met  with  on  his  return  from  the
eastern  side  of  the  lake.  The  people  of  Gennesaret  knew  his  power  and  mercy.  They
brought  their  sick ;  they  besought  him  that  they  might  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment.
The  poor  and  simple  came  in  their  simplicity,  seeking  help;  the  zealots,  the  learned
students  of  the  Scriptures,  came,  with  malice  and  envy  in  tljeir  hearts,  seeking  to  com-
pass the  ruin  of  the  Saviour.  The  outward  show  of  sanctity  will  not  deceive  God,  will
not  save  our  souls.  Let  us  see  that  we  come  to  Christ  in  single-hearted  earnestness,
seeking  only  to  know  him  who  is  the  Saviour  of  the  wgrld.  2.  Their  question.  They
busied  themselves,  as  formalists  do,  about  the  infinitely  Ijttle.  The  Lord's  holiness,
wisdom,  power,  were  of  no  interest  to  them  in  comparison  with  the  small  matters  of
ceremonial  observance  enjoined  in  their  traditions.  They  thought  that  it  was  enough  to
secure  salvation  if  a  man  lived  in  the  land  of  Israel,  if  he  ate  his  food  with  duly  washed
hands,  and  spoke  the  holy  language,  and  recited  his  phylacteries  morning  and  evening.
They  regarded  these  traditions  of  theirs  as  more  sacred  than  the  written  Law.  The
Lord's  disciples  had,  it  seems,  neglected  these  frequent  washings.  The  Pharisees
wished  to  fix  the  responsibility  on  him:  "Why  do  thy  disaiples  transgress  the
tradition  of  the  elders?"  Strange  perversity,  to  insist  on  these  trivialities  in  the
presence  of  th*t  unearthly  holiness ;  to  ask  these  petty  ensnaring  questions  of  him
who  could  teach  them  the  way  to  heaven  I    3.  The  Lwd'i  amwer,    (1)  He  answers


«H.xv.  1— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.  105


as  at  other  times,  by  another  question,  "Why  do  ye  also  transgress  the  command-
ment of  God  by  your  tradition?"  His  disciples  had,  indeed,  transgressed  the  tradi-
tions of  men ;  but  their  accusers  had  transgressed  the  commandments  of  God,  and  tliat,
because  of  these  traditions.  They  had  dared  to  bring  these  traditions  into  direct
opposition  to  the  holy  Law  of  God.  (2)  The  instance.  They  had  contrived  to  evade
the  force  of  the  fifth  commandment.  A  man  had  only  (they  wickedly  t^aid)  to  pro-
nounce the  words,  "  It  is  a  gift,"  to  be  freed  from  the  duty  of  supporting  his  parents.
It  was  good  to  give,  and  to  give  freely,  for  the  service  of  the  temple — the  Lord  com-
mended the  poor  widow  for  doing  so-^but  it  was  not  light  to  neglect  the  nearer  duty
of  caring  for  father  or  mother  even  for  the  temple's  sake.  And  these  hypocrites,  it
seems,  held  that  the  pronunciation  of  the  word  "  corban "  absolved  a  man  from  the
duty  of  supporting  his  nearest  relatives,  even  if  he  did  not  really  give  the  property  so
dedicated  to  the  service  of  God.  Thus  they  made  the  commandment  of  Gnd  of  none
effect.  Theyput  these  miserable  traditions  above  the  eternal  laws  of  morality,  above
the  written  Word  of  God.  Well  might  the  Lord  denounce  them  as  hypocrites ;  they
were  acting  the  part  of  religious  men,  but  they  knew  not  what  religion  was ;  they  had
no  love  for  God,  no  care  for  his  glory ;  they  loved  the  praise  of  men.  i.  Bis  quotation
from  Isaiah.  The  Lord  applies  to  the  Pharisees  what  the  prophet  had  said  of  his  con-
temporaries. Prophecy  is  for  all  time ;  it  is  fulfilled  again  and  again  in  the  history  of
the  Church.  God's  words  spoken  by  Isaiah  extended,  in  their  prophetic  range,  to  the
scribes  and  Pharisees  of  our  Lord's  days.  They  honoured  God  with  their  lips,  but
their  heart  was  far  from  him.  Such  worship  is  in  vain.  It  is  no  true  worship;  it  is
false,  counterfeit.  Worship  is  the  adoration  of  the  heart  when  it  loses  sight  of  self  in
the  contemplation  of  the  glory  of  God.  The  worship  of  the  Pharisees  was  full  of  self ;
they  sought  not  the  glory  of  God ;  they  put  the  commandments  of  men  above  his  holy
Word.  In  truth,  they  worshipped  themselves,  and  not  God ;  for  it  was  their  own
profit,  their  own  advancement,  their  own  honour,  which  they  loved  with  all  their
heart.  And  that  which  we  love  with  the  whole  heart  is  the  object  of  our  worship.
Let  us  take  heed  to  ourselves.

II.  The  multitude.  1.  The  Lord  called  them.  Perhaps  they  had  stood  aloof.
They  honoured  the  Lord;  they  had  been  taught  to  reverence  the  Pharisees;  they  were
ill  perplexity.  But  now  the  Lord  turned  away  from  the  Pharisees  in  holy  indignation
at  their  hypocrisy,  their  perversion  of  the  truth  of  God.  He  called  the  multitude  to
come  nearer ;  he  would  not  have  them  lose  the  lesson.  "  Hear,  and  understand,"  he
said.  He  bespoke  their  attention  ;  for  he  was  about  to  enunciate  a  great  principle — a
principle  which  seems  simple  enough  to  us ;  but  it  was  new  and  startling  then ;  it  was
contrary  to  accepted  doctrines.  It  struck  at  the  minute  observances  of  the  scribes  and
Pharisees;  it  swept  them  away  by  the  application  of  one  wide-reaching  rule.  And  it
did  more  than  this ;  it  pointed  to  the  coming  abrogation  of  the  ceremonial  law.  2.  Eis
teachirtg.  "  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth  a  man ;  but  that  which
Cometh  out  of  the  mouth,  this  defileth  a  man."  The  words  might  be  understood,
according  to  the  well-known  Hebrew  idiom,  as  meaning  only  that  moral  defilement
was  far  more  serious  and  important  than  ceremonial  defilement  (compare  the  twice-
quoted  passage  of  Hosea,  "  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice ; "  or  our  Lord's  words
in  John  vi.  27,  "Labour  not  for  the  moat  which  perisheth,  but  fur  that  meat  whiuh
endureth  unto  everlasting  life  ").  But  probably  the  Lord's  meaning  went  fun  her.  It
was  an  anticipation  of  the  coming  chang ',  According  to  the  reading  of  the  most
ancient  manuscripts,  as  explained  by  Chrysostom  and  several  modern  commentators,
St.  Mark  represents  our  Lord  as  saying  this,  "  cleansing  all  meats "  (Mark  vii.  19),
If  this  be  correct,  the  Lord  anticipates  here  the  Divine  announcement  made  afterwards
to  St.  Peter,  "  What  God  hath  cleansed,  that  call  not  thou  common "  (Acts  x.  16).
The  Lord's  utterance  was  not  so  decided  now.  The  Jews  were  not  yet  able  to  bear
a  peremptory  declaration  of  the  abolition  of  the  laws  respecting  meats.  The  distinc-
tion between  clean  and  unclean  was  to  them  of  immense  importance  and  significuncu,
one  of  the  marked  characteristics  of  their  religious  life,  one  of  the  barriers  between
them  and  the  Gentiles.  They  could  not  have  endured  to  see  all  this  elaborate  system
swept  away  at  once ;  the  disciples  themselves  were  not  ripe  for  such  a  change.  Long
afterwards  St.  .Paul  found  it  necessary  to  deal  very  tenderly  with  consciences  that
might  be  troubled  by  similar  scruples.    The  Lord  now  indicates  the  cominK  abolitiou


106  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xv.  1—89.

of  tbe  Levitical  rules ;  he  does  not  insist  upon  it ;  lie  returns  to  the  original  topic  of
discussion,  "  To  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not  a  man."  It  was  one  of  those
sayings  which  the  apostles  could  not  receive  in  their  full  meaning  at  once,  but  which
remained  in  their  memory,  and  afterwards  were  understood  and  brought  forth  fruit.

III.  The  disciples.  1.  Their  /ears.  The  Pharisees  were  offended.  The  Lord's
words  were  a  stumbling-block  to  them ;  he  had  struck  so  hard  at  their  prejudices,  their
traditions — those  traditions  which  were  so  deeply  interwoven  with  their  whole  life ;  he
had  called  them  hypocrites,  too ;  he  had  said  that  they  were  no  better  than  actors  of  a
part,  and  had  applied  to  them  the  strong  condemnation  of  Isaiah.  Again,  in  his
address  to  the  multitude,  reported  doubtless  to  the  Pharisees,  perhaps  heard  by  them,
he  seemed  to  set  aside  the  plain  teaching  of  the  written  Law.  At  all  this  the  Pharisees
stumbled ;  it  was  an  offence  to  them ;  such  teaching  was  in  direct  opposition  to  all
that  they  esteemed  most  sacred.  They  thought  it  dangerous,  heretical.  They  w?ro
offended,  irritated,  alienated.  And  evidently  the  Lord's  disciples  had  not  wholly
divested  themselves  of  their  old  reverence  for  the  rabbinical  system,  and  for  the  received
teachers  of  the  nation,  the  Pharisees.  They  were  troubled  at  their  increasing  hostility ;
perhaps  they  were  in  their  hearts  somewhat  vexed  with  the  Lord  himself;  his  words,
it  may  be,  seemed  to  ttiem  so  stern,  so  needlessly  strong.  They  apprehended  di£B-
culties,  dangers;  they  feared  for  their  Master  and  for  themselves.  And  now  they
came  to  him  privately,  into  the  house  (Mark  vii.  17) ;  they  hinted  at  their  anxieties ;
they  sought  to  know  what  he  would  do.  We  must  always  come  to  Christ  in  our
troubles ;  but  we  must  trust  him  and  yield  up  our  wills  to  him ;  he  doeth  all  things
well.  2.  The  answer.  (1)  The  teaching  of  the  Pharisees  was  not  of  God ;  it  came
from  human  tradition  or  from  their  own  evil  hearts.  And  all  that  is  not  of  God  must
perish.  The  whole  system  of  rabbinical  teaching  must  pass  away.  It  had  wrought
itself  into  the  very  nature  of  the  Pharisees,  as  the  good  seed  in  the  parable  had  filled
the  heart  and  determined  the  character  of  the  true  disciples.  That  system  must  perish,
and  its  professors,  alas !  with  it,  if  they  would  not  receive  the  love  of  the  truth,  that
they  might  be  saved.  (2)  "  Let  them  alone,"  the  Lord  said.  They  stood  high  in  popular
estimation;  they  sat  in  Moses'  seat;  but  they  were  blind  guides.  "  Let  them  alone."
Christ  is  the  one  Master ;  we  must  follow  him.  They  are  blind  who  see  not  Christ,
for  Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  world.  They  who  see  not  the  light  walk  in  darkness ;
the  darkness  hath  blinded  their  eyes.  Guides  who  see  not  the  Christ  and  follow  not
the  Christ  themselves  are  no  guides  for  the  Christian ;  he  must  let  them  alone.  Such
men  may  sometimes  be  set  in  places  of  authority ;  Judas  was  an  apostle.  We  may  not
speak  of  them  as  the  Lord  spoke  of  the  Pharisees ;  we  have  not  the  right ;  we  have
not  his  knowledge,  his  holiness;  we  must  not  speak  evil  of  dignities.  But  let  them
alone;  be  not  dazzled  by  their  rank,  their  popularity,  their  intellectual  power.  They
are  blind,  and  those  who  follow  them  are  blind  also.  This  blindness  is  wilful;  it  is
the  result  of  spiritual  sloth,  or  pride,  or  indulged  sin  of  some  sort.  The  blind  who
follow  the  blind  must  fall  into  the  ditch ;  spiritual  blindness  must  lead  to  spiritual
ruin.  Come  to  Christ  with  the  prayer,  "  Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight ! "
Follow  those  who  follow  him  the  closest ;  who,  seeing  him  themselves  with  the  vision
of  faith,  are  enabled  by  his  grace  to  lead  others  nearer  to  the  true  Light  that  shineth
upon  them.  3.  The  request  of  Peter.  He  spoke  in  the  name  of  all  the  disciples  (Mark
vii.  17).  But  we  know  that  long  afterwards  he  clung  to  his  old  Jewish  habits  of  life
(Gal.  ii.  11 — 16) ;  and  at  this  time  our  Lord's  words  in  ver.  11  must  have  seemed  a
very  hard  saying  to  him.  He  called  it  a  parable ;  it  was  very  difficult  for  him  with
his  Jewish  training  to  receive  it ;  he  wanted  to  understand  what  was  in  our  Lord's
thoughts,  the  spiritual  meaning  of  his  words.  4.  The  Lord's  reply.  "  Are  ye  also  yet
without  understanding  ?  "  he  said  to  the  disciples.  They  had  been  with  him  long  ;
they  ought  to  have  understood  by  this  time  the  spiritual  character  of  his  teaching.'
But  it  was  hard  for  them  to  throw  aside  the  beliefs,  the  practices,  of  a  lifetime ;  the'y
needed  the  plainest  teaching  on  a  subject  like  this.  And  Christ  gave  it  them.  It  is
the  inner  life  of  thought  and  feeling  which  determines  the  true  cleanliness  or  uncleanli-
ness  of  a  man,  not  the  quality  of  his  food.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and
drink  ;  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  All  things  indeed
are  pure ; "  there  may  be  good  and  holy  reasons  for  abstaining  from  certain  things  under
certain  ciroumstanceB ;  but "  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself."    Such  was  the  teaching


Cfi.  XV.  1— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  107

of  St.  Paul,  inspired,  as  lie  tells  us,  by  the  Lord  Jesus ;  the  same  Lord  anticipates  that
teachiog  here.  It  is  that  which  cometh  oat  of  the  mouth  which  defilcth  a  man ;  for
out  of  the  mouth  come  evil  words,  and  evil  words  issue  from  the  evil  treasure  of  the
heart.  Evil  words  imply  evil  thoughts,  and  evil  thoughts  are  wrought  into  the  inner
moral  being  of  the  man,  into  the  very  centre  of  his  personality.  The  man,  the  true
self,  is  defiled,  not  by  things  external,  not  by  meats  or  by  unwashen  hands ;  these  and
such-like  matters  have  to  do  only  with  his  bodily  frame.  Cleanliness  is  good ;  it  may
be  next  to  godliness ;  there  is,  as  a  rule,  a  certain  connection  between  them ;  there
must  be  a  certain  connection  between  the  outward  life  and  the  inward,  as  long  as  we
remain  in  the  flesh.  But  cleanliness  is  not  godliness ;  the  body  may  be  clean,  but
the  heart  within  full  of  all  uncleanness.  It  was  so  with  these  Pharisees  who  blamed  the
Lord  ;  they  took  the  greatest  pains  to  secure  the  exactest  external  cleanness ;  but  the
Lord  said  to  them,  "  Your  inward  part  is  full  of  ravening  and  wickedness "  (Luke
xi.  39).  Let  us  remember  the  words  of  the  wise  man,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  dili-
gence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  Let  us  labour  for  that  inner  purification  of
the  heart  which  is  granted  unto  those  who  walk  in  the  light,  whom  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  is  cleansing  from  all  sin.

Lessons.  1.  The  Pharisees  found  fault  with  our  Lord ;  men  will  find  fault  with
the  holiest  of  his  servants.  Remember  the  eighth  Beatitude;  be  patient.  2.  God  is
our  King ;  he  is  to  be  obeyed  ;  not  men,  when  they  would  draw  us  from  his  com-
mandments. 3.  Follow  those  who  follow  Christ.  There  are  blind  guides ;  let  them
alone.  4.  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God ;  seek  earnestly  that  precious  grace  of
purity.

Vers.  21 — ^28. — Depwrture  from  the  Holy  Lamd.  L  The  jottenet  northwabds.
1.  The  Lord  leaves  Qalilee.  He  had  been  teaching  there  long,  perhaps  for  two  years.
At  first  there  had  been  a  time  of  dazzling  popularity.  The  strange  dignity  of  his
personality,  the  Divine  authority  of  his  words,  the  singular  originality  of  his  teaching,
the  pure  holiness  of  his  perfect  life,  his  many  deeds  of  love  and  mercy  and  power,  had
drawn  multitudes  around  him.  The  world  was  going  after  him,  the  Pharisees  said ;  their
opposition  seemed  useless ;  they  prevailed  nothing.  It  seemed  as  if  there  would  be  no
failures,  no  discoujagements;  but  a  steady  progress,  success  after  success,  till  he  should
be  raised  to  the  throne  of  his  father  David,  and  reign  as  the  King  Messiah  with  undis-
puted sway  over  his  people  Israel.  But  it  was  not  to  be  so ;  a  change  was  coming.  The
Lord's  popularity  had  excited  the  intense  hostility  of  the  Pharisees ;  it  threatened  their
influence,  their  authority.  They  conspired  against  him.  They  had  apparently  pro-
cured his  exclusion  from  the  synagogues  of  Judsea ;  they  were  now  driving  him  from
those  of  Galilee.  Their  opposition  was  gathering  strength,  bitterness,  determination.
The  Lord's  followers  must  not  look  for  popularity ;  if  it  comes,  they  must  not  be
dazzled  with  it,  they  must  not  count  on  its  continuance ;  it  comes  and  it  goes.  The
multitude  are  uncertain,  fickle;  they  soon  weary  of  those  whom  they  imce  admired.
Christ,  the  beloved  Master,  was  sometimes  popular,  sometimes  despised  and  rejected  of
men;  his  servants  must  be  content  to  share  the  Master's  lot.  There  must  be  dis-
appointments and  discouragements  in  pastoral  work  ;  this  mortal  life  i:  full  of  changes.
Let  the  Christian  seek,  not  success,  not  human  praise,  but  righteousness  and  the  praise
which  cometh  from  God  to  those  who  serve  him  with  a  single  heart.  2.  He  depai  ts
into  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Driven  from  the  Holy  Land,  he  retires  to  the  heathen
countries  of  the  north,  not  for  mission  work,  but  for  safety,  for  rest,  for  quiet  inter-
course with  the  twelve.  The  end  of  his  earthly  life  was  drawing  near ;  he  was
preparing  his  disciples  to  carry  on  the  work;  they  needed  much  teaching,  much
undisturbed  communion  with  the  Lord.  It  was  for  this  purpose,  apparently,  that  our
Lord,  as  St.  Mark  tells  us  (vii.  24),  would  have  no  man  know  where  he  was.  It  is  a
touching  thought  that  the  Lord  found  more  safety  in  heathen  lands  than  in  his  own
country,  among  his  own  people.

II.  The  woman  of  Canaan.  1.  Her  circumstances.  She  was  a  Greek,  St.  Mark
tells  us,  that  is,  a  Gentile ;  not  one  of  God's  chosen  people,  but  a  Gentile  by  birth,  and,
apparently,  by  religion.  She  was  a  Canaanite,  too,  living  in  Phoenicia;  she  was
descended  from  the  ancient  enemies  of  Israel.  She  had  no  claim  either  of  kindred  or
religion.  2.  Ser  trouble.   Her  young  daughter  had  an  unclean  spirit ;  she  was  grievoiis! .


108  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cji.  xv,  1—39

rexed  with  a  deril.  The  mother's  heart  was  full  of  sorrow  for  her  child.  She  knew  not
what  to  do;  probably  she  had  tried  such  modes  of  healiag  as  were  in  vogue  among  her
heathen  neighbours — incantations,  strange  forms  of  e:&orciBm.  All  was  in  vain.  But
she  had  heard  of  Christ;  his  fame  had  long  ago  gone  tliroughoiit  all  Syria  (ch.  iv.  24).
Now  the  great  Healer  had  come  into  het  neighbourhood  j  she  took  the  opportunity  at
once ;  she  left  her  daughter  at  home ;  she  came  out,  and  sought  the  Lord.  3.  Her
interview  loith  Ghritt.  (1)  She  found  him.  She  told  him  of  hef  distress.  She  had
heard  something,  even  in  that  heathen  land,  of  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  who  was
to  sit  on  David's  throne ;  she  owned  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  the  long'-expected  King;  she
cried  after  him  with  a  loud  shrill  cry  to  have  mercy  on  her  and  to  heal  her  child.  Her
heart  was  full  of  anguish ;  her  mother's  love  made  her  daughter's  grief  her  own.  "Ha*e
mercy  on  me"  she  cried.  That  Cry  had  never  before  fallen  in  vain  on  the  ears  of  the
cooipassionate  Bedeemer.  But  now  he  was  strangely  silent.  He  had  eutered  into  a
house,  St.  Mark  tells  us,  aud  would  have  no  man  know  it.  The  woman  had  followed
him  there.  He  sat  still  as  if  absorbed  in  meditation  too  sacred  to  be  interrupted.  It
was  unlike  his  usual  custom.  This  long  silence  was  distressing  to  the  suppliant,
perplexing  to  the  disciples;  they  could  not  understand  the  reason  of  it.  Often  the
Lord  seems  silent  now  when  we  come  to  him  in  earnest  prayer ;  there  U  no  voice,  no
answer.  But  We  must  pray  on;  he  is  purely  listening,  for  he  heareth  prayer.  There
are  reasons,  unknown  to  us,  for  his  silence ;  reasons  full  of  thoughtful  love  and  holy
wisdom.  He  will  answer  in  his  own  good  time.  (2)  The  disciples.  They  interceded
tor  her.  "  Let  her  go,"  they  said ;  as  Simeon  had  Said,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy
servant  depart "  (the  Greek  word  is  the  same).  They  knew  that  the  Lord  was  uut
wont  to  refuse  the  petitions  of  those  who  stood  in  need  of  his  help ;  they  wished  him
to  grant  her  prayer  at  once.  But  their  request  was  partly  selfish,  like  the  action  of
the  unjust  judge  in  the  parable.  The  woman  was  crying  after  them;  she  was  inter-
rupting their  intercourse  with  the  Lord;  she  was  drawing  the  attention  of  the  multitude
upon  them-^the  very  thing  which  at  that  time  they  wished  to  avoid.  How  ofteii
people  give  alms  now  from  similar  reasons,  to  escape  trouble  and  importunity,  not  out
of  real  charity  I  (3)  The  Lord's  answer.  He  did  not  at  once  act  according  to  the
wish  of  the  disciples.  Their  intercession  was  not  single-hearted ;  it  arose  from  mingled
motives ;  it  did  not  prevail.  "  I  am  not  Bent,"  he  Said,  "  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  Of  tht
house  of  Israel."  The  Lord's  personal  mission  wks  to  the  Jews ;  ho  was  "  a  Minister
of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God,  to  confirm  the  promises  made  unto  the  fathers  "
(Rom.  XV.  8).  He  was  born  in  the  ancient  covonant ;  he  was  formally  admitted  into
it  by  the  rite  of  cil-cumcision.  He  lived  as  a  Jew ;  he  preached  to  the  Jews.  Bal  he
himsfelf  had  prophesied  that  many  should  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  and
should  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  In  the  kingdom  of  God.  He  Lad
other  sheep  not  of  that  fold ;  aud  here  was  one — one  that  had  been  lost — now  coming  to
the  good  Shepherd,  while  many,  alas  I  from  his  oWu  special  fold  were  wandering,  aud
would  wander  further  and  further  in  the  wilderness.  Tirouble  brought  her  to  kim  ;
trouble  is  a  blessed  thing  when  it  brings  us  to  the  Lord.  He  seemed  not  to  notice  her ;
not  even  when  the  disciples  drew  his  attention  to  heif  cries.  It  was,  we  may  be  sure,
uut  of  thoughtful  mercy,  for  her  sake  and  for  theirs ;  for  the  more  confirmation  of  her
faith,  and  perhaps  to  prove  to  the  apostles  that  she  was,  though  a  Canaauite,  spiritually
u  child  of  Abraham ;  her  faith  brought  her  into  the  family  of  the  father  of  the  faithful.
"  They  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham."  (4)  The  woman's
perseverance.  She  came  nearer,  and  worshipped  him.  Ho  had  not  as  yet  answered
her  a  word ;  she  had  heard  nothing  from  his  lips,  except,  perhaps,  the  discouraging
reply  which  he  addressed  to  his  disciples ;  but  still  she  persevered.  She  threw  herself  at
his  feet  in  the  intensity  of  her  longing  desire,  Saying,  "  Lord,  help  me."  This  time  tile
I^rd  answered  her ;  but,  it  seemed,  with  a  cold  tod  stern  refusal.  "  It  is  not  meet  to
take  the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  to  dogs."  He  had  never  before  so  repelled  a
suppliant;  he  had  never  before  used  words  apparently  so  harsh,  so  contemptuous.  But
still  the  Gentile  woman  persevered  in  her  entreaty.  She  accepts  the  truth  of  the  Lord's
words.  It  was  right,  she  owned,  that  the  children  should  first  be  filled  ;  it  would  not  be
meet  to  cast  their  bread  to  the  dogs ;  and  the  Gentiles,  she  admits,  were  as  dogs  compared
with  the  chosen  people.  But  she  understands  the  word,  in  its  milder  application,  of  the
little  dog*  (tA  twifim)  which  play  with  the  children  and  lie  under  the  table,  not  of  the


CH.  XV.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  IW

wild  savage  packs  which  roam  about  Eastern  cities.  She  is  well  pleased  to  be  regarded  A!^
a  little  dug,  for  it  gives  her  a  claim  to  the  Master's  kindness.  The  Jews  were  wayward
children ;  they  had  rejected  the  bread  of  life.  The  Gentiles  would  floctc  round  the  l)oard.
The  Jews  called  them  dogs ;  they  would  gladly,  thankfnlly  receive  the  bread  which  the
Jews  had  spurned.  She  pleaded  for  her  share ;  she  asked  only  for  the  crumbs  which
fell  from  the  table.  They  were  the  children's  crumbs,  she  knew ;  but  the  children  had
let  them  folL  Might  not  she— no  child,  but  a  Gentile;  no  better,  she  owned,  than  a
dog — ^might  not  she  have  her  i^ortion  of  those  most  precious  crumbs?  It  was  a
beautiful  humility,  a  touching  holy  perseverance.  It  was  an  illustration  of  the  first
Beatitude.  This  Syro-Phcenician  woman  was  poor  in  sjirit;  she  felt  her  spiritual
poverty,  and  acknowledged  it ;  and  she  obtained  her  shi.re  in  the  blessings  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  though  not  a  child  of  the  kingdom.  Her  prayer  is  a  model  for  us.
So  ought  we  to  pray ;  with  the  same  humility,  feeling  and  owning  our  own  utter
unworthiness,^;  with  the  same  importunity,  urging  our  request  in  earnest  continual
supplication,  though  the  Lord  be  silent  and  seem  to  heed  us  not.  Sooner  or  later,  he
always  answers  the  prayer  of  faith.  He  answered  now.  "  0  woman,"  he  said,  "  great
is  thy  faith  I  "  The  Lord  admired  the  faith  of  this  Canaanite  woman,  as  he  had  marvelled
at  the  faith  of  the  Gentile  centurion.  Sometimes  those  who  have  the  fewest  privileges,
few  opportunities,  little  knowledge,  are  nevertheless  rich  in  faith,  and  live  very  near
to  Christ.  Such  shall  receive  the  blessing  of  this  Gentile  woman,  "  Be  it  unto  thee
even  as  thou  wilt."  For  the  Christian's  prayer  is,  "  Thy  will  be  done."  He  yields  up
his  will  to  God's  most  holy  will ;  and  thus,  willing  such  things  as  God  willeth,  he
obtains  his  requests ;  for  "  all  things  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye
shall  receive."  And  now  the  mother's  heart  was  glad ;  her  child  was  healed.  The
Lord  was  distant  in  body,  but  his  saving  energy  was  present,  aa  it  is  present  now
wherever  men  call  on  him  in  faithful  prayer.  He  has  taught  us  by  his  holy  apostle  to
make  prayers  and  supplications,  and  to  give  thanks  for  all  men.  Let  us  try  to  fulfil
this  great  duty  of  intercessory  prayer.  Let  ministers  pray  for  their  people,  parents  for
their  children,  all  Christians  for  one  another.  Let  parents  pray  earnestly,  perseveringly,
for  erring  children.  "  It  is  impossible,"  it  was  said  to  the  mother  of  St.  Augustine,
"  that  the  child  of  so  many  tears  should  perish."

Lebbohb.  1.  Do  not  value  too  highly  the  external  signs  of  success ;  think  more  of
duty  than  success.  2.  "  Men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint,"  3.  6«  humble ;
to  such  God  giveth  grace.

Vers.  29 — 39. — Tht  return,  I.  Thh  joubnbt.  1.  Th«  Lord  leavei  the  harder*  of
Tyre,  He  had  sojourned  for  a  short  time  in  this  heathen  land.  He  had  wrought  one
mighty  miracle ;  one  heathen  woman  had  shown  a  strangely  energetic  and  persevering
faith — a  faith  that  we  Christians  may  well  covet  earnestly.  Surely  some  heathen  souls —
two  at  least,  one  would  think — ^must  have  been  drawn  to  Christ  and  to  salvation  by  that
work  of  love  and  power.  They  may,  perhaps,  have  been  among  the  little  company  who,
thirty  years  afterwards,  "  kneeled  down  on  the  shore,  and  prayed,"  when  St.  Paul  left
Tyre  on  his  last  journey  to  Jerusalem.  But  the  borders  of  Tyre  were  not  to  he  the
scene  of  the  Lord's  personal  labours.  He  departed,  going  northwards  at  first  through
Sidon  (if  the  reading  of  the  most  ancient  manuscripts  in  Mark  vii.  31  is  to  be  followed).
He  looked  on  the  great  Phcenician  cities,  with  their  commerce,  their  magnificence,  their
idolatries.  So  now  from  heaven  he  looks  down  on  our  great  towns,  with  their  strange
sharp  contrasts  of  wealth  and  poverty,  luxury  and  misery,  with  their  unbelief  and
heathenism,  with  their  drunkenness  and  uncleanness.  His  followers  were  to  labour
afterwards  in  those  great  centres  of  population.  His  own  work  lay  not  there.  2.  Ee
comes  to  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  He  turned  south-eastwards,  and  came  through  the  half-
heathen  Decapolis  to  the  eastern  coast  of  the  well-known  lake.  He  went  up  into  a
mountain  and  sat  down  there,  perhaps  for  prayer  and  meditation,  perhaps  for  quiet
intercourse  with  the  twelve.  But  again  he  could  not  be  hid ;  the  healing  of  the  deaf
man  who  had  an  impediment  in  his  speech  (Mark  vii.  32 — 37)  was  soon  noised  abroad.
Great  multitudes  came ;  they  were  rough,  ignorant  mountaineers,  inhabiting  a  semi-
pagan  country ;'  but  they  saw  the  works  of  Christ ;  they  recognized  his  power  and  love.
They  brought  the  sick  and  suffering  from  all  the  neighbourhood,  and  cast  them  down  at
Jesus'  feet.    We  do  not  read  of  any  words — they  knew  not  how  to  pray ;  but  in  their


110  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  x-v   1— 3a

intense  eagerness  and  excitement  they  cast  down  their  suffering  friends  before  the  Lord.
The  action  was  enough.  The  sick  lay  around  him ;  their  reverential  attitude,  their
mute  distress,  pleaded  with  the  corapaBsionate  Saviour ;  he  healed  them  all,  3.  Tlie
wonder  of  the  multitude.  These  peasants  of  Decapolis  were  men  of  simple  hearts ;  they
had  not  been  prejudiced  against  our  Lord  by  the  emissaries  of  the  Pharisees ;  they  saw
the  Lord's  power,  and  they  wondered.  But  they  did  more  than  wonder  j  they  glorified
the  God  of  Israel.  Possibly  they  had  worshipped  other  gods ;  but  it  was  the  Prophet
of  the  God  of  Israel  who  had  wrought  these  marvellous  cures ;  they  recognized  his
majesty,  as  Naaman  the  Syrian  had  done  ages  before.  It  is  a  lesson  to  us.  God's
mercies  should  lead  us  on  to  adoration.  Worship  is  what  we  owe  to  God,  and  worship
is  the  prostration  of  the  whole  being,  bowed  low  in  adoring  reverence  before  the  glory
of  G<3d.  May  the  mercies  of  each  day  lead  us  to  practise  here  on  earth  that  holy
unselfish  worship  which  we  hope  hereafter  to  offer  before  the  glory-throne !

II.  The  second  mikaole  of  the  loaves.  1.  The  Lord's  words.  The  disciples
made  no  suggestion  now,  as  they  had  done  before  under  similar  circumstances  (ch.  xiv.
15).  Their  confidence  in  their  Master  was  increasing ;  their  reverence  was  deepening  j
they  felt,  it  may  be,  that  patient  waiting  was  their  most  becoming  attitude ;  it  was  not
their  place  to  offer  Eidvice.  But  he  called  them ;  he  would  teach  them,  and  us  through
them,  to  care  for  the  bodily  wants  of  our  fellow-creatures.  "  I  have  compassion  on
the  multitude."  "  These  words,"  Stier  well  says, "  in  the  mouth  and  from  the  heart  of
Christ,  have  called  into  existence  all  the  institutions  of  philanthropy,  unknown  to
heathenism,  for  all  sorts  of  indigence  and  distress."  The  people  were  hungry ;  some  of
them  (the  Lord  knew,  as  he  knoweth  all  things)  had  come  from  far ;  they  had  continued
-  with  him  three  days.  TheLi  deep  interest  in  the  Lord's  teaching,  their  wonder  at  his
miracles,  had  so  absorbed  their  thoughts  that  they  had  made  no  provision  for  their
necessities,  and  their  food  was  exhausted.  Probably  they  were  strangers  from  Decapolis  ;
very  possibly  they  had  not  heard  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  who  seem  to  have
been  gathered  together  on  their  way  to  the  Passover.  But  these  ignorant  country  people
forgot  themselves  in  attending  upon  the  Lord.  He  cared  for  them.  So  he  wUl  care  for  us
if  we  continue  in  his  service,  casting  all  our  care  on  him.  2.  The  disciples.  They  must
have  remembered  the  former  miracle ;  their  question,  indeed,  as  reported  by  St.  Matthew,
sounds  almost  like  an  allusion  to  it :  "  Whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread  ?  "  The
Lord's  words  seemed  to  imply  that  they  were  to  provide  the  food ;  whence  shduld  they
obtain  it  ?  He  could  supply  it— that  they  knew ;  they  knew  not  yet  certainly  whether
it  would  please  him  to  do  as  he  had  done  before ;  they  did  not  presume  to  prescribe  his
course  of  action.  Their  stock  of  provisions  was  very  small,  somewhat  larger  than  on  the
former  occasion,  but  utterly  inadequate  for  the  wants  of  such  a  multitude.  3.  The
miracle.  Again  the  Lord  gave  thanks,  teaching  us  that  we  should  never  omit  to
acknowledge  the  bounty  of  God  at  every  meal ;  again  he  brake  the  bread  in  that  gracious
manner  so  long  and  so  well  remembered  (Luke  xxiv.  35) ;  again  the  disciples  were  his
ministers  in  conveying  the  food  to  the  assembled  crowds.  "  And  they  did  all  eat,  and
were  filled."  The  seven  loaves  and  the  few  little  fishes  satisfied  the  hunger  of  four
thousand  men.  The  evangelist  reminds  us  that,  though  the  men  only  were  numbered,
there  were  women  and  children  also.  The  Lord  provided  liberally  for  all  alike.  In
Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  male  nor  female.  Christianity  has  raised  woman  to  her
proper  place  in  society.  The  Lord  always  loved  the  little  children ;  he  bade  them
come  to  him.  He  fed  the  whole  multitude  in  his  sovereign  power  and  generous  bounty,
as  now  from  day  to  day  he  feedeth  us,  fathers,  mothers,  children.  "  He  satisfied  them
with  the  bread  of  heaven."  There  was  enough,  and  more  than  enough ;  the  disciples
took  up  seven  baskets  full  (and  those  baskets  of  large  size ;  compare  in  the  Greek,  Acts
ix.  25) — ^more,  apparently,  than  the  little  store  which  they  had  at  first.  So  he  will  bless
ur  basket  and  our  store  if  we  trust  in  him.

Lessons.  1.  The  multitudes  brought  their  sick  to  Christ ;  let  us  commend  our  sick
in  faithful  prayer  to  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  2.  They  glorified  the  God  of  Israel ;  let  us
learn  always  to  recognize  his  gracious  hand,  and  to  adore  him  who  giveth  all  things.
3.  He  had  compassion  on  the  multitude ;  let  us  learn  of  him  to  feel  for  the  needy  and
helpleu.    4.  Let  us  look  to  him  for  our  daily  bread ;  the  Lord  will  provide.


on.  XV.  1—39.]    THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  Ill


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  2,  3. — The  miichief  of  tradition.  I.  Tbadition  comes  feom  ak  inexpebienobd
AMTlQulTr.  The  Pharisees  and  scribes  showed  reverence  for  it  because  it  descended
from  the  elders ;  but  these  elders  were  only  men.  It  is  common  to  attach  the  greatest
weight  to  the  oldest  opinion.  Yet  it  is  not  correct  to  look  for  wisdom  in  antiquity ;
because,  as  Bacon  reminds  us,  we  are  the  ancients,  and  they  who  lived  before  us
belonged  to  the  childhood  of  the  race.  Under  the  Divine  education  of  man  wisdom
should  be  growing  with  the  ages.  We  look  back  with  amazement  on  a  multitude  of
fantastic  notions  cherished  by  our  forefathers  which  have  become  ridiculous  in  our
eyes.  There  is  one  thought,  however,  to  be  set  off  against  this.  Ideas  that  have  stood
the  test  of  time  win  a  certain  guarantee  of  their  solidity  in  comparison  with  raw
notions  suddenly  springing  from  the  imagination  of  a  new  thinker.  But  that  is  only
the  case  when  those  ideas  are  being  constantly  tested  by  experience  and  criticism ;  and
it  does  not  apply  after  tradition  has  become  petrified  and  has  attained  the  rank  of  a
venerated  idol.

II.  Tradition  is  uabeed  bt  huuak  iufebfeotion.  The  enemies  of  Christ  greeted
the  elders  with  reverence;  but  our  Lord  replied  by  calling  attention  to  a  greater
authority.  They  had  honoured  the  elders,  but  they  had  dishonoured  God,  The
tradition  of  the  elders  may  deserve  some  reverence,  but  it  cannot  be  compared  with
the  commandment  of  God.  Yet  it  was  being  preferred  to  that  commandment.
Tradition  sometimes  claims  to  be  of  Divine  origin,  handed  down  in  the  Church  from  the
time  of  the  apostles  in  a  line  of  authorized  teachers.  If  its  claim  could  be  proved,  of
course  it  would  have  an  apostolic  authority ;  but  even  then  how  could  it  be  of  superior
value  to  the  immediate  utterances  of  the  apostles  recorded  in  the  Scriptures?  We
have  no  warrant  for  believing,  as  the  Gnostics  taught,  that  an  esoteric  teaching  of
supreme  importance  has  been  thus  handed  down.  The  extravagant  pretensions  of
Romanism,  founded  on  the  authority  of  tradition,  which  the  Council  of  Trent  declared
to  be  of  equal  value  with  that  of  Scripture,  warn  us  against  the  danger  of  trusting
similar  claims  again.

III.  Tradition  mat  become  an  excuse  foe  nNFAiTHFULUBSs  to  Ditdtb  bevela-
TiON.  Thus  it  was  with  the  Jews.  The  revelation  they  treated  with  contempt  was
that  of  the  moral  law.  Parental  claims  were  eluded  on  the  plea  of  traditional  usages.
Nothing  short  of  horrible  hypocrisy  was  here  practised.  The  plea  that  what  was  due
to  a  needy  parent  could  not  be  given  because  it  had  been  already  consecrated  to  God  was
quite  false,  inasmuch  as  the  pretended  consecration  did  not  prevent  the  unnatural  son
from  enjoying  it  himself.  Thus  tradition  was  a  means  of  relaxing  moral  claims.  The
tendency  to  trust  in  tradition  in  the  Christian  Church  has  been  sometimes  associated
with  a  casuistical  treatment  of  simple  obligations.  The  reason  of  this  seems  to  be
that  while  God's  commandments  are  "exceeding  broad"  (Ps.  cxix.  96),  man's  addi-
tions to  them  are  dreadfully  narrow.  Thus  tradition  slides  down  to  petty  contrivances,
and  wastes  its  resources  in  miserable  scruples.  Christ  would  warn  us  to  escape  from
the  lowering  and  narrowing  influence  of  this  system  of  man's  invention,  by  turning  to
the  large,  living,  eternal,  spiritual  truth  of  the  kingdom  as  he  has  revealed  it  to  us. —
W.  F.  A.

Ver.  11. — 2%e  sowrce  of  defilement.  The  religions  people  in  the  time  of  Christ  were
right  in  being  anxious  to  avoid  defilement,  but  they  made  a  great  mistake  in  their  idea
as  to  its  source,  and  therefore  they  went  wrong  in  their  notions  of  the  evil  thing  itself

I.  The  awakened  oonsoienoe  dbsiees  to  be  fbkk  from  defilement.  1.  On  itt
own  account.  Children  who  have  been  brought  up  in  the  gutter  have  no  idea  of
cleanliness  and  no  desire  for  it ;  and  souls  that  have  habitually  wallowed  in  filth  do
not  perceive  their  own  degradation  until  a  new  and  better  influence  has  been  brought
to  bear  upon  them.  Nevertheless,  man,  made  in  the  image  of  God,  cannot  attain  his
true  end  while  the  Divine  image  is  corrupted  and  befouled,  and  when  a  gleam  of
his  better  nature  awakes  he  longs  to  be  pure.  The  cultivation  of  the  spiritual
life  brings  a  horror  of  defilement.  For  its  own  lake  the  soul  then  longs  to  be  clean.
2.  Because  of  the  effects  of  defilement.    (1)  Shame.     The  first  perception  of  defilement


112  THE   GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xr.  1—89


Been  aide  by  side  with  purity  sends  a  shock  of  shame  through  the  awakened  soul.
(2)  Banishment  from  God.  Without  holiness  no  one  can  see  QoA.  Nothing  unclean
can  enter  heaven,  i.e.  the  presence  of  God  (Rev.  xxi.  27).  (3)  Blindnese.  The
defiled  soul  is  dark  ;  it  cannot  perceive  spiritual  truth.

II.  The  perverted  coNscrBNCB  mistakes  thk  bourob  of  difHiKment.  The  roct-
error  of  the  Pharisees  was  externalism.  The  prim  propriety  of  demeanour  which
characterized  the  professional  saints  of  Jerusalem  covered  hearts  as  corrupt  as  any  of
the  publicans'  and  sinners*.  Yet  the  Pharisees  thought  themselves  clean.  They
dreaded  contact  with  a  corpse,  but  they  had  little  scruple  in  entertaining  a  corrupt
thought.  They  would  stop  their  ears  at  the  sound  of  blasphemy,  but  they  would  give
the  reins  to  their  tongues  in  malignant  words.  The  evil  of  Pharisaism  is  by  no  means
extinct  to-day.  Beligious  people  dread  to  be  found  in  association  with  questionable
characters.  They  are  anxious  to  be  perfectly  correct  in  the  external  observances  of
worship.  They  do  not  go  to  the  extreme  of  the  folly  of  the  Pharisees,  bat  they  too
often  manifest  the  same  spirit.

III.  The  bnliohtbnbd  cohsoibnck  peboeivbs  the  tbub  bouboe  of  defilbmbnt
WITHIN  ITSELF.  It  is  part  of  the  work  of  Christ  to  arouse  and  guide  the  consciences
of  men.  Thus  he  shows  us  that  the  real  origin  of  defilement  is  in  our  own  hearts.  A
black  fountain  will  always  pour  out  a  black  flood,  do  what  we  may  to  cleanse  the
stream ;  on  the  other  hand,  a  spring  of  pure  water  will  quickly  wash  away  any  casual
defilement  t^at  falls  into  it.  A  man  is  not  his  environment.  It  is  dangerous  to  be  in
the  midst  of  corrupting  influences ;  and  yet  a  bed  of  lilies  may  grow  out  of  foulest  mire.
A  herd  of  swine  will  not  be  converted  into  a  troupe  of  pure  virgins  by  entering  a
temple ;  they  will  only  convert  the  sanctuary  into  a  sty.  The  corruption  of  a  bad
heart  will  be  detected  in  language  and  conduct.  When  these  are  unworthy  they  will
reflect  shame  on  the  debased  heart  from  which  they  come.  It  is  the  great  lesson  of
Christ,  needed  much  in  our  own  day,  that  as  the  root  of  all  evil  in  the  world  is  the
evil  heart  of  man,  the  only  radical  cleansing  must  be  that  which  washes  the  heart.
We  must  have  done  with  the  superficial  treatment  of  mere  appearances.  Christ's
method  is  to  renew  th«  life  within. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  14. — "  Blind  leaden  of  the  blind,"  This  is  a  startling  image,  vividly  suggest-
ing to  our  minds  a  most  deplorable  condition  of  society.  While  it  was  especially  true
of  the  official  teachers  of  Israel  ia  our  Lord's  time,  it  has  never  ceased  to  have  an
application  to  somewhat  similar  men.  It  may  be  applied  to  heathen  priests,  to  the
benighted  leaders  of  superstition  in  medieval  Europe,  and,  alas  1  to  many  in  Christendom
to-day  who  essay  to  guide  others  though  they  themselves  cannot  see  the  way  of  life.

I.  Teb  blind  look  fob  leadbbb.  The  consciousness  of  inability  and  the  confession
of  it  may  not  be  recognized  by  superficial  observers,  because  a  certain  surface  pride
tries  to  veil  the  deep  diffidence  and  the  yearning  hunger  for  guidance  that  really  inhabit
the  souls  of  men.  The  blindness  of  the  multitudes  that  "  knew  not  the  Law  "  was  but
a  shadow  of  the  blindness  of  mankind  generally.  Ignorant  of  God,  unable  to  compre-
hend itself,  lost  in  the  wilderness  of  thought,  the  mind  of  man  seems  to  be  eyeless,  or
at  best  dim-sighted  and  confused  in  its  attempt  to  grasp  spiritual  truth.

II.  The  blind  mat  be  deceived  in  teeib  leadebs.  Their  very  blindness  puts
them  under  a  disadvantage  in  judging  of  the  worth  of  those  who  offer  to  guide  them.
Sounding  words  are  no  proofs  of  clear  vision.  Yet  too  often  teachers  have  been  accepted
on  their  own  terms  and  accredited  by  their  self-assertions.  Nevertheless,  when  one
who  sees  arrives,  it  is  possible  for  him  and  others  to  detect  a  mistake.  The  common
people  who  heard  Jesus  gladly  quickly  perceived  that  his  teaching  had  an  authority
which  that  of  the  scribes  lacked.

III.  Tub  besfonbibilitt  of  the  leaders  of  the  blind  is  host  bebiodb.  They
are  trusted  men,  and  in  proportion  to  their  acceptance  of  confidence  will  be  their
responsibility.  If  they  fail  to  carry  out  their  promises  their  charges  will  suffer.  But
they  too  will  fall  into  trouble.  Men  cannot  guide  others  wrongly  without  going
wrong  themselves.  Their  fatal  mistake  is  to  pretend  to  be  leaders  of  souls  while  they
themselves  are  benighted,  for  it  is  possible  to  refuse  the  responsible  function  and  to
take  the  lower  nnd  humbler  place  of  the  blind  who  need  guidance.

IV.  It   18    MOST    IMPOBTANT  that   EELIGIOUS   TEA0HEB8    SHOULD    KNOW    THE    TBUTH


OH.  XT.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  113

THBT  ARB  CALLED  UPON  TO  TEAOH.  ThiB  idea  is  80  obviouB  thftt  it  seems  to  be  a
waste  of  words  to  state  it.  Yet  it  is  constantly  ignored.  1.  Special  training  is  needed.
In  the  present  day  the  air  is  laden  with  questions  concerning  the  foundations  of  the
faith,  and  no  one  is  fit  to  he  a  teacher  of  others  who  is  not  prepared  to  meet  those
questions.  Though  some  of  then  may  not  l>e  readily  answered,  at  least  the  teacher  must
know  how  to  give  some  guidance  to  the  inquirer  in  his  perplexity.  2.  Divine  light
is  needed.  It  is  not  enough  for  the  teacher  to  have  been  trained  in  theological  studies.
These  may  have  left  him  in  a  midnight  darkness  ;  and  they  will  do  so  if  he  has  not
ooened  his  soul  to  the  light  of  God.

y.  The  onlt  safe  Guide  is  Jesus  Christ.  He  has  clear  vision,  and  he  leads  surely
through  all  difSculties.  We  lean  on  the  teaching  of  ignorant  men  when  we  might  go
straight  to  the  teaching  of  Christ.  With  the  Light  of  the  world  shining  upon  our  path,
we  should  be  able  to  see,  and  yet  this  will  not  be  possible  if  we  are  blind.  Kow,  it  is
the  great  work  of  Christ  not  merely  to  guide  the  blind,  but  to  give  them  sight,  so  that
they  may  see  their  way  and  follow  him  by  their  owii  rision  of  truth. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  21 — 28. — Tfie  triumph  ^  j  mother's  lave.  Jesus  was  beyond  the  borders  of
Palestine,  on  heathen  soil.  He  Ibad  not  extended  his  travels  in  order  to  carry  hia
ministry  to  the  heathen  ;  but  he  was  in  retirement.  He  had  left  Galilee  because  the
Galilaeans  were  in  a  restless  state — many  of  them  perplexed  by  his  teaching  and  turn-
ing from  him,  and  also  because  the  o£Bcial  teachers  were  seriously  impeding  his  work.
After  this  our  Lord  never  resumed  his  old  open  ministry  by  the  seashore  and  on  the
hillside.  Tet  even  during  his  retirement  he  could  not  resist  the  pleadings  of  a
mother's  love.

L  The  conduct  of  the  mother.  The  vivid  picture  given  to  ui  by  the  evangelist
sets  before  ns  a  very  remarkable  character.  Let  us  observe  some  of  its  most  interest-
ing features.  1.  Devoted  love,  A  mother  is  just  absorbed  in  her  devotion  to  her
poor  daughter.  As  is  often  seen,  the  very  affliction  of  the  child  the  more  endears  her
to  the  mother.  A  mother's  love  is  no  mere  sentiment,  and  it  is  not  satisfied  to
expend  itself  in  idle  tears.  It  inspires  a  keen  and  energetic  interest.  The  mother  is
lifted  above  her  people,  and  is  carried  forward  to  attempt  what  others  never  thought  of,
because  her  love  will  not  permit  her  to  give  up  her  hope  and  her  effort.  2.  Ra^e  faith.
(1)  The  woman  was  a  heathen.  Yet,  like  the  centurion  of  Capernaum,  she  had  a
faith  greater  than  that  of  any  Jew  or  Jewess,  Thus,  although  our  Lord's  immediate
ministry  is  to  Israel,  it  is  manifest,  even  while  this  is  being  carried  out,  that  other
peoples  must  share  its  benefits.  (2)  She  recognized  the  Messiahship  of  Christ,
Though  a  heathen,  she  had  learnt  to  share  the  hope  of  Israel.  In  the  time  of  his
exile,  depression,  and  disappointment,  she  did  not  fail  to  recognize  the  very  Christ  of
God.  3.  Unyielding  persistency.  The  wonder  is  that  this  woman  would  take  no  refusal ;
and  yet  shall  we  call  it  a  wonder  at  all  when  we  remember  that  she  was  a  mother?
Here  is  the  greatest  instance  in  all  history  of  the  victory  of  persevering  prayer.  4.
Quick  inventiveness.  Jesus  was  a  Master  of  the  fine  art  of  repartee ;  but  for  once  he
gladly  allows  that  his  words  are  perfectly  met  and  replied  to,  and  he  generously  leaves
the  last  word  with  his  applicant.  In  this  word  there  is  a  full  admission  of  all  Christ
said,  and  no  departure  from  perfect  humility,  and  yet  there  is  a  brilliant  shaft  of  wit
as  modest  as  it  is  efifective.  There  is  room  for  the  quick  intellect  in  the  kingdom  ot
heaven.

II,  The  behaviour  or  Christ.  On  the  surface  this  is  mysterious  and  apparently
ungenerous ;  but  a  fair  consideration  of  the  whole  narrative  will  not  leave  any  groxmd  of
complaint  ajtainst  it.  1.  A  true  statement.  The  mission  of  Christ  was  to  the  Jews.
This  was  a  fact  not  to  be  gainsaid.  Though  he  came  for  the  salvation  of  the  world,
his  method  was  to  begin  with  Israel  and  to  confine  his  personal  labours  on  earth  to  the
people  who  were  to  be  his  instrument  for  saving  others.  2.  A  test  of  faith.  Our  Lord's
discouragement  of  the  applicant  would  have  been  unkind  if  she  had  been  a  weak  and
limorous  person.  But  with  his  keen  intuiticsi  of  character  he  could  see  at  h  glance
that  she  was  a  woman  of  courage  and  confidence.  It  was  an  acknowledgment  of  her
good  qualities  that  permitted  the  severe  test  to  be  applied  to  her.  3.  A  final  blessing.
In  the  end  this  eager  mother  got  all  she  sought  after,  and  therefore  she  had  no  com
, plaint  against  Christ,  but,  on  the  contrary,  good  ground  for  thankfulness,  Jesus Chritf
KATTHEW — n.  (


114  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xv.  1—39


does  not  refuse  any  true  applicant  for  his  grace.     He  may  seem  to  discourage  at  first,
but  in  the  end  faith  is  always  rewarded. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  29 — 31. — The  healing  ministry.  After  his  retirement  to  the  north,  Jesus
seems  to  have  returned  for  a  short  time  to  the  scenes  of  his  earlier  labours  in  Galilee.
His  open  public  ministry  had  almost  ceased,  and  his  miracles  were  now  for  the  most
part  rare,  and  oaly  performed  in  response  to  some  special  appeal.  But  we  have  here
one  last  occasion  of  widespread  healing,  crowning  the  public  beneficence  of  Christ's
earthly  life.

I.  OuB  Lobd's  pueposb.  He  went  up  the  well-known  mountain  where  he  had
taught  the  people  during  his  earlier  ministry,  and  there  he  seated  himself  in  prepara-
tion for  further  teaching.  This  was  his  aim,  as  the  deliberate  sitting  down  implied.
But  this  was  not  what  the  people  wanted ;  they  were  anxious  for  bodily  healing.  Now,
we  do  not  find  that  Jesus  discouraged  applications  for  the  cure  of  sickness;  he
encouraged  them  by  his  generous  response.  Nevertheless,  it  must  have  been  painful  for
him  to  see  how  much  more  anxious  the  people  were  to  receive  earthly  blessings  than
to  secure  those  higher  spiritual  blessings  which  it  was  the  great  end  of  his  life-work
to  bestow.  He  is  always  thinking  first  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  only  adding  the
other  things  to  it  as  secondary  boons.  His  true  difciples  should  learn  a  sense  of  pro-
tjortion,  and  seek  first  what  Christ  is  most  anxious  to  bestow.

II.  The  people's  teoublb.  1.  Great  bodily  distress.  It  is  noteworthy  that  all  the
oases  here  specified  represent  diseases  or  defects  in  some  bodily  organ.  They  are  not
like  the  instances  of  fever,  leprosy,  or  general  paralysis  that  we  have  met  with  earlier.
It  would  seem  that  these  cases  would  be  difiicult  to  treat.  2.  Variety  of  need.  Though
a  certain  common  character  belongs  to  all  these  cases,  they  still  differ  from  one  another
very  considerably.  Yet  they  are  all  brought  to  Christ.  He  is  not  a  specialist  able
only  to  treat  one  class  of  complaints.  He  welcomes  and  helps  people  whose  needs  arp
infinitely  various.  3.  Brotherly  sympathy.  The  people  brought  their  afflicted  friends
leading  the  blind  and  carrying  the  lame  up  the  steep,  broken  mountain-path.  It  wan
the  Christ-spirit  that  helped  these  poor  sufferers  to  Christ.  There  is  room  for  large
mutual  helpfulness  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  If  we  cannot  save  our  brothers,  we  can
bring  them  to  the  Saviour.

III.  Our  Lobd'b  obace.  The  response  was  ready  and  sufiBcient.  It  is  stated  in  few
words,  "  And  he  healed  them;  "  yet  this  is  enough.  The  very  laconic  phrase  shows
that  there  were  no  qualifications,  limitations,  exceptions.  1.  Eealing.  This  was  the
chief  miracle-work  of  Christ.  It  was  the  symbol  of  his  spiritual  ministry  (Luke  iv.  18).
He  comes  to  give  eyes  to  the  soul,  and  the  hearing  of  Divine  voices,  and  strength  for
the  service  of  God.  2.  Feeding.  This  is  recorded  in  the  following  paragraph.  Some
needed  healing ;  all  needed  feeding.  Now,  Christ,  who  cures  sick  souls,  also  nourishes
healthy  souls  with  the  bread  of  life.  They  who  bring  others  to  Christ  are  themselves
blessed  by  Christ.

IV.  The  people's  jot.  It  is  occasioned  by  the  wonderful  sight  of  the  results  of
Christ's  miracle-working.  Christ  is  honoured  by  what  he  does  in  the  world  now.  We
can  see  his  spiritual  miracles,  and  they  are  his  best  credentials.  The  effect  on  the
people  was  twofold.  1.  Amanement.  "  The  multitude  wondered."  Yet  they  had
come  to  seek  these  very  boons  I  The  sight  of  the  reality  was  greater  than  the  previous
hope.  Christ  is  truly  named  "  Wonderful "  (Isa.  ix.  6).  2.  Praise.  The  people  saw
the  hand  of  God  in  this,  and  a  spontaneous  outburst  of  praise  followed.  Thus  the  work
of  Christ  glorifies  the  Name  of  God. — W,  F.  A.

Vers.  1 — 20. — On  hand-washing.  The  omission  with  which  the  Pharisees  here
charge  the  disciples  was  that  of  a  ceremonial  observance  on  which  they  laid  immense
stress.  Certain  washings  for  purification  had  been  commanded  by  the  Law  of  Moses
but  to  these  countless  additions  of  a  minute  and  vexatious  kind  had  been  added  by  the
rabbis.  Even  when  no  defilement  had  been  consciously  contracted,  the  washings
must  be  observed  because,  unwittingly,  a  man  might  touch  what  would  defile  him.
Wherever  in  religion  such  human  inventions  are  accepted  as  binding,  they  tend  to
become  more  prominent  than  the  fundamental  moral  law.  It  was  so  in  this  case  and
it  is  to  this  our  Lord's  words  point.     "  By  your  tradition,"  he  says,  "  ye  make  the  Word


OH.  XT.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO  ST,   MATTHEW,  lin

of  Ood  of  none  effect.  Tou  put  aside  his  commandment  that  you  may  keep  your  own
tradition.  You  accept  as  the  important  things  snob  trifles  as  these,  while  the  truly
great  things  of  the  Law  yon  utterly  neglect."  But  the  evil  of  Pharisaism  lay  even
deeper  than  this.  The  Pharisees  were  not  mere  formalists ;  those  of  Paul's  type  could
honestly  say  that,  touching  the  Law,  they  were  blameless.  Their  mistake  was  that
they  thought  their  good  actions  made  them  good  men.  Our  Lord  came  to  give  men
clear  perception  and  hold  of  the  real  distinction  between  good  and  evil.  Men  were
not  to  be  allowed  to  suppose  the  distinction  between  good  men  and  bad  was  a  slight
one,  that  could  be  bridged  over  by  a  few  acquired  habits  or  formal  observances.  They
were  to  be  made  to  see  that  the  distinction  was  deep  as  humanity  itself;  that  their
goodness  must  be  one  that  would  be  eternal;  not  being  the  result  of  a  superficial
imitation,  or  attempt  to  satisfy  the  expectations  or  win  the  applause  of  men,  but
springing  from  the  man's  inmost  self.  To  illustrate  the  principle  that  respect  to
human  tradition  tends  to  disrespect  of  God's  Law,  our  Lord  cites  an  instance  well  known
to  them.  Under  the  guise  of  extra  devotion  to  God,  a  man  could  evade  the  first  of
human  duties  by  merely  saying  over  anything  he  wished  to  keep,  "  Oorban  " — "  It  is
devoted,"  This  was  monstrous,  and  the  system  which  encouraged  it  manifestly
"  a  plant  which  his  Father  had  not  planted."  The  principle  which  lies  at  the  root  of
our  Lord's  teaching  here  he  enounces  in  the  words,  "There  is  nothing  from  without
a  man  that,  entering  into  him,  can  defile  him ;  but  the  things  which  come  out  of  him,
those  are  they  that  defile  a  man,"  We  may  apply  this  in  two  ways,  1,  To  those
who,  under  the  guise  of  greater  religiousness  than  that  of  other  men,  evade  the  common
duties  of  life ;  who,  in  defending  some  trifle  that  hangs  to  the  skirt  of  religion,  do  not
scruple  to  transgress  the  broad  laws  of  justice,  truth,  and  charity  which  form  its  life.
Every  age  has  had  its  representatives  of  the  Pharisees,  the  defenders  of  traditional
leligion,  who  have  shown  the  same  unsorupulousness  and  intolerance  in  defence  of  what
they  suppose  to  be  religious  truth.  And  when  we  consider  the  damage  done  to  religion
by  such  persons,  and  the  difficulty  of  convincing  them  of  tlieir  error,  we  do  not  wonder
that  no  class  was  so  frequently  and  so  unsparingly  denounced  by  our  Lord.  In  every
religious  community  there  is  a  tendency  to  place  the  keeping  of  certain  observances
chat  are  added  to  the  Law  above  the  Law  itself;  to  consider  these  extra  things  as  the
marks  of  a  religious  man,  and  to  call  a  man  religious  or  irreligious  according  as  he  does
or  does  not  things  that  have  as  little  to  do  with  fundamental  morality  as  the  washing
of  hands  before  eating.  We  are  apt,  all  of  us,  to  pay  attention  to  the  means  rather
than  to  what  is  the  great  end  of  all  religion ;  to  wash  our  hands  instead  of  our  hearts.
"  These  things  ye  ought  to  have  done,  bnt  not  to  have  left  the  others  undone."  All
these  things  that  are  peculiar  marks  of  religious  people  are  good,  but  become  enormous
evils  when  out  of  proportion  to  the  essential  matters  of  the  Law — of  morality,  of  justice
and  truth  between  man  and  man,  of  love  to  God  and  to  our  fellow.s.  Or:  2.  We  may
consider  the  principle  as  enouncing  the  general  truth  that  man's  life  is  determined  in,
all  respects  hy  what  is  within,  not  hy  what  is  without.  Our  Lord  was  sinless,  not
because  he  was  not  in  circumstances  of  temptation,  but  because  there  was  nothing  on
which  temptation  could  fix.  We  lay  the  blame  of  our  low  spiritual  condition,  our
actual  falls,  on  our  circumstances.  But  why  is  it  these  circumstances  tempt  us?
Others  pass  through  them  without  peril.  The  blame  is  within.  We  must  seek  for
the  remedy,  also,  within.  The  change  that  determines  our  destiny  is  a  change  in
ourselves, — D.

Vers,  21 — 28.— The  Syro-Phanieian  woman.  The  peculiarity  of  the  incident  here
related  is  not  the  cure  wrought,  but  the  refusal  with  which  the  mother's  petition  was  at
first  met.  It  did  not  need  a  sympathy  such  as  our  Lord's  to  urge  him  to  dismiss  this
foul  intrusion  into  the  innocent  and  happy  days  of  childhood ;  it  did  not  need  his
hatred  of  evil  to  urge  him  to  rebuke  the  Satanic  malice,  which  could  exult  in  attacking,
not  the  aged  sinner,  but  the  pure  child  who  knew  nothing  of  the  sources  of  disease  and
had  no  arguments  to  resist  its  terror.  Who  would  not  count  it  one  of  the  best  plea-
sures to  be  able  to  bring  a  suffering  child  from  pain  and  terror  to  the  sane  and  healthy
joy  of  childhood  ?  But  our  Lord  answered  never  a  word,  and  when  urged  to  speak,  his
speech  was  more  discouraging  than  silence.  What  is  it,  then,  which  justifies  this
conduct?     It  may  have  been  his  meaning  from  the  first  to  grant  the  petition,  and  he


HR  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xt.  1—89,


put  the  difficulties  in  a  haret  form  that  the  woman  might  apprehend  the  yalne  of  what
she  asked.  But  what  were  the  difficulties?  His  own  reason  was  that  he  wag  not  sent
to  any  but  Israelites.  He  sent  his  apostles  to  eTery  creature,  but  his  own  ministry  was
confined  to  Israel.  This  people  had  been  the  object  of  a  constant  enriching  care  for
many  generations,  that  at  length  the  Messiah  might  come  to  them  and  through  them
bless  the  world ;  and  to  act  in  the  end  as  if  this  made  no  difference  would  have  been
for  God  to  stultify  himself.  It  is  only  after  the  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile
has  been  cordially  accepted  by  the  woman  that  her  request  is  granted.  In  humbly  and
faithfully  taking  her  place  among  the  dogs,  ihe  took  her  place  among  the  children  of
faithful  Abraham.  She  had  the  faith  which  was  the  best  possession  of  the  Jew,  and
for  the  sake  of  which  all  their  training  had  been  given.    Observe —

I.  Heb  humilitt.  Radically  it  was  her  humility  which  made  her  victorious.
Quick  in  intellect  and  brilliant;  resolute,  capable,  and  even  audacious,  in  obtaining
what  she  set  her  heart  on,  she  was  yet  humble.  She  was  of  the  meek  who  inherit  the
earth.

n.  It  was  hbb  faith  to  whioh  dub  Lobd  dbew  attention.  This  woman  alone
was  victorious  over  him  in  debate ;  but  it  is  not  her  cleverness,  but  her  faith,  which
delighted  him  when  she  snared  him  in  his  own  words — her  faith  in  his  inability  to
refuse  to  do  a  kindness,  and  in  his  God-given  power  to  do  it.

IIL  Wk  sometimes,  like  this  woman,  ask  God  fob  bomethino  which  he  mighi

tell  nS  IN  THE  FIBBT  INSTAMOE  IT  WAS  NOT  LAWFUL   FOB  HIH  TO  DO.      We  break  SOme

natural  law,  physical  or  moral,  and,  broken-hearted  at  the  consequences,  we  cry  to  Qoi.
But  he  answers  us  never  a  word ;  there  is  no  sign  that  we  have  spoken.  We  feel  that
we  are  receiving  the  wages  of  sin.  Gradually  and  painfully  and  with  deep  humility  we
accept  the  position  we  have  brought  ourselves  into,  and  learn  to  say,  "  It  is  Ijetter  I
shoidd  learn  the  rigour  of  this  perfect  and  holy  order  of  things  than  that  I  should  at
once  have  all  I  ask  for."

IV.  Bbginnino  with  this  woman  bt  uhabnino  how  little  olaim  we  have,  wb
HOST  with  heb  hold  TO  Chbist  till  hb  siyeb  ns  ALL  WB  NEED.  Can  you  have  such
reason  to  think  you  are  not  among  Christ's  people  as  this  woman  had  ?  Did  he  not
^ainly  tell  her  that  he  was  not  sent  to  her,  and  yet  in  the  end  yield  all  to  her  ?
Yon  will  find  that  by  submitting  yourself  humbly  to  the  laws  yon  have  broken,  and  to
him  whose  laws  they  are,  you  do  pass  into  a  new  condition,  and  other  laws  begin  to
work  in  your  favour.

Y.  PaBENTS  must  BB  ENOODBAOED  bt  THB  SUOOBBS  of  this  HOTHEB's  INTEBOEBaiON.

You  may  be  able  to  make  nothing  of  your  child  that  strangely  perplexes  you  by  bis
conduct,  but  Christ  can  make  something  of  him.

In  conclusion,  have  you  sufficiently  considered  the  blessedness  of  succeeding  with
Christ,  of  getting  from  him  what  you  desire?     He  assures  you  that  importunate

grayer  prevails.  Whatever  great  trouble,  he  bids  you  come  to  him.  He  knows  human
fe  well,  and  does  not  underrate  its  difficulty.  He  assures  you  he  can  help  you.  He
•sks  for  no  certificate  of  character.  If  you  feel  no  want  he  can  relieve,  is  not  this
itself  a  reason  for  seeking  him ;  a  proof  that  you  are  benumbed  in  spirit,  and  need  the
life  he  offers  ?—D.

Vers.  29 — 39. — Feeding  o/the/our  thousand.  Matthew  puts  side  by  side  with  miracles
of  healing  this  miracle  of  feeding  the  four  thousand,  as  u  inviting  us  to  read  them  in
the  light  they  reflect  upon  each  other.  1.  The  first  point  of  contrast  is  that,  while  the
healing  origmatci  in  the  dttir*  of  the  multitude  who  sought  our  Lord's  help,  the  feeding
originated  with  him,  he  beteg  the  first  to  notice  the  faint  looks  of  many  of  the  people.
It  were  much  to  receive  at  (Prist's  hand  all  we  ask  for ;  but,  in  fact,  we  receive  a  great
deal  more.  This  miracle  is  a  concrete  proof  that  God  knows  what  we  have  need  of
before  we  ask  him,  and  that  the  Creator  cares  for  his  creature  with  a  tenderness  and
sympathy  which  no  human  relationship  rivals.  2.  As  the  one  class  of  miracles  exhibits
Christ's  power  to  cure,  the  other  reveals  his  power  to  prevent,  human  sutTering.  As  it
b  a  lowered  vitality  that  gives  disease  its  opportunity,  so  the  only  preservative  against
■ny  form  of  sin  is  a  strong  spiritual  life.  Perhaps  the  gospel  has  come  to  be  looked  on
too  exclusively  as  a  remedial  scheme,  and  too  little  as  the  means  of  maintaining  a
luslthy  condition  of  spirit.    It  is  men  who  have  thirsted  for  righteousness  all  their


OH.  XV.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  117

lives  who  have  Berved  their  generation  beat ;  and  while  we  should  not  do  less  for  the
reclamation  of  the  abandoned,  we  should  rectify  the  balance  by  doing  more  to  preserve
the  young  from  the  misery  of  a  wasted  life.  For  every  oreeour  Lord  healed,  he  fed  ten.
He  presents  himself  not  only  and  always  as  Medicine,  but  also  as  Food — as  the  Bread
that  nourishes  true  and  eternal  life.    Bread  a  fit  symbol,  as  showing —

L  Thk  universal  need  op  Christ  and  his  applioabelitt  to  au..  From  the
first  God  saw  that  bo  surely  as  we  should  all  hunger  and  need  bread,  so  surely  shonld
we  need  Christ  if  our  souls  were  to  live.  In  all  that  Christ  calls  us  to,  he  is  not  putting
a  strain  on  our  natures,  but  simply  recalling  us  to  that  condition  in  which  alone  we  can
Mve  with  the  ease  and  comfort  of  health,  and  in  which  alone  we  can  finally  and  perraa-
nontly  delight.

II.  Chbkt  aivEs  LIFE  TO  THE  WORLD  THROUGH  HiB  DISCIPLES.  He  distributed  to  the
disciples,  and  the  disciples  to  them  that  were  set  down.  It  is  a  very  grave  truth  that
every  one  of  us  who  has  himself  received  spiritual  life  from  Christ  has  thereby  in
possession  what  may  give  life  to  many  human  souls.  We  may  give  or  withhold,  but  it
is  given  not  only  to  be  consumed,  but  to  be  distributed.  It  is  not  the  privilege  of  any
one  class  of  disciples,  but  of  all.

III.  Faith  in  Jesus  Chbist  as  the  Source  of  life  ib  bequibite  both  fob
REOETvnra  and  impabtino  spmrruAL  life.  That  bread  was  offered  was  nothing ;  each
man  must  use  it  for  himself.  Had  any  scoffed  at  the  idea  of  our  Lord's  feeding  the
multitude  with  the  few  loaves  he  had  before  him,  or  refused  to  believe  that  bread  so
prodnced  could  have  any  nourishment  in  it,  they  must  have  remained  unfed  and  faint.
And  it  must  have  been  trying  to  the  disciples  to  do  as  they  were  bid,  and  advance  each
man  to  his  separate  hundred  with  his  morsel  of  bread.  But  if  they  gave  cautiously  and
sparingly  to  the  first,  they  must  soon  have  felt  rebuked  and  their  hearts  enlarged.  How-
ever slender  our  attainments  or  our  power  of  influencing  others,  let  us  not  be  afraid  of
attempting  to  nourish  some  other  soul;  it  is  not  what  we  have,  but  what  Christ  makes
of  it,  &at  is  to  do  good.

IV.  OoHSiDEB  the  abundance  AND  THE  ECONOMY  OF  Cheist's  peoviding.  Many
might  have  despised  to  gather  up  the  broken  bread  and  bits  of  fish ;  have  thought  they
must  be  hungry  indeed  who  would  use  such  food.  Yes,  and  it  is  only  the  hungry  soul
God  promises  to  satisfy.  His  food  is  plain,  but  it  is  nutritious,  and  they  who  must
have  fresh  food  or  will  take  none  will  be  disappointed.

V.  The  ohabaoteb  in  which  Christ  here  afpeabb  ib  one  which  wb  may
BEUEHBEB  ALWAYS.  Now,  Bs  then,  he  is  considerate  of  our  wants,  mindful  of  our  infir-
mities, quick  to  calculate  our  worldly  prospects,  and  provide  for  us ;  simple,  practical,
earnest  in  his  love.  In  his  presence  none  need  lack  any  good  thing.  "  Hearken  dili-
gently unto  me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in
fatness."— D.

Vers.  1—2/0.— Ccuui$try  rmroved.  lue  fame  of  the  mintcles  and  ministry  of  Jesus
passed  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  whence  came  certain  Pharisees  and  scribes,  who  were
probably  sent  to  watch  him,  and  find  matter  of  accusation  against  him  (cf.  ch.  xiii.
15,  16).  "  Jerusalem— the  high-school  of  hypocrisy.  Rabbi  Nathan  says,  'If  the
hypocrites  were  divided  into  ten  parts,  idne  would  be  found  in  Jerasaleiii,  and  one  in
the  world  beside ' "  (Stier).  These  eealoti  set  up  the  traditions  of  the  elders  against  the
character  and  claims  of  Jesus.  Their  accusation  is  contained  in  the  question,  "Why
do  thy  disciples,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  2).  The  reply  takes  the  form  of  a  retort,  an  admonition,
and  an  exposition  ;  the  former  being  hurled  at  the  accusers,  and  the  latter  given  for
the  edification  of  disciples  and  the  people.  „   ,  .

I.  The  betobt.  "  Why  do  ye  transgress  the  commandment  of  Gbd  because  of
your  tradition?"  1.  I7te  appeal  wat  foUoiued  up  hy  an  example.  (1)  The  instance
cited  is  their  violation  of  the  fifth  commandment  This  enjoined,  under  the  term
"honour,"  a  dutiful  respect  to  parents  in  taking  care  of  and  supporting  them  (cf.  Prov.
iii.  9 ;  Numb,  ixiii.  17 ;  1  Tim.  v.  3,  17).  The  neglect  of  parents  is  included  under  the
expression  cursing  them,  and  was,  according  to  the  Law,  a  crime  so  heinous  as  to  be
punishable  with  death  (cf.  ver.  4 ;  Exod.  xxi.  17).  Let  our  youth  remember  this.
(2)  Under  pretext  of  zeal  for  God  the  casuists  manajred  to  release  themselves  rom
thu  obligation.     The  device  was  to  make  a  vow  to  devote  to  the  temple  treasury  that


118  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,    [ch.  xv.  1— 39

which  their  parents  might  otherwise  claim  from  them  (see  Mark  vii.  11).  In  this
wickedness  tViey  sheltered  themselvefl  under  the  authority  of  their  traditions,  and  thus
made  void  the  Law  of  God.  2.  This  was  a  triumphant  defence  of  the  duciples.  (1)  It
showed  that  the  traditions  in  question  were  vicious,  and  therefore  that  no  blame
could  justly  be  laid  to  the  account  of  the  disciples  for  disregarding  them.  It  showed
that  they  were,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  commended  for  protesting  against  them.  If  this-
was  the  worst  thing  alleged  against  them,  they  must  have  conducted  themselves
inoffensively.  (2)  It  was  all  the  more  incumbent  upon  the  disciples  to  protest,  since
the  Jewish  doctors  affirmed  that  the  matter  of  their  traditions  had  been  originally
delivered  by  God  himself  to  Moses,  and  from  him  orally  transmitted ;  that  they  are
more  excellent  than,  and  consequently  of  superior  obligation  to,  the  Law  itself.  (3)
Note :  The  Council  of  Trent  claims  for  the  Romish  traditions  that  "  they  are  to  be
held  with  the  same  idous  affection  and  reverence"  as  the  Holy  Scriptures  (sess.  4,  deer.
i).  Brooks  compares  this  addition  of  tradition  to  Scripture  to  putting  paint  upon  a
diamond.  Luther  likens  the  interpretation  of  Scripture  by  tradition  to  the  straining
of  milk  through  a  coal-sack.  3.  It  was  a  heavy  impeachment  of  the  accusers.  (1)  It  put
them  to  the  worse.  Whether  or  not  the  disciples  had  transgressed,  their  accusers  are
accused  of  being  the  chief  transgressors.  Those  who  have  the  beam  in  their  own  eye
are  not  the  persons  to  take  the  mote  out  of  their  brother's  eye.  Those  who  live  in
glass  houses  should  not  throw  stones.  The  Pharisees  of  every  religious  community
take  more  pleasure  in  blaming  others  than  in  amending  themselves.  (2)  It  branded
ihem  as  hypocrites.  What  else  are  they  who,  under  pretence  of  zeal  for  God,  transgress
his  holy  Law  ?  They  honoured  him  with  the  lip  while  their  heart  was  far  from  him.
Their  heartless  worship  was  "  vain  " — such  as  God  could  not  approve.  What  vanity
there  is  in  the  major  portion  of  .the  religion  of  every  age  and  clime  (see  Jas.  i.  26)!

II.  The  admonition.  This  was  addressed  to  the  disciples.  "  Then  came  the  dis-
ciples," etc.  (vers.  12—14).  1.  The  doom  of  the  hypocrite  is  declared.  (1)  They  were
offended  at  the  truth.  This  was  obvious  to  the  disciples.  Their  pride  was  mortified.
They  were  silenced.  They  had  no  reply.  They  nursed  their  wrath.  Plain  speaking
never  fails  to  offend  the  sinner  who  is  unwilling  to  repent.  (2)  They  were  blinded  by
the  light.  Their  blindness  was  not  involuntary  ignorance,  but  voluntary  error.  They
shut  their  eyes  against  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  were  in  consequence  judicially
blinded.  So  it  fell  out  according  to  the  prediction  in  Isaiah  (see  context  in  the
prophet,  Isa.  xxix.  14).  (3)  They  were  doomed  to  be  rooted  out  of  the  Church  of  God.
He  would  not  own  them  as  his  planting  (cf.  Isa.  xli.  19 ;  John  xv.  2).  The  sect  of  the
Pharisees  did  not  survive  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Every  spurious  plant  will  be
rooted  out  of  the  Church  in  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  (see  ch.  xiii.  30).  (4)  Their
membership  will  be  transferred  to  the  Church  of  tlie  devil  The  blind  guides  will  fall
into  a  pit  (see  John  ix.  40 ;  Rom.  ii.  19,  20).  The  well  in  the  figure  represents
Gehenna.  The  pit  of  falsehood  is  the  prelude  to  the  pit  of  perdition.  2.  Their  dupes
will  share  their  doom.  (1)  So  it  proved.  The  blinded  nation  were  led  on  to  crucify
their  King,  and  to  blaspheme  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  were,  together  with  their  guides,
rooted  out  by  the  Romans  (cf.  Jer.  xiv.  15,  16 ;  xx.  6).  "  How  many  men  have  ruined
their  estates  by  suretyship  for  others!  But  of  all  suretyship  none  is  so  dangerous  as
spiritual  suretyship.  He  that  pins  his  faith  upon  another  man's  sleeve  knows  not
whither  he  will  carry  it"  (Plavel).  (2)  The  crime  and  consequences  of  illegal
impositions  will  be  charged  upon  those  who  maintain  as  well  as  upon  those  who
invent  them  (see  Micah  vi.  16).  God  suffers  one  man  to  lead  many  to  ruin,  (o)  A
rich  profligate.  (6)  An  infidel,  (c)  A  man  of  learning,  (d)  A  politician.  (e)  A
teacher  of  heresy  or  of  levity.  "  If  both  fall  together  into  the  ditch,  the  blind  leaders
will  fall  undermost,  and  have  the  worst  of  it "  (Henry).  But  that  wiU  be  slender
comfort  to  the  sufferers  in  the  crush  that  will  follow.  (3)  The  moral,  then,  is,  "  Let
them  alone."  Avoid  false  teachers.  Have  no  communion  with  them.  A  literal
attention  to  these  words  of  Christ  produced  the  Reformation  (see  Hos.  iv.  17 ;
1  Thess.  ii.  14, 16).  Be  not  satisfied  with  attending  a  place  of  worship.  See  that
the  teaching  is  of  God  (cf.  1  John  iv.  1).  None  but  the  bUnd  will  submit  to  be  led  by
the  blind.

III.  The  bxpobition.  This  was  given  alike  to  the  disciples  and  the  people  (vers.
10, 11, 15 — ^20).    1.  It  distinguishes  between  Moses  and  the  eldert.    (1)  The  traditions


OH.  XY.  1—39.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  119

were  human.  "  The  precepts  of  men,"  not  to  he  confounded  with  the  "  doctrines  "  v{
God.  Moses  made  a  distinction  in  meats — the  clean  and  unclean — hut  prescrihed
nothing  respecting  the  eating  with  unwashen  hands.  This  was  a  refinement  of  the
elders.  The  ground  of  it  was  the  possibility  of  the  hands  having  touched  something
that  might  communicate  legal  uncleauness,  and  the  contention  that,  since  the  Jews,
like  other  Orientals,  made  great  use  of  their  fingers  in  eating,  the  uncleauness  would
he  communicated  to  the  food  ;  then  the  food,  taken  into  the  system  and  assimilated,
would  defile  the  whole  body.  Hence  such  precepts  as  this  of  the  Rabbi  Akiba  :  "  He
that  takes  meat  with  unwashen  hands  is  worthy  of  death."  (2)  With  these  refine^
ments  the  disciples  had  no  sympathy.  They  rejected  the  casuistry  that  would  make
void  the  law  of  the  fifth  commandment.  They  did  not  scruple  to  eat  with  unwashen
hands.  (3)  But  the  multitude  still  needed  enlightenment  on  this  point.  And  how
many  nowadays  scruple  to  communicate  with  unwashed  hands,  but  scruple  not  to
communicate  with  unwashed  consciences!  (Quesnel).  2.  It  distinguishes  hetween  the
letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  Law.  (1)  In  the  letter  those  who  ate  of  unclean  meat  were
unclean  ;  hut  then  the  uncleanness  was  that  of  the  meat ;  not  moral,  but  ceremonial.
Moreover,  the  Mosaic  distinction  of  meats  was  not  instituted  for  its  own  sake,  bnt  tu
point  out  the  distinction  hetween  moral  good  and  evil.  Hence,  when  the  ceremonial
law  ceased  to  serve  this  purpose,  it  became  useless.  (2)  These  principles  were  now
enunciated  by  Christ,  and  so  commenced  that  spiritual  teaching  respecting  the  war
between  the  flesh  and  Spirit  unfolded  in  the  writings  of  Paul  (of.  Rom.  vii.  18,  19 ;
viii.  1,  2  ;  Gal.  v.  16 — 21).  (3)  This  was  what  Peter  could  not  understand  when  he
"answered  and  said,  Declare  unto  us  this  parable"  (ver.  15).  He  could  scarcely
believe  his  ears  that  a  distinction  in  meats,  in  the  abstract,  availed  nothing.  His
prejudices  darkened  his  understanding ;  nor  were  they  dispersed  until  nine  years  later,
when  he  received  the  vision  of  the  sheet  (see  Acts  x.  15,  28).  (4)  The  spirit  of  the
Law,  then,  is  the  all-important  matter.  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth,  but  that
which  Cometh  out  of  the  heart.  In  religion  the  heart  is  everything.  Religion  is  the
union  of  the  heart  with  God.  The  teaching  of  Christ  here  (o)  recognizes  original  sin.
"  Temptations  and  occasions  put  nothing  into  a  man,  but  only  draw  out  what  is  in
him  before "  (Dr.  Owen).  (6)  Before  evil  becomes  sin  it  must  have  the  sanction  of
the  understanding  (see  1  John  iiL  4). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  21 — 28. — Oreat  faith.  So  the  faith  of  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman  is  described
by  the  Lord.     The  elements  of  that  great  faith  are  evident  in  the  narrative.

I.  Gbeat  faith  is  clbak-sighted.  1.  In  the  discernment  of  evil.  (1)  This  woman
saw  that  her  daughter  was  possessed  of  a  devil ;  that  her  faculties  were  under  the  power
of  an  evil  spirit.  Her  eyes  were  not  blinded  by  maternal  partiality.  She  clearly
apprehended  the  terrible  fact.  Do  Christian  parents  ever  fail  to  discern  that  their
unchristian  children  are  vexed  in  spirit  with  a  proud  devil,  an  unclean  devil,  a  malicious
devil  ?  (2)  She  saw  that  her  daughter  was  "  grievously  vexed."  The  demon,  in  this
case,  was  of  extraordinary  malignity.  Note :  As  in  evil  men,  so  in  devils,  there  are
varieties  and  degrees  of  malignity.  Or  the  demon  in  this  case  had  unusual  scope
allowed  him  for  the  exertion  of  his  malignity.  2.  In  the  discernment  of  the  cure.  (1)
This  woman  saw  that  the  cure  for  her  daughter  was  not  within  the  ordinary  physicians'
skill.  She  may  have  come  to  this  conclusion  through  experience.  She  may  have  come
at  it  by  reasoning.  For  devils  are  stronger  than  men.  (2)  She  saw  it  in  the  power
of  God.  That  power  devils  must  acknowledge.  That  power  she  sought  in  Jesus.
When  she  called  him  "  Lord,"  she  meant  more  than  the  complimentary  Sir.  She
identified  him  as  the  Christ;  for  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  title  "Son  of  David."
(8)  She  saw  it  in  the  mercy  of  God.  The  Messiah  of  prophecy  is  full  of  mercy.  The
fame  of  Jesus  was  in  accordance  with  the  promises.    "  Mercy,"  therefore,  was  her  plea.

II.  Gebat  taith  is  humblb.  1.  In  conduct.  (1)  This  woman  cried  for  "  mercy."
Here  was  no  plea  of  right.  Her  hope  was  in  the  sympathy  of  a  merciful  heart.
Nothing  can  touch  that  like  the  cry  of  misery.  (2)  She  cried  "  after  "  him  (ver.  23)—
followed  at  a  distance,  as  unworthy  to  come  too  near.  As  a  daughter  of  Canaan,  her
behaviour  accorded  with  the  condition  of  a  servant  (see  Gen.  ix.  26).  (3)  When  she
did  come  near,  "  she  came  and  worshipped  him,  saying.  Lord,  help  me.  In  her  the
humble  attitude  of  worship  expressed  truly  its  humble  spirit.    2.  In  temper.    (1)  bh«


120  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,    [oh.  xv.  1—89

consented  to  the  appellation  of  "  dog."  «  Triitli,  Lord,"  was  ber  humble  reply.  "  Dog"
here  is  opposed  to  "  sheep."  The  clean  animal  in  the  Law  was  the  type  of  the  Israelite ;
the  unclean,  of  the  Gentile.  She  was  a  "Gh-eek"  or  Gentile,  "a  Syro-Phoenioian  by
race  "  (Mark  vii.  25).  She  does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  proselyte.  (2)  It  does  not
hence  loUow,  however,  that  she  was  an  idolater.  Hiram,  a  king  of  her  nation,  had  a
hand  in  building  the  temple  of  Solomon,  and  was  a  lover  of  David,  and  bleseed  the  Gh)d
of  Israel  (see  1  Kings  v.  7).  Zarephath,  where  dwelt  the  worthy  widow  in  the  days  of
Elijah,  was  in  the  land  of  Sidon  (see  1  Kings  xvii.  9  ;  Luke  iv.  25).  Many  Gentiles  in
those  parts  respected  Judaism,  and  looked  for  the  promised  Messiah.  (3)  If  she
understood  the  spirit  of  the  Law,  and  the  force  of  the  promise  which  makes  clean  the
Gentile  believer,  and  constitutes  him  the  child  of  Abraham's  faith,  she  did  not  plead
this.  She  accepted  the  title  of  "  dog "  in  its  spiritual  as  well  as  in  its  ceremonial
signification.    Note :  Modesty  is  no  restriction  to  greatDess  of  faith  (cf.  ch.  viii.  8,  9).

III.  Great  ^aith  ib  eabnzst.  1.  It  will  not  miss  an  opportunity.  (1)  Here  was
a  gnlden  opportunity.  Jesus  was  "in  the  parts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon."  He  was  "a
Minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  Gud  "  (Bom.  zv.  8),  yet  went  to  the  limits
of  his  commission  to  cast  a  look  of  pity  over  the  boundary.  (2)  Hearing  of  bis  vicinity
she  "came  out."  She  did  not  wait  until  Jesus  should  cross  over  the  border-land.
Had  she  done  so,  she  would  have  missed  her  opportunity.  Note :  Many  lose  their
souls  by  devising  opportunities  instead  of  accepting  those  provided  for  them  by  GoiL
(3)  Abram  had  to  come  out  of  Ur  in  order  to  his  inheriting  Canaan.  This  woman  bad
to  come  out  of  Phoenicia  to  inherit  the  blessing  of  Israel.  So  must  the  sinner  leave  his
sins  in  order  to  find  salvation.  If  be  be  in  earnest  he  will  not  miss  his  opportunity.
2.  Its  heart  is  in  its  cause.  (1)  This  woman  made  her  daughter's  case  her  own.  Her
cry  was,  "  Have  mercy  upon  me."  Her  plea  was  as  though  she  herself  was  sorely
vexed  with  the  demon  that  possessed  her  child.  So  she  sought  relief  as  for  herselt.
"  Lord,  help  me."  (2)  Her  importunity  moved  the  disciples  to  plead  for  her :  "  Send
her  away;  for  she  crieth  after  us."  "0  disciples  1  and  does  the.  voice  of  prayer  trouble
you  ?  How  little  at  present  do  ye  resemble  the  Master  I  We  never  read  of  his  being
troubled  with  the  cry  of  the  poor  and  needy.  And  this  is  all  that  you  have  to  urge,
is  it  ?  Your  charity  amounts  to  just  so  much  as  that  of  some  wealthy  persons,  who
give  a  poor  man  a  penny,  not  out  of  compassion,  but  in  order  to  get  rid  of  him  1 "
(A,  Puller).  But  whether  the  motive  of  the  disciples  was  that  of  the  unjust  judge  or
something  more  worthy  of  them,  the  earnestness  of  the  woman  cannot  be  mistaken.

IV.  Great  faith  is  pebsistent.  1.  It  re/uses  discouragement.  (1)  Jesus  "  answered
her  not  a  word; "  still  she  cried.  He  knew  the  quality  of  her  faith.  We  must  no
construe  delay  in  answering  our  prayers  into  a  refusal  to  answer  them.  It  may  be  to
draw  out  the  quality  of  our  faith.  Gk>d  proves  that  he  may  improve  our  faith.  (2)
Jesus  refused  the  intercession  of  his  disciples  for  her;  still  she  cried.  "He  answered
her  and  said,  I  am  not  sent  but  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  This  silenced
the  disciples ;  not  so  the  woman.  (3)  Jesus  "  entered  into  a  house,  and  would  have  no
man  know  it,"  apparently  to  avoid  her  importunity.  But  "  he  could  not  be  hid,"  for
this  woman  followed  him,  and  then  "  fell  down  at  his  feet "  (see  Mark  vii.  24).  (4)
Jesus  said,  "  It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  tc  the  dogs."  This
was  the  culminating  point.  2.  In  the  very  heart  of  discouragement  it  finds  encourage-
ment. (1)  Never  for  a  moment  did  she  lose  sight  of  her  great  argument,  viz.  that
hers  was  the  appeal  of  misery  to  Mercy  itself.  The  more  sensibly  we  feel  the  burden
the  more  resolutely  we  pray  for  its  removal.  Christ  himself  in  his  agony  prayed  more
earnestly.  This  plea  of  misery  to  Mercy  remained  in  undiminished  force.  (2)  The
quickness  of  her  faith  could  even  discover  the  presence  of  that  mercy  in  the  tenderness
of  tone  behind  the  sternness  of  expression.  Did  not  Jesus  use  the  diminutive  (Kwdpia),
"  little  dogs  "  ?  Here  was  a  leverage  which  she  adroitly  seized.  The  children  are  familiar
with  the  little  doge,  and  have  no  objection  to  their  eating  the  crumbs  that  fall  from  the
table.  "  The  spirit  of  faith  suggests  the  best  forms  of  prayer  "  (Bengel).  It  is,  more-
over, "  their  master's  table.*'  It  cannot  go  ill  with  the  dogs.  "  There  is  bread  enough
[for  the  children]  and  to  spar*  "  for  the  servants  and  the  dogs  (see  Luke  xv.  17, 19).
A  crumb  of  OhriB^s  iccrcy  is  sufficient  to  expel  a  malign  aut  devil.  (3)  So  faith
triumphed.  "It  resembled  the  river,  which  becomes  enlarged  by  the  dykes  opposed
to  it,  till  at  last  it  sweeps  them  away  "  (A.  Clarke).    "  O  woman."    By  faith  the  dog


OH.  XV.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  121

is  already  transformed  into  the  woman.  "Great  is  thy  faith."  "  Jeaua  admires  this
faith  to  the  end  we  may  admire  and  imitate  it"  (A.  Clarke).  " Be  it  done  unto  thee
even  as  thou  wilt."  There  is  faith  in  willing.  "  And  her  daughter  was  healed  from
that  hour."  Healed  at  her  home  (see  Mark  vii.  30).  (4)  Here  was  a  gleam  of  that  light
which  was  to  lighten  the  Gentiles ;  a  presage  of  that  mercy  to  be  fully  revealed  after
his  death.  Here  also  is  a  proof  that  the  curse  upon  Canaan  was  only  meant  for  those
of  his  race  who  should  follow  his  unbelief.  The  doom  of  corporate  bodies  does  not
necessarily  fall  upon  all  their  individual  members.  True  faith  is  saving  evermore.^
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  29 — 31. — Th«  power  of  Christ.  In  this  narrative  there  is  no  word  of  Christ
recorded ;  yet  the  scene  is  full  of  animation.  It  is  the  animation  of  power.  We  have
in  it —

I.  Chsist  nr  the  foweb  of  his  attbaotion.  1.  He  sat  upon  the  mountain.  (1)
Possibly  Tabor.  "  The  mountain,"  meaning  some  particular  mountain  which  he  was
accustiimed  to  frequent;  for  whenever  it  is  spoken  of  at  a  ticne  when  Jesus  is  in
ffalilee,  it  is  always  distinguished  by  the  article  (cf.  ch.  iv.  18 ;  v.  1 ;  xiii.  54 ;  siv.  23 ;
xxviii.  16).  "I  suppose  it  was  Mount  Tabor"  (Wakefield).  (2)  Mountains  were
symbols  of  powers.  So  they  are  put  for  kingdoms.  Thus  the  powerful  kingdom  of
Babylon  is  described  as  a  "destroying  mountain"  to  be  devoted  to  destruction  (see
Jer.  li.  25).  Places  of  power  and  authority  within  a  kingdom  are  also  compared  to
movmtains  (see  Amos  iv.  1).  Powerful  obstacles  to  the  progress  of  the  gospel  are
described  as  mountains  which  have  to  be  removed  (see  Isa.  x1.  4 ;  zli.  6 ;  xliz.  11).
The  exaltation  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  above  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  is  called  the
establishing  of  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  in  the  top  of  the  mountains  and  its
exaltation  above  the  hills  (see  Isa.  ii.  2;  Micah  iv.  1).  And  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is
described  as  a  little  stone  destined  to  swell  into  a  great  mountain  which  shall  fill  the
whole  earth  (see  Dan.  ii.  35).  (3)  The  attitude  of  Jesua,  seated  upon  this  mountain,
silently  asserted  his  enthronement  above  all  power,  material  and  8|iritual,  secular  and
sacred.  2.  Oreat  multitudes  came  to  him.  (1)  See  them  streaming  out  from  the  sur-
rounding towns  and  villages.  Yet  are  these  but  portents  of  the  millions  through  the
ages  to  be  influenced  by  his  attractive  power  (see  John  xii.  32).  Surely  this  is  that
Shiloh  to  whom  shall  be  the  gathertng  of  the  people  (Gen.  ilix.  10).  (2)  Some  came
to  him.  These  were  the  more  healthy.  It  is  a  sign  of  spiritual  health  when  a  man
can  come  to  Jesus  in  faith.  Conspicuous  amongst  those  who  came  would  be  those
upon  whom,  on  former  occasions,  Jesus  had  shown  miracles  of  healing.  (3)  Others
were  hrought.  These  were  the  diseased  who  could  not  come  without  help.  It  is  the
purest  benevolence  to  bring  to  Jesus,  the  Healer,  in  faith  those  who  are  morally
diseased.  Perhaps  many  who  now  bring  the  sick  were  formerly  themselves  brought
as  sick.     So  the  attractive  power  of  Christ  is  ever  multiplying.

II.  Chbist  in  his  power  of  healing.  1.  Physical  maladies  owned  this  power.
(1)  The  sick  of  all  sorts  were  brought  to  him.  Note :  Sin  has  turned  this  world  into
a  hospital.  (2)  The  spectacle  moved  his  compassion  as  the  accumulation  of  living
misery  was  "  cast  down  at  his  feet."  The  oratory  of  misery  is  eloquent  in  the  ear  ot
mercy.-  (3)  "And  he  healed  them."  Here  was  no  case  so  malignant  as  to  baffle  the
resources  of  this  "reat  Physician.  As  from  the  Mount  of  Beatitudes  Jesus  delivered
in  his  memorable  sermon  lessons  of  wisdom,  so  now  from  this,  probably  the  same
mountain,  he  dispenses  the  blessings  of  his  power.  2.  The  physical  are  typical  of  the
spiritual.  (1)  The  lame.  Lameness  here  is  perhaps  limited  to  the  legs,  and  is  thus
distinguished  from  the  maiming  mentioned  afterwards.  Those  are  ma;ally  lame  whose
walk  or  conduct  is  irregular  or  inconsistent,  or  who  cannot  move  in  the  ways  <.f
righteousness.  (2)  The  dumb.  These  are  also  generally  deaf.  And  there  are  those
who  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  God  calling  them  to  duty ;  and  who  have  not  the  moral
courage  to  confess  the  truth,  or  the  racial  disposition  to  praise  God.  (3)  The  blmd.
Those  the  vision  of  whose  understanding  is  blinded  by  prejudice.  Those  whose
judgment  is  at  fault  through  ignorance,  error,  or  malignity.  Mural  bUndness  is
voluntary,  and  therefore  the  more  difBcult  of  cure  (see  Juhn  ix.  41).  (4)  a  he  maimed.
These  would  include  those  who  had  lost  a  member;  those  who  had  lost  the  use  of  •
member,  as  1^  palsy ;  and  those  whose  limbs  were  disabled  by  distortion  through


122  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDIN(J  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,    [ch.  xv.  1— 39.


disease  or  accident  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  8 ;  Mark  ix.  43).  The  morally  maimed  are  those
whose  faculties  are  impaired  or  obliterated  by  sin.  (5)  " Many  others."  As  devils
are  legion,  so  are  th^ir  possessions.  The  varieties  of  evil  are  legion  as  welt  as  the
number  of  their  victims.  3.  The  miraculotis  is  typical  of  the  spiritual  healing.  (1)
See  now  the  lame  leaping  for  joy  and  walking  steadily  in  the  ways  of  God's  command-
ments. (2)  Listen  now  to  the  dumb  witnessing  for  Christ  and  singing  the  praises  of
the  Saviour.  (3)  Behold  how  the  faculties  and  powers  of  the  maimed  have  been
restored.  Is  theie  not  a  new  creation  here?  (4)  Witness  how  the  blind  eyes  are
opened  to  see  the  wonders  of  God's  Law,  (5)  All  distortions  of  the  soul  are  cured  by
the  power  of  Jesus.

III.  Christ  the  Poweb  of  God.  1.  ThepeopU  glorified  Christ  as  God.  (1)  His
healing  power  was  undoubtedly  the  power  of  God.  For  here  is  the  reproduction  of  a
hand  or  foot  at  a  word  or  touch.  Is  not  this  creative  energy?  What  power  short  of
omnipotence  can  create?  (2)  But  Jesus  wrought  his  miracles  immediately  from  him-
self. In  this  case  he  could  not  have  wrought  by  delegated  power.  Omnipotence
cannot  be  delegated,  for  there  cannot  be  two  Omnipotents.  (3)  How  otherwise,  then,
could  the  people  who  "wondered"  at  the  miracles  glorify  God  without  discerning
Christ  to  be  the  Power  of  God  ?  2.  2%ey  glorified  him  as  "  the  God  of  Israd."  (1)
They  identified  him  as  the  very  God  of  Jacob,  who  in  human  form  wrestled  with  that
patriarch  and  changed  his  name  to  Israel  (cf.  Gen.  xxxii  24 — 30).  (2)  They  identified
him  as  the  God  of  the  covenant  people.  The  same  Miracle- Worker  who  brought  Israel
out  of  Egypt.  The  same  who  gave  them  the  Law  from  Sinai.  The  same  who  estab-
lished tiiem  in  the  land  of  promise.  The  same  who  in  the  Shechinah  enthroned  himself
in  the  temple  as  in  the  palace  of  his  kingdom.  The  same  who  will  restore  again  to
Israel  the  kingdom. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  32 — 39. — The  compassion  of  Jesus.  Having  let  fall  that  crumb  under  the
table,  in  the  parts  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  Jesus  returns  to  make  a  full  feast  for  the  children.
When  he  had  here  performed  miracles  ^f  healing,  he  proceeds  to  the  performance  of
a  miracle  of  feeding.    The  removal  of  evil  is  a  prelude  to  the  communication  of  good.

I.  The  compassion  op  Jesus  is  ebady.  1.  Quick  to  discern  a  need.  (1)  "  I  have
compassion  on  the  multitude,  because  they  continue  with  me  now  three  days,  and  have
nothing  to  eat."  Three  hours,  under  ordinary  conditions,  would  be  a  long  service ;
especially  so  should  the  dinner-hour  be  invaded.  But  here  is  a  service  of  three  days,
in  which  dinner  is  the  last  thought  with  the  congregation.  The  Minister,  however,
able,  and  withal  considerate.  (2)  "  They  have  nothing  to  eat."  This  world  is  a  desert,
where  nothing  can  be  found  to  satisfy  the  soul  of  man,  but  the  salvation  which  Christ
has  purchased.  (3)  Christ  suffered  the  multitude  to  hunger,  as  Israel  of  old,  to  teach
them  great  lessons  (see  Deut.  viii.  3).  That  is  sweet  to  the  hungry  soul  which  the  full
soul  loathes.  Fasting  precedes  feasting.  Hungering  and  thirsting  after  righteousness
is  the  prelude  to  being  satisfied  with  the  bounties  of  God's  table.  2.  Quick  to  provide
against  calamity.  (1)  "  They  may  faint  in  the  way."  Note :  It  is  fittinj;  and  religious
to  give  due  attention  to  the  wants  of  the  body.  "  Our  prayers  should  be  for  a  sound
niind  in  a  sound  body"  (Juvenal).  (2)  The  wants  of  the  body  restrain  the  desires  of
the  spirit.  "The  spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh. is  weak."  Jesus  still,  from  the  loftier
elevation  of  the  mount  of  glory,  compassionately  sees.  (3)  The  compassion  of  Jesus
provides  for  the  everlasting  future.  Through  his  merciful  provisions  we  may  avoid  the
hungering  and  thirsting  of  perdition.  The  spiritual  body  of  the  better  resurrection  will
have  no  wants  to  impair  the  desires  of  the  spirit.  "They  hunger  no  more,  neither
thirst  any  more  "  (see  Eev.  vii.  16 — 18).  So  can  they  "  serve  God  day  and  night  in
his  temple."

II.  The  compassion  of  Jesus  is  potent.  1.  Its  potency  had  been  evinced.  Within
the  year  or  two  of  his  public  ministry  how  many  miracles  had  Jesus  wrought  I  Yet
how  few  that  were  not  miracles  of  mercy  1  2.  Some  of  these  were  recent.  Within
these  "  three  days  "  how  numerous  were  the  "  lame,  blind,  dumb,  maimed,  and  many
others,"  the  healing  of  whom  "astonished"  this  multitude  (see  vers.  30,  31)1  3.  The
potency  of  the  compassion  of  Jesus  was  now  to  receive  additional  illustration.  Here
are  eight  thousand  hungry  people.  Pour  thousand  men, "  besides  women  and  children,"
who  were  probably  as  many  more.    For  the  nourishment  of  these  there  are  "  seven


CH.  XV.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  123


loaves,  and  a  few  small  fishes."  But  "  they  did  all  eat,  and  were  filled ;  "  and  moreover
of  the  fragments  left  there  were  seven  hampers.  The  spyris  was  larger  than  the  cophinus
of  the  miracle.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  load  for  a  porter  (see  Acts  ix.  25).  A
Hamper  of  fragments  for  every  loaf.

III.  The  compassion  op  Jesus  is  disobiminatino.  1.  The  circumstances  of  the
miracle  are  instructive.  (1)  "  He  gave  thanks."  In  the  former  miracle  with  the  five
loaves  "  he  blessed."  It  comes  to  the  same.  Giving  thanks  to  God  is  a  proper  way
to  ask  the  blessing  of  God.  Thanks  given  before  taking  food  (see  Acts  xxvii.  35)
acknowledges  his  past  bounty,  craves  his  blessing  upon  the  present,  anticipates  the
future.  All  good  comes  from  God.  His  blessing  makes  little  go  far.  (2)  He  used  all
the  provision  he  had.  God  works  miracles  only,  and  in  so  far  as  there  is  necessity.
So  are  we  to  use  the  means  Providence  sets  before  us.  When  these  fail,  then  trust  God.
What  his  ordinary  providence  denies  his  miraculous  power  will  supply.  All  spiritual
blessings  are  immediately  from  God,  so  miraculous.  (3)  The  multitude  sat  down  in
faith.  They  saw  but  little.  Yet  took  advice  and  prepared  themselves  for  a  banquet.
So  they  were  all  "  filled."  Those  whom  Jesus  feeds  he  fills  (see  Ps.  Ixv.  4 ;  Isa.  Iv.  2).
Not  only  was  Jesus  from  Bethlehem ;  he  is  Bethlehem  himself,  the  House  of  hread.
(4)  He  then  "  sent  the  multitude  away."  Though  he  had  twice  fed  them,  they  must
not  expect  miracles  to  give  them  daily  food.  Meanwhile  he  himself  entered  the  boat
and  came  to  Magdala.  He  generally  withdrew  after  working  a  miracle,  lest  the  people
should  attempt  to  raise  a  sedition  and  make  him  a  King  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  22 ;  John  v\.  15).
How  diffeient  from  the  conduct  of  a  pseudo-Messiah  I  2.  There  a/re  lessons  in  the
service  of  the  disciples.  (1)  To  them  he  first  expressed  his  tender  sympathy  for  the
people.  This  was  a  mark  of  his  friendship.  The  disciples  of  Christ  know  most  of  his
goodness.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him  "  (cf.  Gen.  xviii.  17 —
19;  Ps.  XXV.  14;  Amos  iii.  7;  John  vii.  17;  xv.  15).  (2)  The  communicatioQ  was
also  intended  to  quicken  their  compassions,  to  teach  them  generosity,  and  to  strengthen
their  faith.  Their  answer  showed  that  they  needed  the  lesson,  "  Whence  should  we
have  so  many  loaves,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  33).  "  They  walked  in  a  world  of  wonders,  spiritual
and  physical,  where  they  felt  strange,  until  the  Holy  Ghost  came  and  brought  to  their
minds  all  that  Christ  had  done"  (Olshausen,  John  xiv.  26).  Forgettini;  former  experi-
ence leaves  us  in  present  doubt.  Here  is  no  iiig4ardliness  of  to-day  in  forethought  for
to-morrow.  (3)  The  disciples  had  the  custody  of  the  provisions.  To  them  also  is
committed  the  custody  of  the  bread  of  God's  Word.  They  have  had  to  shield  it  from
the  vigilance  of  the  anti-Christian  destroyer.  (4)  They  are  the  dispensers  of  the  Word
of  grace  for  (he  nouiishmeut  of  the  world.  In  their  hands  it  multiplies  both  in  the
dispensing  and  in  the  store. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  right  to  reproach  others.  Though  the  address  of  these  visitors  is  put
in  the  form  of  a  question,  it  is  not  really  an  inquiry,  it  is  a  reproach.  Therefore  it  was
properly  met,  not  by  an  explanation,  but  by  another  question,  which  brought  to  others'
view,  if  not  to  their  own,  their  bad  mind  and  intent.  These  Pharisees  could  see  clearly
enough  what  they  thought  was  a  "  mote  "  in  the  eye  of  Jesus.  They  must  be  made  to
feel  the  "  beam  "  that  was  in  their  own  eye.  Who  were  these  men,  and  what  right
had  they  to  reproach  Jesus  ?  The  Sanhedrin  at  Jerusalem  regarded  itself  as  the
supreme  ecclesiastical  authority  in  the  land,  whose  approval  every  teacher  should
secure,  and  whose  inquiries  every  would-be  teacher  must  look  for.  Both  John
Baptist  and  Jesus  acted  in  perfect  independence  of  this  central  authority.  Both  were
subject  to  its  ofBcial  inquiries.  Of  John  we  are  told  (John  i.  19),  "  The  Jews  sent
priests  and  Levites  from  Jerusalem  to  ask  him.  Who  ait  thou  ?  "  John  answered  their
inquiries  in  a  very  patient  fashion.  Jesus  was  sterner  in  his  dealings  with  them,  and
denied  their  right,  or  their  fitness,  to  make  any  such  inquiries,  which  were  but  veiled
reproaches.  .

L  AuTHOBiTT  MAY  GIVE  A  EIGHT  TO  EEPBOACH.  The  natural  authority  of  the
parent ;  and  the  social  authority  of  the  master  and  the  king.  But  the  authority  must
be  rightly  grounded.  It  must  not  rest  on  mere  self-assertion,  and  it  must  be  duly
recognized  and  accepted.  What  authority  could  such  a  council  as  the  Sanhedrin  have
over  one  who  was  a  Prophet,  a  heaven-sent  Messenger  ?  By  all  Israelite  prmciples,
he  had  the  authority,  and  they  should  have  heeded  him.


124  THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATT  FIE  W.    [oh.  xv.  1—39.

(I.  SUPERIOBITT  MAT  GIVE  A  RIGHT  TO  KEPEOAOH.  Superior  knowledge;  superior
character.  The  competent  man  may  reproach  us,  the  saintly  man  may  reproach  us.
Then  had  these  visitors  from  Jerusalem  either  of  these  forms  of  right  to  reproach  ?  Were
they  superiors  of  Christ  in  the  knowledge  of  Divine  things?  Were  they  superiors  of
Christ  in  holy  living  ?  This  at  least  may  at  once  he  tested.  If  they  were  really  holy
they  would  bo  jealous  of  God's  honour  and  God's  claims.  That  they  were  only  sham
holy,  our  Lord  made  clear  enough  hy  his  searching  question  to  them.  They  cared
for  forms  and  ceremonies,  they  cared  little  or  nothing  for  truth,  or  righteousness,  or
charity.    They  would  reproach  another ;  they  should  liave  reproached  themselves.

III.  Love  may  give  a  right  to  beproach.  No  man  rigjhtly  reproaches  unless  he
loves.  No  man  well  receives  reproach  save  from  those  whom  he  is  sure  are  full  of
love  to  him.  The  vital  wrong  in  the  reproach  of  the  text  is  this — there  is  no  lov»  in
it.— E.T.

Ver.  6. — Schemea/or  ihirhing  obligation.  Human  relationships  involve  ohligationg.
Oiir  relations  with  God  bring  the  supreme  obligations.  But  here  is  the  patent  fact —
response  to  our  obligations  toward  God  always  carries  with  it  response  to  our  natural
obligations  toward  man.  The  pious  man  cannot  be  pious  if  he  is  unfaithful  And
unkind  to  his  father  and  mother.  All  the  professions  men  ever  made  would  form  no
excuse  for  the  neglect  of  our  natural  duties  to  our  parents.  And  this  tests  the  seeming
religiousness  of  our  Lord's  time.  Men  might  be  very  pious,  but  were  they  shirking
their  natural  obligations  ?  We  can  well  imagine  the  indignation  of  our  Lord  when  he
found  the  misery  that  the  shameless  system  of  "  corban  "  was  working.  A  man  wanted
to  shirk  all  responsibility  for  the  well-being  of  his  parents,  and  yet  keep  the  public
repute  of  being  a  pious  man ;  so  he  brought  a  gift  to  the  priest,  in  presenting  it  used  a
particular  formula,  and  wiped  out  all  his  obligations.  The  false  religious  sentiment  .uf
those  times  actually  led  to  men's  regarding  such  a  man  as  extra  piuus.  St.  Paul  is
severe,  with  a  very  righteous  severity,  on  such  wickedness:  "  If  any  provide  not  for  his
own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse
than  an  infidel"  (1  Tim.  v.  8).

I.  Schemes  devised  by  belfishnebb.  These  are  specially  hateful  in  relation  to
parents,  because  of  their  self-denials  for  our  sakes  in  our  earliest  years.  They  take
such  forms  as:  1.  Leaving  the  neighbourhood  or  the  coimtry.  2.  Spending  all  a
man  has  on  liis  own  gratification.  3.  Delaying  present  help  under  plea  of  the  excuses
that  it  will  be  wanted  much  more  by-and-by.  Selfish  souls  are  marvellously  clever
at  making  excuses.

II.  Schemes  devised  by  temper.  There  arise  quarrellings  and  disputings  in
families,  and  these  are  made  into  reasons  for  refusing  to  fulfil  natural  obligations.  It
may  even  be  that  the  conduct  and  character  of  parents  make  us  angry,  and  lead  us  to
tlireaten  the  withdrawal  of  our  help.  Character  may  make  advisable  readjustments  of
our  ways  of  meeting  our  obligations,  but  even  bad  character  cannot  excuse  our  shirking
them.

III.  Schemes  devised  by  spurious  piety.  Illustrate  by  a  man  who  excuses  his
neglect  of  his  father  and  mother  by  saying  that  he  has  had  to  give,  such  a  large  sub-
scription to  the  new  church.  Honourably  meeting  our  human  obligations  is  the  sign
and  expression  of  piety.  He  deceives  himself  who  claims  to  serve  God  while  he  is  not
doing  his  duty  to  his  fellow-men. — R.  T.

Ver.  6. — The  evil  influence  of  man-made  rules.  "  Thus  have  ye  made  the  command-
ment of  God  of  none  eifect  by  your  tradition."  Sincerely  enough,  and  with  a  view  to
helping  the  people  to  apply  the  revealed  principles  of  truth  and  duty,  the  national
teachers  had  begun  to  supply  commentaries  on,  and  applications  of,  the  Holy  Scriptures.
These  became  ever  more  and  more  elaborate ;  controversies  were  excited  by  them,  and
an  authority  was  claimed  for  the  minute,  man-made  rule  rather  than  for  the  compre-
hensive and  searching  principle.  One  part  of  our  Lord's  mission  was  to  liberate  men
from  the  painful  and  worryful  pressure  of  these  man-made  rules,  and  recover  for  man
the  genuine  unalloyed  moral  force  on  moral  beings  of  God's  commands.  It  was  some-
times necessary  for  him  to  be  severe  in  dealing  with  the  claims  made  on  behalf  of
traditions.    We  can  but  little  conceive  how  religion-was  affected,  in  our  Lord's  time,


CH.XV.  1— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  125

by  a  mere  ritual  that  was  so  oomprehensive,  so  minute,  and  yet  so  ridiculous,  that  it
must  have  made  men  hate  the  very  name  of  religion.

I.  Man-madb  RELIOIO08  R0LK8  AKB  ATTBACTivB  TO  MEN.  It  may  he  satd,  to  all  men.
It  can  with  confidence  be  said,  to  some  men.  There  are,  in  every  ao:e  and  society,
persons  who  prefer  to  have  their  religion  done  for  them ;  who  cannot,  and  will  not,  bear
the  burden  of  personal  responsibility.  They  ask  to  have  their  conduct  arranged  by  rules.
And  there  have  always  been  those  who  were  willing  to  meet  their  requests,  and  to
claina  authority  for  so  doing.  It  is  a  seemingly  easy  way  in  which  to  get  through  the
difficult  business  of  religion,  if  only  it  could  he  made  satisfactory ;  but  that  it  can
never  be.  In  all  ages,  and  to-day,  the  man-made  rules  are  sure  to  "  make  the  Word  of
God  of  none  effect."  They  are  sure  to  push  God  out  of  those  direct  and  personal  rela-
tions which  he  hears  to  each  one.

II.  Man-made  kbliqiocs  bulbs  asb  bdinous  fob  men.  If  they  could  keep  them  as
mere  helps  and  guides,  all  would  be  well.  But  that  is  just  what  man  has  ueVer  been
able  to  do.  Man-made  rules  are  always  pushing  out  of  their  place,  and  into  a  place
which  does  not  properly  belong  to  them.  The  following  points  may  be  worked  out
and  illustrated.  1.  Man-made  rules  shift  the  basis  of  authority  in  religion  from  God
to  man,  from  the  true  authority  to  an  altogether  false  one.  2.  Man-made  rules
exaggerate  the  place  of  self  in  religion.  For  the  authority  of  man  is  only  the  authority
of  idealized  self.  3,  Man-made  rules  substitute  a  religion  of  hand  (conduct)  for  the
religion  of  the  heart. — R.  T.

Ver.  8. — Sincerity  the  key-note  of  piety.  Formality  is  always  Imperilling  piety.  The
representation  of  religious  truths  in  ritual  and  ceremonial  is  a  necessary  condescension
to  the  weakness  of  men,  who  want  material  aid  in  their  effort  to  grasp  spiritual  things.
But  material  things  have  a  constant  tendency  to  enslave  men.  And  the  enslaving
work  is  done  with  so  much  subtlety  that  many  a  man  who  is  a  slave  to  his  rituals,
and  to  his  rules,  thinks  himself  to  be  a  free  man  to-day.  But,  worse  than  that,  and
the  thing  that  so  much  distressed  our  Lord,  when  a  man  knows  that  all  his  spiritual
religion  is  gone,  he  will  keep  up  his  ritual,  and  be  more  exact  in  obeying  his  rules,  and
try  to  persuade  himself  that  "formality"  will  do  instead  of  "spirituality."  Then  the
searching  Lord  pleads, "  This  people  honoureth  me  with  their  lips,  but  their  heart  is  far
from  me."

I.  Belioion  is  expression.  We  ought  to  "draw  nigh  unto  God  with  our  mouth,
and  to  honour  him  with  our  lip."  Religion  is  holy  worship,  wise  ordering  of  conduct,
hearing  honourable  responsibilities,  taking  part  in  Christian  activities,  bringing  the
body  into  subjection.  No  man  can  wisely  or  safely  restrain  the  expression  of  religion.
A  faith  which  says  nothing  is  no  real  faith.  A  love  that  does  nothing  is  no  real  love.
If  there  is  life  in  the  seed,  the  blade  will  appear  above  the  soil.  Secret  religion  is  self-
delusion.     If  a  man  is  religious,  it  will  get  expression  in  his  life  and  relations.

II.  Belioion  is  feelinq.  It  is  something  that  can  get  expression.  It  is  a  state
of  mind  and  heart.  It  is  a  spiritual  relationship  with  the  Divine  Spirit,  into  which
man,  the  spirit,  has  been  brought.  It  is  the  quickening  of  the  soul's  love,  and  settiHg
it  wholly  on  God.  It  is  the  redirection  of  the  soul's  trust,  and  fixing  it  on  God.  It
is  the  sanctifying  of  the  soul's  will  unto  the  choice  of  God's  will,  "  The  kingdom  of
God  is  within  you."  Piety  is  a  soul  affair.  Religion  is  the  expression  of  piety  in
conduct  and  relation.

in.  Sincerity  is  the  eight  relation  between  feeling  and  expkbssion.
Sincerity  Christ  asked  for.  Insincerity  Christ  denounced.  Sincerity  psalmists  prayed
for  and  prophets  pleaded  for.  Weakness,  incompleteness,  failure,  can  be  patiently
borne ;  insincerity  cannot  be  borne ;  nothing  can  be  done  with  it.  To  a  man's  own
self  he  must  be  true.  "To  his  fellow-men  he  must  bo  true.  To  God  he  must  be  true.
A  man  must  say,  by  lip  and  act,  what  he  feels,  and  only  what  he  feels.  The  vice  of
modern  externtd  religion  is  its  utterance  of  more  and  better  things  than  are  really
In  men's  hearts. — R.  T.

Vers.  11, 19,  2Q.—The  secret  of  human  defilement.  It  is  quite  possible  to  exaggerate
In  presenting  the  teachings  of  our  Lord  in  these  verses.  We  do  so  if  we  make  too
absolute  the  distinction  between  what  goes  into  a  man  and  what  comes  out  of  a  man.


12«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xy.  1—39,

Our  Lord's  illustration  needs  to  he  kept  within  its  natural  and  proper  limits.  The
Pharisees  had  objected  to  the  disciples  eating  their  bread  with  unwashen  hands,  their
notion  being  that  something  causing  ceremonial  defilement  might  be  upon  their  hands,
and  this  taken  in  with  the  bread  would  make  them  ceremonially  unclean.  It  was  a
ridiculous  subtlety,  and  yet  it  had  become  quite  an  established  notion.  It  was  best
met  by  such  scorn  as  Jesus  poured  upon  it.  You  cannot  defile  a  man's  soul  by  putting
some  dirt  into  his  food ;  that  may  bring  on  disease  in  the  man's  body,  but  it  cannot
defile  tiie  man  himself.  Our  Lord  strikes  hard  at  the  insincerities  of  the  Pnariseo
class,  who  were  foul  in  speech,  unclean  in  life,  and  self-seeking  in  relations,  however
anxious  they  were  about  ceremonial  defilement.  What  came  out  of  them — their  speech,
conduct,  relations — these  defiled  them.

I.  The  secret  of  human  defilement  is  the  wbono  inside  a  man.  A  man  is
very  largely  responsible  for  the  contents  of  his  mind.  True,  he  may  have  been  placed
in  circumstances  beyond  his  control  which  have  brought  evil  associations ;  but  the  law
is  always  working,  that  the  things  only  are  retained  and  effective  on  which  attention
is  continuously  and  persistently  fixed.  Then  we  must  have  fixed  our  attention  on
what  our  minds  now  have  in  them,  and  so  we  must  be  responsible  for  their  contents.
Can  we  bear  to  look  at  the  actual  contents  of  our  minds  ?  How  utterly  unimportant
ceremonial  defilements  seem  in  view  of  this  real  evill  A  man  is  in  a  state  of  defile-
ment, heart-defilement,  to  begin  with.  From  this  may  be  shown  the  absolute  need  of
regeneration.

II.  The  pubtheb  seceet  op  human  dbfilbment  is  that  this  insidb  wkono  gets
STBENGTHBNBD  BY  EXPRESSION.  If  the  foul  things  inside  a  man  would  just  stay  quiet,
things  would  not  be  so  serious.  But  they  are  persistently  active,  ever  trying  to  get
expression,  to  say  something  or  to  do  something.  And  they  become  stronger  and
more  active  by  every  expression.  How  that  which  comes  out  of  a  man  defiles  him
may  be  shown  by  indicating  the  way  in  which  a  foul  thought,  gaining  utterance  in  a
foul  s[ieech,  becomes  an  act  of  the  will ;  the  man  is  made  foul  thereby. — B.  T.

Ver.  22. — A  claim  on  Q-ocPs  mercy.  "  Have  mercy  on  me."  The  woman  was  wiser
than  she  knew.  She  could  bring  no  claim;  as  a  foreigner  she  had  no  sort  of  right
to  our  Lord's  help.  She  made  no  pretence  of  having  any  claim,  save  the  claim  which
every  sufferer  and  every  sinner  may  have  on  God's  mercy.  But  that  is  the  best  of  all
claims;  the  one  to  which  response  is  always  assured.  The  sufferer  and  the  sinner  may
fully  hope  in  God's  mercy.

I.  The  claim  of  the  sufferer  on  God's  mbect.  Mercy  includes  interest,  pity,
sympathy,  consideration,  and  desire  to  help.  The  good  man  feels  merciful  toward
the  suffering  creature ;  the  father  is  merciful  to-the  suffering  children.  God  is  merciful
to  the  suffering  being  he  has  made.  But  God's  mercy  is  assured  because,  to  him,  all
suffering  is  the  fruitage  of  sin ;  and  God  knows  how  the  suffering  has  to  fall  on  those
who  have  not  committed  the  sin.  If  God  saw  only  sin,  he  would  respond  with  judgment.
He  sees  so  much  suffering  following  on  sin,  to  which  he  can  only  respond  with  mercy.
The  child  pleaded  for  was  not  suffering  directly  for  sin.  The  mother's  suffering  was
part  of  the  race-burden,  and  not  distinctively  her  own.  So,  here,  suffering  claimed  mercy.
We  might  be  led  on  to  indicain  that  God's  mercy  can  be  shown  to  sufferers  by  prolonging
the  suffering  as  truly  as  by  removing  it.  Mercy  in  its  operation  is  ever  guided  by  an
infinite  wisdom.

II.  The  claim  op  the  sinner  on  God's  hebot.  Not  a  natural  claim.  There  is  no
reason  why  God  should  bear  with  sinners  in  the  nature  of  things.  Every  notion
of  government  shows  dimand  for  justice.  Officially  God  must  deal  justly.  Mercy
brings  in  the  qualification  that  belongs  to  God's  character.  We  see  this  in  the  case
of  a  human  magistrate.  As  a  magistrate  he  has  no  mercy;  he  is  strictly  to  apply  the
law.  As  a  man,  and  as  a  character,  he  can  bring  mercy  in  to  qualify  the  strict  appli-
cations of  law.  It  is  well  to  remember  that  God  never  deals  with  men  simply  as  an
official.  He  is  always  a  character,  a  noble  character,  and  therefore  "merciful  and
gracious."  Lead  on  to  show  that  the  supreme  interest  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ,
the  supreme  interest  of  such  a  scene  as  is  now  before  us,  lies  in  its  revelation  of  the
character  of  God,  and  especially  its  disclosure  of  the  fact  that  God's  having  a  character
gives  both  sufferers  and  dinners  a  claim  upon  his  mercy, — B.  T,


3a.  XV.  1—39.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  127

Ver.  25. — Importunity  and  quick-mttedness.  Importunity :  "  Lord,  help  me."
Quick-wittedness :  "  Truth,  Lord  :  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  their
masters'  table."  The  strangeness  of  our  Lord's  dealing  with  this  woman  has  often
been  pointed  out.  But  the  story  needs  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  fact  that  our
Lord's  supreme  work  was  work  in  character.  In  doing  anything  for  the  bodies  of  men
our  Lord  really  worked  for  their  souls,  and  tried  to  make  his  healing  bear  a  gracious
influence  on  the  minds,  hearts,  and  dispositions  of  those  whom  he  healed.  And  he
seems  to  have  kept  the  further  aim  before  him  of  making  the  manner  in  which
his  miracles  were  wrought  parts  of  his  training  of  his  disciples  for  their  future  mission.
Those  disciples'  learned  so  much  just  by  watching  how  their  Master  dealt  with
individuals,  such  as  this  woman  of  Canaan.

L  OtTB  LoBD  SOUGHT  TO  BRING  OUT  iMPOBTninTT.  This  explains  delay  and  seeming
refusal.  Remember  how  much  our  Lord  thought  of  importunity.  He  commends  it
in  prayer,  by  his  parables.  1.  It  is  a  valuable  sign  of  character.  There  is  something
in  a  man  who  can  persist ;  who  can  set  an  aim  before  him,  and  refuse  to  be  discouraged
It  is  all  the  nobler  when  the  aim  concerns  the  well-being  of  another.  2.  It  is  one
of  the  best  expressions  of  faith.  The  woman  could  not  have  kept  on  her  plea  if  she
had  not  fully  believed  that  the  Lord  both  could  and  would  help  her.  So  Jesus,
by  his  mode  of  dealing  with  her,  brought  out  to  view  her  faith.  3.  It  is  one  of  the
best  indications  of  the  value  of  the  thing  desired.  If  we  do  not  care  much  about
a  thing,  we  soon  give  up  our  pursuit  of  it.  If  it  is  to  us  a  "  pearl  of  great  price,"
we  keep  on  until  we  get  it.  The  woman  had  all  her  heart  in  this  healing  for  her
daughter.  Then  how  importunate  in  seeking  salvation  we  should  be  I  "It  is  not
a  vain  thing  for  you ;  it  is  your  life."

II.   OUB    LOBD   WAS    GEATIFnSD  WHEN     HB   BROUGHT   OUT   QUI0K-WITTKDNB8S.        The

woman's  answer  is  an  exceedingly  sharp  and  clever  one.  She  skilfully  turned  our
Lord's  reason  for  refusing  into  a  reason  for  granting.  Her  word  for  "dogs"  was
cleverly  chosen;  it  meant  the  "  pet  dogs  of  the  house."  They  have  a  claim  on  the
children's  crumbs.  And  she  pleads  just  for  the  crumbs  for  her  "little  pet  dog."
It  will  not  take  anything  &om  the  "  children  "  to  send  her  a  crumb  of  blessing.  Jesus
seemed  really  pleased  with  the  woman ;  there  was  a  most  gracious  tone  in  his  final
reply.  See  how  his  dealing  brought  her  character  out ;  and  showed  the  disciples  how
to  deal  with  people  so  as  to  be  the  fullest  possible  blessing  to  them. — R.  T.

Ver.  28. — The  praise  of  faith.  There  were  several  occasions  oii  which  our  Lord
specially  praised  faith;  we  may  note  what  were  the  peculiar  features  of  the  faith
which  received  these  unusual  commendations.  Olshausen  says,  "  Overcome  as  it  were
by  the  humble  faith  of  the  heathen  woman,  the  Saviour  himself  confesses, '  Great  is  thy
faith,'  and  straightway  faith  received  what  it  asked.  This  little  narrative  lays  open
the  magic  that  lies  in  a  humbly  believing  heart  more  directly  and  deeply  than  all
explanations  or  descriptions  could  do.  In  this  mode  of  Christ's  giving  an  answer  tu
prayer  we  are  to  trace  only  another  form  of  his  love.  Where  faith  is  weak,  he
anticipates  and  comes  to  meet  it;  where  faith  is  strong,  he  holds  himself  far  off  in
order  that  it  may  in  itself  be  carried  to  perfection."

I.  OUB  LOBD'b  NOTICXNG  THE  SIGNS  OF  FAITH  WITHOUT  6FE0IAL  FBAISE.  A  Speci-
men case  is  the  act  of  the  four  friends  who  carried  the  helpless  paralytic  on  to  the  roof
to  ensure  his  getting  into  the  presence  of  Jesus.  It  is  said  of  them,  "  Jesus  seeing
their  faith."  On  another  occasion  it  is  said  of  Peter,  looking  on  the  lame  man,
"  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed."  The  apostles  follow  the  Master  in  looking
for  and  recognizing  faith.  And  this  we  fully  understand  when  we  regard  faith  as  the
necessary  state  of  spiritual  recipiency  for  Divine  help  and  blessing.

IL  OuB  LoBD'S  NOTICING  THE  SIGNS  OF  FAITH  WITH  SPBOIAL  PBAIBB.  TwO  illus-
trative cases  may  be  given.  And  it  is  remarkable  that  they  both  concern  aliens,  and
not  Israelites.  This  probably  accounts  for  our  Lord's  feeling  surprise,  and  giving  it
expression.  The  first  is  the  Roman  centurion,  who  sought  Christ's  healing  for
a  servant.  Everybody  then,  even  those  who  believed  in  Christ's  power,  thought  it
essential  that  Christ  should  totich  the  sufferer.  The  centurion  had  faith  to  believe  that
Jesus  could  act  through  a  simple  commanding  word.  So  of  him  Jesus  said,  "  Verily
I  say  imto  you,  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel."     The  other  case  is


128  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    Ioh.xt.  1— 39.

that  associated  with  our  text.  The  Canaanite  woman  showed  her  strong  faith  by  her  per-
Bistency  in  overcoming  obstacles ;  and  of  her  Jesus  said,  "  0  woman,  great  is  thy  faith."
In  conclusion,  the  reasona  for  praising  such  faith  may  be  given.  1.  Full  trust
honours  God.  2.  Active  and  persistent  faith  reveals  a  state  of  heart  that  fits  for
receiving  Divine  healing  and  salvation. — B.  T.

Ver.  31. — One  effect  of  miracles  of  healing.  "  They  glorified  the  QoA  of  Israel."
Two  points  may  be  unfolded  and  illustrated.  This  effect  was  good  so  far  as  it  went.
This  effect  fell  far  short  of  what  Jesus  desired.

I.  This  effect  was  oooo  bo  fab  as  it  went.  In  a  general  way  they  {vaised
God,  who  had  given  such  power  unto  men.  And  it  is  always  good  to  recognize  the
h»nd  of  God  in  our  guidances,  deliverances,  and  restorations.  He  is  the  Healer  and
Bestorer ;  and  we  should  always  turn  to  thank  the  Source  of  blessing  before  we  thank
the  agent  whom  God  has  been  pleased  to  use.  But  to  class  Jesus  among  God's
prophets,  to  make  of  him  only  an  Elisha,  was  to  keep  in  the  region  of  commonplace,
when  God  would  have  them  step  up  into  the  higher  region  of  revelation.  It  was  an
effect,  to  "  glorify  the  God  of  Israel,"  but  it  wac  not  the  effect.  It  was  a  good  beginning,
but  a  bad  resting-place.  It  did  not  reach  to  apprehend  the  tipocial  meaning  of  Christ's
miracles.  Show  that  men  still  treat  Christ  in  the  same  way.  They  thank  God  for
the  example  of  his  life,  for  the  teaching  of  his  inspiring  truths,  and  for  the  gnunous
deeds  recorded  of  him ;  and  there  they  stop.  That  is  all — "  They  glorify  the  Otoi  of
Israd."    Thut  does  not  go  tea  enough.

II.  ThIB  BFFBOT   SHOOTiD   HAVE   PBBFABSD   THE  WAT    FOB  A  BKTTKB.      After  tuinhlg

to  praise  God,  these  healed  people  should  have  resolutely  fixed  their  attention  on
Christ,  and  tried  to  understand  the  Man  who  could  do  such  mighty  works.  And  this
not  as  a  merely  curious  inquiry,  but  with  the  distinct  feeling  that  such  a  man  must
have  a  message ;  that  his  work  could  not  end  with  opening  blind  eyes  and  unstopping
deaf  ears.  Such  things  were  signs  of  authority  and  power  to  do  greater  things.  Israel
knew  well,  from  its  history,  that  miracles  illustrate  messages  and  authenticite
messengers ;  so  they  ought  to  have  said  of  Christ,  **  Who  is  he  ?  "  "  What  has  he  to
say  ?  "  It  would  be  a  deeply  interesting  subject  of  inquiry — What  would  have  been  the
moral  effects  of  our  Lord's  mission  if  his  miracles  had  been  entirely  concerned  with  the
healing  of  bodily  infirmities,  sicknesses,  and  disabilities?  We  may  well  fear  that
the  people  would  have  used  the  kind  Doctor's  gifts  freely  enough,  and  just  satisfied
themselves  with  "  glorifying  the  God  of  Israel." — E.  T.

Ver.  36. — The  mission  of  miracles  of  supply.  They  were  corrective  of  the  influence
that  was  actually  produced  by  the  miracles  of  healing.  The  differences  in  the  spheres
and  the  character  of  our  Lord's  miracles  is  not  sufficiently  observed.  He  was  no
mere  Eastern  Hakim,  with  a  wonderful  panacea  for  all  forms  of  bodily  woe.  He  is  too
often  spoken  of  as  if  this  were  his  description.  More  importance  needs  to  be  giveti
to  our  Lord's  walking  the  water,  stilling  the  storm,  raising  the  dead,  and  multiplying
the  food-supplies.  It  is  competent  for  any  man  to  plead  that  the  healing  gift  is,  like
the  artistic  gift,  the  special  endowment  of  individuals ;  and  Jesus  was  a  Man  with  an
unusual  gift  of  the  healing  power.  No  such  explanation  can  be  found  for  the  miracles
of  supply,  or  for  the  miracles  of  control  over  nature.  And  we  shall  come  back  upon
the  miracles  of  healing  with  new  and  worthier  ideas  when  we  have  rightly  appre-
hended the  miracles  of  supply.  We  have  seen,  in  the  previous  homily,  that  Christ't
doctoring  work  rather  directed  men's  attention  to  the  "  God  of  Israel "  than  to  himself,
"  Gk>d  manifest  in  the  flesh."

L  The  mibaoles  of  bitpplt  bet  the  Pebson  of  Jebdb  in  pbominbnob.  Illustrate
by  the  effect  of  the  wine-making  at  Cana.  That  miracle  "  manifested  forth  his  glory."
Also  by  the  other  feeding  of  the  thousands,  which  set  Christ's  Person  forth  so  promi-
nently that  the  people  wanted,  then  and  there,  to  make  him  king.  Miracles  of  supply
are  stranger  things,  more  difScuU  to  explain,  and  more  impressively  related  to  the
individual,  than  miracles  of  healing.  Forth  from  miracles  of  supply  men  go,  saying  to
their  neighbonrs, "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  whose  Son  is  he  ?  "  Compare  the  remark-
able direction  of  the  thoughts  of  the  disciples  to  the  Person  and  mystery  of  Christ
when  he  came  to  them  walking  on  the  sea.


OH.  xn.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  8T.  MATTHEW.


129


n.  This  uibacubb  of  sxtfflt  bet  thk  bpibitual  oharaoter  or  thk  wobe  of
3Bsm  JS  PBOMiNENCB.  They  belong  to  another  and  more  luggeative  region,
liemoral  of  disabilities  may  be  a  great  thing,  but  renewal  of  life  is  greater.  Food,  to
be  taken  into  a  man's  body,  and  turned  into  life,  is  a  revelation  of  Christ's  higher
relation  to  men.  He  is  soul-food ;  taken  in  by  faith  and  love,  bt  ii  turned  into  the
koul'a  life.    '*  He  that  eateth  me  shall  live  by  me." — R.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVL


Vers.  1 — i.—The  Pharitea  and  Sadduetet
detin  a  tign.    (Mark  viii.  11 — 18.)

Yer.  1.— The  Pharisees  also  with  the
Sadduoeea;  rather,  and  the  Phariteet  and
8adducee$.  Tiie  scribes  and  Pharisees  are
often  mentioned  together  as  watching  or
attacking  Jesus;  but  this  is  the  first  time
that  we  hear  of  Pharisees  combining  with
Badducees  for  this  purpose.  The  two  sects
were  directly  opposed  to  each  other,  the
traditional  belief  of  the  former  being  anta-
gonistio  to  the  scepticism  and  materialism
of  the  latter.  But  both  were  hostile  to
Christ,  whose  teaching,  on  the  one  hand
Interfered  with  rabbinism,  and  on  the  other
maintained  the  existence  of  the  super-
natural and  the  certainty  of  the  reaurreo-
tion.  The  Sadducees  alone  seem  to  have
attacked  Christ  only  on  two  oooaaions.
Tliey  were  probably  Herodians  (oomp.  oh.
xxiL  16),  and  on  this  account  also  diallked
by  the  Pharisees ;  but  they  were  powerful,
and  held  most  of  the  highest  ofEioea  in  the
state,  and  their  alliance  was  sought  or
allowed  in  order  more  effectually  to  com-
promise Jesus.  Even  theological  hatred
and  political  opposition  sank  into  indiffer-
ence in  the  face  of  wliat  was  regarded  as
a  common  danger.  Strauss  and  his  school
ngard  this  combination  as  so  unnatural
that  they  throw  discredit  on  the  whole  ac-
count. This  is  shallow  criticism.  Nothing
is  more  common  than  for  persons  opposed
on  all  other  subjects  to  coalesce  for  an  nn-
lioly  purpose  in  which  they  are  jointly
interested.  The  most  violent  political  op
ponents  will  join  forces  in  order  to  gain
some  desired  point,  and  when  an  attack  on
tlie  Church  is  meditated,  even  unbelievers
are  gladly  welcomed.  TertulUan  says
forcibly,  "Christ  b  always  being  crucified
between  two  thieves."  Xempting.  Trying
him  with  captious  questions,  to  bring  him
Into  a  difSoulty,  or  to  give,  them  an  oppor-
tunity of  accusing  him  of  heterodoxy,  or
disloyalty,  or  insubordination,  and  of  dis-
orediting  him  with  the  people.  A  sign  from
heaven.  The  rabbis  held  that  demons  and
false  gods  could  perform  certain  miracles
on  earth,  but  God  alone  could  give  signs
bom  heaven,  such  as,  «.g.,  the  manna  of
Hoses'  time,  the  stayug  of  the  sua  and

MATTHEW — II.


moon  by  Joshua,  the  lightning  and  thunder
that  came  at  Samuel's  word,  the  stroke  of
death  on  the  captains  who  tried  to  arrest
Elijah.  They  had  heard  of  the  miraoulons
meal  just  before,  and  saw  how  deeply  the
people  were  moved  by  it,  and  they  would
imply  that  such  a  miracle  was  no  proof  of
a  Divine  mission,  as  it  might  have  been
wrought  by  magical  or  Satanic  agency.
Let  Christ  give  a  sign  from  heaven,  and
they  would  acknowledge  his  claims.  They
knew  what  Christ's  answer  would  be,  as
they  had  already  attacked  him  with  the
same  demand  (ch.  xii.  38);  and  they  hoped
that  he  would  either  refuse  to  gratify  tliem,
as  before,  or  else  make  an  attempt  and  fail.
In  either  case  they  thought  they  might  turn
the  circumstance  to  his  disadvantage.  The
Sadducees  joined  in  the  request,  because
they  disbelieved  in  ull  such  oecurrenees,
and  were  fully  persuaded  that  tliey  were
impossible,  and  any  one  who  attempted  to
produoe  them  must  prove  himself  a  miser-
able impostor.  The  word  translated  desired
(^ixjip^jiaay)  is  emphatic ;  the  verb  is  used
classically  in  the  sense  of  "to  put  a  ques-
tion for  decision;"  so  the  interrogation  here
would  signify  that  this  was  to  be  a  final
test  of  the  claims  of  Olirist;  on  his  answer
depended  their  adhesion  or  opposition  (comp.
1  Cor.  i.  22).

Vor.  2. — Tlie  paragraph  oolsj  Jag  of  this
and  ver.  3  is  omitted  b;  many  gv^  manu-
scripts, probably  owing  to  its  similarity  to
the  passage  in  ch.  xii.  38.  These  verses
are  most  probably  genuine;  and  they  cer-
tainly could  not  have  been  foisted  into  the
text  from  Luke  xii.  54 — 56.  The  circum-
stances are  too  difierent,  and  the  variations
too  marked,  to  make  such  interpolation
probable.  When  it  is  evening.  The  Phari-
sees had  demanded  a  sign  from  heaven;
Jesus  points  to  the  western  glow  in  the
sky,  and  taunts  them  with  being  ready
enough  to  read  the  signs  of  the  weather,
but  slow  to  interpret  proofs  of  more  im-
portant circumstances,  lie  does  not,  in  the
case  of  these  mixed  cavillers,  argue  from
Scripture,  but  from  the  natural  world,  and
he  points  out  that,  had  they  eyes  to  see  and
a  mind  to  discern,  they  might  mark  tokens
in  historical  events,  in  the  moral  and
spiritual  world,  which  attested  his  Messiah-
ship  as  clearly  as  -^ly  speciallf  given  sijpi


130


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xrt.  1—28


from  heaven.  Te  say,  It  will  be  fair
weather  (cuS/o).  Probably  an  exclamation,
Te  tay.  Fair  weather  1  Eabbinical  echoolB
made  a  point  of  teaoliing  weather-lore  j
progno»tications  on  thia  subject  were  greatly
in  Togfue,  and  the  rains  of  the  coming  year
wore  annually  foretold.  On  snob  meteoro-
logical observations,  we  may  refer  to  Virgil,
'  Georg.,'  i.  425,  etc. ;  and  Pliny, '  Nat.  Hist.,'
xviii.  35  and  78.

Ver.  3.— It  will  be  foul  weather  to-day;
more  tersely  in  the  Greek,  To-day  a  storm  I
Such  prognostications  are  found  among  all
peoples.  Many  examples  are  collected  by
Wetstein.  Lowring  laTvyndCav);  a  word
applied  to  the  expression  of  the  counte-
nance ("  his  countenauoe  fell,"  Mark  x.  22),
and  therefore  applicable,  by  prosopopoeia,
to  the  look  of  the  sky.  FUlion  quotes
Aulug  GelliuB,  xiii.  29,  "Non  solum  in
hominum  corporibus,  sed  etiam  in  rerum
cujusquemodi  aliarum  facies  dicitur.  Nam
mentis  et  coeli  et  maris  facies,  si  tempestive
dicatur,  probe  dicitur."  0  ye  hypocrites
(uiroKpiTof).  The  word  is  omitted  by  some
uncial  manuscripts,  the  Vulgate,  etc.,  and
many  modern  editors.  If  it  is  genxune,
we  must  consider  that  Christ  thus  calls
them,  because  their  pretence  of  being  satis-
fied with  suffioieut  proof  of  Christ's  claims
was  a  mere  fiction,  as  tliey  were  obstinately
determined  never  to  acknowledge  him.  It
would  be  casting  pearls  before  swine  to  give
further  external  proofs  to  people  without
sympathy  and  not  open  to  conviction.  The
signs  of  the  times  (rar  KupSni).  Critical
times  the  age  foretold  for  the  appearance
cf  the  Messiah.  These  signs,  which  all
who  were  candid  and  unbiassed  might  read,
ware  such  as  the  following:  the  gceptre
had  depiirted  from  Judab,  and  the  lawgiver
from  between  Ids  feet;  the  fourth  great
empire  was  established ;  the  prophetic
weeks  of  Daniel  were  at  their  close;  the
Baptist  had  come  in  the  spirit  and  power
of  Elias;  all  the  world  was  expecting  the
advent  of  some  great'  personage ;  the  best
and  holiest  Jews  were  looking  for  the  Re-
deemer ;  Christ's  own  miracles  and  teaching
pravtd  his  Divinity  and  the  fulfilment  of
many  obscure  prophecies;  these  and  such
like  signs  were  set  for  all  to  see  and  ponder,
and  the  Lord,  as  he  marked  the  obstinate
unbelief  of  his  countrymen,  might  well  be
grieved,  and  "sigh  deeply  in  his  spirit"
(Mark  viii.  12).

Ver.  4. — A  wicked  and  adulterous  gene-
lation  .  .  .  Jonas.  These  words  our  Lord
hail  already  uttered  on  a  former  occasion
(ch.  xii.  39),  but  he  docs  not  here  explain
them,  as  he  did  before  (see  Introduction,  §
7).  Under  similar  circumstances  he  re-
peats himself,  but  he  wastes  not  time  in
useless  discussions  with  perverse  opponents


who  vrill  not  see  the  truth.  Of  hii  death
and  resurrection,  whereof  Jonah  was  a  type,
they  knew  and  understood  nothing.  Per-
haps they  thought  of  Jonah  only  as  s  pro-
phet against  the  heathen  city  Nineveh,  and
a  preacher  of  repentance,  and  were  disposed
to  resent  the  allusion  as  an  affront  to  their
vaunted  righteousness.  He  left  them.  Took
ship  for  Magedan,  and  crossed  the  lake  to
the  north-east  shore,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Bethsaida  Julias.  He,  as  it  were,  de
spaired  of  their  improvement,  and  left  them
in  righteous  anger  at  their  obduracy.  *'  A
man  that  is  heretical  after  a  first  and
second  admonition  refuse;  knowing  that
such  a  one  is  perverted  and  sinneth,  being
self-condemned  "  (Titus  iii.  10,  11).  Jesus
never  taught  publicly  or  worked  miracles
agaia  on  this  spot.

Vers.  5 — 12. — Warning  against  the  leaven
of  the  PharUees  and  Saddncees,  (Mark  viii.
14—21.)

Ver.  5.— They  had  forgotten  {irtXiBovTo,
not  pluperfect) ;  came  to  the  other  Me,  and
forgot ;  dbliti  sunt  (Vulgate) ;  ».e.  they  per-
ceived that  they  had  forgotten  to  take
sufficient  bread  for  the  jouruey  before  them.
The  district  which  they  were  about  to
traverse  was  but  sparsely  inhabited,  and
offered  no  hope  of  supplying  this  want.  It
is  doubted  whether  the  ensuing  conversa-
tion took  place  during  the  voyage  or  after
they  had  landed.  The  language  of  St.
Mark  inclines  one  to  believe  that  the  de-
ficiency was  discovered  during  the  transit,
and  the  remarks  now  narrated  were  made
then.  Ab  it  would  take  some  hours  to  cross,
there  was  ample  time  to  feel  and  expatiate
upon  the  need ;  and  if  Christ  had  told  them
of  his  future  movements,  they  would  natu-
rally feel  regret  for  their  carelessness  and
want  of  forethought.  Or  it  might  be  that
Christ's  observation  concerning  the  leaven
was  made  in  the  boat,  and  his  reproof  of
their  thoughts  was  given  on  landing.

Ver.  6. — ^The  leaven.  Ohiist's  thoughts
were  still  fixed  on  the  late  disputants,  whose
powerful  influence  on  popular  opinion  called
for  forcible  warning.  By  "  leaven  "  he  does
not  here  refer  specially  to  the  hypocrisy  of
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  as  in  Luke
xii.  1,  but  to  the  evil  influence  which  they
exercised,  which  was  diffused  far  and  wide,
and  penetrated  to  all  ranks  and  classes.
Their  unsound  opinions,  their  inability  or
disinclination  to  enter  into  the  spiritual
sense  of  Scripture,  vitiated  their  whole
system,  and  made  them  dangerous  teachers
directly  they  attempted  to  explain  or  am-
plify the  letter  of  Holy  Writ.  It  was  this
same  perverse  blindness  that  led  them  to
refuse  to  accept  Jesus  as  Messiah  in  spite
of  all  the  proofs  which  had  been  brought


oa.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


131


before  them.  That  leaven,  in  one  aspect,
wag  regarded  as  a  sign  of  impurity  and  cor-
ruption, we  learn  from  the  strict  rules  which
banished  it  from  Divine  service,  and  especi-
ally during  the  Passover  season.  Says  St.
Paul,  "A  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole
lump"  (Gal.  v.  9);  and,  "Purge  out  the
old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,
even  as  ye  are  uoleavened "  (1  Cor.  v.  7).
Elsewhere  Christ  makes  a  distinction  be-
tween what  these  teachers  taught  ex
cathedra,  and  what  they  put  forth  on  their
own  authority  or  what  they  practised  them-
selves (ch.  xxiii.  2,  3,  where  see  note).

Ver.  7. — They  reasoned  among  themselves.
With  a  crass  literaluess,the  apostles  utterly
misunderstood  the  drift  of  their  Master's
warning,  and  thouglit  that  he  alluded  to
their  forgetf  ulness  in  coming  without  bread.
They  were  always  slow  to  apprehend  the
metaphorical  and  spiritual  signification  of
their  Master's  language.  Thus  at  the
synagogue  in  Capernaum  they  failed  to
grasp  his  meaning  when  he  spoke  of  him-
self as  the  Bread  of  life  (John  vi.),  and  at
Jacob's  well  they  interpreted  of  material
food  his  Divine  words  concerning  the
nourishment  of  the  soul  (John  iv.).  It  is
well  remarked  by  Sadler  (in  loc.')  that  "  it
is  no  small  proof  of  the  good  faith  and
consequent  truth  of  the  gospel,  that  the
apostles  should  have  recorded  things  so
against  themselves  as  this  account.  If  they
had  written  for  any  purpose  except  the
simple  exhibition  of  the  truth,  they  could
easily  liave  suppressed  facts  such  as  this,
so  very  discreditable  to  their  spiritnal,  in-
deed to  their  mental,  perception.  But  if
we  had  lost  nccounts  such  as  these,  we
slionld  have  lost  the  proof  of  one  of  the
greatest,  if  not  the  greatest,  miracle  of  its
kind ;  for  no  miraculous  change  in  the
spirit  of  man  which  God  has  wrought  can
be  accounted  greater  than  this — tliat  men
who,  before  the  resurrection  and  the  Day  of
Pentecost,  should  have  exhibited  .such  utter
want  of  the  lowest  spiritual  discernment,
should,  after  the  descent  of  the  Spirit,  have
written  such  searching  spiritual  documents
as  the  catholic  Epistles  of  Peter  and  John."
In  the  present  case  some  commentators  take
it  that  Ihe  apostles  fancied  Christ  was  warn-
ing them  against  procuring  any  leavened
bread  from  Pliarisees  and  Sadduceea,  whom
Jesus  so  sternly  denounced ;  but  it  is  more
probable  that  their  anxiety  arose  simply
from  the  want  of  provisions,  not  from  the
consideration  that  they  were  debarred  from
obtaining  them  at  the  hands  of  certain
parties.  These  doubts  they  seem  to  have
whispered  one  to  another.

Ver.  8. — When  Jesus  perceived  (yvois).
He  knew  their  thoughts,  if  he  did  not  over-
heu  their  words,  and  h«K  reproved  them


severely  on  two  accounts — first,  for  want  of
faith  in  his  care;  and  secondly,  for  not
understanding  the  mystical  allusion  in  the
word  "leaven."  Ye  of  little  faith.  They
showed  lack  of  faith  by  being  solicitous  con-
cerning bodily  wants,  tliinkiilg  that  Christ
was  regardless  of,  or  unable  to  provide  for
them  under  all  circumstances.  He  applied
the  same  term  to  them  elsewhere,  as  when
they  apprehended  not  the  lesson  of  the  grass
of  tlie  field  (ch.  vi.  30),  and  when  they  were
fearful  in  the  storm  on  the  lake  (ch.  viii.
26).

Vers.  9, 10. — Christ,  in  support  of  his  re-
proof, refers  to  the  two  miracles  of  the  mul-
tiplication of  food,  which  ought  to  have
assured  them  of  his  care  and  power.  So  ye  not
yet  understand !  So  he  asked  in  ch.  xv.  16,
"  Are  ye  also  yet  without  understanding  ?  "
Their  heart  was  hardened,  and  they  failed
to  apprehend  the  spiritual  bearing  of  the
incidents.  Neither  remember?  This  was
an  additional  ground  for  censure,  that  they
even  forgot  the  facts  at  the  very  time  when
they  ought  to  have  been  recalled  to  their
memory.  Jesus  reminds  them  of  the  dis-
tinctive differences  between  the  two  miracles,
mentioning  even  the  receptacles  in  which
the  fragments  were  collected — in  the  one
case  k6<j>ivoi,  small  baskets,  and  in  the  other
ffiTvpiSes,  large  panuiers.  It  is  surely  wilful
perversity  that  has  deemed  Ihese  two  inci-
dents, thus  pointedly  disjoined  by  our  Lord,
as  versions  of  one  story ;  and  yet  this  is  what
some  modem  critics  have  suggested  and
upheld.

Ver.  11. — That  I  spake  it  not  to  you,  etc.
TheBevisedVersion,  following  many  modem
editors,  divides  the  clause  into  two,  thus  :
that  1  spake  not  to  you  concerning  bread  f
But  beware  of  the  leaoen,  etc.  This  is  the
second  ground  for  the  Lord's  reproof  ad-
ministered to  the  apostles.  They  had  taken
in  a  carnal,  literal  sense  a  word  which  he
had  used  in  a  symbolical  or  mystical  mean-
ing. It  is  the  want  of  spiritual  discernment
which  he  censures.  They  had  had  frequent
opportunities  of  hearing  and  appreciating
his  mode  of  teaching:  miracles,  parables,
discourses,  had  an  inner  signification,  which
it  was  their  duty  to  apprehend.  The  want
of  understanding  was  a  .moral  fault  for
which  they  were  answerable.  We  may  say
it  would  have  been  easier  for  our  Lord  ta
have  spoken  of  doctrine  without  using  the
misunderstood  figure  of  leaven.  But  it  is
in  the  way  of  his  providence  to  speak  words
which  ne^d  thought  and  grace  to  make  them
fully  comprehended.  They  are  thus  more
impressed  upon  the  heart  and  memory,  and
bring  forth  better  fruit.  A  well-instructed
Hebrew  ought  to  find  no  difficulty  in  under-
standing metaphorical  allusions.  His  Scrip-
tures were  full  of  them,  and  ooold  not  be


132


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    {fm.  xvl  1— 2a


intelligently  read  witliout  the  light  thus
cast  upon  them.

Yer.  12. — Then  nnderstood  they.  Jesna
did  not  explain  his  meaning  further;  but
bis  reproof  roused  their  intellect,  made  them
reflect,  Bot  them  on  the  road  to  the  truth.  The
doctrine.  This  was  what  Jesus  meant  by
"the  leaven."  In  a  wider  sense  it  might
include  practice  as  well  as]  precept,  manner
of  life  as  well  as  teaching.  The  same  spirit
permeated  all.  "  See,"  says  St.  Ghrygostom,
"  how  much  good  his  reproof  wrought.  For
it  both  led  them  away  from  the  Jewish
observances,  and,  when  they  were  remiss,
made  them  more  heedful,  and  delivered
them  from  want  of  faith ;  so  that  they  were
not  afraid  nor  in  alarm,  if  at  any  time  they
seemed  to  have  few  loaves ;  nor  were  they
careful  about  famine,  but  despised  all  these
things."

Vers.  13 — 20. — The  cliiuax  of  reoognition
of  Ohritl'i  true  nature  dtjlared  to  tie  great
con/e»«fon  of  Peter,  (iiaik  viii.  27 — 30;
Lukeix.  18-21.)

Ver.  13. — Coasts  (jxipri) ;  parts,  as  ch.  xv.
21,  etc.  Casarea  Fhilippi.  The  addition
to  the  name  Osesarea  is  intended  to  commemo-
rate its  restorer  and  beautifier,  the  tetrarch
Philip,  and  to  distinguish  it  from  the  city
of  the  same  name  on  the  coast  between
Joppa  and  Carmel  (Acts  viii.  40,  etc.).  Our
Lord  liad  landed  at  Bethsaida,  where  the
Jordan  enters  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret,
turned  northwards,  and,  following  the  course
of  the  liver,  had  now  arrived  in  the  vicinity
of  one  of  its  chief  sources  at  OsBsarea
Philippi,  the  most  northerly  city  of  the
Holy  Land.  It  was,  if  not  identical  with,
in  close  proximity  to,  the  Dan  of  the  Old
Testament,  whence  arose  the  saying,  "  From
Dan  to  Beersheba,"  to  denote  the  whole
extent  of  country  from  north  to  south.  Later
it  was  called  Paneas,  and  now  Baniag.
Philip  altered  the  name  to  Csesarea  in  honour
of  Tiberius  Csesar,  his  patron.  Christ  seems
not  to  have  visited  the  city  itself,  but  only
the  outlying  villages  in  the  district.  We
may  conjecture  why  at  this  time  he  moved
to  this  remote  region.  It  was  probably,
p  irtly,  a  measure  of  precaution.  He  had
excited  the  Hercest  animosity  of  the  domi-
nant party,  and  even  of  the  sceptical
Sadducees  ;  he  was  pertinaciously  followed
by  their  emissaries,  always  on  tlie  watch  to
lay  hold  of  his  words  and  actions,  and  to
found  upon  them  dangerous  charges;  and
now,  knowing  it  was  time  to  announce  to
his  followers  in  plain  terms  his  claim  to  be
Messiah,  lie  would  not  do  this  in  Judsaa,
where  it  might  cause  commotion,  and  em-
broil him  with  the  authorities,  but  preferred
to  teach  this  great  truth  whore  he  might
speak  freely  without  fear  of  immediitte  con-


sequences, out  of  the  reach  of  his  perse-
vering opponents.  Yirtnally,  also,  his  public
work  in  Judasa  and  Galilee  had  reached  its
end.  He  had  no  chance  of  a  hearing  if  he
had  made  further  attempts  at  teaching.
T)ie  calumnies  of  the  rabbis  bad  affected
the  fickle  populace,  who  would  willingly
have  followed  a  military  pretender,  but  had
no  heart  to  set  at  noaght  their  national
teachers  in  favour  of  One  whom  they  were
persuaded  to  regard  as  a  dangerous  innovator,
not  improbably  upheld  by  Satanic  agency.
He  asked  his  disciples.  It  was  after  a  time
of  solitary  prayer  (Luke  ix.  18)  that  be  put
this  question  to  his  followers,  Determined
now  to  reveal  himself,  he  desired  to  make
them  express  tbe  mistaken  views  which
were  rife  concerning  his  Person  and  office,
and  to  lead  them  to  the  more  important
inquiry — what  opinion  they  themselves  held
touching  tills  momentous  mystery  (ver.  15).
Whom  (foho)  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of
man  am  1  Quern  diomit  hominet  etie  fUium
hominia  (Vulgate) ;  Who  do  men  say  that  the
Son  of  man  isi  (Bevised  Version).  The
versions  represent  the  variation  of  manu-
scripts between  rtva  /te  \4youviv,.it.T.\.,  and
rtva  \^70vcr»',  omitting  /le.  The  pronoun  is
probably  genuine  and  emphatic.  In  the
other  case,  "  the  Son  of  man  "  is  equivalent
to  /ic  in  ver.  15.  I  call  myself  the  Son  of
man :  what  do  the  multitudes  say  of  me  7
Who  do  they  consider  tbe  Son  of  man  to
be?  This  was  the  term  he  used  to  show
the  truth  of  the  Incarnation — "perfect  (Jod
and  perfect  man,  of  a  reasonable  soul  and
human  flesh  subsisting."  To  Jewish  ears
it  connoted  Divinity  (see  Lnke  xxii.  69,  70 ;
John  iii.  13).

Ver.  14.-— John  the  Baptist.  This  was
the  opinion  of  Herod  Antipas  (ch.  xiv.  1,  2),
who  fancied  that  Christ  was  animated  by
the  spirit  of  John  the  Baptist,  or  was
actually  that  personage  revived;  thougii
it  was  noticed  by  others  that  John  did  no
miracle  (John  x.  41),  and  lived  a  life  in
contrast  to  that  of  Christ  (ch.  xi.  18,  19).
£llas ;  Elijah,  who  was  taken  up  tu  heaven
without  dying,  and  was  announced  by
Malaohi  (iv.  5)  as  destined  to  return
before  the  appearance  of  Messiah.  Jeremias.
Some  opined  that  lie  was  Jeremiah,  who
was  expected  to  come  as  a  precursor  of
Messiah  (2  Esdras  ii.  18),  and  reveal  the
tabernacle,  ark,  and  the  altar  of  incense,
which,  according  to  the  legend  of  2  Maco.
ii  4 — 7,  he  had  bidden  in  Mount  Nebo,
"  until  the  time  that  God  gather  bis  people
again  together,  and  receive  them  unto
mercy."  One  of  the  prophets.  One  of  the
celebrated  prophets  of  antiquity  revived,
restored  to  life  again  to  prepare  the  way
for  the  great  consummation.  The  well-
known  prediction  of  Moses  (Dent,  iviii.  IS)


«n.  Kvi.  1— 28.]    tHE  GOSPEL  ACCOHCtNG  tO  8T   MATTHEW.


133


may  have  gi\  en  rise  to  this  idea.  The  four
popnlar  opiBiong  here  mentioned  showed
two  facta — that  Jesus  had  a  high  reputation
among  his  ccmtemporaries,  and  that  he  wai
by  none  at  this  time  regarded  as  the
Messiah.  Even  those  who,  after  certain  of
his  marvellous  works,  had  been  ready  to
honour  him  with  that  title,  soon  cooled  in
their  ardour,  ftnd,  checked  by  his  reserve
and  the  slanders  of  the  Pharisees,  learned
to  see  in  him  only  a  wonder-worker  or  a
precursor  of  the  expected  Prince  and
Liberator.

Yer.  15.— But  whom  (wAo)  say  ye  that  I
am  t  More  emphatic  in  the  Greek,  "t/ifts
5^  riva  lie  \4yeTe  clyai;  But  ye,  who  do  ye
say  tliat  I  amt  This  was  the  important
question  to  which  the  previous  one  led.
Ye,  who  have  shared  my  life  and  received
my  teaching,  witnessed  my  miracles  and
have  been  endued  by  me  with  supernatural
powers,  ye  know  lietter  than  the  people,
whose  crude  opinions  you  have  heard  aod
recounted ;  so  tell  plaimly  what  you  believe
of  me :  who  you  think  end  say  that  I  am?
A  momentous  inquiry  \  npon  which  hung
tlie  foundation  of  the  Christian  Church.
Their  knowledge  of  the  real  nature  of  Jesus
^'as  now  to  be  tested.

Yer.  16. — SimOn  Feter  answered  and  said.
The  ardent  Peter,  when  all  were  asked,
replies  in  the  name  of  the  rest,  giving,  how-
ever, bis  own  personal  sentiment  and  belief,
as  we  see  from  Christ's  answer  (ver.  17).
Some  of  the  others  probably  would  have
been  less  ready  to  make  the  same  confession ;
but  in  his  vehement  loyalty,  Peter  silences
all  hesitation,  and  declares  boldly  what
must  be  the  conviction  of  all  his  comrades.
He  speaks  out  the  persuasion  wrought  in
his  soul  by  Divine  graoe.  Thou  art  the
Christ  {i  Xf>i<rTi>},the  Son  of  the  living  God,
The  Ghrht;  tlie  Anointed,  the  Messiah.
The  Son  of  Ood ;  of  the  eamu  substance,  one
with  the  Father.  Livtng;  as  alone  "having
life  in  himself,"  "the  living  and  true  God"
(John  V.  26;  1  Thess.  i.  9).  The  same  (or
nearly  the  same)  confession  was  made  by
Peter  in  the  name  of  all  the  apostles  at
Capernaum  (John  vi.  69);  but  the  sense  of
the  expression  was  different,  and  sprang
from  very  different  conviction.  It  referred
rather  to  the  subjective  view  of  Christ's
character,  as  it  influenced  the  believer's  in-
ward assurance  of  the  source  of  eternal  life.
Here  the  acknowledgment  concerns  the
nature,  ofBoe,  and  Person  of  our  Lord.
That  there  was  some  special  distinction
between  the  two  enunciations  is  evident
from  Christ's  unique  commendation  of  Peter
on  this  occasion  compared  with  his  silence
on  the  former.  The  present  confession  is
indeed  a  noble  one,  containing  itself  a  com-
pendium of  the  Oatholic  faith  concerning  the


Person  and  work  of  Christ.  Herein  Peter
acknowledges  Jesns  to  be  the  true  Messiah,
commissioned  and  sent  by  God  to  reveal  hii
will  to  man,  and  accomplishing  all  that  the
prophets  had  foretold  concerning  him;  no
mere  man,  not  even  the  most  exalted  of
men  (which  common  opinion  held  Mesaiali
to  be)  but  the  Son  of  God,  of  the  Bubsiance
of  the  Father,  begotten  from  everlasting,
God  of  God,  perfect  God  and  perfect  man.
Son  of  God  and  Son  of  man.  Such  was
Peter's  faith.  The  Church  has  added
nothing  to  it,  thongh  she  has  amplified
and  explained  and  illustrated  it  in  her
Creeds;  for  it  comprises  belief  in  Christ's
Messiahship,  Divinity,  Incarnation,  person-
ality, and  the  momentous  issues  depending
thereon.  We'  need  not  suppose  that  Peter
understood  all  this  or  speculated  on  the
question  how  these  several  attributes  were
united  in  Christ.  He  was  content  to  ac-
cept and  acknowledge  the  truth,  waiting
patiently  for  further  light.  This  is  the
attitude  which  Christ  approves.

Yer.  17. — Jesus  answered  and  said  unto
him.  This  weighty  and  momentous  answer
is  given  alone  by  St.  Matthew.  St.  Mark,
who  wrote  under  the  instruction  of  Peter,
and  for  Boman  Cliristians,  mentions  it  not;
the  other  two  evangelists  are  equally  silent,
having  evidently  not  understood  the  special
importance  attached  to  it.  Blessed  art  thou,
Simon  Bar-jona.  "Blessed,"  as  in  the
sermon  on  the  mount  (ch.  v.),  expressing
a  solemn  benediction,  not  a  mere  encomium.
Peter  was  highly  favoured  by  a  special
revelation  from  God.  Chiist  calls  him  "son
of  Jona,"  to  intimate  tliat  Peter's  confession
is  true — ^that  he  himself  is  as  naturally  and
truly  Son  of  God  as  Peter  is  son  of  Jona.
So  Christ  addresses  him  when  he  restores
the  fallen  apostle  at  the  Sea  of  Galilee
after  the  second  miraculous  draught  of
fishes,  reminding  him  of  his  frail  human
nature  in  the  face  of  great  spiritual  privi-
leges (John  xxi.  15,  etc.;  comp.  i.  42).
Simon  would  be  the  name  given  at  his
circumcision ;  Bar-jona,  a  patronymic  to  dis-
tinguish him  from  others  of  the  same  name.
For  (3ti),  This  introduces  the  reason  why
Christ  calls  him  "Blessed."  Flesh  and
blood.  Tin's  is  a  phrase  to  express  the  idea
of  tlie  natural  man,  with  his  natural  endow-
ments and  facilities.  So  St.  Paul  says
(Gal.  i  16), "  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and
blood ; "  and  "Our  wrestling  is  not  against
flesh  and  blood"  (Eph.  vi.  12).  The  Son
of  Sirach  speaks  of  "  the  generation  of  flesh
and  blood"  (Eoclus.  xiv.  18).  No  natoral
sagacity,  study,  or  discernment  had  revealed
the  great  truth.  None  ml  these  had  over-
come slowness  of  apprehension,  prejudices
of  education,  slackness  of  faith.  No  un-
regenerate  mortal  nan  had  taught  him  tha


134


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi.  1—28.


gospel  mystery.  My  Tather  which  is  in
heaven.  Christ  thus  accepts  Peter's  defi-
nition of  him  as  "the  Son  of  the  living
God."  None  but  the  Father  could  have
revealed  to  thee  the  Son.

Ver.  18. — And  I  say  also  (J  alio  say)  unto
thee.  Ab  thou  hast  said  unto  me,  "  Thou  art
the  Christ,"  so  I  say  unto  thee,  etc.  Thou
art  Poter  (nerpos,  Petrus),  and  upon  this
rook  (irsTpa,  petra)  I  will  build  my  Church.
In  classical  Greek,  the  distinction  between
irtVpa  and  irerpos  is  well  known — the  former
meaning  "a  rook,"  the  latter  "a  piece  of
rock,"  or  "  a  stone."  But  probably  no  such
distinotinn  is  intended  here,  as  there  would
he  none'  in  Aramaic.  There  is  plainly  a
paronomasia  here  in  the  Geeek  ;  and,  if  our
Lord  spoke  in  Aramaic,  the  same  play  of
words  was  exhibited  in  Kephae  or  kepha.
When  Jesus  first  called  Peter  to  be  a  dis-
ciple, lie  imposed  upon  him  the  name  Cephas,
which  the  evangelist  explains  to  be  Feter
(John  i.  42).  Tlie  name  was  bestowed  in
anticipation  of  Peter's  great  confession:
"  Thou  slialt  be  called."  This  preannounce-
ment  was  here  fulfilled  and  confirmed.
Upon  this  passage  chiefly  the  claims  of  the
Eoman  Church,  which  for  fifteen  centuries
have  been  the  subject  of  acrimonious  con-
troveisy,  are  founded.  It  is  hence  assumed
that  the  Christian  Church  is  founded  upon
Peter  and  his  successors,  and  that  these
successors  are  the  Bishops  of  Borne.  The
latter  assertion  may  be  left  to  the  decision
of  history,  which  fails  to  prove  that  Peter
was  ever  at  Rome,  or  that  he  transmitted
his  supposed  supremacy  to  the  episcopate
of  that  city.  We  have  in  this  place  to  deal
with  the  former  assertion.  Who  or  what
is  the  roek  on  which  Christ  says  that  he
will  hereafter  build  his  Church?  French
Eomanists  consider  it  a  providential  coin-
cidence that  they  can  translate  the  passage,
"  Je  te  dis  que,  Tu  ea  Pierre ;  et  sur  cette
pierre  je  b&tUai,"  etc.  j  but  persons  outside
the  papal  communion  are  not  satisfied  to
hang  their  faith  on  a  play  of  words.  The
early  Fathers  are  by  no  means  at  one  in
their  explanations  of  the  paragraph.  Living
before  Eome  had  laid  claim  to  the  tremen-
dous privileges  which  it  afterwards  affected,
they  did  not  regard  the  statement  in  the
light  of  later  controversies  ;  and  even  those
who  held  Peter  to  be  the  rock  would  have
indignantly  repelled  the  assumptions  which
have  been  built  on  that  interpretation.  The
apostolic  Fathers  seem  to  have  mentioned
the  passage  in  none  of  their  writings  ;  and
they  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  refer  to
it  had  they  been  aware  of  the  tremendous
issues  dependent  thereon.  Jt  was  embodied
in  no  Catholic  Creed,  and  never  made  an
article  of  the  Chnstiun  faith.  We  may
r«iu»ik  also  that  of  the   erangelists  St.


Matthew  alone  records  the  promise  to
Peter  ;  Mark  and  Luke  give  his  confession,
which  was  the  one  point  which  Christ
desired  to  elicit,  and  omit  that  which  is
considered  to  concern  his  privileges.  This
looks  as  though,  in  their  view,  the  chief  aim
of  the  passage  was  not  Peter,  but  Christ ;
not  Peter's  pre-eminence,  but  Christ's  nature
and  office.  At  the  same  time,  to  deny  all
allusion  to  Peter  in  the  "rock"  is  quite
contrary  to  the  genius  of  the  language  and
to  New  Testament  usage,  and  would  not
have  been  so  pressed  in  modem  times
except  for  polemical  purposes.  Three  views
have  been  held  on  the  interpretation  of  this
pussage.  (1)  That  Christ  himself  is  the
Buck  on  which  the  Church  should  be  built.

(2)  That  Peter's  confession  of  Jesus  Christ  as
Son  of  God,  or  God  incarnate,  is  the  Knck.

(3)  That  St.  Peter  is  the  roek.  (1)  The  first
explanation  is  supported  by  passages  where-
in Christ  speaks  of  himself  in  the  third
person,  e.g.  "Destroy  this  temple;"  "If
any  man  eat  of  this  bread ; "  "  Whoso
falleth  on  this  stone,"  etc.  In  the  same
sense  are  cited  the  words  of  Isaiah  (xxviii.
16),  "  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation
a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious  comer-
stone,  a  sure  foimdation."  Almighty  God
is  continually  called  "  a  Bock  "  in  the  Old
Testament  (see  2  Sam.  xxiL  32 ;  Ps.  xviii.
31 ;  Ivii.  2,  6,  7,  etc.),  so  that  it  might  be
deemed  natural  and  intelligible  for  Christ
to  call  himself  "  this  Book,"  in  accordance
with  the  words  of  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  iii.  11),
"  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than
that  which  is  laid  ((reiTai),  which  is  Jesus
Christ."  But  then  the  reference  to  Peter
becomes  unmeaning :  "  Thou  art  Peter,  and
upon  myself  I  will  build  my  Church."  It
is  true  that  some  few  eminent  authorities
have  taken  this  view.  Thus  St.  Augustine
writes,  "  It  was  not  said  to  him, "  Thou  art  a
ioak.(petra),'  but, '  Thou  art  Peter,'  and  the
Enck  was  Christ"  ('Betraot.,'  i.  21).  Ami
commentators  have  imagined  that  Christ
pointed  to  himself  as  he  spoke.  In  such
surLnises  there  is  an  inherent  improbability,
and  they  do  not  explain  the  commencement
of  the  address.  In  saying,  "  Thou  art  Peter,"
Christ,  if  he  made  any  gesture  at  all,  would
have  touched  or  turned  to  that  apostle.
Immediately  after  this  to  have  directed
attention  to  himself  would  have  been  most
unnatural  wid  contradictory.  We  may
safely  surrender  the  interpretation  which
regards  Christ  himself  as  the  Eock.  (2)  The
explanation  which  finds  the  rock  in  Peter's
great  confession  has  been  widely  adopted
by  commentators  ancient  and  modern.  Thus
St.  Chrysostom,  "  Upon  this  rook,  that  is,  on
the  faith  of  his  confession.  Hereby  he
signifies  that  many  were  now  on  the  point
of  believing,  and  raises   Lis  spirit,  aai


eaivtl— 28.]    THE  60SPEL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  135


makes  him  a  shepheid."  To  the  same
purport  might  be  quoted  Hilary,  Ambrose,
Jerome,  Gregory  Nyss.,  Cyril,  and  otiiera.
It  is  remarkable  that  in  the  Collect  from  the
Oregorian  Sacramentary  and  in  the  Boman
Miasal  on  the  Vigil  of  St.'Peter  and  St.  Paul
are  found  the  words,  "Grant  that  thou
wonldst  not  suffer  us,  whom  thou  hast
established  on  the  lOok  of  the  apostolio
confession  (quo»  in  apottolicm  eonfetHonia
petra  Bolidasti)  to  be  shaken  by  any  com-
motions." Bishop  Wordsworth,  as  many
exegetes  virtually  do,  combines  the  two
interpretations,  and  we  cite  his  exposition
as  a  specimen  of  the  view  thus  held :  "  What
he  says  is  this,  'I  myself,  now  confessed  by
thee  to  be  both  God  and  Man,  am  the  Book
of  the  Church.  This  is  the  foundation  on
which  it  is  built'  And  because  St  Peter
had  confessed  him  as  such,  he  says  to  St.
Peter, '  Thou  hast  confessed  me,  and  I  will
now  confess  thee ;  thou  hast  owned  me,  I
will  now  own  thee.  Thou  art  Peter,'  {.e.
thou  art  a  lively  stone,  hewn  out  of  and
built  upon  me,  the  living  Bcxik.  Thon  tut
a  genuine  Fetrot  of  me,  the  Divine  Petra,
And  whosoever  would  be  a  lively  stone,  a
Peter,  mast  imitate  thee  in  this  thy  true
confession  of  me,  the  living  Roele ;  for  upon
tbls  Bock,  that  is,  on  myself,  believed  and
confessed  to  be  both.  God  and  Man,  I  will
build  my  Church."  As  the  opinion  that
Oil  list  means  himself  by  "this  rock"  is
untenable,  so  we  consider  that  Peter's  con-
fession is  equally  debarred  from  being  the
foundation  intended.  Who  does  not  see
that  the  Church  is  to  be  built,  not  on  confes-
sions or  dogmas,  but  on  men — men  inspired
by  God  to  teach  the  great  truth  ?  A  con-
fession implies  a  confessor;  it  was  the  person
who  made  the  confession  that  is  meant,  not
the  mere  statementitseIf,howevermomentous
md  true.  Thus  elsewhere  the  Church  is
gaid  to  have  been  built  upon  the  foundation
)f  the  apostles  and  prophets  (Eph.  ii.  20),
'  Ye,"  says  St.  Peter  (1  Pet  ii.  5), "  as  living
tones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house."
"  James  and  Cephas  who  were  reputed  to
be  pillars"  (Gal.  ii.  9).  In  Bevelation
(xxi.  14)  the  fonndation-stones  of  the
heavenly  temple  are  "  the  twelve  apostles  of
the  Lamb."  Hence  we  gather  that  the  rock
la  a  person.  (3)  So  we  come  to  the  explana-
tion of  the  difficulty  which  naturally  is
deduced  from  the  language  if  considered
without  regard  to  prejudice  or  the  pernicious
ase  to  which  it  has  been  put.  Looking  at  the
matter  in  a  straightforward  way,  we  come
to  the  conclusion  that  Christ  is  wishing  to
leward  Peter  for  his  outspoken  profession
of  faith ;  and  his  commendation  is  couched
in  a  form  wliich  was  usual  in  Oriental  ad-
dresses, and  intelligible  to  his  hearers.
"TboQ  hast  said  to  me,  'Thou  art  the  Son


of  God ;  •  I  say  to  thee,  •  Thou  art  Peter,'
a  rock-man,  'and  on  thee,'  as  a  rock,  'I
vrfll  buiid  my  Church.'"    As  he  was  the
first  to  acknowledge  Christ's  nature  and
ofSce,  so  he  was  rewarded  by  being  ap-
pointed   as    the   apostle   who  should   in-
augurate the  Christian  Church  and  lay  its
first  foundation.    His  name  and  bis  work
were  to  coincide.  This  promise  was  fulfilled
in  Peter's  acts.    He  it  was  who  took  the
lead  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when  at  his
preaching,  to  the  hundred  and  twenty  dis-
ciples there  were    added  three  thousand
souls  (Acts  ii.  41);  he  it  was  who  admitted
the  Gentiles  to  the  Christian  community
(Acts  X.);  he  it  was   who  in  those  early
days  stood  forth  prominently  as  a  master-
builder,  and  was  the  first  to  open  the  king-
dom of  heaven  to  Jews  and  Gentiles.    It  is
objected  that,  if  Peter  was  a  builder,  he
oould  not  be  the  rock  on  which  the  building
was  raised.    The  expression,  of  course,  is
metaphorical.    Christ  buUds  the  Church  by
employing  Peter  as  the  foundation  of  the
spiritual  house ;  Peter's  zeal  and  activity
and   stable  faith  are    indeed    the    living
rock  which  forms  the  material  element,  so
to  speak,  of  this  erection ;  he,  as  labouring
in  the  holy  cause  beyond  all  others,  at  any
rate  in  the  early  days  of  the  gospel,  is
regarded  as  that  solid  basis  on  which  the
Church  was  raised.    Christ,  in  one  sense,
builds  on  Peter;  Peter  builds  on  Christ.
The  Church,  in  so  far  as  it  was  visible,  had
Peter  for  its  rocky  foundation ;  in  so  far  as
it  was  spiritual,  it  was  founded  on  Christ
The  distinction  thus  accorded  in  the  future
to  Peter  was  personal,  and  carried  with  it
none  of  the   consequences  which  human
ambition  or  mistaken  pursuit  of  unity  have
elicited  therefrom.     There  was  no  promise
of  present  supremacy ;  there  was  no  promise
of  the  privilege  being  handed  down  to  suc-
cessors.   The  other  apostles  had  no  concep-
tion of  any  superiority  being  now  conferred
on  Peter.    It  was  not  long  after  this  that
there  was  a  strife  among  them  who  should
be  the  greatest;  James  and  John  claimed
the  highest  places  in  the  heavenly  king-
dom ;  Paul  resisted  Peter  to  the  face  "  be-
cause he  stood  condemned "  (Gal.  ii.  11);
the  president  of  the  first  council  was  James,
the  Bishop  of  Jerusalem.     It  is  plain  that
neither  Peter  himself  nor  his  fellow-apostles
understood  or  acknowledged  his  supremacy ;
and  that  he  transmitted,  or  was  intended  to
transmit,  such  authority  to  successors,  is  a
figment  unknown  to  primitive  Christianity,
and  which  was  gradually  erected,  to  serve
ambitious  designs,  on  forged  ilecretals  and
spurious  writings.     This  is  not  the  place
for  polemics,  and  these  few  apologetic  hints
are  introduced  merely  with   the  view  of
showing  that  no  one  need  be  afraid  of  tho


136


I'HI!  GOStEL  ACCORDING  tO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh,  xvi.  1—28.


obvions  and  straigbtforward  interpretation
of  Christ's  words,  or  suppose  that  papal
claims  are  necessarily  supported  thereby.
I  will  build  my  Church  (jiov  tV  ^/tKAijo-foy).
My  Church,  not  thine.  Plainly,  therefore,
the  Church  was  not  yet  builded.  Christ
speaks  of  it  as  a  house,  temple,  or  palace,
perhaps  at  the  moment  gazing  on  some
castle  founded  securely  on  a  rock,  safe  from
flood  and  storm  and  hostile  attack.  We
know  how  commonly  he  took  his  illustra-
tions from  objects  and  scenes  around  him ;
and  the  rooky  base  of  the  great  castle  of
Ctesarea  Philippi  may  well  have  supplied
the  material  for  the  metaphor  here  intro-
duced. The  word  translated  "  church "
{iKKhTi(ria),  is  found  here  for  the  first  time  in
the  New  Testament.  It  is  derived  from  a
verb  meaning  "to  call  out,"  and  in  classical
Greek  denotes  the  regular  legislative  as-
sembly of  a  people.  In  the  Septuagint  it
represents  the  Hebrew  kahal,  tlie  congrega-
tion united  into  one  society  and  forming
one  polity  (see  Trench, '  Synonyms ').  The
name  kehila  in  modem  times  is  applied  to
every  Jewish  community  whicli  has  its  own
synagogue  and  ministers.  From  the  use  of
the  metaphor  of  a  house,  and  the  word
employed  to  designate  the  Church,  we  see
that  it  was  not  to  be  a  mere  loose  collection
of  items,  but  an  organized  whole,  united,
otScered,  and  permanent.  Hence  the  word
Eoehtia  has  been  that  which  designated
the  Christian  souiuty,  and  has  been  handed
down  and  recognized  in  all  ages  and  in  all
countries.  It  may  be  regarded  as  the
personal  part  of  that  kingdom  of  heaven
which  was  to  embrace  the  whole  world,
when  "  the  kingdom  of  the  world  is  become
the  kingdom  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ "
(Bev.  xi.  15 ;  see  Introduction,  §  x.).  The
gates  of  hell  (^5ou)  shall  not  prevail
against  it.  Hades,  which  our  version  calls
"  hell,"  is  the  region  of  the  dead,  a  gloomy
and  desolate  place,  according  to  Jewish
tradition,  situated  in  tlie  centre  of  the  earth,
a  citadel  with  walls  and  gates,  which  ad-
mitted the  souls  of  men,  but  opened  not  for
their  egress.  There  are  two  ways  of  ex-
plaining these  words,  though  they  both
come  to  much  the  same  idea.  The  gates  of
Hades  represent  the  entrance  thereto ;  and
the  LorJ  affiims  that  death  shuU  have  no
power  over  the  members  of  the  Church ;
they  shall  be  able  to  rise  superior  to  its
attacks,  even  if  for  a  time  they  seem  to
succumb;  their  triumphant  cry  shall  be,
"  0  death,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  O  death,
where  is  thy  stiug  ? "  (1  Cor.  xv.  65).
Through  the  grave  and  gate  of  death  they
shall  pass  to  a  joyful  i  esurrection.  The  other
interpretation  is  derived  from  the  fact  that
in  Oriental  cities  the  gate  is  the  scene  of
deliberation    and    oounani      Hence  "the


gates  "  here  may  represent  the  evil  designs
planned  by  the  powers  of  hell  to  overthrow
the  Chnrch,  the  wiles  and  machinations  of
the  devil  and  his  angels,  Hades  beiug  taken,
not  as  the  abode  of  the  dead,  but  as  the
realm  of  Satan.  Neither  malignant  spirits
nor  their  allies,  such  as  sin,  persecution,
heresy,  shall  be  able  to  wreck  the  eternal
building  which  Christ  was  founding.  Com-
bining the  two  expositions,  we  may  say  that
Christ  herein  promises  that  neither  the
power  of  death  nor  the  power  of  the  devil
thall  prevail  againtt  it  QtaTiax^ifoixriv  ab-
T^s),  shall  overpower  it,  keep  it  in  subjection.
The  pronoun  refers  doubtless  to  Church,  not
rock,  the  verb  being  more  applicable  to  the
former  than  the  latter,  and  the  pronoun
being  nearer  in  position  to  iKKXrjirtav.  To  see
here  an  assurance  of  the  infallibility  of  the
pope,  as  Bomanists  do,  is  to  force  tlie  words
of  Scripture  most  unwarrantably  in  order  to
support  a  modern  figment  which  has  done
infinite  harm  to  tlie  cause  of  Christ.  As
Erasmus  says,  "Proinde  miror  esse,  qui
locum  huno  detorqueant  ad  Bomanum  Pou-
tifleem."

Ver.  19. — ^I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys
of  the  kingdom  al  heaven.  The  metaphor
of  a  house  or  oastle,  with  its  gates  that  must
be  opened  with  keys,  is  still  maintained ;  or
else  the  idea  is  of  the  exercise  of  a  steward-
ship in  a  household.  But  the  kttei  seems
unnecessarily  to  introduce  a  new  notion,  and
to  mar  the  concinnity  of  the  passage.  In
Isa.  xxii.  22  we  read,  "  The  key  of  the  house
of  David  will  I  lay  upon  his  shoulder ;  and
he  shall  open,  and  none  shall  shut ;  and  he
shall  shut,  and  none  shall  open" — where
the  figure  is  similar.  The  delivery  of  the
keys  of  a  city,  etc.,  to  a  person,  symbolizes
the  handing  over  of  the  authority  to  that
person.  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  "  means
here  the  visible  Church  of  Christ  in  its  most
extended  form.  In  this  Church,  hereafter
to_  be  constituted,  Peter  personally  is  pro-
mised a  certain  authority.  Tiiis  is  a  parioual
reward  for  his  good  confession,  and  a  pre-
(Uction  of  the  way  in  which  he  was  to  exer-
cise it.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  change
in  the  figure  used.  He  who  was  the  founda-
tion of  the  Church  is  now  its  overseer,  and
may  open  or  shut  its  doors,  may  admit  or
exclude  whomsoever  he  will,  always  follow-
ing the  guidance  of  the  inspiring  Spirit
This  promi/e  was  fulfilled  after  the  Day  of
Pentecost.  It  seems  to  have  been  at  this
time  only  promised,  not  conferred  upon
Peter.  The  actual  gift  of  the  power  to  him
and  his  brother  apostles  took  place  after  the
Eesurreotion,  as  we  read  in  Jolm  xx.  22.
The  "power  of  the  keys,'  as  it  is  called,  is
considered  to  have  two  branches— a  legisla-
tive power  and  un  absolving  power.  The
former  Peter  exercised  when  he  took  th«


CH.  XTL  1— 28.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


137


lead  after  the  effnsion  of  the  Spirit,  and
opened  the  door  to  the  Jews.  X^  was  his
action  that  admitted  the  Gentiles,  without
compliance  witli  the  distinctive  ritei  of
Judaism,  to  all  the  privileges  of  the  gospel
('see  Acts  xv.  7).  This  most  momentous
[irecedent  he  established  and  made  good  for
all  time.  Tbeae  were  legislative  acts  which
he  had  the  honour  of  introducing,  and
which,  thus  inaugurated,  upheld,  and  de-
fended by  him,  tended  to  advauce  that  unity
which  the  Lord  held  so  dear.  As  an  in-
stance of  bis  shutting  the  door  of  the  king-
dom in  the  face  of  kn  impious  intruder,  we
may  notice  his  rebuke  to  Simon  Migus
(Acta  viii.  21),  "  Thou  hast  neither  part  nor
lot  in  this  matter."  The  absolving  power,
lupposed  to  be  contained  in  the  gift  of  the
keys,  seems  rather  to  belong  to  the  terms  of
the  succeeding  promise.  We  conceive  that
this  power  was  first  given  to  St.  Peter  in
acknowledgment  of  his  good  confession,  and
as  an  emblem  of  unity,  and  was  afterwards
bestowed  on  all  the  apostles.  That  the
fi'athers  did  not  regard  it  as  limited  ex-
clusively to  Peter,  maybe  seen  by  quotations
gathered  by  Wordsworth  and  other  com-
mentators. Thus  TertuUian, '  Scorpiac.,'  10,
"  Memento  claves  bio  Dominum  Petro,  et  per
ilium EcolesisB  reliquisse ; "  St.  Cyprian, ' De
Uiiit.,'  p.  107,  "  Apostolis  omnibus  post  re-
surrectionem  suam  parem  potestatem  tri-
buit ; "  St.  Augustine, '  Serm.,'  coxov.,  "  Has
claves  non  homo  unns,  sed  unitas  accepit
EcClesias."  Whatsoever  thou  Shalt  bind  on
earth,  etc.  "Binding"  and  "loosing"  has
been  explained  in  various  ways.  Some  say
the  terms  mean  admitting  or  debarring  from
the  Church, which  would  make  them  identical
with  the  power  of  the  keys,  and  would  give
no  additional  privilege ;  whereas  it  is  plain
that  further  honour  is  intended  to  be  be-
stowed. Others  affirm  that  the  expression
is  to  be  understood  of  absolution  from  sin.
They  take  the  metaphor  to  be  derived  from
a  prisoner  and  his  chain.  Sinners  are  tied
and  bound  with  the  chain  of  their  sins ;  they
are  released  on  repentance  by  the  ministry
of  reconciliation  (2  Cor.  t.  18, 19);  they  are
bound,  when  the  means  of  grace  are  with-
held from  them,  owing  to  the  absence  of
tokens  of  sincerity  :md  faith.  This  is  the
view  taken  in  the  Anglican  Ordinal,  where
to  the  priest  it  is  solemnly  said, "  Whose
sins  thou  dost  forgive,  they  are  forgiven ;
and  whose  sins  thou  dost  retain,  they  are
retained."  But  this  was  no  special  gift  to
Peter ;  it  was  bestowed  not  long  after  upon
eJl  the  apostolic  body  in  the  very  same
terms  (ch,  xviii.  18),  and  was  indeed  in-
herent in  the  ministry.  This  interpretation
also  iatroduces  a  new  element  into  the  pro-
mise, which  does  not  agree  with  the  context.
There  is  nothini;  to  lead  one  to  expect  buo)i


an  item,  and  to  supply"  sin*  "  to  the  general

term  "  whatsoever  "  twice  repeated,  is  harsh
and  unnatural.  A  more  reasonable  expla
nation  of  the  phrase  is  derived  from  the  use
of  the  terms  among  the  Jews  themselves
In  their  Talmudic  glosses  we  find  equiva-
lent expressions.  "  To  bind  "  is  to  forbid,
to  pronounce  unlawful;  "to  loose"  is  to
allow,  to  declare  lawful.  And  the  Lord
here  promises  Peter  a  certain  pre-eminence
in  the  government  and  organization  of  the
Church,  and  that  the  rules  which  he  ordained
and  the  sentences  which  he  should  pass  in
the  due  exercise  of  his  apostolical  authority,
should  be  ratified  and  confirmed  in  heaven
(Burgon).  The  phrase  is  found  in  Josephus,
expressive  of  the  possession  of  unrestricted
authority.  Thus  he  speaks  of  the  Pharisees
as  having  power  to  loose  and  bind  (\deiy  re
Ka.1  Sell/)  whom  they  would  ('Bell.  Jud.,*
i.  5.  2).  And  it  is  noted  that  an  inscription
upon  a  statue  of  Isia  reads,  "  I  am  the  queen
of  the  country,  and  whatsoever  I  bind  no
man  can  loose"  (Diod.  Sio.,  i.  27>  This
is  a  personal  distinction  conferred  on  St.
Peter  in  the  exercise  of  an  office  common  to
all  the  apostles.  It  was  needful,  in  the  early
Church,  that  one  should  1x3  chosen,  primus
inter  pares,  to  be  the  chief  office-bearer  and
leader  of  the  body  of  believers.  Not  that
he  conceived  himself  to  be,  or  was  recog-
nized by  others  as,  infallible,  or  as  an  irre-
sponsible despot;  many  events  before  and
after  Pentecost  forbid  such  an  assumption ;
but  his  faith,  character,  and  zeal  pointed
him  out  as  well  constituted  to  regulate  and
order  the  infant  community,  and  to  take
the  first  part  in  maintaining  that  unity
which  was  essential  to  the  new  kingdom.
This  personal  primacy  may  justly  be  con-
ceded, even  by  those  who  are  most  inimical
to  the  arrogant  claims  of  the  papacy ;  for
it  carries  not  with  it  the  consequences  which
have  been  appended.  Precedence  in  rank
does  not  of  necessity  involve  supreme  or
even  superior  authority.  A  duke  has  no
authority  over  a  baron,  though  he  has  pre-
cedence. The  fuller  oonsideration  of  this
sphere  of  the  subject  belongs  rather  to  the
historian  and  the  polemist  than  to  the  ex-
positor, and  to  such  we  leave  it,  only  adding
that,  in  his  peculiar  privilege,  Peter  stands
alone,  and  that  in  his  extraordinary  power
he  had,  and  was  intended  to  have,  no
successors.

Yer.  20. — Then  charged  he  bis  disciples.
Immediately  after  Peter's  confession  and
Jesus'  promise.  St.  Matthew's  word
"  charged  "  (SteimtXaTo)  becomes  more  em-  .
phatio  in  the  other  synoptists  (^eireTt/iria-ev),
implying  a  command  with  a  rebuke  attached
to  it  on  its  infringement;  Vulgate,  eoTn-
minatut  est  (Mark  viii.  30).  That  they
should  tell  no  maa  tliat  he  (airhs)  waa


138


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvl  1—29.


[Tesiu]  the  Christ.  The  reoeived  text  in-
BertB  the  word  "  Jesus,"  but  very  many  good
manuscripts  omit  it ;  and  it  eeems  to  have
been  received  by  inadvertence,  the  point
being  that  he  was  Messiah.  The  injunction
to  tell  no  man  (with  which  comp.  oh.  viii.  4)
was  necessary  at  this  time  for  many  reasons.
The  time  was  not  ripe  for  the  declaration,
which  might  have  led  to  tumult  and  dis-
order among  an  excited  populace.  Any
ambitious  ideas  which  the  apostles  might
have  formed  from  what  had  just  passed  were
here  nipped  in  the  bud.  They  were  not
sufficiently  familiar  with  the  true  notion  of
the  Messiah,  especially  a  suffering  Messiah,
to  be  competent  to  preach  him  to  others.
This  we  see  by  Peter's  inconsiderate  re-
monstrance in  ver.  22.  Till  they  received
the  Holy  Ghost  after  Ohrist's  ascension,
tliey  could  not  rightly  and  profitably  preach
of  Christ's  nature,  office,  aud  Inngdom.
Jesus  may  have  looked  forward  to  their
desertion  of  him  in  hii  hour  of  trial,  and
prevented  them  from  proclaiming  his  real
character,  which,  in  the  face  of  such  desei^
tion,  would  have  proved  a  stumbling-block
to  the  faith  of  believers.  Some  of  these
reasons  we  may  reverently  believe  were
those  which  led  Christ  to  lay  this  severe
restriction  on  the  enthusiasm  of  his  follow-
ers (see  on  oh.  xvii.  9).

Ver.  21 — ch.  xxv.  46. — SmnvBora:  Jsavs

ACCEPTS  AND  DOES  NOT  SHTJN  IT.

Vers.  21 — ^28. — Jesiu  announoet  plainly
hii  death  and  returreetion.  Bebuka  Peter.
(Mark  viii.  31— ii.  1 ;  Luke  ix.  22—27.)

Ver.  21. — ^From  that  time.  Henceforward
Ohrist  changes  his  teaching  and  his  be-
haviour. He  tells  of  his  sufferings,  and  of
their  necessity  in  the  order  of  things,  bo
that  any  one  who  opposes  this  design  is
fighting  againat  God ;  and  shows  how  self-
denial  and  pain  must  be  the  lot  of  his
followers.  Began  to  show  unto  his  disciples.
No  longer  obscurely,  but  plainly  and  with-
out reserve.  He  had  already  intimated  his
future  sufferiugs,  though  his  disciples  had
been  slow  to  receive  these  dark  hints,  so
opposed  to  all  their  preconceived  opinions
of  Messiah's  glory  aud  victorious  career.
Such  sayings  as,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and
in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  "(John  iL
19)  ;  aud,  "As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent
in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of
man  be  lifted  up  "  (John  iii.  14),  had  fallen
unheeded  on  the  disciples'  ears,  and  had  not
guided  them  to  forecast  the  future.  Even
the  allusions  to  their  own  trials,  in  the
warnings  about  bearing  the  cross  and
following  him  (ch.  x.  38),  were  not  under-
stood. The  great  point  of  his  real  nature
h«d  become  clear  to  them;  they  had  now


to  learn  that  the  way  to  glory,  both  tat
him  and  them,  led  through  suffering  and
death.  Conscious  of  Christ's  Divinity,  they
could  now  more  patiently  endure  the
mystery  of  his  cross  and  Passion.  Unto
Jemsalem.  The  appointed  scene  of  these
events  (see  ch.  xx.  17).  He  must  (Se<)
go  thither  to  meet  and  endure  these
snAerings,  because  it  was  so  ordained  in
the  counsels  of  God  and  announced  by  the
prophets  (comp.  oh.  xxvi.  S4 ;  Luke  zxiv.
26,  46).  Uany  things.  These  are  detailed
in  ch.  XX.  18,  19;  Luke  xviii.  31 — 33.
Elders,  chief  priests,  and  scribes.  The  various
members  of  the  Sanhedrin  (see  ch.  ii.  4).
The  three  classes  are,  in  Nosgen's  opinion,
intentionally  named  here — the  elders,  as
the  most  aged  and  venerated  members,  or
such  as  were  distinguished  by  rank  and
character;  the  chief  priests,  heads  of  the
twenty-four  courses,  as  office-bearers  of  the
theocracy ;  and  scribes,  at  that  time  occu-
pying almost  the  position  of  the  prophets.
The  whole  religious  world  would  thus  be
combined  against  Ohrist.  Be  killed.  He
does  not  here  say  "  crucified,"  as  he  did
afterwards  (oh.  xx.  19),  only  gradually  re-
vealing the  whole  awful  truth.  Be  raised
again  the  third  day.  This  announcement
was  intended  to  support  the  disciples  in
view  of  Christ's  sufferings  and  deatii.  And
"the  third  day"  is  mentioned,  not  only  for
typical  reasons,  but  to  assure  them  that  his
death  should  be  speedily  followed  by  his
return  to  life  from  the  grave.  It  is  obvious
to  us  that  Jesus  prophesied  plainly  con-
cerning his  resurrection ;  but  such  an  event,
so  unprecedented,  so  unexperienced,  was
not  understood ;  and  though  the  prediction
was  so  far  knovm  as  to  cause  his  grave  to
be  watched,  it  was  only  a  vague  kind  of
expectation,  without  form  or  definiteness,
that  was  cherished,  and  the  actual  fact  came
as  a  surprise  (see  Mark  ix.  10,  32).

Ter.  22. — Peter  took  him  {rrpoirXaP6ii.evos).
Either  taking  him  aside,  or  taking  him  by
the  hand  or  dress — a  reverent  familiarity
permitted  by  the  Lord  to  his  loving  apostle.
And  now  this  same  Peter,  who  had  just
before  made  his  noble  confession,  and  had
been  rewarded  with  unique  coramenctiou,
unable  to  shake  off  the  prejudices  of  his
age  and  his  education,  began  to  rebuke
(^iriTi/uSi')  his  Master.  He  presumed  to
chide  Jesus  for  speaking  of  suffering  and
death.  He,  the  Son  of  God  most  High,
what  bad  he  to  do  with  such  things?  How
could  he  name  them  in  connection  with
himself?  Peter,  while  accepting  the  idea
of  Messiah  as  Divine  and  triumphant,  could
not  receive  the  notion  of  his  death  and
Passion.  That  the  same  person  should  be
so  humiliated  and  yet  so  glorious,  was
beyond  his  conception.    He  was  as  much  in


OH.  xvL  1^28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


139


(he  dark  as  his  fellow-apostlea ;  of  that
which  waa  not  specially  revealed  to  him  he
knew  nothing.  It  was  the  carnal  mind  that
here  influenced  him,  not  the  spiritually
enlightened  soul.  By  writing  "  began,"  the
historian  intimates  that  he  had  not  time  to
say  much  before  the  Lord  mercifully  inter-
posed and  cut  him  short.  Be  it  far  from
thee;  i\e<is  coi:  "Vulgate,  dbsit  a  te.  The
Greek  phrase  is  elliptical,  eifr;  6  ®f6s  being
understood ;  "  God  bo  merciful  to  thee,"
equivalent  to  "  God  forbid."  The  complete
expression  occurs  in  the  Septuagint  of
1  Chron.  xi.  19.  It  is  used  in  deprecation
of  a  disastrous  event.  This  shall  not  be
unto  thee ;  oi  /ii)  hrai  trot  tovto.  This
ia  a  very  strong  assertion,  not  ".  prayer  or
wish,  as  some  would  make  it;  the  use  of
language  is  quite  against  that,  as  the
phrase  is  predictive,  never  prohibitory.  In
his  mistaken  zeal  and  his  ignorant  affec-
tion, Peter  would  be  wiser  than  his  Lord.
The  cross  and  Pasaion  shall  never  be  thy
lot ;  Messiah  cannot  suffer,  the  Son  of  God
cannot  die.  Such  merely  human  assevera-
tion, even  prompted  by  undoubted  love,  had
to  be  checked  and  rebuked.

Ver.  23. — He  turned.  Peter  and  the  rest
were  following  Chriat,  aa  he  walked  on-
ward. Now  Jesus  stops,  turns,  and  faces
them.  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan.  Jesus
uses  nearly  the  same  worda  in  rebuking
Peter  that  he  had  used  to  the  devil  in  his
temptation  (ch.  iv.  10) ;  and  justly,  becauae
tlie  apoatle  waa  acting  the  adversary's  part,
by  opposing  the  Divine  economy,  and  en-
deavouring to  persuade  Jesus  that  the  way
he  proposed  was  wholly  unnecessary.  The
lively  stone  has  become  a  very  Satan  in
oppoaing  the  Divine  will ;  hence  the  sharp-
ness of  the  rebuke  administered  to  him.
An  offence  unto  me  {a'Ktit'5a\ov  e/ioO);  my
stwnbling-bloch.  Petros,  the  stone,  to  main-
tain the  metaphor,  is  now  "a  stone  of
stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence"  (1  Pet.  ii.
8).  He  stood  in  the  Saviour's  way,  and
impeded  his  onward  progress  in  the  course
ordained.  He  who  would  turn  him  aside
from  Calvary  is  the  enemy  of  man's  salva-
tion, which  was  to  be  won  there.  Thou
savourest  {(ppovels)  not;  mindest  not  (as
Eom.  viii.  5);  thy  taste  is  nob  for  the
Divine  plans,  but  for  human  considerations ;
thou  art  not  promoting  the  great  purpose
of  God,  but  worldliness  and  self-pleasing.
"Peter,"  sajis  St.  Ohryiostom,  "examining
the  matter  by  human  and  earthly  reasoning,
accounted  it  disgraceful  to  him  [Christ]
and  an  unmeet  thing.  Touching  him  there-
fore sharply,  he  saith,  'My  Passion  is  not
an  unmeet  thing,  but  thou  givest  this
sentence  with  a  carnal  mind;  whereas  if
thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my  sayings  in  a
godly  manner,  disengaging  thyself  from  thy


carnal  understanding,  thou  wouldst  know
that  this  of  all  things  most  becometh  me.
For  thou  indeed  supposest  that  to  suffer  ig
unworthy  of  me ;  but  I  say  unto  thee,  that
for  me  not  to  suffer  is  of  the  devil's  mind; '
by  the  contrary  statements  repressing  his
alarm  "  (Oxford  transl.).

Ver.  24. — St.  Mark  tells  us  that  Jesus
called  the  multitude  unto  him  together
with  the  disciples,  as  about  to  say  some-
thing of  universal  application.  The  con-
nection hetween  this  paragraph  and  what
has  preceded  is  well  put  by  St.  Chrysostom.
Then  "  When  ?  when  St.  Peter  said, '  Be
it  far  from  thee :  this  sliall  not  be  unto  thee,'
and  was  told,  '  Get  thee  behinil  me,  Satan.*
For  Christ  was  by  no  means  satisfied  with
the  mere  rtbuke  of  Peter,  but,  willing  more
abundantly  to  show  both  the  extravagance
of  Peter's  words  and  the  future  benefit  of
his  Passion,  he  saith,  '  Thy  word  to  me  is,
"  Be  it  far  from  thee :  this  shall  not  be  unto
thee ; "  but  my  w  ord  to  thee  is,  "  Not  only  is
it  hurtful  to  thee  to  impede  me  and  to  be
displeased  at  my  Passion,  but  it  will  bo
impossible  for  thee  even  to  bo  saved,  unless
thou  thyself  too  be  continually  prepared  for
death." '  Thus,  lest  they  should  think  his
suffering  unworthy  of  him,  not  by  the
former  worda  only,  but  by  those  that  were
coming,  he  teaches  them  the  gain  thereof."
If  any  man  will  (B4\€i,  wiUt  to)  come  after
me.  To  come  after  Christ  ia  to  be  his
follower  and  disciple,  and  the  Ix)rd  here
declares  what  will  be  the  life  of  such  a  one
(see  a  parallel  passage,  ch.  x.  38,  39).
Jesus  mentions  three  points  which  belong
to  the  character  of  a  true  disciple.  The
first  is  self-denial.  Let  him  deny  himself.
There  is  no  better  test  of  reality  and
earnestness  in  the  religious  life  than  tiiis.
(See  a  sermon  of  Newman's  on  this  subject,
vol.  i.  serm.  v.)  If  a  man  follows  Jesus,  it
must  he  by  his  own  free-will,  and  lie  must
voluntarily  renounce  everjtiiing  that  might
hinder  his  discipleship,  denying  himseU
even  in  things  lawful  that  he  may  approach
the  likeness  of  his  Master.  Take  np  his
cross.  This  is  the  second  point.  St.  Luke
adds,  "  daily."  He  must  not  only  be  re-
sign id  to  bear  what  is  brought  upon  him
— suffering,  shame,  and  death,  which  he
cannot  escape,  but  be  eager  to  endure  it,
meet  it  with  a  solemn  joy,  be  glad  that  he
is  counted  worthy  of  it.  Follow  me.  The
third  point.  He  must  be  energetic  and
active,  not  passive  only  and  resigned,  but
with  all  zeal  tracking  his  Master's  footsteps,
which  lead  on  the  way  of  sorrows.  Here
too  is  comfort ;  he  is  not  called  to  a  task  as
yet  untried ;  Christ  has  gone  before,  and  in
his  strength  he  may  be  strong.

Ver.  25.— (Comp.  oh.  x.  39 ;  John  xii  25.)
Whosoever  will  (hs  yhp  %•>  64k^,  wltotoevtt


140


THE  GJOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvl  1— 28.


loilh  to)  Bave  Mb  life  (iffi/xV)-  Here  are  Bet
forth  the  highest  motives  for  courage,  en-
durance, and  perseverance  in  the  way  of
righteousnesB.  The  word  translated  "  life"
is  used  four  times  in  this  and  the  following
verse,  though  in  the  latter  it  is  rendered
"sonl"  in  the  Anglican  Version.  The  fact
is  the  word  is  used  in  two  senses:  for  the
life  which  now  is — the  bodily  life;  and
the  life  which  is  to  come — the  spiritual,
the  everlastlag  life.  These  are  indeed  two
stages  of  the  same  life — that  which  is
bounded  by  earth  and  that  which  is  to  be
passed  with  the  glorified  body  in  heaven ;
but  they  are  for  the  moment  regarded  as
distinct,  though  intimately  connected  by
belonging  to  the  same  personality.  And
the  Lord  intimates  that  any  one  who  avoids
bodily  death  and  suffering  by  compromise
of  duty,  by  denying  Christ  and  disowning
the  truth,  shall  lose  everlasting  life.  On
the  other  hand,  whosoever  sacrifices  his  life
for  the  sake  of  Christ,  to  promote  his  cause,
!>hall  save  his  soul  and  be  eternally  re-
warded. Shall  find  it.  "  Find,"  as  the  oppo-
site of  "  lose,"  is  here  equivalent  to  "  save."
There  may,  too,  be  in  it  a  notion  of  some-
thing great  and  unexpected,  a  treasure  dis-
covered, "salvation  far  beyond  all  that  they
looked  for"  (Wisd.  v.  2)l  Says  St.  Gregory,
"  If  you  teep  your  seed,  you  lose  it ;  if  you
sow  it,  you  will  find  it  again"  (*Hom.  in
Evang.,'  xxxii.).

Ver.  26. — For  what  is  a  man  (shall  a  nam
be)  profited  t  This  verse  explains  the  para-
dox concerning  loss  and  gain  in  the  previous
verse.  It  is  probably  intended  as  a  remin-
iscence of  Fs.  xlix.  7, 8.  Wordsworth  notes
that  it  is  quoted  by  Ignatius,  '£p.  ad  Bom.,'
vi. ;  but  it  is  probably  an  early  interpolation
there.  The  whole  world.  It  is  but  a  trifle
of  the  whole  world,  with  its  riches,  honours,
pleasures,  which  the  most  successful  man
can  obtain;  but  granted  it  all  lay  at  his
feet,  how  would  it  repay  him  for  the  loss
of  everlasting  life  7  Lose  his  own  soul  (life)
(t^p  ^vxh"  auToS  fnnmSf).  The  phrase
means  "suffer  loss  in  respect  of," equivalent
to  "forfeit,"  as  in  Luke  ix.  25.  "Life"
here  is  the  higher  life,  the  life  in  God.
The  Vulgate  renders,  Aninue  vera  turn  d»-
tritnentum  patiatur.  In  exchange;  iwrdx-
\aytia:  Vulgate,  eommutationem ;  a<  an
equivalent  for  his  life.  Or,  it  may  be,  to
purchase  back  his  life.  "Again,  he 'dwells
upon  the  same  point.  '  What  ?  hast  thou
another  soul  to  give  for  this  soul?'  saith
he.  'Why,  shouldst  thou  lose  money,
thou  wilt  be  able  to  give  other  money ;  or
be  it  house,  or  slaves,  or  any  other  kind  of
possession ;  but  for  thy  sonl,  if  thou  lose  it,
thou  wilt  have  no  other  soul  to  give ;  yea,
though  thou  hadst  the  world,  though  thou
»Mt  kiuf  of  th«  whole  earth,  thou  wouldst


not  be  able,  by  paying  down  all  earthly
goods,  together  with  the  earth  itself,  to
redeem  even  one  soul "  (Chrys, '  Horn.,'  Iv.).
The  value  of  the  soul  if  often  expressa  I  in
classical  adagea.

Vvxvs  y^P  obiiv  i<rTi  rt/wirepoy.
"  Naught  is  of  higher  value  than  the  soul."
Oil  y&p  Ti  ^vxh^  viKfi  ^yBpafft  ipi\Tepoy  &Wo.
"  Naught  unto  men  is  dearer  than  the  life."
So  Homer, '  Iliad,'  ix.  401 —
"  For  not  the  stores  which  Troy,  they  say,
contained

In  peaceful  times,  ere  came  the  sons  of
Greece,

Nor   all   the   treasures   which   Apollo's
shrine.

The     archer-god,   in    rock-built   Fytlios
holds.

May  weigh  with  life  .  .  .

But  when  the  breath  of  man  bath  passed
his  lips.

Nor  strength  nor  foray  can  the  loss  repair."
(Lord  Derby.)

Ver.  27. — For  the  Son  of  man  shall  come.
The  final  judgment  would  put  things  in
their  true  light — would  show  the  value  of
self-sacrifice,  would  reveal  the  punishment
of  self-pleasing.  Our  Lord  seems  to  refer
to  Dan.  vii.  13,  as  it  were,  in  testimony  to
the  truth  of  what  be  had  just  said.  £%aU
tome;  /ieAAci  lpxe<r8ai:  ventunia  e»t  (Vul-
gate), is  more  than  the  bare  announcement,
and  implies  that  it  is  in  accordance  with
the  eternal  counsels  of  God  that  he  should
appear  this  second  time.  In  the  glory  of
his  Father.  As  one  with  the  Father,  and
his  Bepresentative.  So  he  speaks  of  "the
glory  which  thou  hast  given  me"  (John
xvii.  22).  Beward;  diroSdiaei:  render,  red-
det  (Vulgate).  The  term  includes  punish-
ment as  well  as  recompense.  Works  {Tcpa^iv) ;
doing,  toorle.  The  word  does  not  signify
isolated  acts,  but  general  course  of  conduct,
practice  as  a  whole.

Ver.  28. — This  verse  has  always  been  a
erux  to  commentators,  who  cannot  decide
what  is  the  event  to  which  it  refers.  Many,
taking  it  in  connection  with  the  preceding
announcement,  refer  it  exclusively  to  the
day  of  judgment ;  but  this  idea  is  not  com-
patible with  Christ's  assertion  that  some
present  shall  see  it  ere  they  die.  Nor  can
it  refer  to  Christ's  resurrection  and  ascension,
and  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which
took  place  only  half  a  year  after  this  time,
and  the  prediction  of  which  so  short  a  time
before  could  not  have  been  introduced  in
the  terms  here  used.  Other  expositors,  and
some  of  great  name,  agree  that  the  event  to
which  Christ  alludes  is  his  transfiguration
narrated  In  the  next  chapter.  But  there
are    insuperable    ol)jeotious  to   tbis  view.


CH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


141


How  could  Christ  assert  in  the  most  solema
manaer,  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  some  of
his  hearers  would  live  to  witness  an  event
which  was  to  occur  only  a  week  hence?
Nor  is  it  likely  that  he  would  thus  publicly
announce  a  transaction  which  was  strictly
private,  seen  only  by  three  chosen  witnesses,
who  were  further  charged  not  to  reveal  the
vision  till  the  Son  of  man  was  risen  from
the  dead.  The  Lord  had  been  telling  of
the  final  judgment;  he  now  announces,  with
the  formula  used  by  him  to  present  some
revelation  of  Divine  truth,  that  there  was
to  be  a  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  at  no  very
distant  date.  This  advent  is  doubtless  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which,  as  it
occurred  only  some  forty  years  after  this
time,  some  of  his  auditors,  apostles  and  the
multitude,  would  live  to  behold.  Tliis  great
event  was  a  type  of  the  second  advent,  the
two  being  closely  connected  by  Christ  him-
self (see  ch.  xxiv.).  There  is  some  truth  in
all  the  views  that  have  obtained  concerning
this  passage:  "The  prophecy  unfolded
itself  by  degrees ;  it  has  put  forth  buds  and
blossoms,  but  it  will  not  be  in  its  full  bloom
of  accomplishment  till  the  great  day"
(Wordsworth).  There  was  some  display  of
Christ's  kingdom  at  the  Transfiguration;
another  at  bis  resurrection,  and  the  eventg
consequent  thereupon:  but  the  great  one


was  when  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  and
its  temple  made  way  for  the  full  establish-
ment and  development  of  the  gospel,  putting
an  eud  to  the  first  dispensation.  Some  stand-
ing (of  them  that  siand)  here.  Among  the
apostles  St.  John  certainly  survived  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem.  There  seems  to  be
no  recondite  meaning  in  the  term  "stand-
ing," as  if  it  signified  "remaining  stead-
fastly by  me,  adhering  to  my  side ; "  as,  taste
of  death  is  merely  a  periphrasis  for  "  die,"  and
has  not  tlie  sense  of  tasting  the  bitterness
of  death,  experiencing  its  sting.  It  appears
to  have  been  originally  a  metaphor  derived
from  a  nauseous  draught,  which  every  one
must  drain,  Coming  in  Ms  kingdom.  Not
"  into  his  kingdom,"  but  in  the  power  and
glory  that  appertain  to  his  kingdom.  Not
that  he  will  personally  appear,  but  his  mys-
tical presence  will  be  seen  by  its  effects,  the
judftment  on  the  Jewish  nation,  the  es-
tablishment of  a  spiritual,  yet  visible  king-
dom in  the  place  of  the  old  covenant.  There
may  be  a  similar  allusion  in  Christ's  words
about  St.  John,  "If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till
I  come  "  (John  xxi.  23),  and  "  This  gene-
ration shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be
fulfilled"  (ch.  xxiv.  34)— where  the  disso-
lution of  the  Jewish  polity  is  the  event
signified.


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  visit  to  Galilee.  I.  Thb  Loed  crosses  the  lake  to  the
WBBTEBN  SHORE..  1.  He  dismisses  the  multitude.  They  went  away  quietly,  it  seems.
There  was  no  need  now  to  constrain  the  disciples  to  depart  first.  The  people  did  not
attempt  to  take  the  Lord  by  force  to  make  him  a  King.  They  were  more  docile  than
the  five  thousand  had  been.  They  were  full  of  thanklulness.  They  glorified  the  God
of  Israel.  But  they  were  simple-hearted  people ;  they  did  not  regard  themselves  as
wiser  than  the  Lord.  They  were  content  to  believe  and  adore.  So  we  must  wait  on
him,  and  say,  like  the  rustic  people  on  the  east  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  "  He  hath  done
all  things  well."  He  sent  them  away,  and  took  ship,  and  crossed  to  the  western  side
of  the  lake.  2.  The  coalition  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees.  They  were  bitterly
hostile  to  each  other.  The  Sadducees  rejected  the  whole  system  of  traditional  inter-
pretations and  observances  on  which  the  Pharisees  insisted  so  strongly,  and  maintained
the  necessity  of  accepting  in  every  particular  the  literal  meaning  of  the  written  Law.
They  were  in  possession  of  the  chief  places  in  the  Church.  They  were  cold-hearted
and  apathetic.  They  clung  to  the  honours  and  emoluments  of  the  priesthood,  but
they  had  no  earnestness,  no  faith  in  spiritual  religion.  They  were  the  aristocratic
party  in  the  Jewish  Church  of  the  day.  Their  support  of  the  Herodian  family  and  the
Rcjman  rule  made  them  unpopular  with  the  people.  The  Pharisees  were  fanatics,  full
cf  zeal ;  but  it  was  misguided  zeal — ^zeal  for  the  letter  of  the  Law  as  interpreted  by  the
immense  mass  of  rabbinical  learning  which,  though  not  yet  digested  into  the  Mishna  and
Gemara,  was  taught  in  the  school  of  the  rabbis,  and  regarded  as  at  least  of  equal  authority
with  the  Scriptures  themselves.  The  Pharisees  were  intensely  national.  They  mixed
■with  the  people.  They  sympathized  with  and  encouraged  their  hatred  to  foreign
domination.  Their  principles  were  generally  accepted.  They  were  looked  upon  with
reverence  as  the  teachers  of  the  nation.  Their  great  popularity  more  than  compensated
for  the  fact  that  all  the  highest  positions  in  the  Church  were  held  by  the  Sadducees,


142  THE   GOSPEL  ACOOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xti.  1—28.

The  Pharisees  were  narrow-minded  fanatical  zealots ;  the  Sadducean  priests  were  worldly
unspiritual  ecclesiastics.  The  two  parties  hated  one  another  with  all  the  bitterness  of
party  spirit ;  but  they  hated  the  Lord  yet  more ;  and  this  common  hatred  now  brought
them  together  in  ill-omened  union  against  the  most  holy  Saviour.  Apparently  they
had  been  on  the  watch  for  his  return.  He  had  been  some  time  absent ;  first,  in  the
borders  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  then  in  the  half-heathen  Decapolia.  The  rude  country-
people  had  received  him  with  enthusiasm ;  but,  it  may  be,  his  holy  human  heart  (for
he  was  made  like  unto  us,  sin  only  excepted)  yearned  for  the  familiar  scenes  of  the
muoh-loved  Galilee,  his  own  country,  his  home,  so  far  as  he  could  be  said  to  have  had
a  home  during  the  years  of  his  ministry.  He  returned;  but  his  feet  had  scarcely
touched  the  land  when  his  enemies  were  upon  him.  They  came  with  a  renewed
demand  for  a  sign  from  heaven.  The  Lord  had  wrought  miracles  in  abundance,  but
these  they  wickedly  attributed  to  the  agency  of  the  evil  one.  Let  him  show  some
sign  from  heaven,  they  said,  such  as  Joel  and  Daniel  had  predicted;  then  they  would
recognize  him  as  the  Messiah.  They  understood  not  the  Scriptures.  They  confused
the  first  and  second  advents.  They  expected  an  earthly  Messiah — a  king  like  David
or  Solomon.  They  prescribed  the  kind  of  miracle  which  they  required.  So  unbe-
lievers now  say,  "  Let  there  be  such  and  such  a  miracle  wrought  publicly  in  London
or  Paris  ;  then  we  will  believe."  But  this  is  tempting  God.  Such  a  demandjmplies  a
presumptuous  boldness  which  is  the  very  opposite  of  trustful  faith.  If  men  wUl  not
believe  after  all  that  God  has  done  for  our  salvation,  "  neither  will  they  be  persuaded
though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  3.  TOe  LorcCs  answer.  They  were  weather-prophets,
he  said.  They  talked  much  about  the  weather,  as  people  do  still ;  they  knew  the
signs  of  its  probable  changes.  These  things  interested  them;  they  were  much
in  their  thoughts  and  on  their  lips.  But  there  were  signs  of  far  more  momentous
import  for  those  who  had  eyes  to  see.  The  sceptre  had  departed  from  Judah ;  the
mystic  weeks  of  Daniel  were  fulfilled ;  the  Lord  himself  had  pointed  out  to  the
messengers  of  the  Baptist  the  signs  of  the  Messiah's  presence.  These  things  they
would  not  understand.  The  signs  of  the  times  should  be  to  us  a  subject  for  carefnl
study  aikd  solemn  thought.  The  signs  of  the  workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the
Church  should  strengthen  and  encourage  us ;  the  signs  which  seem  to  point  to  the
approach  of  the  great  apostasy  and  to  the  coming  end  should  stir  us  up  to  watch-
fulness and  earnest  prayer ;  the  signs  which  show  the  energy  of  the  wicked  one,  and
his  awful  power  in  ensnaring  the  souls  of  men,  should  kindle  in  us  a  determined
resolution  to  resist  even  unto  death.  The  Lord  had  shown  signs  of  his  Divine  mission
sufBcient  to  the  full  to  satisfy  all  earnest  seekers  after  truth.  The  Pharisees  and
Sadducees  came  in  the  spirit  of  the  tempter,  tempting  him.  The  Lord  would  work  no
further  miracle  in  proof  of  his  Messiahship;  had  he  done  so  they  would  not  have
believed.  He  replied  in  the  same  stern  words  which  he  had  used  once  before  (ch.  xii.
39)  in  answer  to  the  like  demand.  He  left  them,  and  departed.  It  was  not  his  last
visit  to  Galilee,  but  it  was  his  last  public  appearance  there.  He  preached  there  no
more ;  he  wrought  no  more  miracles  there.  "  He  sighed  deeply  in  his  spirit,"
St.  Mark  tells  us,  as  he  spoke  these  last  words,  and  entered  into  the  ship  again.  He
had  come  to  Galilee  with  words  of  love,  with  a  message  of  peace  and  salvation ;  but
these  hard,  selfish  men  rejected  hiia,  and  prejudiced  the  people  against  him.  He  was
indeed  "  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  ifrief."  That  deep  sigh  told  the  anguish
of  his  spirit.  He  came  to  save  them.  He  had  given  up  the  effulgence  of  the  Divine
Majesty.  He  was  ready  to  lay  down  his  life  for  their  salvation  ;  and  they  would  not
be  saved.  He  had  come  to  his  own  country,  the  Galilee  which  he  loved  so  well ;  and
they  opposed  and  insulted  him,  and  drove  him  from  his  only  home  on  earth.  Let  us
be  patient  when  we  meet  with  opposition  and  disappointments.  Opposition  and  dis-
appointments, if  we  take  them  meekly  and  in  faith,  will  help  to  make  us  more  and
more  like  unto  our  Lord.

II.  He  returns  to  the  eastern  side.  1.  The  Lwd'a  caution.  He  bade  his
disciples  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees.  It  was  not  the
first  time  that  he  had  used  this  Hgure  ;  but  they  misunderstood  him.  Probably  they
were  in  great  distress.  They  had  hoped  to  return  to  Capernaum.  Tliey  had  seen  it  in
the  distance.  Now  they  were  obliged  to  depart  again  to  the  inhospitable  eastern  side
of  the  lake,  «wny  from  home  and  kindred,  away  from  the  scene  of  the  many  triumphs


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  143

of  the  Lord's  earlier  ministry.  They  felt,  too,  that  their  Master's  popularity  was
pasiing  away.  The  influence  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  had  undermined  it.  Now
the  Sadduce^s,  wh(^  wielded  all  the  power  of  the  priesthood,  had  joined  them  in
opposing  him.  The  disciples  continued  faithful.  They  followed  Christ  in  his  retreat ;
but  probably  with  very  sad  and  troubled  hearts.  In  tlieir  excitement  they  had
forgotten  to  .take  bread.  They  had  only  one  loaf,  St.  Mark  tells  us,  with  his  wonted
exactness  in  little  details.  The  discovery  of  their  neglect  added  to  tiieir  trouble.  What
should  they  do ?  Where  should  they  find  bread  in  those  uninhabited  regions?  They
interpreted  the  Lord's  warning  according  to  the  thoughts  that  filled  their  mind.  He
seemed  to  forbid  them  from  using  the  bread  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees,
though  tliey  had  but  one  loaf  with  them.  They  thought  that  Christ's  words  were
aimed  at  their  neglect,  as  people  sometimes  suppose  that  the  preacher  is  aiming  at
them,  when  it  is  really  their  own  conscience  that  disquiets  them.  The  disciples  were
full  of  excitement  iind  hurry;  the  Lord  was  calm.  Let  us  imitate  him,  and  try  to
learn  of  him  that  holy  calmness  of  spirit  which  will  keep  us  by  his  grace  thoughtful
and  collected  amid  trouble  and  disappointment.  2.  His  explanation.  (1)  ^e  rebuked
them  for  their  want  of  faith.  They  had  seen  his  miracles.  Twice  he  had  fed  with  his
sovereign  bounty  vast  multitudes  on  those  same  barren  shores  which  they. were  now
approaching.  He  recalled  to  their  memory  the  details  of  those  wondrous  banquets  in
the  wilderness.  He  had  bidden  them  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  what  they
should  eat  or  what  they  should  drink.  Strange  that  they  oould  have  fctgotten  his
words,  enforced,  as  they  had  been,  by  those  marvellous  displays  of  power;  strange
that  they  could  have  been  anxious  about  food  while  the  Lord  was  with  them.  They
knew  him .  then  after  the  flesh ;  we  know  him,  if  we  are  his  indeed,  with  a  deeper
and  holier  knowleiige.  Let  us  trust  him.  If  only  he  is  with  us,  we  have  all  that  we
can  really  want.  We  need  not  fear  the  enemies  of  faith,  whether  fanatics  or  free-
thinkers. We  need  not  tremble  for  ourselves.  We  need  not  be  anxious  about  our
future,  if  only  we  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  ours.  (2)  He  explained  his  words.  It
was  not  of  bread  that  he  had  spoken ;  such  a  caution  would  have  been  like  the  formal
precepts,  the  countless  ceremonial  rulea  of  the  Pharisees,  The  Lord's  words  had  a
deeper  meaning.  As  the  children  of  Israel  at  the  first  institution  of  the  Passover  were
forbiilden  to  take  leaven  with  them,  in  token  that  the  defiling  influences  of  Egypt  were
to  be  left  behind ;  so  now,  when  the  disciples  were  departing  from  the  controversy  with
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  the  Lord  had  warned  them  to  take  with  them  nothing
that  savoured  of  error  and  corruption.  The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  was  hyfjocrisy;
the  leaven  of  the  Sadducees  was  indifference.  We  may  well  dread  such  evil  influences ;
we  may  well  shun  such  evil  examples.  The  leaven  of  hypocrisy  or  of  indifference
spreads  itself  with  a  corrupting  power  through  the  heart  which  admits  it,  through  the
society  which  encourages  it.  "  Take  heed  and  beware,"  the  Lord  says.  The  human
heart  is  prone  to  evil,  prone  to  sloth ;  indifference  and  hypocrisy  soon  take  possession
of  it,  if  they  are  once  received  through  the  contagion  of  sinful  companionship.  We
must  depart  from  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees.  We  must  not  make  friends  of  the
hypocritical  and  the  indifferent ;  we  must  take  none  of  their  influences  with  us.  We
must  depart  with  the  Lord.  (3)  We  must  be  careful,  in  reading  Holy  Scripture,  not  to
understand  literally  what  is  spoken  figuratively ;  and  we  must  be  equally  on  our  guard
against  the  opposite  error.  We  must  not  explain  away  by  figurative  interpretations
what  is  intended  to  be  taken  literally.  The  disciples  made  both  mistakes  at  different
times.  The  student  of  the  Scriptures  needs  humility,  single-hearted  patient  thought,
and  earnest  prayer  for  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Lessons.  1.  Party  spirit  is  an  evil  thing;  beware  of  it.  2.  Study  the  signs  of
the  times;  look  for  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy;  prepare  for  coming  troubles;  prepare
for  the  second  advent.  3.  Shun  hypocrisy  and  indifference ;  be  truthful  and  earnest ;
see  that  your  religion  is  real  and  living.  4.  Bemember  the  Lord's  past  mercies,  and
be  not  anxious  for  the  future.

Vers.  13 — 10. — Ccesarta  Philippi.  I.  The  ore  at  confession.  1.  The  LorcCt
question.  It  was  asked  amid  scenes  of  singular  beauty ;  there  was  much  to  delight  the
eye  :  the  gushing  source  of  Jordan,  the  terraced  heights  on  which  the  city  was  builtj
the  mqestic  mass  of  Hermoa  with  its  crown  of  snow.     But  these  fair  sights  were


in  THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 2&

aasooiated  with  sad  thoughts  of  idolatry  and  sin.  Dan  was  near  at  hand — ^the  seat
of  the  old  worship  of  the  golden  calf.  The  city  itself  was  more  than  half  heathen ;
its  name  told  of  the  Boman  supremacy;  it  had  its  great  temple^edicated  by  the  first
Herod  to  Augustus  C%sar ;  it  had  its  famous  cave  sacred  to  the  Grecian  Faa.  But
here,  in  the  tetrarchy  of  Herod  Philip,  the  Lord  found  that  rest  and  freedom  from
persecution  which  he  could  find  no  longer  in  his  own  Galilee.  Awful  events  were
coming ;  his  hour  was  at  hand ;  he  must  be  alone  with  the  twelve  to  prepare  them
for  the  approaching  trial.  St.  Luke  tells  us  that  he  was  alone  praying ;  only  his
disciples  were  with  him.  There  were  no  thronging  multitudes  here  needing  his
gracious  mercy;  there  were  no  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  to  disturb  him  with  their
taunts  and  hypocrisies.  But  a  great  crisis  was  at  hand,  and  the  Lord  was  alone
praying.  The  holy  Son  of  God  teaches  us  by  his  own  blessed  example  the  infinite
value  of  prayer  to  prepare  us  for  times  of  peril.  He  ever  lived  in  unbroken  communion
with  the  Father.  Those  who  by  the  help  of  his  Spirit  are  learning  to  live  in  that
fellowship  which  is  with  the  Father  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  will  naturally  have
recourse  tonrayer  in  all  the  emergencies  of  life;  habitual  communion  with  God  leads
his  people  to  live  always  in  the  spirit  of  prayer,  and  keeps  tliem  always  ready.  Those
who  thus  ever  live  with  God  will  instinctively  draw  closer  to  him,  and  pour  out  their
hearts  in  the  intense  energy  of  earnest  supplication  at  all  the  turning-points  of  life,
in  the  hour  of  danger  or  temptation,  in  the  critical  times  of  the  history  of  the  Church.
It  was  a  critical  time  now.  The  Lord  had  been  rejected ;  he  had  been  driven  from
Galilee,  where  he  was  once  so  popular.  His  own  action  had  caused  this  seeming
failure.  Not  long  ago  the  multitude  sought  to  take  him  by  force  to  make  him  a  Eiug.
They  would  have  flocked  around  him  in  countless  numbers  and  in  fierce  enthusiasm,
if,  like  Judas  of  Galilee,  he  had  raised  the  standard  of  national  independence  against
the  iloman  rule  ;  if  he  had  announced  himself  publicly  as  the  expected  Messiah,
he  would  have  been  hailed  as  the  Deliverer,  the  Son  of  David,  the  Heir  to  David's
throne.  But  instead  of  following  the  current  of  popular  thought  and  popular
expectation,  the  Lord  had  set  himself  directly  against  it.  He  had  put  aside  the  offered
crown ;  he  had  himself  forced  the  apostles  to  leave  him,  and  had  sent  the  multitudes
away  in  the  hour  of  his  seeming  triumph.  They  did  not  understand  his  mission ;  his
kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  Henceforth  his  work  of  teaching  lay  mainly  with
the  twelve;  he  was  to  convince  them  of  the  true  character  of  his  Person  and  office.
He  was  bringing  them  to  the  point  now.  He  was  bringing  them  face  to  face  with  the
great  truth  which  they  had  long  felt  in  their  hearts,  but  .which  had  not  been  yet
distinctly  declared  save  once  or  twice  in  private.  "  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  the
Son  of  man  am?"  the  Lord  asked.  In  the  dignity  of  his  conscious  Divinity  he  had
never  asked  such  a  question  before ;  he  heeded  not  the  opinions  of  men ;  he  sought
not  their  praise;  he  knew  their  hearts.  But  he  asked  for  the  sake  of  the  apostles,
to  bring  their  vague  thoughts  into  clearer  distiuctness,  to  deepen  their  convictions,
to  confirm  their  faith.  The  well-known  phrase,  "  the  Son  of  man,"  seemed  to  point
to  the  true  answer ;  from  the  time  of  Daniel  it  had  a  Messianic  significance.  It  was
associated  with  the  Messiah,  both  by  the  priests  (Luke  xxii.  69,  70)  and  by  the  people
(John  xii.  34),  but  not,  perhaps,  always  certainly  and  distinctly,  "  Who  is  this  Son
of  man  ? "  the  people  asked  in,  the  passage  last  referred  to.  2.  The  answer  of  the
disciples.  They  were  men  of  the  people ;  they  had  mixed  freely  with  them ;  they  had
heard  frequent  and  eager  discussions  about  their  Master's  teaching  and  miracles,  about
his  character,  bis  authority,  his  claims.  His  life  must  have  been  regarded  with  the
deepest  interest  and  the  intensest  curiosity  throughout  the  country.  It  excited
jealousy  and  opposition  in  many  quarters ;  but  it  could  not  be  ignored  by  any  one.  It
foiced  itself  upon  public  attention ;  it  was  so  strange,  bo  unlike  any  other  life  in  its
originality,  in  its  perfect  holiness,  in  its  Divine  power.  And  now  the  Lord  asked
what  had  the  disciples  heard  men  say  of  him.  The  answer  was  sad,  not  disappointing,
to  him  who  knew  all  things ;  but  a  hard  thing  for  the  apostles  to  confess.  None  now
owned  him  to  be  the  Christ.  There  were  many  opinions :  some,  like  the  terrified
Antipas,  thought  that  he  was  John  the  Baptist  risen  from  his  martyr's  tomb ;  some
thought  that  he  was  Elijah,  come  again   as  Malachi  had  prophesied ;    some  said  he

might  be  Jeremiah,  come  to  restore  the  ark,  as  the  Jews  fondly  hoped  (2  Maco.  ii.  1 8) ;

others  imagined  that  he  might  be  some  one  or  other  of  the  old  prophets,  come,  perhaps,


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING-  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.  145

as  the  forerunner  of  the  Messiah.  Such  were  the  various  opinions  current  among  the
people.  None,  as  far  as  the  apostles  knew,  then  recognized  his  Messiahship.  It  had
not  been  so  always.  From  the  time  when  John  bare  record  that  he  was  the  Son
of  God,  when  Andrew  said,  "  We  have  found  the  Messias,"  there  had  been  many  who
asked,  "Is  not  this  the  Christ?"  The  belief  revived  afterwards  at  Jerusalem
(John  vii.  41 ;  ix.  22 ;  xii.  13) ;  but  now  in  Galilee,  his  own  country,  it  seems  to  have
become  extinct.  The  change  in  popular  feeling  had  been  brought  about,  partly  by  the
Lord's  own  conduct  and  teaching  (John  vi.  66),  partly  by  the  influence  of  the  enemies.
Had  he  adapted  himself  to  the  spirit  of  the  times,  and  yielded  to  the  wishes  of  the
people,  the  way  to  transient  and  apparent  success  lay  open  to  him.  His  refusal  gave
strength  to  the  combined  opposition  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  and  enabled  them
to  undermine  his  popnlarity.  He  knew  it.  He  asked  the  question,  not  lor  infor-
mation, but  to  lead  on  to  deep  and  holy  teaching.  Observe  the  truthfulness  of  the
apostles ;  they  report  the  exact  truth  ;  they  do  not  attempt  to  hide  the  ebbing  tide
of  popular  applause.  They  do  not  flatter  the  Lord  with  false  hopes ;  they  were  too
sincere  for  that ;  he  was  too  high  and  holy.  3.  The  second  question.  "  But  whom  say
ye  that  I  am  ?  "  This  was  the  question  that  was  in  the  Lord's  heart.  The  views
entertained  about  Christ  in  the  world,  the  different  phases  of  opinion  concerning
the  Lord's  Person  and  office,  are  subjects  of  interest  to  the  student  of  theology ;  but
this  is  the  momentous  question  which  w  presented  to  each  individual  soul,  "  What
think  ye  of  Christ?"  "Whom  say  ye  that  I  am?"  The  speculative  opinions  of
unbelievers  or  half-believers  are  not  without  their  importance ;  but  the  great  question
is,  what  do  they  think  who  have  known  the  Lord,  who  have  heard  his  holiest  teaching,
and  lived  in  close  commimion  with  liim  ?  What  do  they  think  who  are  to  be  the  Lord's
ambassadors,  who  are  to  go  forth  in  his  Name  to  preach  the  gospel  of  salvation,
to  carry  on  the  blessed  work  which  he  began?  They  must  be  men  of  deep  and  strong
convictions;  they  must  not  be  carried  about  by  every  blast  of  vain  doctrine;  they
must  be  established  in  the  truth  of  the  holy  gospel  which  they  preach.  Double-
minded  and  lukewarm  men  are  worse  than  useless  in  the  ministry ;  it  is  only  the  force
of  strong  conviction  that  can  win  souls  for  Christ.  4.  The  confession.  The  question
was  put  to  all  the  apostles ;  Peter  answers  in  the  name  of  all.  He  was,  as  Ohrysostom
says,  the  mouth  of  the  apostles,  the  leader  of  the  apostolic  choir.  Yet  there  is  some-
thing of  his  individual  character,  his  fervid  impetuous  personality,  in  the  strong  decided
answer.  Peter  had  no  doubts,  none  at  all.  He  may  have  shared  (all  the  apostles
shared)  in  the  general  mistake  as  to  the  office  and  work  of  the  Messiah ;  he  had  looked
for  a  king  to  reign  on  the  earthly  throne  of  David.  But  he  was  at  least  sure  of  this —
the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  Messiah.  Whatever  might  be  his  surroundings,  whether
poverty  and  seeming  weakness  or  magnificence  and  sovereign  power;  however  he
might  be  received,  whether  scorned  and  rejected  by  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  or
welcomed  with  the  acclaiming  shout,  "Hosanna  to  the  King  of  Israel!"  whatever
might  happen,  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  Messiah,  the  anointed  King.  Of  this  Peter
wab  convinced  with  an  absolute  undoubting  conviction.  But  this  was  not  all.  Peter
not  only  recognized  Jesus  as  the  Christ  according  to  the  Jewish  conception  of  the
Messiah ;  he  rises  higher.  The  Lord  was  not  what  the  Jews,  it  seems,  expected — a  Man
very  highly  distinguislied  for  wisdom  and  holiness,  chosen  by  God  to  be  the  Messiah.
He  was  far  more ;  he  was  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  The  words  are  full  of  force  and
energy.  Men  may  beconae  the  sons  of  God  by  adoption  and  grace;  but,  we  feel
instinctively,  no  mere  man  could  be  styled  "  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  The  Lord
is  the  Son  of  him  who  hath  life  in  himself,  and  by  virtue  of  that  eternal  generation
he  hath  life  in  himself  (John  v.  26).  He  is  the  only  begotten  Son,  Life  of  life,
as  he  is  Light  of  light,  very  God  of  very  God.  We  know  not  whether  St.  Peter
himself  understood  at  the  time  the  full  meaning,  the  blessed,  holy,  awful  meaning  of
his  great  confession.  It  was  revealed  to  him  now  by  the  Father.  The  Holy  Spirit  led
him  by  degrees  to  realize  the  great  and  solemn  truths  which  it  implied.  Nathanacl,
indeed,  had  anticipated  him;  the  disciples  had  hailed  the  Lord  as  the  Son  of  God
when  he  had  come  moving -over  the  stormy  sea  to  their  succour;  Peter  himself,
not  long  before,  had  confessed  his  faith  in  the  same  exalted  terras  (John  vi.  69).
But  on  those  occasions  the  Lord  seemed  not  to  heed  the  title  which  was  ascribed
to  him.     Now  he  formally  accepted  it.    The  time  was  come  when  the  apostles  should

MATTHEW II.  Il


146  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi  1—28.


recognize  their  Master  as  the  Christ,  the  time  for  the  first  founding  of  the  Christian
Church.

II.  The  eatipioation  of  the  confession.     1.  The  blessing.    The  Lord  repeats  the
word  which  he  had  so  often  used  on  the  Mount  of  the  Beatitudes  in  describing  the
children  of  the  kingdom;  he  applies  it  now  to  St.  Peter.     "Blessed  art  thou,  Simon
Bai-Jona,"  he  said  solemnly,  using  the  full  name,  patronymic  as  well  as  personal  name,
as  we  do  on  solemn  occasions ;  as  he  did  once  again  when  he  put  to  the  same  apostle
the  searching  question,  "Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me?"     Simon  was  blessed,
for  this  knowledge  had  come,  not  from  humau  teachers,  but  by  revelation  from  the
Father.     Simon's  confession  was  not  like  other  confessions  of  the  Lord's  Messialiship,
an  inference  from  his  words  or  works ;  it  was  the  expression  of  an  inward  spiritual  con-
viction, a  knowledge  gained  by  Divine  revelation,  like  St.  Paul's  knowledge  of  Christ
(Gal.  i.  15, 16),  a  knowledge  which  transformed  his  heart  and  consecrated  his  whole
life  to  the  service  of  the  Lord.    Blessed  are  they  now  who  have  the  like  knowledge,
into  whose  hearts  God  hath  shined,  "  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of
God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."    Blessed  are  they  who  with  that  inner  knowledge  of
the  heart  own  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  the  dhrist,  the  Son  of  the  living  God ;  for  thus  to
know  Christ,  he  himself  hath  told  us,  is  eternal  life.     2.  2%e  prophecy.    (1)  "  Thou
art  Peter."    The  Lord  had  given  him  that  name  long  ago,  at  his  first  interview  with
him  (John  i.  42).    It  was  then  given  by  anticipation.     Now  Simon  had  shown  the
truthfulness  of  the  Lord's  foreknowledge  ;  he  was  proving  himself  to  be  a  true  Peter,
or  rock-like  apostle,  strengthened  and  established  by  the  grace  of  Christ  for  the  work
to  which  the  Lord  had  called  him.     He  was  Peter,  rock-like,  a  piece  of  rock.     "  That
Eock  was  Christ,"  the  Lord  whom   Peter  had  just  confessed  to  be  the  Christ,  the
Son  of  the  living  God.     There  is  not  "  any  rock  like  our  God."    He  is  the  Rock  of
Ages,  the  Eock  that  is  higher  than  the  highest  of  saints,  tuo  Eock  of  our  refuge,  the
Eock  of  our  salvation.     The  Lord  Jesus  is  our  Book,  because  he  is  God,  the  Messiah,
the  incarnate  Son  of  the  living  God.     "The  Word  was  made  flesh ;"  that  great  fact
IS  the  foundation  of  all  our  hopes.     "God  manifest  in  the  flesh"  is  the  Eock  on  which
the  Christian  Church  is  built,  the  one  foundation  once  laid  (1  Cor.  iii.  11);  the  Stone
which  the  builders  disallowed,  but  nevertheless  the  Head  of  the  corner;   the  chief
Corner-stone,  elect,  precious.     Peter  had  no  strength  in  himself  apart  from  the  one
Eock ;  he  was  sinking  in  the  stormy  sea  when  the  Lord  caught  him  by  the  hand ;
he  was  falling  into  a  deeper  abyss  when  the  Lord's  loving  mournful  look  recalled  him
to  the  sense  of  his  sinfulness.     Peter  was  as  the  dove  (Bar-Jona :  Jonah  means  "  a
Dove  ")  that  is  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock  (Cant.  ii.  14) ;  he  was  only  safe,  as  we  are  only
safe,  when  he  was  hidden  in  the  Eock  of  Ages.    Yet,  in  a  secondary  sense,  Peter  may
be  regarded  as  a  rock.   He  derived  his  new  name,  which  is  by  interpretation  "  a  Stone,"
from  Christ  the  Book;  he  derived  his  rock-like  character  from  spiritual  union  with
the  Eock  of  Ages ;  he  was  one  of  the  living  stones,  hewn  out  of  the  Book  (Isa.  li.  1),
tuilt  into  the  Eock,  which  form  the  spiritual  house  described  by  himself  in  his  First
Epistle.     (Doubtless  he  was  thinking  then  of  these  great  words  of  Christ  when  he
spoke  of  Christ  as  a  living  Stone,  a  chief  Corner-stone,  a  Book.)    But  he  was  more  than
this ;  he  was  one  of  those  who  helped  to  lay  the  one  foundation,  the  one  only  founda-
tion in  the  truest  sense  (1  Cor.  iii.  11),  the  foundation  laid  by  the  apostles  and  prophets
of  the  New  Testament  (Eph.  ii.  20),  when  they  preached  Christ  as  the  only  Saviour.
And  in  a  secondary  sense  he  might  himself,  like  the  other  apostles,  be  called  one  of
Ihe  foundations  (comp.  Eev.  xxi.  14),  one  of  the  pillars  (Gal.  ii.  9),  and  in  another
figure  one  of  the  master-builders  (1  Cor.  iii.  10).     But  the  foundation-stones  rest  upon
the  Eock,  the  one  true  Foundation ;  and  the  wise  master-builders  build  under  the  one
Master,  which  is  Christ.    (2)  The  Church.     We  meet  with  this  great  word  here  for
the  first  time  as  we  read  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  existing  order ;
once  more  only  it  occurs  in  the  Gospels  (ch.  xviii.  17).     We  must  remember  where
this   prophecy  was   spoken ;   in    the  coasts  of  Ctesarea  Philippi,   among   the  most
remarkable  rook-scenery  of  the  Holy  Land,  possibly  under  the  shadow  of  the  hi^h  red
limestone  cliff  which  overhangs  the  town,  the  summit  of  which  was  crowned  by  the
white  marble  temple  built  by  Herod  in  honour  of  Augustus,     That  rock,  Dean  Stanley
says  ('Sinai  and  Palestine,'  p.  399),  "may  possibly  have  suggested  the  words  which
now  run  round  the  dome  of  St.  Peter's."    That  temple  with  i<is  blasphemous  dedication


CH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  147

was  an  outrage  in  the  eyea  of  the  holy  Son  of  God ;  the  temple  which  he  would  rear
was  wholly  different,  built  on  a  Rook  more  stable,  more  abiding  far.  "  My  Church  " —
it  was  a  wondrous  prophecy.  All  seemed  to  have  forsaken  him  save  only  the  twelve ;
one  was  a  traitor  even  in  that  little  company ;  yet  the  Lord  looked  forward,  in  the
vision  of  his  Divine  foreknowledge,  to  that  great  multitude  which  no  man  could  number,
called  out  from  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues.  It  was  to  be  the
whole  congregation  of  Christian  people  called  out  of  the  whole  world,  first  by  himself,
then  by  his  apostles  and  their  successors  speaking  in  his  Name.  It  was  to  be  built  up
(edified)  in  him,  resting  on  him  the  living  Bock,  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the
apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  Corner-stone.  It  was  to  be
one,  and  yet  many ;  many  living  stones  built  up  into  one  holy  temple,  united  into  one
by  the  one  chief  Corner-stone,  the  one  Eock  on  which  it  rests.  It  was  Christ's,  "  my
Church ; "  given  to  him  by  the  Father,  bought  to  be  his  own  with  his  most  precious  blood,
sanctified  and  illuminated  by  the  indwelling  of  his  most  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  the  Church
of  the  Uving  God ;  therefore  the  gates  of  Hades  cannot  prevail  against  it.  Hades  is
the  realm  of  the  disembodied  dead ;  it  is  insatiable,  it  hath  never  enough,  it  enlargeth
itself,  and  opeiieth  its  mouth  without  measure.  The  Lord  himself,  the  Head  of  the
Church,  seemed  once  to  yield  to  its  power ;  he  descended  into  Hades.  But  it  was  not
possible  that  he  could  be  holden  of  death ;  the  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the  dead,
"  He  is  alive  for  evermore,  and  hath  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death."  Because  he  liveth,
his  Church  shall  live  also.  The  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevent  his  saints  from  rising
to  meet  the  returning  Lord.  The  abode  of  the  dead  shall  not  retain  the  Church  which
belongs  to  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  the  Church  which  is  his  bride,  nay,  his
body ;  which  liveth  in  the  life  of  Christ  and  rejoioeth  in  his  love.  Filled  with  this
blessed  hope,  the  Church  sings  its  song  of  triumph  in  the  presence  of  death,  "  0  death,
where  is  thy  sting?  0  Hades,  where  is  thy  victory?  Thanks  be  to  God,  which
giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  3.  The  promise.  (1)  The
keys.  The  Church  is  now  presented  to  our  view  as  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  holy
city.  The  Lord  Christ  hath  the  key  of  David;  he  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth ;  he
shutteth,  and  no  man  openeth  (Eev.  iii.  7).  That  power  was  now  delegated  to  St,
Peter  as  the  representative  of  the  apostolic  college.  He  exercised  it  when  under  his
ministry  three  thousand  souls  were  added  to  the  Church  on  the  great  Day  of  Pente-
cost ;  he  exercised  it  when  he  baptized  Cornelius,  when  he  said  to  Simon  Magus,  "  Thou
hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter."  The  Church  exercises  that  power  now  in
preaching,  in  baptizing,  in  admitting  to  Communion,  in  declaring  by  God's  authority
God's  absolution  of  the  penitent.  "  He  pardoneth  and  absolveth  all  them  that  truly
repent."  (2)  Binding  and  loosing.  The  words  seem  to  mean,  according  to  constant
Hebrew  usage,  "to  forbid"  and  "to  allow."  The  Lord  commits  to  Peter,  as  afterwards
(ch.  xviii.  18)  to  all  the  apostles,  the  government  of  the  Church ;  he  gives  him  legislative
authority,  power  to  declare  what  is  lawful,  what  is  unlawful ;  what  is  obligatory,  what
is  open.  That  power  he  exercised  when  he  spoke  in  favour  of  the  Gentiles  at  the
Council  of  Jerusalem  (Acts  xv.  7 — 11).  That  power  St.  Paul  exercised  again  and
again.  That  povver  in  some  degree  is  still  vested  in  the  Church.  "  The  Church  hath
power  to  decree  rites  or  ceremonies,  and  authority  in  controversies  of  faith ;  and  yet  it
is  not  lawful  for  the  Church  to  ordain  anything  that  is  contrary  to  God's  Word  written,
neither  may  it  so  expound  one  place  of  Scripture  that  it  be  repugnant  to  another."

Lessons.  1.  What  is  the  Lord  Jesus  to  us  ?  Oh  that  he  may  reveal  himself  into
our  hearts,  that  we  may  know  him  as  the  Son  of  the  living  God !  2.  It  is  a  blessed
thing  to  have  St.  Peter's  strong  convictions;  let  us  pray,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith."
3.  Christ  is  the  Eock  of  Ages;  let  us  seek  to  be  living  stones,  built  into  that  living
Bock,

Vers.  20 — 28. — The  cross.  I.  The  anncunobmbnt  of  coming  sufferino.  1.  TTie
Lord.  Two  figures  come  prominently  into  contrast — the  Lord  and  Peter :  the  Lord
looking  forwards  with  sweet  and  holy  calmness  to  agony  and  shame  and  death  ;  Pever,
eager  and  impetuous,  burning  vsdth  zeal  for  what  seemed  to  him  his  Master's  honour.
The  Lord  bade  the  apostles  tell  no  man  that  he  was  the  Christ.  The  people  were  not
ready  for  the  announcement ;  if  they  accepted  it,  they  would  in  their  present  temper
misunderstand  itj  they  would  again  try  to  talce  him  by  force  to  make  him  a  King.


L48  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvl  1—28.

Let  us  learn  of  our  dear  Lord  to  be  indifferent  to  titles,  not  to  care  to  make  known
things  that  may  bring  us  earthly  honour.  The  Lord  had  received,  as  his  due,  the
homage  of  St.  Peter ;  he  was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  liviug  God.  But  while  he
accepted,  as  his  by  right,  those  loftiest  of  all  conceivable  titles,  he  prophesied  the  near
approach  of  the  extremest  humiliation.  He  must  go  to  Jerusalem;  he  must  suffer
mauy  things ;  he  must  be  killed.  It  must  be,  he  said ;  it  was  necessary  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  the  Divine  purpose,  for  the  remission  of  sin,  for  the  salvation  of  mankind.
He  must  rise  again  the  third  day.  He  could  not  be  holden  of  death,  for  he  hath  life  in
himself;  he  is  the  Life.  The  apostles  did  not  understand  him  (Mark  ix.  10,  32) ;  they
could  not  think  that  he  was  speaking  literally ;  they  could  not  believe  that  the  Divine
Messiah  would  suffer  what  seemed  to  them  such  utter  degradation.  And  when  it  had
come  to  pass,  their  misery  and  despondency  were  so  great  that  they  found  no  comfort
in  the  prophecy  of  the  resurrection ;  their  horror  and  distress  drove  it  quite  out  of
their  hearts.  The  Lord  was  graciously  and  tenderly  preparing  them  for  the  coming
trial.  Let  us  prepare  in  the  time  of  health  and  strength  for  what  must  come,  sickness
and  pain  and  death ;  so  by  his  grace  may  we  be  ready.  2.  Peter.  He  was  impulsive,
impetuous,  as  always.  He  took  the  Lord,  caught  him  by  the  dress  or  hand ;  he  ventured
to  rebuke  him,  as  if  he  was  wiser  than  the  Christ.  The  Lord  interrupted  him ;  he
would  not  allow  him  to  proceed  in  his  thoughtless  talk;  he  sternly  checked  his
improper  freedom.  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,"  ho  said  to  the  apostle  whom  not
long  before  he  had  pronounced  "  blessed,"  to  whom  he  had  committed  the  keys  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  The  Lord  had  used  those  same  strong  words  once  before.  The
evil  spirit,  whom  he  had  foiled  in  the  wilderness,  was  now  tempting  him  again  through
the  agency  of  Peter.  Again  the  Lord  repelled  the  temptation.  It  was  the  old  tempta-
tion, the  last  of  Satan's  approaches  in  the  wilderness  (oh.  iv.  8,  9),  the  temptation  to
wear  the  crown  without  bearing  the  cross ;  to  take  the  kingdom  which  was  his  by
right,  but  to  take  it  without  treading  the  path  of  suffering,  the  way  ordained  by  God.
Peter  was  a  stumbling-block  now.  Tears  afterwards,  in  his  First  Epistle  (ii.  8),  he
described  "  the  chief  Corner-stone  "  (with  a  manifest  allusion  to  this  conversation)  as
being  to  the  disobedient  and  unbelieving  " a  Bock  of  offence  (irErpa  <rKavSi\av)."  He
was  now  malting  himself  a  stumbling-block  to  Christ ;  he  was  minding,  not  the  things
of  God,  but  the  things  of  men.  Men  set  their  affections  on  earthly  things,  ease,  comfort,
honour,  riches;  these  are  not  always  good  for  us.  Affliction,  meekly  borne,  is  better;
it  worketh  for  ua  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  Peter  acted  the
tempter's  part.  Our  kindest  friends  sometimes  unwittingly  do  the  like,  when  they  dis-
suade us  from  enduring  hardness,  from  making  sacrifices  for  Christ's  sake.  Peter
•  loved  the  Lord  fervently,  but  his  love  was  not  wise.  He  was  presumptuous,  forward,
even  in  some  degree  irreverent.  Perhaps  he  was  exalted  above  measure  by  the  Lord's
commendation,  as  St.  Paul  thought  he  himself  might  have  been  through  the  abundance
of  the  revelations  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).  There  is  no  safety  without  humility ;  the  nearer
we  draw  to  Christ,  the  more  we  need  to  learn  of  him  that  most  precious  grace.

II.  The  disciple  must  follow  the  Master's  steps.  1.  2%e  daily  cross  of  self-
denial.  The  Lord  had  told  the  apostles  of  his  own  coming  sufferings ;  now  he  warns
them  that  those  sufferings  must,  in  some  sense,  repeat  themselves  in  all  his  faithful
followers.  He  speaks  to  all.  "  If  any  man  willeth  to  come  after  me,"  he  said.  There
must  be  the  wish  first.  There  is  no  perseverance  in  religion  without  desire,  without
longing,  without  love.  "  Blessed  are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteous-
ness." They  who  do  not  hunger  are  not  filled.  Again,  the  true  Christian  wish  is  to
come  after  Christ.  All  men  wish,  more  or  less  earnestly,  more  or  less  languidly,  to
get  to  heaven  at  last.  That  wish  is,  as  many  entertain  it,  utterly  selfish.  The  Chris-
tian wishes  to  come  after  Christ,  and,  following  Christ  here,  to  be  at  last  with  him
there.  To  come  after  Christ,  then,  is  the  central  wish  of  the  Christian  life,  and  the
means  by  which  that  wish  is  realized  is  self-denial.  Christ  pleased  not  himself;  his
disciples  must  follow  him.  The  true  self  is  the  conscience ;  but  the  lower  part  of  our
nature,  the  appetites  and  affections  which  we  sliare  with  the  rest  of  the  animal
creation,  are  so  noisy  and  turbulent,  fill  so  large  a  part  of  our  conscious  existence
(in  many  men,  alas !  almost  the  whole),  that  they  seem  to  be  the  self,  and  usurp  the
name  of  self,  which  properly  belongs  to  the  higher  self,  the  conscience  and  the  reiison.
It  is  the  lower  self  which  we  must  deny.   When  appetite  says,  "  This  is  pleasant,"  but


OH.  xvL  1— 28.]    THE  GOSPEL  AC00RD1N&  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,  149

conBOienoe  answers,  "  It  is  wrong,"  then  we  must  take  part  with  conscience,  which  bears
in  itself  the  evidence  of  authority,  and  deny  that  lower  self  which  would  disturb  the
harmony  of  our  nature  by  usurping  the  position  of  command  which  does  not  belong  to  it.
The  precept  is  one  of  paramount  importance.  The  Lord  repeats  it,  translating  it  now
into  the  distinctivelangiiageof  Christianity,  "Let  him  take  up  his  cross."  He  had  used
those  words  once  already  (ch,  x.  38).  It  was  long,  probably,  before  the  apostles  under-
stood them.  We  know  their  meaning  now.  The  cross  was  a  thing  of  horror  once ;
but  the  exceeding  great  love  of  our  Master  and  only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  has  shed
a  halo  of  resplendent  light  around  the  tree  of  shame.  The  word  has  changed  its
meaning;  it  has  become  a  name  for  the  noblest  self-denial,  the  most  Divine  self-
sacrifice.  Not  all  acts  of  self-denial  are  a  bearing  of  the  cross,  but  only  those  which
spring  out  of  faith  in  Christ,  and  radiate  from  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He
taketh  up  his  cross  who  denies  himself  daily  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  for  the  sake  of
Christ,  seeking  only  to  please  him  and  to  be  made  more  and  more  like  unto  him.  Such
acts  of  holy  self-denial  are  taken  up,  so  to  speak,  into  the  one  great  act  of  holiest  self-
sacrifice,  and  become  parts  of  it  (Col.  i.  24),  and  derive  their  beauty  and  glory  from  the
reflected  glory  of  the  Saviour's  cross.  Such  faithful  Christians,  whom  the  strong  wish
to  come  after  Christ  urges  with  ever-growing  earnestness  to  take  up  their  cross  daily,
will  follow  him  who  bore  the  cross  for  them  along  the  narrow  way  till  they  appear,
sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  living  &od  upon  their  foreheads,  before  the  glory-throne.
2.  The  true  life.  The  wish  which  is  centred  in  this  present  life  is  opposed  to  the
Christian  wish  to  come  after  Christ.  When  the  heart  is  set  upon  the  things  of  this
life,  comfort,  station,  wealth,  and  such-like,  it  loses  sight  of  Christ,  who  is  the  Life  of
men.  Therefore  he  who  willeth,  whose  set  purpose  is,  to  save  this  life,  with  all  its
treasures,  must  lose  the  true  Life,  which  is  Christ.  For  the  Lord  died  upon  the  cross.
His  first  followers  shrank  not  from  the  death  of  martyrdom  for  his  sake.  All  true
Christians  must  have  the  martyr-spirit ;  they  must  be  martyrs  in  will ;  they  must
be  willing,  if  need  be,  to  lose  all  earthly  things,  even  life  itself,  for  Christ's  sake.  The
Lord  gave  himself  for  hs.  He  asks  for  our  whole  self  in  return.  We  must  keep
nothing  back,  or  we  shall  lose  the  true  life,  which  is  the  life  in  Christ — eternal  life,
Christ  himself.  And  if  this  is  lost,  all  is  lost.  Nothing  can  compensate  a  man  for  the
loss  of  the  true  life.  No  gain,  not  even  the  gain  of  the  whole  world,  if  it  were  possible,
can  balaoce  that  tremendous  loss.  For  the  loss  is  real,  but  the  gain  illusory.  A  man
may  seem  to  gain  all  that  the  world  prizes ;  but  if  with  that  gain  the  true  life  is  lost,
there  is  no  true  joy,  no  brightness,  no  abiding  gladness.  And  all  that  was  gained,
though  it  seemed  like  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory  of  thena,  must
vanish  in  a  moment  when  the  years  come  to  an  end  as  it  were  a  tale  that  is  told.
Then  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  life,  when  the  true  life  is  lost,  and
only  that  life,  which  is  living  death,  remains?  What  shall  a  man  give  then,  when  he
hath  naught  to  give ;  when  his  riches,  and  his  knowledge,  and  his  strength,  and  his
earthly  rank,  and  the  time  given  him  for  working  out  his  own  salvation,  and  all  his
opportunities  of  serving  God  and  doing  the  work  which  God  had  given  him  to  do,  have
passed  away  for  ever; — when  all  these  things  have  fallen  away  from  him  and  left  him
all  desolate  and  alone,  a  poor  soul,  helpless  and  destitute,  realizing,  when  it  is  too  late,
the  bitter  truth  that  it  is  in  the  sight  of  God  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and
blind,  and  naked — what  shall  a  man  give  then  ?  Let  him  learn  to  give  now— to  give
his  heart,  and,  with  his  heart,  his  time,  his  labour,  his  prayers,  his  earthly  goods.  It
is  a  poor  gift  at  the  best ;  but  if  it  is  given  in  faith  and  love,  it  is  lent  unto  the  Lord,
and  the  Lord  will  repay  with  large  increase  in  the  great  day  of  account.  We  are
unprofitable  servants ;  the  best  of  us  only  do  what  is  our  bounden  duty ;  we  only  give
him  what  is  his  own.  But  he  is  pleased  in  his  gracious  condescension  to  accept  this
poor  service  of  ours,  and  to  give  us  in  return  that  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight
of  glory,  that  eternal  life  which  is  the  gift  of  God.  3.  The  end.  "  The  Son  of  man
shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  his  angels."  He  is  the  Son  of  man  in  virtue
of  his  incarnation ;  but  in  his  essential  Being  he  is  God,  equal  with  the  Father  as
touching  his  Godhead.  The  Father's  glory  is  his;  the  amgels  of  God  are  his  angels,
for  "  all  things  that  the  Father  hath  are  mine  "  (John  xvi.  15).  Then  he  shall  reward
every  man  according  to  his  work,  li  s  work  as  a  whole.  The  award  will  be  propor-
tioned to  the  whole  scope  and  meaning  of  each  man's  earthly  life  in  infinite  justice.


150  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDma  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xvi.  1— 28.

and,  blessed  be  his  holy  Name,  in  infinite  mercy.  He  bids  us  to  look  ever  forward  to
the  coming  of  that  great  day,  and  to  estimate  things  in  reference  to  the  coming
judgment.  The  glory  of  the  world  seems  now,  to  our  short-sighted  eyes,  very  great
and  magnificent  and  overpowering.  But  look  at  it  in  the  fierce  light  that  streams
from  the  judgment-throne ;  then  it  shrinks  into  nothingness.  Its  brightness  is  like
the  poor  little  caudle  in  the  effulgent  radiance  of  the  noontide  sun ;  you  see  that  its
beauty  is  marred  with  the  traces  of  decay,  rottenness,  death.  "  The  world  passeth
away  .  .  .  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  Let  us  not  lose  that
eternal  life  for  the  sake  of  this  fleeting,  dying  world.  For  the  Son  of  man  cometh  in
his  kingdom.  There  were  some,  the  Lord  said,  standing  there  who  should  see  that
kingdom  before  they  died.  Three  of  them  soon  saw  the  transfigured  Saviour  in  his
glory.  All,  save  one,  saw  the  risen  Lord,  victorious  over  death,  manifested  as  the
Lord  of  life,  the  everlasting  King,  to  whom  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth  is  given.
Some  of  them,  we  know  not  how  many,  saw  the  manifestation  of  his  power  in  the
destruction  of  Jeiusalem;  when  the  old  dispensation  made  way  for  the  kingdom  of
heaven,  the  one  Catholic  Church  over  which  Christ  shall  reign  as  King  until  the  end
cometh;  then,  on  the  ruins  of  the  old  theocracy,  was  established  that  spiritual
kingdom  which  shall  reach  its  consummation  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  In  each  of  these
great  events  the  Lord's  prediction  was  in  some  sense  fulfilled.  If  we  cannot  define  its
meaning  to  our  complete  satisfaction,  let  us  remember  what  he  said  of  the  last
survivor  of  the  apostles,  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee  ?
follow  thou  me."

Lessons.  1.  The  cross  is  the  very  emblem  of  our  religion ;  he  is  no  true  Christian
who  beareth  not  the  cross.  2.  The  whole  world  is  worth  nothing  to  him  whose  aoul
is  lost.  No  price  can  redeem  the  lost  soul.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear
and  trembling."  3.  The  judgment  is  at  hand.  Think  of  this  life  in  the  light  of  the
judgment.    "  Love  not  the  world."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  4. — Tlie  cry  for  a  sign.  It  strikes  us  as  somewhat  remarkable  that  the  con-
temporaries of  our  Lord  should  be  inquiring  a  sign ;  for  was  not  his  work  teeming
with  signs  and  wonders  ?  Plainly  the  demand  of  the  sceptical  people,  and  the  response
with  which  Christ  met  it,  give  us  another  view  of  miracles  and  their  relation  to  the
evidences  of  Christianity  from  that  commonly  held  by  apologists.

I.  Men  desire  a  convinoino  sign  of  the  tkuth  or  Chbistianity.  This  desire  is
not  in  itself  wrong  or  unreasonable.  To  believe  without  sufficient  evidence  is  a  symptom
of  weakness,  and  such  a  faith  is  only  a  superstition.  It  is  not  a  mark  of  pride,  but
a  simple  consequence  of  loyalty  to  truth,  that  we  should  seek  for  good  grounds  on
which  to  establish  our  convictions.  If  this  were  all  that  the  people  demanded,  our
Lord  could  not  have  met  the  cry  for  a  sign  with  the  anger  which  we  see  he  displayed
against  it.  But  it  is  evident  that  the  Jews  were  not  satisfied  with  the  signs  Christ
offered.  They  wanted  a  "  sign  from  heaven  " — some  flaring  portent  that  would  compel
conviction.  Is  there  not  a  tendency  in  the  present  day  to  look  away  from  the  only
sources  of  truth  that  are  available,  and  to  demand  impossible  grounds  of  conviction  ?

II.  The  demand  fob  a  sign  may  spring  from  an  unworthy  oharagtbr.  It  is
most  unjust  to  accuse  doubters  of  exceptional  wickedness.  Many  people  have  no
doubts  simply  because  they  dare  not  face  truth.  They  would  be  sceptics  if  they  were
not  cowards.  On  the  other  hand,  it  cannot  be  maintained  that  scepticism  is  in  itself
an  indication  of  sanctity.  Now,  Jesus  tells  us  that  the  pure  in  heart  are  they  who
shall  see  God.  But  all  men — doubters  included — have  lost  the  vision  of  God  by  their
sin.  Thus  the  whole  faculty  of  discerning  the  spiritual  has  become  dim.  Further,  an
age  of  self-indulgence  must  be  an  age  of  aggravated  spiritual  blindness.

III.  Christ  will  not  satisfy  the  unworthy  demand  for  a  sign.  1.  He  cannot.
With  all  reverence  this  must  be  affirmed.  No  portent  can  prove  a  spiritual  truth  to
one  who  has  not  spiritual  sight.  You  might  as  well  expect  the  blare  of  a  trumpet
to  reveal  the  beauty  of  a  landscape  to  a  blind  man.  2.  He  would  not  if  he  could.
Forced  faith  has  no  moral  wortL    Truth  revealed  to  unprepared  hearts  is  but  as  pearls


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MA.TTHBW.  151

oast  before  swine.  Abraham  refuses  the  prayer  of  Dives  that  Lazarus,  risen  from  the
dead,  should  be  sent  to  his  brothers,  telling  the  miserable  man  that  no  good  would
come  of  such  an  errand.

IV.  Christ  uivus  the  sign  that  is  beally  needed.  He  never  disappoints  the
honest  seeker  after  truth,  although  he  does  not  always  lead  to  truth  by  the  expected
path.  The  only  truth  of  value  is  that  which  touches  our  hearts  and  consciences,  and
this  is  not  thrust  upon  us  by  sheer  authority,  with  threats  of  punishment  if  we  will  not
accept  it  blindfold.  That  insolent  and  tyrannic  ecclesiastical  method  is  quite  abhorrent
to  "the sweet  reasonableness"  of  Jesus.  His  way  is  to  bring  a  genuine  proof  to  the
awakened  soul,  and  he  compares  this  to  the  sign  of  Jonah.  The  preaching  of  Jonah
convinced  by  reaching  the  consciences  of  the  Ninevites.  Christ's  teaching,  his  life —
above  aU,  his  death  and  resurrection — speak  to  our  consciences.  When  these  are
responsive,  they  can  perceive  the  weight  of  his  claims. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  6. — Dangerous  leaven.  It  is  astonishing  to  us  that  our  Lord's  disciples  should
have  been  so  slow  to  understand  the  simplest  metaphors  employed  in  the  teaching  of
their  Master.  When  he  speaks  of  leaven,  they  think  of  baker's  bread!  The  fact
that  the  evangelists  describe  this  singular  backwardness  is  a  strong  evidence  of  the
truthfulness  of  the  Gospel  writings;  for  it  is  not  to  he  supposed  that  such  humiliating
circumstances  would  have  been  invented  or  imagined  by  a  later  generation  which
regarded  the  apostles  with  the  greatest  reverence.  The  backwardness  itself  must
have  been  one  of  the  trials  of  Christ;  his  efforts  to  meet  it  and  overcome  it  reveal  his
wonderful  patience  and  perseverance.  By  such  means  he  succeeds  in  bringing  his
warning  lesson  home  to  the  dullest  comprehension  (vers.  11, 12).

I.  The  Chubch  is  infected  with  danoebous  leaven.  1.  Hvil  influences  in  her
midst.  The  leaven  is  plunged  into  the  meal;  it  cannot  produce  any  effect  until  it  is
thus  mixed  up  with  what  it  is  to  influence.  We  have  to  beware,  not  only  of  entirely
external  dangers,  but  of  such  as  are  found  in  the  very  teaching  and  practices  ot
-  Christian  people.  .  2.  SuitU  influences.  Thfl  leaven  is  almost  invisible.  There  is  at
first  but  "  a  little  leaven."  Obscure,  unobserved  influences  may  be  the  causes  of  much
serious  harm.  3.  Spreading  influences.  The  growing  power  of  the  leaven,  its
marvellous  capacity  for  propagating  itself,  makes  it  a  serious  thing  to  admit  but  a
Uttle.  Sinful  ideas  tend  to  spread  and  permeate  Christian  society  when  once  they  are
permitted  to  exist  unchecked.  .

II  The  leaven  of  evil  may  come  fbom  bbspectbd  adthoeitibs.  ine  fbansees
were  the  professed  saints  of  their  day ;  the  Sadducees  were  the  party  of  the  priesthood
and  of  the  national  council.  Yet  both  of  these  were  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  as  souroes
of  evil  influence.  We  can  with  difficulty  picture  to  ourselves  the  immense  significance
of  his  words.  It  is  as  though  the  mediasval  Church  were  warned  against  the  influence
of  the  monks  and  priests;  as  though  the  Church  of  to-day  were  told  that  there  was
danger  for  her  in  the  presence  of  the  most  pious-looking  of  her  communicants  and  the
most  respected  of  her  ministers.  Surely  here  is  a  warning  agamst  being  misled  by
appearances  in  religion.  .  ^  n,-„  „

III  The  leaven  mat  assume  vabious  fobms.  It  is  starthng  to  meet  this  con-
mnction  of  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  because  we  know  that  the  two  parties  were  bitterly
opposed  to  one  another;  but  then  we  also  know  that  they  were  brought  into  a  sort  of
partnership  in  their  common  enmity  to  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  bath  Oi  them  are  repre-
sented as  constituting  the  dangerous  leaven.  1.  Pretentious  piety.  -Tins  is  one  ot
the  most  dangerous  of  evil  influences,  because  (1)  it  ensnares  with  a  show  of  religion,
and  (2)  it  denies  the  true  essence  of  religion.  It  is  hypocrisy  (Luke  xu.  1>  i.
WorWy  scepticism.  The  doubt  of  the  typical  Sadducee  was  not  the  Pf^ple^ty  «  t^e
serious  studint  of  truth;  it  was  the  scoffing  indifference  of  the  man  of  'he  world  who
did  not  believe  in  the  spiritual  because  his  whole  hfe  was  absorbed  m  the  earthly.

IV.  The  danoeb  of  the  leaven  necessitates  a  watchful  attitude.  late
heed  and  beware."  It  is  not  enough  to  cultivate  Christian  g-'^J^^-^^'^/e  servant  of
Christ  must  be  a  soldier  as  weU  as  a  husbandman.  He  "lust  stand  as  a  sentry
challenging  all  suspicious  thoughts  and  influences.  He  must  ^.^^'^'''fj'^^  P°^<=^"^!I
office  in  arresting  the  dangerous  disturbers  of  the  peace  and  purity  of  his  soul.

W.  F.  A,


152  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xvi,  1—28.

Vers.  13 — 17. — The  great  confession.  Jesus  had  now  reached  a  crisis  in  his  ministry.
Away  from  the  scenes  of  his  earlier  labours,  at  the  beautiful  Eoman  colony  by  the  foot
of  Mount  Hermon,  close  to  the  famous  altar  of  Pan,  where  the  Jordan  springs  from  the
mountain-side,  he  suddenly  called  upon  his  disciples  to  give  a  definite  expression  of
their  thoughts  concerning  himself.

I.  The  momentous  question.  This  was  preceded  by  a  less  important  inquiry — as
to  the  various- opinions  of  the  world  about  Christ.  Then  the  disciples  were  brought  face
to  face  with  the  question  for  themselves,  "  Whom  say  ye  that  1  am  ?  "  We  must  be
able  to  furnish  an  answer  to  this  question.  The  whole  weight  and  worth  of  the
gospel  hangs  upon  it.  The  special  character  of  the  gospel  is  that  it  is  immediately
concerned  with  its  Founder.  The  Christian  ethic  and  the  Christian  theory  of  the
universe  will  neither  of  them  redeem  the  world.  Beneath  and  before  all  else  comes
the  Person  of  Christ.  To  know  him  is  to  know  the  gospel.  If  he  is  not  what  he
claims  to  be,  all  our  faith  rests  on  a  delusion.  But  if  his  claims  are  true,  all  else  is  of
secondary  importance.

II.  The  DIFFIC0LTT  OP  ANSWEBiNG  THIS  QUESTION.  The  Jcws  Were  much  per-
plexed. They  could  not  but  be  impressed  with  the  greatness  of  Christ,  yet  they  failed
to  recognize  his  high  claims.  It  would  not  have  been  surprising  if  the  disciples  also
had  been  perplexed ;  indeed,  many  were  troubled,  and  many  forsook  the  great  Teacher
(John  vi.  66).  Jesus  had  not  fulfilled  the  hopes  of  the  people;  the  religious  leaders
of  the  nation  had  definitely  rejected  him ;  he  was  now  in  voluntary  exile,  deserted  by
the  crowds  that  had  once  followed  him  with  enthusiasm.  If  some  of  us  find  it  difficult
to  believe  in  him  to-day  after  his  great  work  has  been  completed,  and  we  see  the  fruits
of  it  in  history,  is  it  wonderful  that  many  felt  the  difficulty  in  his  lifetime?

III.  The  TRUTH  CONFESSED.  St.  Peter  does  not  hesitate  or  doubt  for  one  moment.
He  knows  that  his  Master  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  His  confession  contains  two
ideas.  1.  The  office  of  Christ.  The  apostle  saw  that  Jesus  was  the  long-expected
Messiah.  This  truth  means  to  us  that  he  is  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  2.  The  nature
of  Christ.  The  apostle  also  saw  that  Jesus  was  "  the  Son  of  the  living  GSod."  How
far  these  words  expressed  a  faith  in  the  essential  Divinity  of  Christ  we  cannot  say.
The  Church  was  not  very  slow  in  perceiving  that  tremendous  truth,  for  we  find  that
the  earliest  heresy  was  not  a  denial  of  the  Divinity,  but  a  denial  of  the  humanity,  of
our  Lord.

IV.  The  sbcbet  of  the  confession.  How  did  the  apostle  come  to  see  this  great
truth  under  the  most  unpropitious  circumstances  ?  Jesus  says  it  was  a  revelation.
We  need  not  understand  by  that  term  any  direct  heavenly  voice.  The  revelation  was
inward.  Some  such  revelation  is  always  needed.  Until  the  eyes  of  our  hearts  are
opened,  we  cannot  perceive  the  true  character  and  nature  of  Christ.  In  the  spiritual
world  this  is  parallel  to  the  fact  of  daily  life  that  we  can  only  understand  a  man  when
we  are  in  sympathy  with  him. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  18. — The  rock  on  which  the  Ohwrch  is  huHt.  This  famous  sentence,  which  is
emblazoned  in  great  letters  of  gold  round  the  interior  of  the  dome  of  St.  Peter's  at
Rome,  has  been  a  centre  of  controversy  in  the  Church  for  generations.  It  would  be
beside  our  present  need  to  discuss  the  history  of  that  controversy.  Leaving  out  of
account  the  angry  arguments  of  polemical  theology,  let  us  see  what  positive  truth
our  Lord  is  here  teaching  us ;  for  too  often  the  jewel  of  truth  is  lost  by  both  parties  in
a  quarrel  while  they  are  contending  as  to  who  has  a  right  to  the  possession  of  it.

I.  St.  Peter's  confession  is  the  rook  on  which  the  Church  is  built.
Accepting  this  idea  as  the  most  probable  outcome  of  a  fair  exegesis  of  the  passage,  let
us  see  what  its  real  significance  is.  1.  The  Church  is  built  on  Christ.  He  is  its  Author,
its  original  Foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  11),  and  its  chief  Corner-stone  (Bph.  ii.  20).  When
we  abandon  faith  in  Christ  we  forsake  the  grounds  of  our  faith.  2.  The  Messiuhship
and  Divinity  of  Christ  are  essential  to  the  stability  of  the  Church,  1'hese  two  facts
were  the  contents  of  St.  Peter's  confession.  The  Church  cannot  rest  on  vague  senti-
ments concerning  Christ.  Exact  philosophical  definitions  may  not  be  attainable ;  the
history  of  theology  shows  that  the  effort  to  form  them  nearly  wrecked  the  Church.
But  the  great  central  truths  themselves  are  essential.  3.  The  confession  of  these  truths
is  requisite  in  order  that  the  Church  may  be  firmly  planted.     It  looks  as  though  our


OH,  xvL  1— 28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  158

Lord  spoke  of  the  confession  as  being  itself  the  foundation.  We  must  hare  faith  in
Christ  before  we  can  profit  by  him,  and  we  must  have  courage  to  confess  him  if  we
would  possess  a  robust  Christian  life.

IL  The  Church  on  this  book  will  be  seouhb.  1,  It  is  huilt  hy  Christ.  There-
fore the  superstructure  will  be  sound  as  well  as  the  foundation.  Our  Lord  is  ever  at
work  on  his  Church.  He  can  do  nothing  with  those  who  will  neither  believe  him  nor
confess  him.  But  wherever  he  finds  the  faith  and  confession,  he  himself  builds  up  the
strong  structure  of  a  Christian  character,  2.  It  is  assailed  hy  evil.  The  powers  of  hell
attack  the  Church  because  she  is  their  enemy ;  therefore  the  question  of  a  sure  founda-
tion is  of  vital  importance.  The  floods  are  sure  to  come  and  try  the  house.  3.  It
cannot  he  overthrown.  This  is  a  poi-itive  prediction  of  Christ's,  and  it  ought  to  dispel
our  fear  and  confirm  our  faith.  Of  all  he  has  predicted  nothing  has  failed.  He
promised  that  the  grain  of  mustard  seed  should  become  a  great  tree ;  and  his  promise
has  come  true.  His  assurance  that  nothing  shall  overthrow  the  Church  built  on  the
true  confession  of  faith  in  him  has  proved  to  be  correct  for  nearly  tweinty  centuries,
4.  Its  security  is  shared  hy  those  who  confess  the  faith  it  embodies.  St.  Peter's  name  is
justified  by  his  rock-like  confession.  The  Christian  character  is  confirmed  by  a  loyal
faith  and  a  bold  confession.  The  spirit  of  St.  Peter's  confession  is  typical  of  the
Christian  heroism  that  can  withstand  all  attacks  of  doubt  or  opposition. — W.  F,  A.

Vers.  21 — 23. — A  terrible  anti-climax.  Immediately  after  receiving  his  apostles'
confession  of  his  claims  Jesus  began  to  tell  them  of  his  approaching  death.  He
wanted  to  be  assured  first  that  they  had  the  faith  which  would  stand  the  test  of  this
announcement.  Then  he  delayed  no  longer  in  confiding  to  them  the  dark  secret  which
oppressed  his  own  heart.  The  result  was  a  terrible  auti-climax.  St.  Peter,  who  had
been  treated  with  the  greatest  honour,  is  seen  for  the  time  being  as  only  an  incarnation
of  the  tempter.

I.  The  sad  announcement.  Jesus  now  for  the  first  time  distinctly  declares  his
approaching  rejection  by  the  rulers,  his  death,  and  his  subsequent  resurrection.  1.
The  facts  predicted.  (1)  Eejection,  Th-s  looked  like  utter  failure,  for  Christ  came  to
be  thff  King  and  Deliverer  of  Israel.  (2)  Death.  This  would  put  the  crowning  stroke
on  the  apparent  failure.  It  would  also  add  a  new  horror,  for  "  all  that  a  man  hath  will
i.e  give  for  his  Ufe."  (3)  Resurrection,  This  should  completely  transform  the  prospect.
But  the  final  announcement  does  not  seem  to  have  been  understood  or  at  all  taken  in
by  the  disciples,  2,  The  foresight.  Jesus  saw  what  lay  before  him,  yet  he  set  his
face  steadfastly  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  His  foresight  meant  much  to  him.  (1)
Additional  distress.  God  mercifully  veils  the  future  from  us.  If  we  saw  the  coming
evil  with  certainty  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  face  it.  But  Jesus  walked  with  the
shadow  of  the  cross  on  his  path.  (2)  Courage.  3.  Tlie  prediction.  Why  did  Jesus
tell  his  disciples  of  this  awful  future?  (1)  To  prepare  them  for  it,  and  prevent  the
disappointment  of  false  hopes.     (2)  To  claim  their  sympathy.

II.  The  rooLisH  rebuke.  St.  Peter's  conduct  is  culpably  officious.  He  lays  hold
of  Christ  with  undue  familiarity,  and  even  ventures  to  rebuke  his  Master.  His  action,
however,  is  true  to  the  well-known  impetuosity  of  his  character,  and  it  reveals  very
natural  traits.  1.  Intense  affection.  The  apostle  loves  his  Master  unwisely  but
greatly,  with  a  love  that  is  not  sufficiently  submissive,  yet  with  one  that  is  most
intense.  It  is  easy  for  cold-hearted  people  to  blame  the  apostle.  But  they  who  do
not  approach  his  love  for  Christ  are  not  the  men  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  devoted
disciple.  2.  Elated  self-confidence.  Jesus  had  just  greatly  coinmended  St.  Peter.  It
looks  as  though  he  were  one  of  those  unhappy  people  who  lose  their  balance  when  they
are  too  much  praised.  Such  people  have  many  a  sad  fall  from  glorious  self-complacenoy
to  deepest  humiliation,  3.  Sudden  surprise.  The  apostle  did  not  speak  deliberately.
The  astounding  words  of  Christ  started  an  ill-considered  remark.     Hasty  words  are  not

often  weighty  words.  .         m,  •  i  t  t„™_

IIL  The  steen  reply.  1.  Eehuffing  a  temptation.  The  quick  answer  of  Jesua
shows  how  keenly  he  had  felt  the  well-meant  dissuasion  of  his  friend,  which  had  just
chimed  in  with  the  cravings  of  his  human  natnre.  Here  was  a  real  temptation  of  the
devil  which  must  be  faced  and  conquered!  Jesus  recognized  it  as  a  stumbhng-block
laid  on  his  path.    2.  Unmasking  an  illusion.     The  words  were  from  St.  Peter,  but  the


164  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  XTi.  1— 28.

spirit  of  tliem  was  Satan's,  and  the  keen  coDScience  of  Jesus  at  once  assigned  them  to
their  true  source.  In  an  unguarded  moment  the  apostle  had  let  the  tempter  into  his
heart,  had  become  but  a  tool  of  Satan.  The  character  of  the  words  reveal  their  origin,
they  have  a  savour  of  men  about  them.  The  common  principles  of  men  of  the  world
are  many  of  them  directly  counter  to  the  will  of  God,  Then,  for  all  their  innocent
appearance,  they  are  of  a  Satanic  character, — W.  P.  A.

Ver,  24. — The  great  condition.  The  heart-searching  truths  of  this  verse  are  too
often  neglected  in  popular  presentations  of  the  gospel.  We  have  a  Christianity  made
easy  as  an  accommodation  to  an  age  which  loves  personal  comfort.  Not  only  is  this
unfaithful  to  the  truth,  no  part  of  which  we  have  any  right  to  keep  back ;  it  is  most
foolish  and  shortsighted.  It  prepares  for  a  surprising  disappointment  when  the
inevitable  facts  are  discovered ;  and  it  does  not  really  attract.  A  religion  of  sweet-
meats is  sickening.  There  is  that  in  the  better  nature  of  man  which  responds  to  the
doctrine  of  the  cross ;  it  is  the  mistake  of  the  lower  method  that  it  only  appeals  to  the
selfish  desire  of  personal  safety,  and  therefore  does  not  awaken  the  better  nature  at  all
Christ  sets  the  example  of  the  higher  and  truer  method ;  he  does  not  shun  to  set  before
us  the  daugers  and  difBculties  of  the  Christian  course.  If  we  meet  with  them  we
cannot  say  we  have  not  been  warned.

L  Christianity  is  following  Christ.  It  is  not  merely  receiving  certain  blessings
bom.  him,  K  we  think  we  are  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  work  while  we  remain  just  as
we  were,  we  are  profoundly  mistaken.  He  does  give  us  grace,  the  result  of  his  life-work
and  atoning  death.  But  the  object  of  this  grace  is  just  that  we  may  have  strength  to
follow  him.  It  is  all  wasted  upon  us  and  received  quite  in  vain  if  we  do  not  put  it  to
this  use.  Now,  the  following  of  Christ  implies  three  things.  1,  Imitating  him.  2.
Seeing  him.  3.  Obeying  him.  He  whose  experience  comprises  these  three  things  is  a
Christian ;  no  one  else  is  one.

II.  Following  Christ  is  conditioned  by  sblf-sukrbndbb  to  him.  This  is  what
he  means  by  self-denial.  He  was  not  an  ascetic,  and  he  never  required  asceticism  in
his  disciples;  those  who  did  not  understand  him  accused  him  of  encouraging  an
opposite  mode  of  life.  There  is  no  merit  in  putting  ourselves  to  pain  for  the  mere  sake
of  enduring  the  suffering.  Christ  will  not  be  pleased  if  we  approach  him  in  agony
because  we  have  affixed  a  thumb-screw  to  our  own  person.  It  is  possible  to  he  very
hard  on  one's  body  and  yet  to  remain  terribly  self-willed.  What  Jesus  requires  is  the
surrender  of  our  will  to  him — that  we  may  not  seek  to  have  our  own  will,  but  submit  to
his  will.

ni.    SELF-StJBBBNDEB   TO  ChRIST    LEADS    TO    BEARING    THE    0E0S3    FOB    HIM.       It    is

impossible  to  give  ourselves  up  to  Christ  without  suffering  some  loss  or  trouble.  In
early  days  the  consequence  might  be  martyrdom ;  in  our  own  day  it  always  involves
some  sacrifice.  Now,  the  cross  which  the  Christian  has  to  bear  is  not  inevitable  trouble,
such  as  poverty,  sickness,  or  the  loss  of  friends  by  death.  These  things  would  have
been  in  our  lot  if  we  had  not  been  Christians,  They  are  our  burdens,  our  thorns  in
the  flesh.  They  are  sent  to  us,  not  taken  by  us.  But  the  cross  is  something  additional.
This  is  taken  up  voluntarily;  it  is  in  our  power  to  refuse  to  touch  it.  We  bear  it,  not
because  we  cannot  escape,  but  because  it  is  a  consequence  of  our  following  Christ ;  and
the  good  of  bearing  it  is  that  we  cannot  otherwise  closely  follow  him.  He,  then,  is  the
true  Christian  who  will  hear  any  cross  and  endure  any  hardship  that  is  involved  in
loyally  following  his  Lord  and  Master. — W.  F,  A,

Vers.  25,  26. —  The  gain  that  is  loss,  and  the  loss  that  is  gain.  Great  confusion  has
been  introduced  into  these  verses  in  the  Authorized  Version  by  the  rendering  of  the  same
Greek  word  as  "  life  "  in  ver.  25,  and  "  soul "  in  ver.  26.  The  Revisers  have  helped  to  a
better  understanding  of  the  passage  by  translating  the  word  "  life  "  throughout.  Christ
was  not  speaking  of  the  soul  as  we  understand  it,  of  the  h^her  nature  of  man  ;  but  of
life  as  opposed  to  the  idea  of  being  killed  and  so  losing  one's  life.

I.  Sej.f-seeking  18  SELF-LOSING.  Jesus  IS  warning  his  disciples  of  the  dangers
and  hardships  of  his  service.  Many  will  be  tempted  to  shrink  from  the  cross  in  order
to  save  their  lives.  They  are  told  that  a  cowardly  unfaithfulness  under  persecution  is
noi  the  way  to  save  their  lives.     It  is  true  a  violent  death  may  be  thus  avoided.    But


tH.  XMT.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  155


what  is  the  use  of  a  life  preserved  at  the  cost  of  honour  and  fidelity?  It  is  not  reaUy
saved,  for  it  is  so  degraded  that  it  has  hecome  a  worthless  thing.  Thus  it  is  a  wasted
iife,_a  lost  life.  The  same  is  true  to-day  under  other  circumstances.  The  man  who
denies  Christ  for  bis  own  convenience  lowers  himself  to  the  level  of  worthlessness.
He  who  greedily  grasps  at  his  own  pleasure  to  the  neglect  of  higher  interests  so
impoverishes  his  nature  by  his  meau  and  narrow  way  of  living  that  his  life  is  really
ruined.  This  is  the  case  on  earth.  It  will  be  more  apparent  in  the  next  world,  when
Christ  comes  to  "  render  unto  every  man  according  to  his  deeds  "  (ver.  27).  Even  in
spiritual  things,  if  a  man's  religion  is  purely  selfish  it  will  be  of  no  use  to  him.  If  he
thinks  only  of  his  own  salvation,  and  nothing  of  the  service  of  Christ  and  the  benefit  of
his  fellow-men,  he  will  be  lost.  It  is  not  the  teaching  of  Christ  that  our  great  business
is  to  save  ourselves.  Eeligious  teachers  are  greatly  to  blame  for  inculcating  this  most
unchristian  notion.  Christ  comes  to  save  ub  from  ourselves ;  but  this  will  not  be
effected  by  the  cultivating  of  a  habit  of  supreme  self-seeking  in  religion.  Such  a  habit
is  ruinous  to  all  that  is  worthy  in  a  man.  Therefore  ver.  26,  which  is  often  quoted  in
favour  of  a  self-seeking  religion,  should  be  read  in  the  light  of  ver.  25.

II.  Self-losing  is  bblf-pindino.  This  is  the  opposite  to  the  principle  just  con-
sidered ;  it  has  a  positive  importance  of  its  own  that  demands  careful  consideration.
How  is  the  paradox  verified  in  experience  ?  We  must  first  of  all  call  to  mind  the
immediate  circumstances  our  Lord  had  in  view.  His  disciples  were  being  warned  of
coming  persecutions.  Some  of  them  would  lose  their  lives  in  martyrdom.  Yet  then
they  would  most  truly  find  them,  for  they  would  be  the  heirs  of  life  eternal,  and  would
live  on  in  the  bright  future.  That  is  the  first  lesson  of  the  words.  But  they  go  much
further.  What  is  true  under  persecution  is  true  at  all  times.  The  martyr-temper  is
the  Christian  spirit.  We  gain  the  only  life  worth  living  on  earth  when  we  deny  our-
selves and  embark  on  a  career  of  unselfish  service.  The  abandonment  of  selfish  aims
is  the  acquisition  of  heavenly  treasures.  There  is  a  blessedness  in  the  life  of  obedience
and  self-surrender  that  the  selfish  can  never  know.  Happiness  is  not  attained  by
directly  aiming  at  it ;  it  comes  in  as  a  surprise  to  him  who  is  not  seeking  it  when  he  is
busy  in  unselfish  service.  Now,  those  lessons  are  driven  home  and  clenched  by  the
obvious  truth  of  the  following  verse  (ver.  26).  What  is  the  use  of  a  world  of  wealth  to
a  man  who  loses  his  life  in  acquiring  it?  The  pearl-seeker  who  is  drowned  in  the
moment  of  clutching  his  gem  is  a  supreme  loser  even  while  he  is  a  gainer.  Nothing  will
compensate  a  man  lor  ruaking  shipwreck  of  his  life  by  self-seeking. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  13 — 19. — Peter's  confession.  This  renewed  retirement  of  our  Lord  is  best
accounted  for  by  his  need  of  quiet.  What  was  now  to  be  done  ?  Another  Passover
was  coming  round.  To  proclaim  himself  at  Jerusalem  was  indeed  certain  death  ;  and
yet  was  not  the  hour  for  taking  this  step  at  last  come  ?  Filled  with  inward  conflict,
our  Lord  journeys  on  and  on  until  he  finds  himself  at  the  very  edge  of  the  land  of
Israel.  But  when  his  own  mind  is  made  up  he  at  once  communicates  with  the
disciples,  because  it  was  necessary  that  those  who  were  to  be  his  witnesses  should
understand  the  state  of  matters  and  should  willingly  accompany  him  on  the  fatal
journey  to  Jerusalem.  And  in  asking  them  to  declare  frankly  what  they  thought
about  him,  he  wished  them  to  do  this  in  presence  of  their  remembrance  of  other  and
more  generally  received  opinions,  and  feeling  that  the  weight  of  authority  was  against
them.  With  that  generous  outburst  of  affectionate  trust  which  should  ring  through
every  creed,  Peter  exclaims,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  tlie  living  God."  Our
Lord  does  not  conceal  his  intense  relief  and  keen  satisfaction.  "  Blessed  art  thou,
Simon  Bar-Jona,  for  this  faith  is  wrought  in  thee  not  ty  mere  logical  inferences  from
my  works,  nor  by  weighing  other  men's  opinions,  but  by  that  enlightenment  which
God  produces  and  suffers  never  again  to  be  obscured."  In  this  divinely  wrought  con-
viction of  Peter's  our  Lord  finds  at  last  the  foundation-stone  or  solid  rock  on  which  the
earthly  building  of  his  Church  can  be  raised.  Now  for  the  first  time  does  he  mtroduce
his  disciples  to  the  great  idea  that  this  divinely  wrought  power  to  see  his  nature  and
confess  him  is  destined  to  form  men  into  the  most  distinct  and  permanent  of  associa-
tions ;  that  a  new  society  is  now  begun  in  this  little  circle,  a  society,  however,  formed
of  those  whom  Qod  calls,  and  who  are  distinguished  from  all  others  by  their  attach-
ment to  what  is  Divine,  and  by  their  being  recipients  of  a  Divine  teaching.    The


156  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi.  1— 28.

significance,  therefore,  of  this  moment  cannot  be  exajrgerated,  though  it  lias  been  mis-
uaderstood.  When  our  Lord  says,  "On  this  rock  will  I  build  my  Church,"  he  intro-
duces to  the  minds  of  hia  hearers  a  new  idea.  They  see  their  future  associates  in  the
faith  forming  together  an  edifice  or  spiritual  temple  in  which  God  will  dwell.  And
they  are  assured  that  amidst  the  wieok  of  other  societies  this  shall  stand.  The  power
of  "  Hades,"  "  the  unseen,"  that  mysterious  region  into  which  all  liumau  things  pass,
is  to  have  no  power  over  the  Church.  This  is  the  fact :  while  empires  moulder  into  a
mere  memory,  the  Church  renews  herself  from  age  to  age,  and  is  as  living  now  as  ever
before.  But  that  Christ  should  have  predicted  this,  and  at  the  very  time  when  all  seemed
over  with  his  hope  of  being  received  by  Israel,  seems  almost  as  wonderful  as  the  con-
tinuance of  the  Church  itself.  "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "
— this  certainly  involves  that  Peter  should  have  a  position  of  the  highest  authority  in
the  Church.  And  in  point  of  fact,  it  was  Peter  who  opened  the  gates  of  the  kingdom  to
the  Gentiles.  This  power  is  further  explained  in  a  form  of  speech  common  among  the
Jews,  and  which  bore  a  perfectly  definite  meaning.  The  power  to  bind  and  loose  was
what  we  speak  of  as  legislative  power,  power  to  introduce  new  laws  and  to  repeal  old
ones.  Such  is  the  overwhelming  return  which  our  Lord  makes  to  Peter  for  his  con-
fession. No  confession  can  rival  the  first,  or  can  bring  the  comfort,  the  relief,  the  hope
which  Peter's  brought  to  the  overburdened  spirit  of  his  Lord — no  confession  now  made
can  seem  to  our  Lord  as  the  firm  rock  on  which  the  Church  may  rise.  And  yet  every
acknowledgment  must  bring  gratification  to  his  spirit,  and  must  be  responded  to  by
some  recognition  more  or  less  distinct.  Perhaps  it  is  not  easier  for  us  than  it  was  for
Peter  to  come  to  a  clear  decision  regarding  the  Person  of  Christ.  Certainly  there  was
a  great  weight  of  authority  against  Peter,  but  our  own  judgment  is  not  free  from  the
disturbing  effect  of  similar  influences.  The  verdict  of  the  leaders  of  thought  in  our
own  day  is  almost  unanimously  against  the  distinctive  claims  of  Christ.  Christians,
too,  betray  a  consciousness  that  they  are  in  a  less  secure  and  certain  position  than
formerly,  and  are  too  careful  to  let  it  be  seen  they  appreciate  the  difficulties  of  belief.
There  is  all  the  louder  call  upon  us  to  make  our  confession  of  Christ  full,  clear,  hearty,
and  steadfast ;  to  form  an  opinion  for  ourselves ;  so  that  we  come  to  Christ  with  what
he  can  accept  as  a  fresh  tribute,  and  not  as  a  mere  echo  of  some  other  people's  confes-
sion. We  see  here  that  the  difference  between  acknowledging  him  as  a  Prophet  and
acknowledging  him  as  the  Son  of  God  is  just  the  difference  between  faith  and  unbelief.
In  answer  to  Peter's  "  Thou  art  Christ,"  comes  our  Lord's  "  Thou  art  Peter."  It  is  an
instance  of  the  fulfilment  of  his  promise,  "  He  that  confesseth  me  before  men,  him  will
I  confess  before  my  Father ; "  but  it  is  more  than  this.  In  recognizing  who  Jesus
was  Peter  learned  what  his  own  character  and  hia  own  prospects  were.  Now,  for  the
first  time,  he  saw  the  significance  of  his  own  name.  It  is  so  with  every  one.  It  is  in
the  vision  of  Christ's  true  nature  and  purpose  that  a  man  awakens  to  a  sense  of  his  own
worth  and  of  the  possibilities  that  lie  before  him.  For  you  as  for  Peter  he  will  mark
out  the  proper  work ;  he  will  give  you  a  place  as  a  living  stone ;  he  will  impart  to  you
every  quality  you  need  in  the  difficult  circumstances  of  life  and  in  the  actual  career
'^hat  lies  before  you. — D.

Vers.  20 — 28. — Necessity  of  the  cross.  Peter's  words  pierced  like  a  sharp  thorn  into
the  very  heart  of  Christ,  and  roused  as  keen  an  indignation  as  his  previous  words  had
awakened  gratitude.  For  the  horror  which  our  Lord  saw  in  Peter's  face  as  he
announced  the  near  approach  of  death  reflected  the  horror  he  himself  had  passed
through  during  those  past  days  in  which  he  had  been  making  up  his  mind  to  die ;  the
incapacity  of  Peter  to  understand  that  death  should  be  the  necessary  step  to  glory
tended  to  upset  the  balance  of  his  own  mind  as  well  as  to  disclose  to  him  the  extreme
difficulty  there  would  be  in  persuading  the  world  at  large  that  a  crucified  King  could
be  a  King  at  all.  Peter  seemed  for  the  moment  to  be  the  very  embodiment  of  tempta-
tion, to  be  inspired  by  that  very  spirit  of  evil  which  had  assailed  him  in  the  wilderness.
Instead  of  a  rock  on  which  to  Ibund  the  Church,  he  had  become  a  rock  of  offence.
The  words  of  reprimand  were  severe,  but  in  the  circumstances  intelligible.  Seeing,
then,  the  unwillingness  of  the  disciples  to  think  of  a  Messiah  who  should  not  come
with  armed  followers  and  all  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  war,  our  Lord  from  this
time  forward  spends  much  time  in  an  endeavour  to  demonstrate  the  neoeasity  of  his


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  157


death,  and  to  fix  in  their  minds  that  in  following  him  to  Jerusalem  they  were  going  to
Bee  him  die.  Again  and  again  we  find  him  solemnly  assuring  them  that  he  must  he
taken  and  put  to  death,  and  that  he  would  rise  again.  And  yet  when  he  was  crucified
they  were  entirely  disheartened,  and  had  no  expectation  of  his  rising  again.  Our
wonder  at  the  small  impression  made  by  our  Lord's  words,  is  lessened  when  we  consider
the  originality  of  his  conception  of  the  Messiah's  glory.  Only  by  Divine  illumination,
he  said,  could  Peter  have  known  him  to  be  the  Christ,  but  even  a  higher  Divine
illumiflaticn  was  needed  to  teach  him  the  doctrine  of  the  cross.  So  clean  counter  to
natural  human  belief  is  this  law  that  the  truest  glory  is  in  humiliation  for  others,  that
even  now  each  one  has  to  discover  this  law  for  himself,  and,  when  he  discovers  it,
thinks  he  alone  has  had  it  revealed  to  him.  So  difficult  is  it  for  us  to  comprehend
that  what  the  world  needs  for  its  regeneration  more  than  the  strong  hand  of  a  wise
Kuler  is  the  entrance  into  it,  and  the  diffusion  throughout  it,  of  a  meek  and  lowly
spirit,  of  a  righteous  and  God-fearing  life.  But  our  Lord  assures  us  that  not  only  for
the  Leader,  but  for  the  follower,  this  law  holds  good ;  those  who  would  be  with  him  in
his  glory  must  take  his  own  path  to  it.  The  man  who  means  to  keep  near  Christ
must  not  only  deny  himself  one  or  two  enjoyments  or  sinful  indulgences,  but  must
absolutely  deny  himself,  must  renounce  self  as  an  object  in  life,  must  give  himself  up  as
the  enthusiastic  physician  gives  himself  up,  regardless  of  all  consequences  to  self,  to  the
relief  of  his  patients  or  to  the  advancement  of  science.  You  may  say  that  the  physician
who  does  so  does  not  deny  himself,  but  gives  expression  to  his  highest  and  best  self,
and  that  is  what  our  Lord  means  when  he  adds  as  his  first  proof  of  the  truth  of  his
law,  "  For  whosoever  will  save  his  life  shall  lose  it :  and  whosoever  will  lose  his  life
for  my  sake  shall  find  it."  So  long  as  you  make  self  your  object,  your  end,  and  your
centre,  you  are  losing  your  life  and  your  self ;  but  when  you  are  enabled  to  abandon
self  andi  to  live  for  righteousness,  for  God,  for  Christ,  for  the  community,  you  emerge
into  life  eternal,  you  find  your  truest  self.  "  And  what  is  a  man  profited  if  he  shall
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?  "  This  is  one  of  those  truths  that  need
no  demonstration,  and  yet  are  very  difScult  to  act  upon.  To  gain  even  a  very  small
part  of  the  world  is  so  appreciable  a  gain,  whereas  the  loss  of  the  soul  is  so  inappre-
ciable often  in  the  process,  and  it  seems  so  easy  to  regain  it,  that  we  are  tempted  to
act  as  if  it  were  a  very  small  matter.  A  third  ground  on  which  our  Lord  rests  his
injunction  to  follow  him  is  laid  down  in  the  twenty-seventh  verse.  All  permanent
happiness  is  so  bound  up  with  character  that  he  can  only  make  men  happy  in  propor-
tion to  their  growth.  The  reward  chiefly  desired  by  every  one  who  loves  him  is  an
increase  of  that  love  and  a  truer  likeness  to  himself,  and  in  eternity,  as  on  earth,  Christ
and  all  who  are  like  him,  will  find  their  glory  in  works  of  self-sacrificing  compassion
and  helpful  mercy.  Vers,  27,-28  :  As  far  as  can  be  gathered  from  the  abbreviated
form  we  have  in  the  text,  our  Lord  meant  to  say  that  the  man  who  spent  his  life  on
self,  and  so  lost  his  truest  life,  would  find  his  mistake  in  the  day  when  at  Christ's
second  coming  things  are  for  ever  arranged  according  to  the  principles  he  himself  laid
down  and  lived  on  in  his  first  coming,  and  then,  as  if  to  answer  the  doubt  whether
such  a  day  of  true  judgment  should  ever  come,  he  goes  on  to^ay  that  the  kingdom  of
heaven  would,  even  in  the  lifetime  of  some  standing  there,  be  sufficiently  manifested
to  make  his  Divine  power  clear  to  them. — ^D.

Vers.  1 — t. — The  signs  of  the  Messiah.  Coming  into  the  borders  of  Magadan,
after  the  miracles  of  the  mountain  in  which  he  healed  all  manner  of  diseases,  and
miraculously  feasted  abouli  eight  thousand  persons,  Jesus  encountered  the  Pharisees
and  Sadduoees,  who,  sinkirg  their  sectarian  differences  for  the  time,  agreed  to  tempt  or
test  him  by  demanding  a  special  sign  of  his  Messiahship.  Jesus  declined  to  gratify
them  in  this,  appealing  to  the  signs  of  the  times  which  should  be  sufficient  for  them,
and  giving  them  himself  a  special  sign.     Let  us  consider,  then —

L  The  special  sign  which  the  Phabisebs  sought.  .  1.  They  sought  a  sign  from
heaven.  (1)  This  was  clearly  the  sign  of  the  Prophet  Daniel  (see  Dan.  vii.  9—14).
The  Pharisees  then  desired  Jesus  then  and  there  to  prove  his  Messiahship  to  theni  by
appearing  in  the  heavens  as  the  Son  of  man  in  glory,  and  to  establish  a  visible  king-
dom. (2)  This  is  a  true  sign  of  the  Messiah.  Nut  only  is  it  a  favourite  sign  with
the  Jews,  but  one  also  which  Jesus  acknowledged.    He  commonly  spoke  of  himself,  in


158  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh,  xvi.  1—28.

manifest  allusion  to  that  very  sign,  as  "  the  Son  of  man."  But  why,  then,  did  he  not
gratify  their  expectations  ?  The  answer  is :  2.  They  sought  that  sign  too  soon.  (1)
It  is  a  sign  of  a  second  advent  of  Messiah.  A  second  advent  there  must  needs  be,  for
Messiah  is  described  in  prophecy  in  two  distinct  characters,  which  he  could  not  fulfil
at  one  and  the  same  time.  He  is  to  come  in  the  character  of  a  Pi  iest,  to  make  atone-
ment for  sin,  in  humiliation,  suffering,  and  death.  He  is  also  to  come  in  the  character
of  a  King,  in  glory  and  immortality.  (2)  In  the  first  of  these  characters  Jesus  had
then  appeared.  He  must  first  suffer  before  he  can  enter  into  his  glory,  and  therefore,
also,  before  he  can  be  revealed  in  his  glory  (cf.  Gen.  iii.  15  ;  Deut.  zviii.  15 — 19 ;  Ps.
xvi.  8 — 10 ;  xxii. ;  Isa.  1.  5,  6 ;  liii. ;  Dan.  ix.  24 ;  Luke  xxiv.  26).  (3)  In  the  second
character  he  promises  in  due  time  to  appear  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  29 — 35  ;  xxvi.  64 — 68 ;  Bev.
i.  7  i  xiv.  14).  And  in  this  character  accordingly  he  is  expected  by  his  disciples  (cf.
Acts  i.  11;  1  Thess.  i.  10;  iv.  14—17;  2  Thess.  1.  7—10)."

II.  The  8IQN8  OF  THE  TIMES  TO  WHICH  Jesus  APPEALED.  1.  Tkosi  connected  with
his  personal  advent.  (1)  At  the  period  of  his  birth  there  was  a  general  expectation.
The  weeks  of  Daniel  were  fast  running  out  within  which  Messiah  was  to  be  cut  off
(see  Dan.  ix.  23 — 27).  He  must  be  born  a  considerable  time  before  the  date  of  his
Passion.  Gentiles  then  shared  in  the  expectation  of  the  Jews.  (2)  His  birth  was
itself  a  miracle.  He  was  bom  of  a  virgin,  and  m  the  house  and  lineage  of  David.
This  was  according  to  the  requirement  of  the  first  promise  in  Eden,  that  he  should  be
the  "  Seed  of  the  woman,"  and  of  that  remarkable  place  in  Isaiah  where  a  virgin  of  the
house  of  David  was  to  bring  forth  a  son,  who  was  to  be  distinguished  as  Immanuel  (see
Gen.  iii.  15 ;  Isa.  vii.  14 ;  ch.  i.  23).  (3)  That  birth  was  also  attended  by  miracles.
The  annunciation  to  the  Virgin  by  Gabriel  corresponded  to  that  made  to  Manoah's
wife  concerning  the  birth  of  Samson,  who  was  a  type  of  Christ  (cf.  Judg.  xiiL  2 — 5 ;
Luke  i.  26 — 35).  The  wonderful  birth  was  then  celebrated  by  angels,  who  appeared
to  the  shepherds ;  and  by  a  star  seen  by  the  Wise  Men  in  the  East  (cf.  Numb.  xxiv.  17  ;
ch.  ii.  2 ;  Rev.  xxii.  16 ;  Luke  ii.  9 — 14).  2.  Those  connected  with  his  public  ministry.
(1)  Foremost  amongst  these  was  the  miracle  at  his  baptism,  when  he  was  about  tp
enter  upon  that  public  ministry  (ch.  iii.  16,  17).  (2)  This  was  followed  up  by  the
testimony  of  the  Baptist.  That  testimony  could  not  be  impeached.  The  Baptist  was
authenticated  as  a  prophet  of  God  by  the  miracles  connected  with  his  birth  (see  Luke
i.  5 — 22).  In  that  character  he  was  acknowledged  by  his  nation.  He  announced  him-
self, as  the  angel  had  designated  him  to  be,  the  harbinger  of  Messiah.  In  that  capacity
he  pointed  out  Jesus  to  his  disciples  as  the  "  Lamb  of  God  that  beareth  away  the  sin
of  the  world  "  (John  i.  29).  (3)  This  wonderful  character  Jesus  was  able  to  sustain.
He  wrought  the  miracles  which  the  prophets  said  Messiah  was  to  work.  He  did  every-
thing and  suffered  everything  which  the  prophets  said  Messiah  was  to  do  and  suflfer  in
his  advent  as  a  Priest.  (4)  The  very  wickedness  of  the  generation  that  "  tempted  him,
and  proved  him,  and  saw  his  works,"  was  a  sign  of  the  times  (cf.  Isa.  vi.  9 — 12 ;  ch.
xiii.  14,  15).  And  to  all  but  themselves  is  their  obstinacy  in  rejecting  Jesus,  together
with  their  long-continued  sufferings,  a  proof  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ ;  for  these  things
he  foretold  (cf.  ch.  xxiii.  34—39 ;  Luke  xxi.  22 — ^24).

III.  The  special  sign  which  Jesus  gave.  1.  Re  gave  them  a  sign  from  the  earth.
(1)  They  sought  a  sign  from  heaven.  The  sign  they  sought,  as  we  have  seen,  was  that
of  the  Prophet  Daniel.  That  he  gave  them  was  the  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonah  (cf.  ch.
xii.  39).  (2)  They  sought  the  sign  of  the  kingdom  of  glory.  He  gave  them  the  sign
of  the  priesthood  and  suffering.  The  burial  presupposes  the  death,  and  the  death  the
suffering,  of  Messiah.  These  things  he  afterwards  plainly  showed  to  his  disciples  (see
ver.  21).  2.  This  sign  lest  suited  a  wicked  generation.  (1)  It  fulfilled  the  sacrifices
of  the  Law.  Those  sacrifices  were  ostensibly  to  make  atonement  for  sin.  But  in  what
sense  ?  Ceremonially  and  typically.  MoraUy  they  could  not  remove  sin.  To  suppose
so  would  be  to  outrage  common  sense.  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and
goats  could  take  away  sins,"  Their  inability  to  do  this  was  acknowledged,  for  it  was
necessary  to  repeat  the  sacrifices.  In  the  light  of  the  great  sin-sacrifice  of  Oalvary,  all
is  plain.  (2)  It  fulfilled  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac.  In  the  daily  prayers  read  in  the  syna-
gogue we  have  this :  "itews,  0  most  merciful  and  gracious  King  1  we  beseech  thee
to  remember  and  to  look  back  on  the  covenant  made  between  the  divided  oflerings,
and  let  the  recollection  of  the  sacrificial  binding  of  the  only  son  appear  before  thee,  io


CH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  159


favour  of  Israel."  But  what  sense  is  there  in  this  unless  the  "sacrificial  hinding"  of
Isaac  he  accepted  as  typical  of  the  only  Son  of  God,  the  Seed  of  Isaac,  in  whom  all  the
families  of  the  earth  are  hlessed  ?  (3)  The  sign  of  a  sufficient  sacrifice  for  the  expiation
of  sin  is,  of  all  others,  to  be  desired  by  a  wicked  generation.  But  were  the  Lord  to
have  answered  their  foolish  prayer,  and  to  have  appeared  without  a  sin  sacrifice,  as
their  King  in  judgment,  they  would  be  the  first  to  be  destroyed  in  the  fires  of  his  anger.
3.  Jesus  rested  Ms  claims  upon  this  sign.  (1)  He  predicted  that  he  "  must  go  unto
Jerusalem,  and  suffer  many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and  scribes,  and  he
killed."  Within  a  year  this  was  literally  fulfilled.  (2)  But  now  comes  the  testing
point.  He  added,  "  and  the  third  day  be  raised  up  "  (see  ver.  21).  So  about  a  year
earlier  he  explained  this  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonah  to  certain  scribes  and  Pharisees.
"  For  as  Jonah  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  belly  of  the  sea-monster;  so
shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  "  (see  ch.
xii.  40).  (3)  This  also  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  No  event  of  history  is  better
authenticated  than  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  Atid  if
the  evidence  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  will  not  convince  the  Jews,  they  cannot  be  con-
vinced by  evidence ;  they  can  only  be  convinced  by  judgment.  The  sign  from  heaven
will  convince  them.— ^J.  A.  M.

Vers.  5 — 12. — The  leaven  of  error.  After  an  encounter  with  certain  Pharisees  and
Saddiicees  at  Magadan,  Jesus  warned  his  disciples  against  their  teaching.  This  is  not
written  for  their  sakes  alone,  but  also  fur  our  admonition.  From  Luke's  account  we
may  infer  that  Jesus  likewise  warned  the  people  (see  Luke  xii.  1).  Every  age  has  its
Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  and  it  becomes  us  to  note —

I.  The  brkors  aoaikst  which  we  abb  warned.  1.  Those  which  distinguish
the  Pha/risee.  (1)  He  plumes  himself  upon  his  orthodoxy  and  superior  sanctity.  The
ancient  Pharisee  was  scrupulous  in  observing  the  ritual  of  the  elders,  and  refused  to  eat
with  sinners.  Hence  his  name,  from  the  Hebrew  word  »13,  "  to  separate."  But  the
reputation  of  orthodoxy  is  no  security  against  error.  The  apostate  Greek  Church  is
called  "orthodox;"  and  her  Bomish  sister  claims  infallibility.  These  and  their
kindred  are  the  Pharisees  of  our  times.  (2)  He  is  zealous  for  Church  traditions.  The
ancient  Pharisee  pretended  that  his  traditions  came  to  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai  together
with  the  Law,  immediately  from  God,  and  concluded  that  they  were  of  equal  authority.
Several  of  these  traditions  are  mentioned  in  the  Gospels ;  but  a  vast  number  more  may
be  seen  in  the  Talmud.  Corresponding  to  these  are  the  "  apostolical  traditions  "  and
papal  "  decretals  "  of  the  Bomanists.  (3)  Such  authority  is  worthless,  to  say  the  least.
For  any  simple  story  passing  through  half  a  dozen  hands  will  be  found  to  receive  so
many  new  complexions  and  additions,  and  to  suffer  so  many  distortions  and  omissions,
that  the  original  narrator  could  scarcely  recognize  it.  Church  traditions  are  in  this
respect  no  better  than  others.  Perversion  and  distortion  could  only  be  prevented  by
plenary  inspiration  continued  throughout  all  the  links  of  transmission.  (4)  But  it  is
worse  than  worthless.  The  ancient  Pharisee  set  his  tradition  above  the  Law  of  God  by
making  it  the  interpreter  of  the  Law,  and  thus  by  it  the  Law  was  made  void  (cf.  ch.  xv.
1 — 9 ;  Luke  xi.  39 — 42).  The  vicious  effects  of  the  traditions  of  our  modern  Pharisee
upon  the  Gospel  corresponds.  What  single  truth  of  God  is  there  that  has  not  been
distorted  by  this  process  ?  2.  Those  which  distinguish  the  Sadducee.  (l).The  Sadducee
of  old  derived  from  Sadoo,  a  disciple  of  Antigonus  Sochaaus,  who  lived  about  three
hundred  years  B.o.  Antigonus,  in  his  lectures,  taught  the  duty  of  serving  God  from
filial  love  and  fear  rather  than  in  a  servile  manner,  whence  Sadoc  concluded  that  there
are  no  rewards  after  this  life.  His  followers  proceeded  to  deny  the  existence  of  a
spiritual  world,  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the
providence  of  God  (see  ch.  xxii.  23 ;  Acts  xxiii.  8).  They  differed  little  from  the
ancient  Epicureans.  (2)  Sadduceeism  is  not  limited  to  ancient  times.  We  have  it
stiU  under  the  names  atheism,  deism,  agnosticism,  positivism,  rationalism,  erastianism.
They  are,  in  many  respects,  the  opposite  of  Phariseeism.  The  one  is  the  reaction  of  the
other.  Hence  they  are  associated  evermore.  (3)  As  the  Pharisee  boasts  superior  piety,
so  does  the  Sadducee  affect  superior  intelligence.  Sadduceeism  is  fashionable  through
the  concessions  of  ignorance  to  this  affectation.  Herod  was  the  head  of  the  Sadducees
in  Galilee.    The  "  leaven  of  the  Sadducees  "  is  otherwise  described  as  the  "  leaven  of


160  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi.  1—28

Herod  "  (of.  Mark  viii.  15).  Herod's  courtiers,  of  course,  were  Sadducees.  The  con-
ceited amongst  the  vulgar  would  sympathize  with  boasted  intelligence,  that  they
might,  in  turn,  be  credited  with  an  intelligence  which  they  did  not  possess.  3.  Those
common  to  both,  (1)  Failure  to  discern  the  signs  of  the  times.  The  prophecies  of
Scripture  were  lost  upon  them.  The  events  of  providence  were  to  them  without  signifi-
cance. Their  intelligence  went  no  further  than  discerning  the  face  of  the  sky.  With
all  their  boasted  piety  and  affectation  of  sagacity,  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  were  alike
in  this  condemnation.  Note :  The  neglect  of  the  study  of  prophecy  is  neither  creditable
nor  innocent.  (2)  Opposition  to  the  truth  of  Gfod.  As  Pilate  and  Herod  became  friends
in  their  hostility  to  Christ,  so  did  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  sink  their  differences  to
oppose  him.  However  fiercely  errors  may  wrangle  together,  they  will  evermore  combina
against  the  truth  of  God.  (3)  Herein  the  Sadducee  is  open  to  the  same  impeachment  of
hypocrisy  as  the  Pharisee.  Pretence  in  devotion  is  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisee;
yet  he  opposes  Christ,  who  is  the  impersonation  of  goodness.  Pretence  of  a  free  and
impartial  search  after  truth  is  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Sadducee ;  yet  he  also  opposes  Christ,
who  is  the  impersonation  of  truth.

II.  The  necessity  fob  the  admonition.  1.  Error  is  like  leaven,  subtle  in  its
influence.  (1)  As  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven,"  in  the  parable,  "  is  like  unto  leaven,"  so
is  the  kingdom  of  hell.  Many  interpret  the  parable  to  describe  the  subtle  working  of
error  in  the  lump  of  the  Church,  rather  than  the  secret  working  of  the  truth  in  the
lump  of  the  world  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  33 ;  1  Cor.  v.  6  ;  Gal.  v.  9).  (2)  Its  subtlety  lies  in
its  hypocrisy.  "  Think  not  that  false  doctrine  will  meet  you  face  to  face,  sayiug, '  I
am  false  doctrine,  and  I  want  to  come  into  your  heart.'  Satan  does  not  go  to  work  in
that  way.  He  dresses  up  false  doctrine  like  Jezebel.  He  paints  her  face,  and  tires  her
head,  and  tries  to  make  her  like  truth  "  (Anon.).  (3)  Christians  are  not  proof  against
this  subtlety.  They  are  often  such  as  have  no  great  forecast  for  this  world.  Here  the
disciples  "forgot  to  take  bread."  Mark  says  they  had  only  one  loaf  in  the  ship
(Mark  viii.  14).  Tn  nothing  is  the  veracity  of  the  sacred  writers  more  plainly  seen
than  in  the  unsparing  fidelity  with  which  they  record  the  proofs  of  their  own  infirmity.
Their  very  simplicity  would  expose  them  to  the  subtlety  of  error.  It  was  therefore
needful  to  warn  them.  (4)  In  the  false  concern  of  the  disciples  concerning  the  bread,
we  see  already  a  Pharisaic  care  for  externals,  and  a  Sadducean  forgetfulness  of  the
supernatural.  "  It  is  because  we  took  no  bread."  Men  blame  themselves  most  for
carelessness  in  externals,  which  is  just  that  in  which  God  blames  them  least.  We  may
blame  ourselves  for  a  forgetfulness  for  which  God  does  not  blame  us,  while  he  blames
us  for  a  forgetfulness  for  which  we  blame  not  ourselves.  They  did  not  remember  the
miracle  of  the  loaves.  If  through  thoughtlessness  we  come  into  straits,  even  then  we
may  trust  Christ  to  bring  us  out  of  them.  The  experience  of  the  disciple  is  an  aggra-
vation to  the  sin  of  his  distrust.  (5)  For  lack  of  faith  it  is  easy  to  fall  into  errors  of
doctrine.  "  Why  reason  ye  among  yourselves  ? "  We  waste  much  precious  time  in
profitless  reasonings.  Eeasoniugs  are  profitless  when  they  are  apart  from  Christ.  "  0
ye  of  little  faith."  There  are  degrees  of  faith.  Little  faith  may  be  the  germ  of  great
faith.  Want  of  faith  is  accompanied  by  want  of  quick  spiritual  discernment.  2.  The
influence  of  error  is  demoralizing.  (1)  It  makes  the  Pharisee  a  hypocrite.  The  ancient
Pliariaee,  with  all  his  affectation  of  sanctity,  was  but  self-righteous ;  he  was  proud,
unjust,  selfish,  and  worldly.  The  semblance  of  piety  was  the  mark  of  wicked-
ness. The  modern  Pharisee  is  like  him.  (2)  As  superstition  demoralizes  the  Phari-
see, so  does  scepticism  demoralize  his  complement.  When  the  restraints  of  belief
are  removed,  the  rein  is  thrown  over  the  neck  of  appetite  and  passion  and  every
propensity  of  the  evil  heart.  Extremes  meet.  (3)  Creed  has  greater  influence  upon
temper  and  conduct  than  men  are  commonly  aware  of.  Doctrines  act  in  the  soul
like  leaven;  they  assimilate  the  whole  spirit  to  their  own  nature.  False  doctrine
is  like  evil  leaven  souring  the  temper,  and  swelling  and  inflating  with  pride.
Unsound  faith  will  never  beget  sound  practice.  Zeal  for  purity  of  doctrine  is  essential
to  godliness.  (4)  Error  tends  to  blasphemy.  "It  is  because  we  have  brought  no
bread."  The  disciples  here  judged  unworthily  of  Christ,  viewing  him  through  their
own  low  medium  of  unbelief.  Men  are  prone  to  make  themselves  their  standard  for
Christ  rather  than  making  him  their  standard.  As  we  can  view  Christ  only  in  our
thoughts,  the  spiritual  alone  can  think  justly  of  him.    3.  The  issues  of  error  are


m.  xTi.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  161

disastrous.  (1)  Christ  cannot  abide  with  perversity.  After  suitably  replying  to  the
Pharisees  and  Sadducees  at  Magadan,  "  he  left  them,  and  departed  "  (ver.  4).  A  sinner
abandoned  by  the  only  Saviour  is  in  a  melancholy  case.  Thereupon  he  warned  his
disciples  to  beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees,  viz.  lest  it
should  land  them  in  a  similar  state  of  abandonment.  (2)  Christ  separated  himself
from  them  by  crossing  the  sea.  Was  not  this  action  parabolic  ?  Did  it  not  suggest
that  "  great  gulf  fixed "  by  which  the  righteous  are  for  ever  separated  from  the
wicked  (see  Luke  xvi.  26)?  (3)  The  caution  to  "take  heed  and  beware  of  the  leaven
of  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees  "  suggests  that  their  doctrine  is  especially
pernicious,  like  poisoned  leaven.  The  disciples  should  beware  of  any  doctrine  coming
through  such  hands.  "  Oome  forth,  my  people,  out  of  her,  that  ye  have  no  fellow-
ship with  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues "  (see  Eev.  xviii.  4). —
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  13 — 20. — The  true  confession.  "Who's  who?"  This  is,  generally  speaking,
a  question  of  very  little  consequence.  When  the  "  Son  of  man  "  is  concerned,  it  is  of
infinite  moment.  Everlasting  issues  turn  upon  the  manner  in  which  it  is  answered.
Prom  this  important  teit  we  learn —

I.  That  the  faith  which  is  human  is  nKCERTADf.  1.  Jt  may  take  colowr  frmn,
ihe  distraction  of  guilt.  (1)  "  Some  say  John  the  Baptist."  So  said  Herod.  He  has
murdered  the  Baptist  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  1 — 12).     Herod's  courtiers  would  say  as  Herod  said.

(2)  Herod  had  not  heard  of  Christ  before.  Some  men  never  concern  themselves  with
the  claims  of  Jesus  until  conscience  alarms  them.  (3)  Such  alarms  will  come.  They
come  in  visitations  of  judgment — death-bed  experiences.  (4)  The  faith  so  excited  is
too  often  uncertain.  2.  It  mayle  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  the  world.  (1)  "Some
say  Elijah."  For  Elijah  was  promised  as  the  forerunner  of  Christ  (see  Mai.  iv.  5,  6),
And  the  time  for  the  advent  of  Messiah  had  arrived  (see  Gen.  xlix.  10 ;  Dan.  ix.
25).  (2)  But  why  say  "  Elijah  "  rather  than  "  Messiah  "  ?  The  spirit  of  the  world
blinded  *hem.  They  expected  a  secular  king.  They  were  too  materialistic  to  see  that
John  Baptist  had  come  "  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah."  They  now  confounded
Christ  with  an  Elijah  of  their  own  devising,  and  missed  him.  In  the  mists  of  the  world
the  spiritual  Jesus  is  stiU  fatally  missed.  (3)  They  confounded  the  advents.  They
are  two.  Messiah  was  to  come  in  humiliation.  He  was  also  to  come  in  glory.  They
looked  for  the  glorious  appearing  to  be  heralded  by  Elijah  in  person.  They  failed  to
discern  the  Christ  in  his  suffering.  Yet  the  advents  are  intimately  related.  Those
only  who  confess  him  in  his  sufferings  can  share  in  his  glory.  3.  It  may  he  distorted
hy  the  vanity  of  reason.  (1)  "  Some  say  Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  prophets."  The
doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  transmigration,  or  passing  of  the  soul  from  one  body  into
another,  was  accepted  among  the  Jews  (cf.  ver.  14;  ch.  xiv.  2 ;  John  ix.  2).  (2)  This
doctrine  largely  entered  into  the  Pharisees'  notion  of  the  resurrection.  To  them  the
question  of  the  Sadducees  would  be  a  real  puzzle,  which  Jesus  answered  to  the  astonish-
ment of  both  (see  ch.  xxii.  23 — 33).  (3)  Herod,  though  a  Sadducee,  yet  favoured  this
Pharisaic  notion.  In  this  he  was  inconsistent.  But  what  of  that  ?  Unbelief  is  incon-
sistent evermore  under  the  excitements  of  conscience.

II.  That  the  truk  faith  of  Christ  is  a  revelation  from  God.  1.  In  its  doctrine.
(1)  "But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am?"  The  disciples  of  Jesus  should  have  it.  They  had
the  best  opportunity  of  judging.  (2)  What,  then,  was  their  coufession?  "Simon
Peter  answered  and  said,  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  Here  Jesus
was  identified  as  the  Messiah  of  the  nation's  hope.     His  Divinity  also  was  recognized.

(3)  But  fhis  confession  had  been  made  before.  After  the  stilling  of  the  storm,  "they
that  were  in  the  boat  worshipped  him,  saying,  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God  "
(ch.  xiv.  33).  Nathanael's  confession  was  still  earlier  (see  John  L  49).  And  still  later
we  have  another  remarkable  confession  (see  John  vi.  69).  (4)  The  disciples  of  Jesus
were,  several  of  them,  disciples  of  John ;  and  from  John  they  had  this  testimony  con-
cernins  Jesus  (see  John  i.  35 — 42).  2.  In  its  experience.  (1)  In  this  confession  of
Peter  there  is  a  new  element,  and  an  element  too  of  great  importance ;  for  it  had  a
special  commendation.  The  earlier  confessions  were  more  speculative.  This  was
experimental;  from  the  very  heart.  (2)  Miracles  cannot  carry  conviction  to  the
heart.     No  effort  of  reason  can  give  it.     "  Flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto

MATTHEW — ^n.  M


162  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi.  1—28.

thee."    (3)  It  is  immediately  from  God.    "  No  man  can  say  Jesus  is  Lord,  but  by  the
Holy  Spirit."

III.  That  happy  is  he  that  oonpbssbs  Cheist  from  the  heart.  },  Sei§a  living
stone  in  the  living  temple.  (1)  Simon,  at  his  call,  received  this  patronymic  (see  John
i.  42).  Literally,  Peter  is  a  "  stone ; "  metaphorically  it  is  stability,  strength.  The
change  of  name  suggests  change  of  nature,  or  conversion  (cf.  Gen.  xxxii.  28).  (2)  The
firmness  of  the  rook  belonged  not  to  Peter  in  respect  to  bis  mental  temper  (see  ch.  xxvi.
69 ;  Gal.  ii.  11).  (3)  It  belonged  to  him  in  connection  with  his  faith.  He  had  the
patronymic  in  anticipation  of  his  confession ;  for  when  he  made  it  Jesus  said,  "  Thou
art  Peter,"  q.d.  now  thou  hast  merited  thy  name.  Heart-faith  is  the  principle  of
Christian  firmness.  (4)  Whoever  has  the  faith  of  Peter  thereby  becomes  himself  a
Peter — a  living  stone.  Peter  himself  witnesses  to  this  (see  1  Pet.  ii.  4,  5).  Translate
this  figure,  and  what  does  it  import  ?  2.  He  is  founded  on  the  Bock  of  Ages.  (1)  This
Eock  is  not  Peter.  Petros  does  not  signify  "a  rock"  otherwise  than  as  a  stone  is  a
rock.  Stone,  not  rock,  is  the  proper  meaning  of  that  term.  Petra  is  the  name  for  the
living  rock.  On  the  petra  the  Church  is  built.  (2)  Peter  is  accordingly  found  amongst
the  other  apostles,  and  together  with  them  also  the  prophets,  as  one  of  the  many
foundation-stones  resting  upon  the  Bock  (see  Eph.  ii.  20 ;  Rev.  xxi.  14).  (3)  Christ,
who  is  the  Foundation  (see  Acts  iv.  11, 12 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  11),  is  also  the  Builder  of  his
Church.  In  his  hand  every  stone  has  its  proper  place  and  fitting.  3.  Eis  salvation
is  secured.  (1)  "The  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  In  ancient  times
the  gates  of  fortified  cities  were  used  to  hold  councils  in,  and  they  were  usually  strong
places.  This  expression  means  that  neither  the  counsels  nor  strength  of  Satan  can  pre-
vail against  the  truth  of  this  confession,  nor  against  the  Church  that  is  founded  on  it.
(2)  Hades  is  the  abode  of  disembodied  spirits,  and  death  is  the  gate  or  entrance  into
thai  abode.  But  death  does  not  prevail  against  the  living  Church.  Its  members  die,
but  others  take  their  places.  (3)  Neither  does  death  prevail  against  any  living  member
of  the  Church  to  remove  him  out  of  it.  For  death  does  but  translate  him  from  that
part  of  the  Church  which  is  militant  to  that  other  part  which  is  triumphant.  For  the
one  true  Church  of  Christ  is  catholic  to  the  universe  and  to  the  ages.  "  Hell  hath  no
power  against  faith ;  faith  hath  power  for  heaven."

IV.  Signally  blessed  is  he  that  is  foremost  nr  this  cokpession.  1.  Peter  had
the  honour  of  the  keys.  (1)  Keys  were  anciently  a  common  symbol  of  authority;  and
presenting  the  keys  was  a  form  of  investing  with  authority ;  and  these  were  afterwards
worn  as  a  badge  of  office  (see  Isa.  xxii.  22).  Peter's  authority  was  to  open  the  gate  of
faith  to  the  world.  (2)  He  accordingly  first  preached  the  gospel  to  the  Jew,  on  the
memorable  Day  of  Pentecost  (see  Acts  ii.  41).  He  first  preached  the  gospel  to  the
Gentiles  also  (see  Acts  x.  44 — 47  ;  xv.  7).  (3)  In  this  honour  Peter  stood  alone.  In
the  nature  of  the  case  he  could  have  no  successor.  In  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to
Jew  and  Gentile  his  successors  are  counted  by  millions ;  but  in  being  the  first  to  preach
it  he  has  no  successor.  2.  He  had  the  power  of  binding  and  loosing.  (1)  "  The  term
of  loosing  and  binding  was  customarily  applied  by  Jews  to  a  decision  about  doctrines
or  rites,  establishing  which  were  lawful  and  unlawful.  Thus  of  many  articles,  it  is
said,  'The  school  of  Shammai,  which  was  the  stricter,  bindeth  it;  the  school  or
followers  of  Hillel  looseth  it'"  (Lightfoot).  (2)  This  Peter  was  to  do  authoritatively,
by  plenary  mspiration,  and  therefore  so  as  to  be  ratified  and  confirmed  in  heaven.  And
in  this  accordingly  Peter  took  the  initiative,  declaring  the  terms  of  salvation  when  be
first  used  his  keys.  (3)  But  beyond  this  he  had  no  distinction  from  the  other  apostles,
who  were  also  inspired  authoritatively  to  set  forth  these  terms.  The  question  which
Peter  answered  was  addressed  to  the  whole  company  of  the  apostles,  "Whom  do  ye  say
that  I  am  ?  "  and  Peter  answered  it  in  their  name,  or  as  their  representative  (cf.  John
XX.  21 — 23).  (4)  In  this  the  apostles  have  no  successors.  Plenary  inspiration  has
ceased  with  them.  The  fruits  of  that  inspiration  come  down  to  us  in  the  New  Testa-
ment canon.  To  this  we  have  our  one  and  sole  appeal.  3.  Every  foremost  confessor
has  his  honour.     (1)  The  martyr  has  his  crown.     He  has  his  conspicuous  place  in  the

tter  resurrection  (see  Eev.  ii.  10 ;  xx.  4 — 6).    (2)  Superior  goodness  will  be  signally
gnized  (see  Dan.  xii.  3 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  41,  42). — J.  A.  M.

•.  21—24. — Christian  tdf-denial.    After  the  noble  confession  of  Peter  Jesus


OH.  xvL  1— 28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  163

"began  to  show  unto  his  disciples  how  that  he  must  go  unto  Jerusalem,  and  sufifer."
This  intelligence  roused  all  the  devil  in  Peter,  so  that  he  took  that  Blessed  One  whom
he  had  just  acknowledged  to  be  the  "  Son  of  the  living  God,"  and  began  to  rebuke
him.  Simon  was  not  innocent  of  selfishness  in  his  concern  for  the  life  of  his  Lord,
for  he  shrewdly  concluded  that  the  servants  might  suffer  with  the  Master.  Jesus
strongly  resented  this  evil  spirit  of  the  world,  and  urged  the  absolute  necessity  of  self-
denial.

L  Self-dbnial  is  eequibbd  by  our  belation  to  God.  1.  The  will  of  God  is  the
creature's  law.  (1)  Ether  expands,  flame  ascends,  water  finds  its  level,  the  blade  of
grass  pushes  sunward.  Theories  may  be  hazarded  to  explain  these  things,  but  the
theories  will  need  explanation.  Sooner  or  later  we  come  back  upon  the  principle  that
the  will  of  God  is  the  creature's  law.  (2)  Man  is  no  exception.  His  intellect,  con-
science, affections,  will,  are  as  truly  creatures  of  God  as  the  instincts  of  animals,  the
habits  of  plants,  or  the  properties  of  matter.  (3)  God  does  not  coerce  the  human  will,
but  he  gives  us  a  law  with  sanctions.  The  very  superiority  of  our  endowments  should
influence  our  heart  to  love  and  serve  him  to  the  limit  of  our  ability.  2.  Tet  our
inclinations  cross  the  will  of  God.  (1)  Originally  this  was  not  bo.  We  were  created
in  innocency  and  uprightness.  Our  senses  let  in  the  evidences  of  the  power,  wisdom,
and  goodness  of  our  Creator.  Our  intellects  were  filled  with  admiration  of  his  perfec-
tions ;  our  hearts  glowed  with  love  to  him ;  our  obedience  was  loyal  and  delightful.
(2)  But  in  an  evil  hour  this  Eden  was  blighted,  and  we  became  earthly,  sensual,
devilish.  3.  Therefore  now  the  necessity  for  self-denial.  (1)  Without  it  we  cannot
regain  the  forfeited  favour  of  God.  Worldliness  must  be  fought  and  conquered.  The
flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts  must  be  crucified.  Waywardness  must  be  resisted.
(2)  Without  self-denial  that  favour  cannot  be  retained.  Let  the  duty  of  reproving
sin  be  neglected  because  it  is  unpleasant,  and  the  relish  for  the  worship  of  God  will  go,
and  his  service  will  degenerate  into  formality.  Let  the  duty  of  giving  bountifully  to
the  cause  of  God  and  humanity  be  restrained  because  the  love  of  gain  is  pleasant,  and
the  life  of  God  will  languish  and  expire.

II.  Self-denial  is  required  bt  oub  relation  to  man.  1,  The  human  race  is  one
great  family.  (1)  Polygenists  should  consider  the  striking  differences  in  persons  con-
fessedly of  the  same  nation  and  race,  and  how  they  might  be  aggravated  by  the  influ-
ence of  climate,  diet,  and  habits  of  life  extended  over  many  generations.  The  same
class  of  dog  that  in  the  tropics  will  grow  a  thin  covering  of  hair  will  in  the  arctic
regions  grow  a  thick  coat  of  wool.  Let  the  experiment  be  fairly  made  with  the  negro,
and  he  will  flourish  in  any  climate.  Let  him  not  be  suddenly  removed  from  one
extreme  of  climate  to  another;  but  let  him  pass  through  gradations  in  a  series  of
generations  so  as  to  give  the  powers  of  adaptation  a  chance.  (2)  Developmentarians
who  trace  the  American  Indian  to  the  broad-nosed  simian  of  the  New  World,  tlie  African
to  the  Troglodytic  stock,  and  the  Mongolian  to  the  orang,  should  consider  that  no  two
tribes  of  men  differ  as  the  orang  and  chimpanzee.  (3)  Moses  ought  to  know  what  he
was  writing  about,  living  as  he  did  within  a  few  generations  of  the  origin  of  our  race.
If  the  accepted  chronology  may  be  taken  as  correct,  he  was  contemporary  with  men
who  were  contemporary  with  Abraham,  and  Abraham  was  contemporary  with  men
who  remembered  Noah,  and  Methuselah  was  at  once  contemporary  with  Noah  and
Adam.  Could  Moses  have  imposed  on  the  men  of  his  generation  a  fanciful  account
of  the  origin  of  their  race  which  the  traditions  of  every  family  might  be  presumed  to
contradict?  (4)  Sin,  not  science,  is  the  true  origin  of  polygenism.  Sin  is  dissocializing.
It  expels  brotherly  love,  generates  hatred,  variance,  emulation,  strife,  sedition.  It
originates  wars  and  tyrannies.  2.  The  necessities  of  the  family  call  for  self-denial,  (1)
Some  of  these  are  physical.  Should  not  our  luxuries  minister  to  the  necessities  of  the
hungry  and  naked  and  homeless  (see  Jas.  ii.  15,  16 ;  1  John  iii.  17)  ?  (2)  Some  are
spiritual.  What  is  done  for  the  heathen  abroad  and  at  home?  For  the  street  Arab?
For  the  inhabitant  of  the  mansion  who  habitually  neglects  the  means  of  grace?  Do
we  give  money  ?  Do  we  give  personal  service  to  Church  work,  which  is  more  valuable
than  money  ?  (3)  The  temper  of  the  world  will  tax  our  self-denial.  Meet  a  hypo-
condriac,  and  he  will  weary  you;  but  you  may  release  yourself  by  asking  after  the
health  of  his  soul.  The  subject  is  un]ialatable  to  the  impenitent,  but  without
encountering  resentments  we  cannot  clear  our  consciences  of  the  blood  of  soula.


164  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ok.  xvi.  1—28.

ni.  Selp-denial  is  required  by  the  example  of  Christ.  1.  He  stooped  to  the  form
of  a  servant.  (1)  Bom  in  a  stable;  cradled  ia  a  manger;  associated  with  poverty.
(2)  But  who  is  this  'I  The  King  of  glory  I  (3)  Can  the  sticklers  for  precedence  be
the  servants  of  this  great  Exemplar  ?  How  small  in  his  great  presence  are  the  artifices
of  pride !  How  contemptible  is  borrowed  greatness !  2.  He  exercised  himself  with  fasting.

(1)  At  the  entrance  upon  his  ministry  he  fasted  in  the  wilderness  as  our  Exemplar.
If  we  would  be  successful  in  our  spiritual  conflicts  we  should  in  our  measure  follow  him
here.  (2)  In  this  age  of  wisdom  men  see  no  reason  in  fasting,  and  yet  here  is  a  kind
of  devil  that  will  not  depart  without  faith ;  and  here  is  a  kind  of  unbelief  that  will  nut
go  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting,  3.  He  took  up  his  own  cross.  (1)  He  went  to  Jcru
salem  to  suffer.  There  he  "  suffered  many  things  of  the  elders  and  chief  priests  and
scribes."  The  false  accusation,  the  shame,  the  spitting,  the  sc(jurge.  (2)  There^  at
Jerusalem,  he  literally  carried  his  cross.  On  it  he  was  "killed."  (3)  And  every  man
has  his  cross  to  lift  and  carry,  and  perhaps  on  it  to  be  killed  for  Christ's  sake.  It  is
not  his  place  to  rebuke  Jesus  for  bringing  him  to  it,  but,  when  he  finds  it,  to  lift  it  and
shame  the  devil. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  26 — 28. — Profit  and  loss.  As  the  time  of  the  brief  ministry  of  Jesus  drew  to
its  close,  he  began  to  show  his  disciples  how  he  must  go  to  Jerusalem  and  suffer  and
be  killed,  and  rise  again  the  third  day.  The  sombre  part  of  this  anticipation  was  a
terrible  shock  to  the  strong  Jewish  prejudices  of  Peter;  and  he  lost  sight  of  the
glorious  element  of  the  resurrection.  So  is  prejudice  blind  evermore.  He  had  the
presumption  to  take  Jesus  to  task,  and  stoutly  protested  against  any  such  issue.  For
this  temerity  Peter  merited  a  terrible  rebuke  from  Christ,  who,  after  administering  it,
insisted  upon  self-denial  and  cross-lifting  as  essential  to  his  discipleship.  Then  he
preceded  to  reason  and  expostulate  in  the  words  of  the  text.

I.  What  IS  THE  OAm  ?  The  world.  1.  Not  the  empire  of  the  universe.  (l)*'The
whole  world,"  in  the  largest  sense,  includes  not  only  this  globe,  but  the  sun,  the  planets,
and  the  moons  of  this  solar  system;  and,  moreover,  all  the  firmaments  of  such  systems
within  the  searching  power  of  telescopes  and  beyond  into  immensity.  (2)  The  pro-
prietorship of  the  world  in  this  large  sense  belongs  to  God  alone.  Such  a  sceptre  could
be  wielded  only  by  the  Infinite.  2.  Not  the  empire  of  this  earth,  (1)  Alexander  the
Great  is  said  to  have  "  conquered  the  world,"  and  then  to  have  "  wept  because  he  had
not  another  world  to  conquer."  Yet  was  that  empire  of  Alexander  but  a  small  portion
of  the  globe  after  all.  And  instead  of  conquering  the  other  world  of  his  own  mind,  his
evil  passions  conquered  him.  (2)  The  fiomans  were  said  to  be  "  masters  of  the  world,"
but  there  were  barbarians  beyond  they  could  never  subdue.  There  were  vast  continents
they  never  knew.  (3)  The  British  empire  is  the  most  extensive  that  the  sun  has  seen.
Yet  are  we  far  from  possessing  the  monopoly  of  the  globe.  Universal  empire,  in  this
sense,  is  still  reserved  for  the  proper  Man.  3.  All  the  pleasures  of  the  worldling.  (1)
In  his  enjoyment  of  all  natural  endowments.  Health  of  body;  symmetry  of  propor-
tions; vigour  of  mind;  hilarity  of  spirits.  (2)  AH  accidental  advantages.  The
inheritance  of  wealth,  of  title,  of  position.  (3)  All  opportunities  of  animal  indulgence.
Luxuries  of  the  table — choice  wines,  rare  fruits — all  in  profusion.  Every  conceivable
gratification  for  the  appetite  and  passion.  (4)  All  opportunities  for  intellectual  grati-
fication. A  taste  cultivated  to  appreciate  the  finest  poetry,  the  most  exquisite  music,
the  noblest  eloquence,  consummate  painting  and  sculpture,  and  refinements  of  art,
together  with  all  these  things.  4.  But  hold,  the  colouring  is  too  high  I  (1)  Who  can
have  all  this  with  religion  ?  Can  it  be  all  indulged  if  the  claims  of  religion  are  respected  ?

(2)  But  who  can  have  all  this  without  religion  ?  For  are  there  not  punitive  sequences
bound  up  with  indulgence  ?  (o)  Health  will  not  abide  it.  (6)  Capacity  is  limited,  and
to  surcharge  is  to  produce  revulsion  and  disgust,  (c)  Conscience  will  have  its  recl«on-
ing.  (d)  Fear  will  intrude  with  thoughts  of  the  coming  of  the  "  Son  of  man  in  t'  e
glory  of  his  Father  with  his  angels"  to  "reward  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds."
It  will  bring  alarmingly  near  the  judgment  in  the  doom  of  death.

II.  What  is  the  loss?  The  soul.  1.  Its  greatness  is  seen  in  its  achievements.
(1)  Those  of  the  astronomer.  The  calculation  of  the  Nautical  Almanac.  The  discovery
of  the  planet  Neptune.  Light  thrown  upon  chronology.  (3)  Those  of  the  chemist
and  electrician.    (3)  Those  of  the  engineer.    (4)  What  a  loss  when  such  great  power*


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  165

are  prostituted,  wasted,  blighted,  damned !     2.  It  is  evident  in  its  capability  of  God.

(1)  Powers  to  contemplate  his  being  and  attributes ;  his  government  and  his  claims.

(2)  Enjoying  his  friendship.     Reciprocating  his  love.     Working   out  his   purposes.

(3)  Hoping  in  his  promises  of  heaven.  (4)  But  all  this  capability  is  capability  also  of
suffering.  Awful  to  the  sinner  is  the  very  justice  of  his  judgment.  Thoughts  of  the
being  and  attributes  of  an  infinite  Enemy.  How  terrible  are  the  fires  of  his  wrath!
3.  It  is  seen  in  Qod's  estimate.  (1)  He  framed  the  creation  for  man  (see  Ps.  viii.).
(2)  He  gave  himself  foi'  man.  Became  incarnate  in  our  nature.  In  that  nature  suffered
and  died  for  us.  (3)  Carried  our  nature  into  heaven.  There  it  is  exalted  above  all
principality.  (4)  In  it  be  will  come  forth  "  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  his  angels."
(5)  The  distance  between  heaven's  rapturous  height  and  hell's  horrible  depth  is  the
measure  of  God's  estimate  of  man.

III.  What  is  the  peofit?  1.  For  what  do  youlartw  your  sovlf  (1)  "All  that
is  in  the  world "  is  soon  summed  up.  "  For  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the
liesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  vain-glory  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father"  (1  John
\\.  16).  (2)  But  what  have  we  here  ?  (o)  Sensuality.  Wine.  Women.  (6)  Oove-
tousness.  Gain  by  meanness.  Gain  by  fraud.  Gain  by  oppression,  (c)  Ambition.
The  esteem  of  the  deceived.  Or  the  esteem  of  the  vain.  What  does  it  profit  ?  2.  What
is  the  profit  when  life  is  spent  f  (1)  What  would  a  damned  soul  give  for  the  oppor-
tunity to  retrace  his  steps?  (2)  But  life  is  spent  before  a  man  is  dead.  What  does
the  world  profit  when  a  man  outlives  its  pleasures — when  his  energy  is  spent  ?  3.  What
must  we  sacrifice  for  the  soul  ?  (1)  Not  the  world,  in  its  use.  (2)  We  must  sacrifice
the  world  in  its  abuse.  All  sin  must  go.  (3)  Life  must  be  sacrificed  if  necessary.
But  then  "  to  die  is  gain." — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  4. — ITie  sign  of  Jonas.  There  are  many  indications  of  the  persistency  with
which  our  Lord  was  worried  and  hindered  by  a  hostile  party  from  among  the  Pharisees.
They  were  ever  trying  new  devices  for  entangling  him.  They  hoped  to  nonplus  him  ;
or  to  get  him  to  try  something  in  which  he  would  fail,  or  to  say  something  which  they
could  turn  into  an  accusation.  On  this  occasion  the  Pharisaic  party  united  with  the
GaliljBan  Sadducees  (who  may  be  the  same  as  the  Herodians)  in  what  seemed  a  clever
scheme.  They  were  to  plead  that  such  miracles  as  he  wrought  could  not  prove  his
Divine  claim,  because  they  were  all  susceptible  of  natural  explanations.  They  were
to  say  that,  if  he  meant  them  to  believe  in  him,  he  must  do  some  really  wonderful
thing — make  thunder  in  a  clear  sky,  as  Samuel  did  (1  Sam.  xii.  18),  or  bring  fire  from
heaven,  as  Elijah  did  (1  Kings  xviii.  38).  Of  course,  they  intended  the  people  to  hear
them  put  this  test,  and  they  would  make  use  of  his  refusal  as  proof  of  his  inability.
Our  Lord  did  refuse.  He  understood  the  temper  and  needs  of  his  time  far  better  than
they  did ;  and  if  they  wanted  manifest  signs  from  heaven,  the  people  did  not ;  or  if
they  did,  such  signs  were  not  really  best  for  them.  What  would  most  help  to  awaken
men  was  the  mystery  of  his  death  and  resurrection.  That  was  the  true  sign  of  his
spiritual  being  and  mission.  These  Pharisees  might  take  that  sign.  It  was  fore-
shadowed in  the  story  of  Jonah.  It  was  all  they  would  get.  They  must  do  the  best
they  could  with  it.

I.  The  sign  op  Jonab  was  intended  to  puzzle.  Those  who  knew  nothing  of
the  spiritual  nature  of  Christ,  or  of  his  redemption  by  suffering  and  sacrifice,  could
make  nothing  of  this  sign.  It  is  a  good  way  in  which  to  treat  malicious  questioners,
to  answer  them  by  giving  them  something  to  puzzle  over,  a  "  hard  nut  to  crack."
Can  we  imagine  how  these  Pharisees,  who  were  so  clever  at  "  splitting  hairs  "  in  argu-
ment, disqussed  this  "  sign  of  Jonas  "  ?  The  people  must  have  smiled  when  they  saw
them  so  answered  and  so  discomfited.

II.  The  sign  of  Jonas  was  intended  to  suggest.  For  us  it  suggests  what  was
then  the  special  burden  on  the  mind  of  Christ.  He  was  anticipating  the  time  of  his
suffering  and  death.  For  them  the  sign  seemed  to  say,  "  Your  prejudiced  opposition
to  me  will  grow  until  it  onsummates  in  securing  my  death.  You  will  throw  me  over-
board, as  Jonas  was  thrown  over.  But  you  will  be  baffled  even  then.  Like  Jonas,  I
shall  rise  again."

III.  The  sign  of  Jonas  was  intended  to  teach.  Only  one  point  in  the  story
is  recalled  by  Christ.    The  only  likeness  between  Jonas  and  Christ  is  that  "  rising


166  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xvi.  1—28.

again."    The  sign  of  the  Divine  origin,  Divine  mission,  and  Divine  nature  of  Christ
is  his  resurrection  from  the  dead. — E.  T.

Ver.  6. — Pharisaic  haven.  In  their  short  journeyings  among  the  villages,  and  wher
they  went  east  of  the  lake  for  the  sake  of  retirement,  the  disciples  were  accustomed  tf
carry  in  their  little  baskets  sufBcient  food  for  a  day  or  two.  By  some  mischance  thf
food  had  been  forgotten  on  this  occasion.  Their  minds  were  full  of  this  lack  of  bread  '
and  so  they  thought  their  Master's  mind  must  be  fuU  of  the  same  thing.  He  was
quite  unconcerned  about  bodily  food,  and  meditating  on  the  mischievous  influence,
upon  themselves  and  upon  others,  of  the  characteristic  spirit  and  disposition  of  the
Pharisees,  of  which  so  striking  an  illustration  had  just  been  given.  It  was  an  evil
force,  an  active  force,  and  a  dangerous  force.

I.  Pharisaic  doctrine  as  ah  evil  fobcb.  It  was  the  notion  that  a  good  creed
will  excuse  an  evil  life ;  that  a  man  may  do  evil  that  good  may  come ;  that  religion
is  formality;  that  subtlety  is  more  important  than  sincerity;  that  blind  prejudice
can  make  honest  judgments.  The  "leaven"  will  go  into  the  term  " hypocrisy,"  or
"  religious  insincerity ; "  "  the  unreality  of  a  life  respectable,  rigid,  outwardly  religious,
even  earnest  in  its  zeal,  and  yet  wanting  in  the  humility  and  love  which  are  the
essence  of  true  holiness."  Such  hypocrisy  and  insincerity  is  a  ruinous  influence  in
character.  A  man  cannot  be  noble  who  allows  any  shams.  Religion  a  mere  garb  is
worthless  to  man  and  dishonouring  to  God.  Nothing  roused  our  Lord's  indignation
like  the  leaven  of  insincerity.

II.  Pharisaic  docteine  as  an  active  force.  Here  we  find  the  reason  for  calling
itjeaven,  which  is  a  thing  which  will  not  keep  quiet,  and  remain  where  it  is  and  as
it  is.  Leaven  will  act;  it  will  grow;  it  will  push  through  ;  it  will  pervade.  Leaven
consists  of  plant-cells,  which  multiply  with  extraordinary  rapidity  under  favourable
circumstances.  A  doctrine  which  allows  licence  to  man's  evil  passions,  and  hides  it
under  a  show  of  superior  piety,  is  a  doctrine  that  readily  finds  a  sphere  in  man's  corrupt
natm'e,  and  there  it  acts  vigorously.  A  little  of  such  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump.
We  need  to  see  clearly  that  all  error  is  active ;  but  all  error  that  tends  to  give  moral
licence  is,  for  fallen  man,  especially  active.     You  can  never  hope  to  keep  such  error  still.

III.  PflAEiSAio  DOCTRINE  AS  A  DANGEROUS  FORCE.  Therefore  our  Lord  warned  his
disciples  against  letting  the  Pharisaic  spirit  get  into  them  unawares.  It  works  such
havoc  in  character.  Any  evil  is  possible  to  a  man  who  once  permits  himself  to  excuse
insincerity.  Piety  is  nourished  upon  absolute  truth  and  righteousness.  Guile,  for-
mality, and  outward  show  never  can  support  it. — R.  T.

Ver.  13. — Opinions  concerning  Jesus.  It  seems  strange  that  our  Lord  should  want
to  know  men's  opinions  about  himself.  Two  explanations  may  be  given.  1.  These
disciples  mixed  more  freely  with  the  people  than  Jesus  could,  and  were  more  likely
to  know  the  common  talk.  So  they  could  give  him  information  which  would  mate-
rially help  his  work.  2.  Our  Lord's  question  may  only  have  been  meant  to  introduce
a  conversation,  through  which  he  might  teach  those  disciples  the  higher  truth  concern-
ing himself.  Jesus  removed  into  the  district  of  C»sarea  Philippi  for  the  sake  of  retire-
ment and  safety.  His  work  in  Galilee  was  virtually  finished,  and  something  in  the
nature  of  a  review  of  that  work,  and  estimate  of  its  results,  was  befitting.  Our  Lord's
work,  in  its  higher  aspect,  was  a  self-revelation.  What  he  said,  and  what  he  did,  were
intended  to  show  what  he  was.  The  mystery  of  the  Peison  of  Christ  is  the  subject  of
the  gospel.  So  our  Lord,  in  asking,  "  Whom  do  men  say  that  I  am  ?  "  really  proposed
to  test  the  results  of  his  sell-manifestation  in  mighty  deeds  and  gracious  words  and
holy  example.

I.  A  POOR  OPINION  CONCERNING  Jbsus.  "Some  say  that  thou  art  John  the
Baptist."  This  was  a  poor  opinion.  There  was  no  personal  thought  or  consideration
in  it.  In  a  time-serving  sort  of  way,  some  folk  had  taken  up  the  excited  exclamation
of  Herod,  "  It  is  John  the  Baptist ;  he  is  risen  from  the  dead."  It  was  foolish,  for
there  was  no  real  likeness  between  the  two  men,  or  their  two  missions.  Jesus  could
never  have  even  suggest-ed  rough,  half-clad  John.  Beware  of  taking  up  something
somebody  else  is  pleased  to  say  about  Jesus.  Only  very  poor  opinions  of  him  can  be
gained  in  that  way.


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  167

II.  A  BETTER  OPINION  CONCEENING  Je8H8.  "  Some,  Elias  ;  and  others,  Jeremias,  or
one  of  the  prophets."  Elijah  was  a  bad  guess ;  for  Jesus  was  in  no  way  like  him.
Elisha  would  have  been  better.  Jeremias  was  not  a  bad  guess.  And  it  was  an
advance  to  liken  Christ  to  one  of  the  spiritual,  teaching  prophets.  It  should  be  borne
in  mind  that  there  was  an  almost  universal  expectation  of  the  return  of  Elijah,  and
that  this  had  grown  to  be  a  national  mania,  so  that  every  unusual  man  was  suspected
to  be  Elijah.

I II.  A  BEST  OPINION  CONCERNING  Jesus.  Peter  may  have  been  actually  in  advance
of  the  Other  disciples  in  discerning  the  mystery  of  Christ ;  or  he  may  only  have  been
spokesman  of  a  general  apprehension.  The  disciples  saw  two  things;  but  they
involved  more  than  they  then  saw.  1.  Jesus  was  Messiah ;  but  not  the  kind  of
Messiah  anticipated.  2.  Jesus  was  Son  of  the  living  God ;  and  this  involved  that
Jesus  was  doing  his  Father's  moral  work  in  the  souls  of  men. — R.  T.

Ver.  16. — Visions  of  the  mystery  of  Christ.  It  was  the  end  and  aim  of  our  Lord's
life  to  reveal  the  mystery  of  himself  to  his  disciples.  But  what  is  so  strange  and  yet
so  significant  is,  that  he  made  scarcely  any  direct  declarations  on  the  subject.  He
evidently  wanted  it  to  he  the  impression  left  by  his  presence,  his  words,  and  his  works.
Later  on  in  his  life  we  find  more  of  what  may,  in  a  good  sense,  be  called  self-assertion.
But  in  his  earlier  ministry  he  virtually  answered  all  inquiries  as  he  answered  the  two
disciples  sent  from  John  Baptist :  "  Go  and  show  again  the  things  ye  do  see  and
hear."  Let  him  make  what  he  can  of  them,  and  of  me  by  the  help  of  them.  The
impressions  of  himself  had  been  borne  in  daily,  for  long  months,  upon  those  disciples,
and  so  they  had  gained  visions  of  his  mystery.     What  is  that  mystery  ?

I.  It  IS  HIS  Divinity.  Because  the  word  "  divinity  "  has  been  applied  to  created
beings,  many  persons  prefer  to  speak  of  the  Deity  of  Christ.  The  opened  vision  of  the
disciples  found  God  in  a  man ;  they  discerned  the  "  Divine-human  being,  mau  with
God  for  the  soul  of  his  humanity."  It  is  hardly  in  place  to  inquire  what  notions  of
incarnations  of  deity  prevailed  among  pagan  nations,  because  such  notions  could  not
have  reached  or  influenced  these  simple  disciples.  It  is  to  the  point  to  inquire  how
the  Old  Testament  records  and  associations  would  help  them.  There  were  "  theo-
phanies  "  of  various  forms,  which  must  have  been  helpful  and  suggestive.  St.  John
the  apostle,  in  his  Gospel,  finely  represents  the  process  which  had  gone  on  in  his  own
mind,  by  the  help  of  which  he  had  grasped  the  mystery  of  Christ's  Dei  ty.  It  was  the
humanity  that  did  it.  John  gives  a  series  of  narratives,  and  one  after  auother  they
make  on  the  reader  a  twofold  impression.  1.  He  says — How  manifestly  Jesus  was
a  real  brother-Man!  2.  But  then  he  says — How  manifestly  Jesus  was  more  than  man,
a  Divine  Man  1  No  true  notion  of  Christ's  Divinity  can  ever  be  attained  save  in  the
disciples'  way,  by  actual,  constant,  living  contact  with  Christ's  humanity.  It  is  that
extraordinary  humanity  which  convinces  of  the  Divinity,

II.  It  is  HI8  SoNSHiP.  A  previous  homily  has  dealt  with  this  point.  The  impres-
sion on  which  we  now  dwell  is  that  the  Divinity  of  Christ  is  to  be  conceived  as
"equality  with  God,"  not  subordination  or  creation.  The  contrast  to  son  is  servant.
A  servant  is  told  the  will ;  a  son  shares  the  will.  A  servant  is  at  the  footstool ;  the
son  is  on  the  throne.     "  I  and  my  Father  are  one." — R.  T.

Ver.  18. — Hie  rock-truth.  "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church."  There  has
been  grave  dispute  over  this  passage.  Is  the  rock-foundation  of  the  Church  (1)
Peter  himself;  or  (2)  Peter's  faith;  or  (3)  Peter's  confession;  or  (4)  Christ  himself,
the  Son  of  the  living  God  ?  Without  entering  into  that  discussion,  we  may  simply  say
that  this  is  true — the  confession  which  Peter  made  expresses  the  foundation,  the  rook-
truth  of  Christianity, every  doctrine  of  which  rests  secure  on  the  Divine-human  Sonship
of  our  Lord.  Peter  is  taken  as  representing  this  rock-truth,  because  he  was  the  first
distinctly  to  give  it  expression.  The  figure  of  rock-foundation  needs  explanation  in  the
light  of  ISastern  modes  of  building,  and  ideas  of  building.  Still,  we  know  the  impor-
tance of  sound  foundations,  though  there  is  no  longer  more  than  a  poetical  interest  in
foundation-siones.

I.  This  confession  was  the  kock-foundation  of  Christ's  kevelation.  For
Jesus  brought  a  revelation /fom  God,  whicn  was  a  revelation  of  God.    Search  down  to


168  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvi.  1—28.

the  foundation  on  which  all  Christ  taught  of  God  rests ;  refuse  to  be  satisfied  until
you  have  discovered  its  primary  truth,  its  absolutely  first  and  essential  principle,  and
you  will  find  it  to  be  the  Fatherhood  of  God — the  permission  to  think  of  God  through
the  associations  of  our  human  fatherhood.  But  direct  revelations  of  the  Divine  Father-
hood cannot  be  made  to  men ;  they  come  as  the  correlative  of  Fatherhood,  as  Sonship.
Christ  the  Son  primarily  does  this — reveal  the  Father-God.

II.  This  confession  was  the  rook-foondation  of  Christ's  mission.  That  mission
was,  to  bring  men  to  God.  It  included  and  involved  much.  Bearing  penalty,  setting
example,  teaching  truth,  offering  a  self-sacrifice,  etc. ;  but  get  ,to  the  very  foundation
of  it,  and  we  see  it  was  to  recover  for  men  their  sonship  and  their  proper  son-relations
with  God.  Then  we  see  how  the  Divine  and  perfect  Sonship  X)f  Christ  is  the  "  rock-
truth  "  of  his  mission.  Only  the  Son  could  hope  to  undertake  and  carry  through  the
work  of  recovering  sons.

IIL  This  confession  is  the  book-foundation  on  which  Christ's  mission  is
CONTINUED.  Thoughtful  readers  will  be  struck  by  the  constancy  with  which  Christ
used  the  term  "  Father,"  and  the  apostles  use  the  term  "  Son."  Those  apostles  clearly
apprehended  that  the  gospel  they  had  to  preach  was  the  good  news  of  the  Divine
Fatherhood;  and  that  whoever  received  their  gospel  became  sons  again,  linked  in
obedience,  love,  and  faith  with  Jesus,  the  "  Son  of  the  living  God."— rli.  T.

Ver.  19. — 2%e  power  of  the  keys.  It  is  necessary  to  understand  the  Eastern  associa-
tions which  help  to  explain  our  Lord's  figure  of  the  "  keys."  The  key  in  the  East
was  a  symbol  of  authority ;  it  was  made  lone;,  with  a  crook  at  one  end,  so  that  it  could
be  worn  round  the  neck  as  a  badge  of  office.  To  "  confer  a  key  "  was  a  phrase  equivalent
to  bestowing  a  situation  of  great  trust  and  distinction.  The  expressions  "  binding  "  and
"  loosing  "  are  figurative  expressions,  which  were  in  familiar  use  in  the  rabbinical
schools.  "  The  school  of  Shammai  hound  men  when  it  declared  this  or  that  act  to  be  a
transgression  of  the  sabbath  law.  The  school  of  HUlel  loosed  when  it  set  men  free
from  the  obligations  thus  imposed."  It  should  be  borne  in  minil  that  this  passage  is  a
part  of  Christ's  private  teaching  of  the  apostles.  He  was  feeling  that  his  own  active
work  was  nearly  done,  and  very  soon  the  work  of  saving  men  would  rest  on  them.  He
would  prepare  them  to  understand  their  coming  responsibilities  ;  and  he  would  assure
them  of  their  competent  endowment  to  meet  those  responsibilities.

I.  They  would  have  serious  and  authoritative  work  to  do.  It  is  remarkable
that  Jesus  never  attempted  any  organization  of  those  who  professed  to  believe  in  him.
But  he  contemplated  that  his  apostles  would  have  to  organize  the  converts  they  made.
They  could  not  help  occupying  a  position  of  authority.  They  would  be  consulted  on
doctrines ;  on  the  application  of  doctrines  to  practical  life  and  conduct ;  they  would
have  to  deal  with  inconsistent  disciples.  What  they  would  have  to  do  was  illustrated
in  the  case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  in  the  admission  of  Cornelius.  Their  Lord
would  prepare  them  for  undertaking  those  responsibilities.

II.  They  would  have  special  endowments  for  their  special  work.  That  is
God's  law.  He  makes  the  gift  fit  the  service  that  is  called  for.  Among  the  gifts  in
the  early  Church  one  is  named  "governments."  That  is  the  gift  with  which  they
were  endowed.  And  this  distinction  needs  to  be  made  clear.  Their  gift  came,  not
because  they  were  apostles,  but  because  this  particular  work  was  entrusted  to  them.
Gifts  are  not  possessions  or  rights ;  they  are  trusts;  and  all  the  honour  of  them  lies  in
being  thus  trusted.

III.  They  would  have  special  Divine  recognition  in  their  work.  What
they  did,  in  the  loyal  and  faithful  use  of  their  gifts  of  government,  would  be  owned
and  sealed  by  God.  Illustrate  by  the  Divine  judgment  on  Ananias,  following  ou
Peter's  condemnation  of  him ;  and  the  Spirit  following  Cornelius'  admission. — R.  T.

Ver.  21. — Testing  the  higher  beliefs.  After  our  Lord  had  secured  the  recognition  of
his  Divine  claims,  he  proceeded  to  test  the  belief  of  those  apostles,  to  see  whether  it
was  clear  of  those  materialistic  notions  of  his  Messiahship  which  so  constantly  had
hindered  them.  The  test  was  found  in  the  assurance  that  his  Messiahship  would  seem
to  be  a  failure,  and  his  bodily  life  end  in  shame  and  a  cross.  If  they  had  grasped  the
npiritmU  nature  of  Christ's  mission,  they  would  not  have  felt  so  much  his  earth-


OH.  XVI.  1—28.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  169

failure.  If  tbey  still  held  their  material  hopes,  the  very  mention  of  failure  and  across
would  be  to  them  an  offence  indeed.  Compare  the  record,  in  John  vi.,  of  Christ's  test-
ing his  disciples  by  declaring  high  mystical  truths.  "  Many  went  back,  and  walked
no  more  with  him."  He  even  appealed  unto  the  twelve,  saying,  "  Will  ye  also  go
away?"

L  HiQHEB  BELIEFS  HAT  BE  IMFITLBIVE  BETsninixsTB,  A  sort  of  visioQ  a  man  may  gain.
Something  that  is  a  hope  rather  than  an  opinion;  a  sentiment  rather  than  a  judgment.
Perhaps  every  man  has  some  sublime  but  unworkable  ideas.  There  are  things  we
dream,  wish  they  were  true,  and  wonder  whether  they  are.  Perhaps  the  apostolic
grip  of  the  Divine  Sonship  was  one  of  these  things  that  are  held  convulsively  for  a
moment.  Perhaps  St.  Peter  really  spoke  beyond  himself,  and  no  quiet,  clear  convic-
tion lay  behind  his  impulsive  speech.  And  very  probably  he  was,  for  the  moment,
quite  beyond  the  reach  of  the  rest.  Our  working  beliefs  and  our  visions  of  truth
often  differ.

IL   HlGHEB  BELIEFS  MITST  BE  MADE  WOBKABLE  PBINOIPLEB.      No  truth  is  really  WOrth

anythi&g  to  us  that  will  not  come  as  a  vital  force  into  our  actual  life,  duty,  and  rela-
tion. Christ  will  not  keep  his  apostles  up  in  the  high  realms  of  mystical  truths.  "  If
you  believe  me  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  we  had  better  recognize  some  facts  and  truths,
and  see  how  the  belief  will  affect  them.  This  Son  of  God  is  going  to  suffer,  to  fall  a
prey  to  his  foes,  and  to  be  killed.  Will  you  still  believe  that  he  is  the  Son  of  the  living
God  when  you  see  him  on  a  cross  ?  "  This  is  the  point  of  our  Lord's  reference,  just
here,  to  his  sufferings.  AU  our  advanced  beliefs  must  be  tested.  No  matter  how
beautiful  they  may  seem  to  us,  they  are  of  no  real  value,  they  are  vain  dreams,  unless
they  will  stand  the  test  of  being  actually  fitted  to  fact,  circumstance,  and  duty. — R.  T.

Yer.  23. — He  hinders  Christ  who  would  hold  him  hack  from  his  sufferings.  This
brings  before  us  another  relation  in  which  our  Lord's  sufferings  stand.  We  have
seen  their  relation  as  a  testing  of  that  higher  truth  to  which  St.  Peter  had  given
expression.  Now  we  see  how  they  bore  on  that  particular  mission  which  Jesus  came
to  carry  oui  His  sufferings  were  essential  to  that  mission.  He  saved  the  world  by
his  sufferings.

I.  OoB  Lord's  pubpose  to  enduee  suffekinos.  It  should  be  clearly  seen  that
our  Lord  knew  beforehand  all  that  was  to  happen  to  him ;  and  he  might  have  avoided
all  the  pain  and  distress.  Instead,  he  voluntarily  determined  to  go  steadily  along  the
path,  bearing  and  enduring  all,  because  that  was  the  Father's  will  for  him.  Explain
in  this  way  :  Our  Lord  had  to  present  to  God  the  living  sacrifice  of  a  perfectly  obedient
Son.  But  he  could  not  be  a  perfectly  obedient  Son  if  his  obedience  had  not  been
adequately  tested.  The  series  of  sufferings  through  which  our  Lord  passed  are  the
various  testings  of  his  Sonship.  And  because  Christ  was  resolved  to  make  the  great
redeeming  sacrifice,  he  resolved  to  bear  and  endure  every  way  in  which  the  Father
might  be  pleased  to  test  his  Sonship.     A  violent  and  shameful  death  was  the  final  test.

II.  OuE  Lord's  offence  at  those  who  would  hmdee  him  from  endurinq  his
BUFFERINGS.  They  did  the  work  of  the  flesh,  which  shrinks  from  suffering ;  they  did  not
help  the  sanctified  will  to  gain  free  expression.  St.  Peter  became  a  tempter,  a  worker
of  evil ;  one  who  did  the  work  of  an  adversary,  of  man's  great  adversary.  Our  Lord
here  uses  the  word  "  Satan"  as  a  figure,  without  reference  to  the  personal  devil.  Any
adversary,  any  one  who  works  against  our  best  interests,  is  a  Satan.  To  withdraw
Christ  from  his  sufferings  was  to  withdraw  Christ  from  his  mission;  since  he  could
only  be  made  "  perfect,"  as  a  Bringer-on  of  souls,  by  the  experience  and  testing  of
suffering.  Olshausen  thinks  that  St.  Peter  forgot  himself,  and  presumed  upon  the
praise  which  Christ  had  given  him  for  his  noble  confession.  But  it  is  better,  in  each
case,  to  treat  St.  Peter  as  a  mere  representative,  a  mere  spokesman,  and  to  see  how  very
imperfect  an  apprehension  of  Christ's  deeper  truth  his  words  involve. — R.  T.

Ver.  26. — The  great  gain,  and  the  greater  loss.  "What  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  shall
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  This  is  an  extreme,  a  paradoxical  utter-
ance. No  man  can,  in  any  precise  sense,  "  gain  the  whole  world."  If  he  could,  it  would
weigh  nothing  in  the  scale  against  the  value  of  his  life.  For  on  life  depends  enjoy-
ment of  possessions.    Illustrate  by  the  parable  of  the  rich  farmer  who  boasted  of  what


170  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW      [oh.  xvii.  1—27.

he  possessed,  and  lost  it  all  when  he  died  in  the  night.    Compare  out  Lord's  advice  to
"  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven."

I.  The  gkbat  gain  is  earthly  things.  Look  over  the  whole  world.  Examine
the  pursuits  of  every  class.  Bead  the  story  of  the  long  ages.  This  is  clearly  men's
opinion  everywhere.  They  live  to  get,  to  win,  to  grasp,  to  hold  what  they  call  wealth,
earthly  valuables — houses,  land,  jewels,  money,  fame.  Is  that  really  great  gain  ?  Test
it  by  one  thing — How  does  it  stand  related  to  man's  real  Boul-Ufe  ?  Then  it  is  seen  to
belong  only  to  the  body,  which  man  has  for  a  while  ;  and  in  no  way  to  the  being  that  he
is,  and  will  be  for  ever.  All  a  man  acquires  of  a  merely  earthly  character  belongs  to
his  body,  and  goes  with  his  body  when  his  body  goes ;  then  it  is  his  no  more.  Treasure
on  earth  is  but  falsely  and  unworthily  called  "great  gain."

II.  The  geeatee  loss  is  spieitdal  ohabacvbe.  For  character  is  a  man's  true
wealth ;  it  belongs  to  the  being  he  is,  and  is  for  ever.  And  one  application  of  our
Lord's  teaching  here  comes  out  in  a  very  striking  way.  Gaining  earthly  things  is  only
too  likely  to  involve  the  destruction  of  spiritual  character,  because  it  is  so  sure  to
hinder  that  "  self-denial "  which  is  the  absolutely  essential  foundation  of  noble  and
enduring  spiritual  character.  A  man  gains  the  heavenly  treasure  by  what  he  gives  v/p,
and  not  by  what  he  holds  fast  to  (see  ver.  24).  The  sublime  illustration  is  presented
in  the  case  of  our  Lord  himself,  who  acquired  nothing  earthly,  who  gave  up  everything
he  had  that  men  are  wont  to  esteem  as  gain,  but  who  gained  the  eternal  treasure  of
tested  spiritual  character,  perfected  Sonship.

In  conclusion,  meet  the  difficulty  of  the  apparently  unpractical  character  of  such
teaching.  Show  that  it  is  really  a  question  of  relativity.  Which  is  to  he  first,  pos-
sessions or  character  ? — R.  T.

Ver.  28. —  The  coming  of  the  Son  of  man.  "  Not  taste  of  death,  till  they  see  the  Son
of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom."  This  is  immediately  suggested.  "  Christ's  coming,"
and  "  Christ's  coming  in  his  kingdom,"  must  be  phrases  used  with  a  variety  of  meanings
and  with  a  variety  of  references.  We  begin  to  feel  that  it  must  be  used  as  a  proverbial
phrase.   Various  explanations  of  our  Lord's  meaning  have  been  given.  Examine  three.

I.  Chbist  came  in  his  kingdom  at  the  Transfiguration.  This  meaning  is
suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  natrratiye  of  the  Transfiguration  immediately  succeedSj
and  the  evangelist  appears  designedly  to  set  them  in  close  connection.  That  was  a
very  sublime  manifestation  of  his  glory,  but  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  it  could
be  called  a  "coming  of  tlie  kingdom."  Moreover,  there  is  no  point  in  saying  that  some
would  be  spared  to  the  coming  of  the  kingdom,  when  all  were  to  be  spared  over  the
Transfiguration.     That  explanation  cannot  be  regarded  as  satisfactory.

Ili  Christ  came  in  his  kingdom  at  the  Dat  of  Pentecost.  That  is  properly
regarded  as  the  actual  starting  of  Christ's  new  and  spiritual  kingdom.  In  part  it  may
fulfil  the  reference  of  our  Lord.  But  here  again  the  difficulty  occurs  that  the  apostolic
band  was  intact  at  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  with  the  exception  of  the  traitor  Judas,  who
had  "  gone  to  his  own  place."   It  is  hardly  possible  to  rest  satisfied  with  this  explanation.

IIL  Christ  came  in  his  kingdom  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  "This  was  a
judicial  coming,  a  signal  and  visible  event,  and  one  that  would  happen  in  the  lifetime
of  some,  but  not  of  all,  of  those  present."  John  certainly  lived  beyond  this  event.
"In  a  sense  which  was  real,  though  partial,  the  judgment  which  fell  upon  the  Jewish
Church,  the  destruction  of  the  holy  city  and  the  temple,  the  onward  march  of  the
Church  of  Christ,  was  as  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  in  his  kingdom."  This  is
altogether  the  most  satisfactory  suggestion ;  and  we  need  only  suppose  that  Christ  was
carried  away  in  his  thoughts  beyond  the  present,  and  was  helped  in  thinking  of  the
sufferings  that  were  immediately  before  him,  by  comforting  visions  of  the  success  and
glory  which  would  follow  his  suffering  and  his  sacrifice  in  the  world's  by-and-by. — R.  T.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVII.

Vers.     1 — 13. — The     Tranafiguralion    of
Jeaut.    (Mark  ix.  2-  -13  ;  Luke  ii.  28—36.)


This  mysterious  event  wag  intended
primarily  to  confirm  the  faith  of  the  three
apostles  who  were  to  have  the  chief  hnnd
in  founding  the    Church.    The  Lord  had


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  10  ST.  MATTHEW.


171


just  announced  his  future  sufferings  and
death.  This  prediction  had  been  a  giievous
blow  to  Peter,  and  doubtless  to  the  others
also.  He  had  stumbled  at  the  cross,  and
had  brought  on  himself  a  stern  rebuke  for
his  slowness  and  worldliness.  So  to  comfort
the  chosen  three  under  the  thought  of  what
awaited  their  Master,  they  were  shown  a
glimpse  of  the  gloiy  which  he  has  in
heaven;  they  saw  the  Law  and  the  prophets
yielding  subjection  to  him ;  they  heard  the
voice  of  the  Father  announcing  his  Sonship.
Henceforward  they  might  take  courage  under
all  circumstances;  the  cross  would  be  no
infamy  or  disgrace — would  open  the  way  to
victory  and  glory.  Here  was  a  foretaste
of  the  blessedness  of  heaven— to  be  with
Christ  and  bis  saints  in  his  kingdom.  Such
was  the  Transfiguration  to  the  three
witnesses.  To  the  world,  when  in  due
time  it  was  made  known,  it  taught  lessons
of  the  Incarnation,  the  resurrection  of  the
body,  the  glory  that  shall  be  the  portion
of  the  rigl^eous.  For  Christ  himself  it
was  the  culminating  point  of  his  earthly
life,  "  the  solemn  installation  of  our  Lord
to  his  sufferings  and  their  result "  (Alford).

Ver.  1. — After  six  days.  St.  Luke  says,
"  about  an  eight  days  after  these  sayings,"
either  speaking  indefinitely,  or  using  the
inclusive  method  of  reckoning  which  we
find  in  the  accounts  of  our  Lord's  resur-
rection. The  days  are  counted  from  the
time  of  Peter's  confession  and  Christ's
subsequent  announcement.  The  little
company  were  still  in  the  neighbourhood
of  OsBsarea  Philippi,  though  we  know  not
exactly  in  what  place,  and  nothing  is  told
of  the  events  of  this  week.  The  memorable
day  may  be  specially  noticed  as  being  the
same  day  of  the  week  as  that  on  which  the
great  confession  was  made  in  the  previous
se'nnight ;  or,  if  we  regard  the  typical  bear-
ing of  numbers  in  Soriptare,  the  six  days
signify  the  world  and  daily  labour,  the
seventh,  "after  six  days,"  typifies  heaven
and  rest.  Peter,  James,  and  John.  These
three,  the  chosen  of  the  chosen,  had  already
witnessed  Christ's  power  over  death  in  the
chamber  of  Jairus's  daughter;  later  they
were  present  at  the  agony  in  the  Gfarden
of  Gethsemane.  They  who  had  seen  his
glory  were  strengthened  to  behold  his
sweat  of  blood.  These  men  formed  the
inner  circle  of  his  friends ;  to  them  he
gave  the  privilege  of  knowing  more  of  his
inner  life  and  nature.  They  were  selected
for  various  reasons — Peter,  for  his  energy,


zeal,  and  love,  and  the  part  he  was  to  play
in  the  founding  of  the  Church;  John,
because  he  was  beloved  by  Christ,  and  was
to  be  the  recipient  of  Divine  revelation ;
James,  because  he  was  to  be  the  head  of
the  Church  of  Jerusalem,  and  soon  to  drink
of  Christ's  cup  and  war  a  good  warfare.
The  James  here  named  is  the  son  of
Zebedee,  and  brother  of  John,  and  was
put  to  death  by  Herod  Agrippa  (Acts  xii.).
An  high  monntain.  The  only  tradition
concerning  the  locality  of  the  Transfigura-
tion (which  none  of  the  inspired  narratives
further  identifies)  afBxes  it  to  Mount  Tabor,
the  beautiful  isolated  mountain,  which  rises
some  eighteen  hundred  feet  on  the  north-
east of  the  Plain  of  Esdraelon.  This
tradition,  as  far  as  we  know,  was  first
published  in  the  fourth  century  a.d.,  by
St.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  ('  Catech.,'  xii.  16)
and  St.  Jerome  (Ep.  xliv.  '  Ad  Marcell. ; '
Bp.  oviii.  'Ad  Bustoch.'),  and  thence  was
generally  adopted  and  upheld  till  the
sixteenth  centtuy,  both  by  commentators
and  travellers.  Since  then  more  accurate
examination  and  historical  criticism  have
thrown  grave  doubts  on  this  identification.
The  summit  of  Tabor  has  from  a  very  early
age  been  occupied  by  habitations.  It  is
spoken  of  in  1  Chron.  vL  77  as  including
in  its  limits  a  city  and  its  suburbs.  Later
it  was  strongly  fortified,  and  the  whole
area  was  surrounded  with  a  wall,  of  which
the  ruins  can  still  be  traced.  In  our  Lord's
time  the  town  and  the  fortress  covered  the
level  portion  of  the  hill,  and  there  would
have  been  no  place  of  retirement  where
he  could  have  withdrawn  apart  for  the
purpose  of  the  vision.  There  is  another
reason  that  makes  Tabor  unlikely  to  have
been  the  scene  of  the  Transfiguration.  The
last  geographical  notice  left  our  Lord  and
his  disciples  outside  Galilee  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Paneas.  It  was  about  a  three
days'  journey  thence  to  Bsdraelon ;  but  no
mention  is  made  of  any  such  movement
during  this  week,  and  it  is  after  the  Trans-
figuration that  the  syuoptists  intimate  that
the  return  to  Galilee  took  place  (see  ver.
22;  Mark  ix.  30).  We  must  therefore
surrender  the  old  tradition,  and  look  in  the
vicinity  of  Csesarea  for  the  high  mountain
of  oiur  narrative.  There  was  no  lack  of  such
in  that  region,  and  it  was  doubtless  on  one
of  the  offshoots  of  Hermon  that  the  glorious
vision  was  vouchsafed,  though  more  precise
identification  is  impossible.  Hermon  itself
is  called  by  the  Arabs  Jcibel-esh- Sheikh,
"  The  Ohiff  Mountain,"  and  the  way  in
wliich  the  locality  is  introduced  in  the
narrative,  without  further  specification,
seems  to  point  to  some  eminence  of  the
most  obvious  and  best-known  hill  of  the
district.     St    Peter,  when  in    after-years


172


THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27,


he  alluded  to  it,  called  it  merely  "  the  holy
mount"  (2  Pet.  i.  18);  and  we  may  con-
olode  that  we  are  not  intended  to  know
more  about  it,  lest  we  should  be  tempted
to  make  more  of  the  material  circumstances
than  of  the  great  reality.  St.  Luke  notifies
that  the  Lord  retired  to  this  place  in  order
to  pray.  It  may  have  been  that  he  prayed
for  the  enlightenment  of  the  apostles — that
they  might  receive  the  teaching  of  the
Transflguration  and  the  subsequent  sayings.
Ver.  2. — Was  transfigured  (/ieTe/to/)0<68r));
Vulgate,  transfiguratus  eet.  The  verb  is
used  in  classical  Greek  of  transformation,
as  of  a  man  into  an  animal.  Here  it  refers
to  a  change  of  countenance,  which  is  the
chief  index  of  any  change  exterior  or  in-
terior. St.  Luke  explains  the  matter  with
the  words,  "  The  fashion  of  his  countenance
was  altered."  The  Word  of  God  allows
for  a  brief  space  his  essential  glory  to
irradiate  and  shine  through  the  form  of
a  servant  which  he  wore.  Not  that  he
showed  his  Divine  nature,  or  laid  aside  his
human  body;  his  bodily  nature  remained
in  its  entirety,  but  permeating  it  was  an
effulgence  which  indicated  the  Godhead.
Perhaps  it  might  be  said,  as  an  old  writer
puts  it,  that  the  Transfiguration  was  less  a
new  miracle  than  the  temporary  cessation
of  an  habitual  miracle  ;  for  the  veiling  of
his  glory  was  the  real  marvel,  the  Divine
restraint  which  prohibited  the  illumination
of  his  sacred  humanity.  Before  them.  In
their  presence.  Jesus  probably  had  with-
drawn in  order  to  pray  in  secret,  but  re-
turned to  the  waiting  three,  that  they  might
behold  his  glory — be  "eye- witnesses  of  his
majesty,"  as  St.  Peter  says  (2  Pet.  i.  16).
These,  indeed,  had  been  heavy  with  sleep
(Luke),  but  had  awoke  at  his  appearance,
and  beheld  the  vision  in  full  possession  of
their  senses.  St.  Matthew  mentions  specially
two  points  in  this  transfiguration.  His  face
did  shine  as  the  sun.  This  recalls  the
appearance  of  the  Son  of  man  in  Kev.  i.  16,
"His  countenance  was  as  the  sun  shineth
in  his  strength."  And  his  raiment  was
white  as  the  light.  The  light  which
emanated  from  his  body  shone  through
and  glorified  his  very  garments.  The
Vulgate  has  eicut  nix,  and  x'^"  '^  read  in
some  few  manuscripts  in  place  of  (pcSs :  but
the  word  is  doubtless  introduced  here  from
St.  Mark  (where,  however,  it  is  of  doubtful
genuineness).  If  this  second  evangelist  re-
ceived his  account  from  St.  Peter,  we  recog-
nize the  simile  in  the  apostle's  remembrance
of  the  snow-clad  peak  of  Hermon,  in  whose
vicinity  the  event  transpired.  No  candid
reader  can  fail  to  acknowledge  that  it  is
no  subjective  vision  that  is  here  narrated,
no  merely  inward  impression  on  brain  or
nerve  with  nothing  external  to  correspond.


but  a  real,  objective  occurrence,  which  was
beheld  by  mortal  eyes  endued  with  no
supernatural  or  abnormal  powers,  except
in  so  far  as  they  were  enabled  to  look
on  this  partial  emanation  of  the  Divine
effulgence.

Yer.  3. — ^And,  behold.  The  exclamation,
thrice  repeated  (ver.  5),  marks  the  sudden-
ness and  unexpectedness  of  the  occurrence.
They  who  now  appeared  were  no  delusive,
imaginary  figures,  but  real  personages,
objectively  presented  to  the  spectators,  in
such  bodies  as  appertained  to  their  con-
dition. Moses  and  Ellas.  St.  Luke  adds,
"  who  appeared  in  glory,"  radiant  with  the
light  which  always  accompanies  heavenly
visitants.  Why  these  two  saints  were
chosen  to  be  present  on  this  momentous
occasion  may  be  explained  by  various
considerations.  Both  these  worthies  ex-
perienced something  unparalleled  in  their
departure  from  this  life.  Elijah  was  taken
up  to  heaven  without  dying;  Moses  died,
indeed,  but  he  was  buried  by  God  in  an
unknown  grave,  and  his  body  was  under
the  especial  care  of  Michael  the  archangel
(see  Jude  9),  and  we  know  not  that  it  saw
corruption.  From  the  unseen  world  these
were  brought  to  do  homage  to'the  Messiah
—Moses,  a  type  of  those  blessed  spirits  who
in  Paradise  await  the  final  consummation;
Elijah,  a  type  of  the  saints  who,  after  the
resurrection,  perfect  in  soul  and  body,  shall
enter  into  glory.  Here  were  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  Law  and  the  prophets,  the
principal  supporters  of  the  old  covenant,
honouring  him  who  was  introducing  the
new  covenant,  which  was  to  fulfil  and
supersede  the  previous  one.  Spurious,
degraded  Judaism  rejected  Christ's  claims ;
real,  orthodox  Judaism  acknowledged  him
and  reverenced  him  as  the  Christ  foretold
and  foreshadowed,  "  of  whom  Moses  and  the
prophets  did  write"  (John  i.  45).  Now,
too,  it  was  made  manifest  that  Jesus  was
not  Elias  or  one  of  the  prophets,  as  some
erroneously  had  supposed,  but  different
from  and  superior  to  all ;  that  he  had  power
over  life  and  death,  and  could  bring  whom
he  would  from  the  unseen  world ;  that  the
cross  and  Passion  were  not  degrading,  or
proofs  of  weakness,  but  glorious  and  tri-
umphant accomplishments  of  the  wUl  ot
God.  The  question  is  asked — How  did
Peter  and  the  rest  recognize  the  two
heavenly  visitants  ?  There  may  have  been
something  conventional  in  their  garb  or
appearance,  which  at  once  identified  them ;
or  the  apostles  may  have  known  them
by  spiritual  intuition  or  special  revelation ;
or  they  may  have  gathered  their  knowledge
from  the  conversation  which  they  overheard.
Anyhow,  it  was  necessary  that  the  two
should  be  recognized,  otherwise  their  appear-


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.  173


anoe  would  have  lost  its  gignifioanoe,  and  the
confirmation  which  they  were  intended  to
afford  would  fail  to  be  given.  Is  there
here  an  intimation  that  in  heaven  the
blessed  will  know  each  other,  though  they
never  met  in  the  flesh — sliall  know  even  as
they  have  been  known?  Talking  with
him.  St.  Luke  tells  us  the  subject  of  this
mysterioife  dialogue — they  "spake  of  his
decease  (e^oSov,  exodus,  depaHure)  which
he  was  about  to  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."
They  conversed,  not  of  the  glory  which
was  his  before  the  world  began,  nor  of  the
kingdom  which  he  came  to  establish,  but
of  his  coming  suffering  and  death,  with
their  tremendous  issues.  At  the  very
moment  of  this  revelation  of  Divinity,
^he  discourse  is  of  humiliation  and  the
cross.  The  apostles  had  been  slow  to
understand  the  future  that  awaited  their
Master;  here  the  great  saints  .of  the  cove-
nant bore  their  testimony  to  Ohrist's  fulfil-
ment of  what  had  been  prophesied  and
shadowed  aforehand,  how  by  the  sufferings
of  his  sacred  humanity  eternal  glory  should
be  won.  So  might  the  apostles  be  strength-
ened to  look  forward  without  apprehension
or  weak  shrinking;  for  through  the  grave
and  gate  of  death  lay  the  road  to  a  joyful
resurrection  and  celestial  happiness.

Ver.  4. — Then  answered  Peter.  Accord-
ing to  St.  Luke,  it  was  when  the  two  Divine
prophets  were  disappearing,  or  were  being
withdrawn  from  sight,  that  Peter  spoke.
Bewildered,  overcome  with  joy  and  astonish-
ment, not  knowing  what  to  say  (Mark),  yet
in  bis  excitement  and  ardour  unable  to  keep
silence,  he  cries  to  Jesus,  Lord,  it  is  good
for  US  to  be  here ;  perhaps  equivalent  to  to
remain  here.  He  includes  Moses  and  Elias
in  his  eager  exclamation.  Some  commen-
tators confine  the  reference  to  the  three
apostles,  as  if  Peter  meant  that  it  was
"  good  "that  they  were  present  in  order  to
prepare  the  necessary  habitations.  This
seems  meagre  and  insufficient.  Here  were
peace,  seclusion,  safety:  might  they  not
last?  Was  there  any  need  to  quit  this
hallowed  spot  at  once,  and  lose  the  heavenly
company  with  which  it  was  blessed?  If
thou  wilt.  Even  at  this  supreme  moment,
he  will  not  set  his  will  in  opposition  to  his
Master's.  Let  us  make  (J  wiU  malte,  Kevised
Version)  here  three  tabemaoles  (o-Krjveis).
Booths,  of  branches  and  grass,  such  as  were
used  by  travellers  camping  out,  or  such  as'the
people  erected  when  celebrating  the  Feast
of  Tabemaoles.  He  speaks  of  but  three
shelters,  regarding  only  Jesus  and  the  two
prophets,  and  considering  himself  and  his
fellow-disciples  as  mere  servitors  and  at-
tendants, for  whom  no  such  provision  was
needed.  In  his  confusion  he  thinks  that  if
these  three  remain,  they  must  have  some


kind  of  habitation.  Like  a  child,  Ira  would
fain  prolong  indefinitely  the  joy  of  ibis
great  vision;  and  with  a  Jew's  hankering
for  a  conquering  Messiah  and  the  perma-
nence of  the  old  covenant,  he  desired  that
from  that  secure  mountain-top  the  laws  of
the  kingdom  might  be  issued,  and  all  men
might  acknowledge  the  Christ  attended
and  supported  by  the  great  lawgiver  and
prophet.  Was  there  not  also  a  latent  hope
that  thus  might  be  deferred  or  laid  aside
that  departure  to  Jerusalem,  with  its  calami-
tous consequences?  But  this  was  not  to
be.  No  answer  was  vouchsafed  to  Peter's
thoughtless  request.

Ver. '  5. — A  bright  oloud  overshadowed
them.  The  cloud  spread  over  and  around,
not  Jesus  only  and  the  other  two,  but  in
some  degree  over  the  apostles  also,  as  St.
Luke  adds,  "  They  feared  as  they  entered
into  the  cloud  "  It  was  the  Sheohinah,  the
token  of  the  presence  of  the  Most  High,
who  dwelleth  in  the  unapproachable  light.
It  enshrouded  Jesus  and  his  two  companions,
so  that  mortal  eye  could  not  pierce  it  or
even  look  upon  it;  but  the  apostles,  who
were  outside  its  immediate  contact,  were  in
some  sort  included  in  its  influence,  so  that
it  could  be  said  to  overshadow  them.  St.
Peter  calls  it  "the  excellent  glory  (t^s
fifyaKoTrpeirovs  5^|»|s)"  (2  Pet.  i.  17).  The
cloud  from  which  on  Sinai  the  old  Law
was  given,  was  dark  and  threatening  (Exod.
xix.  18;  XX.  21);  this  was  bright,  coming
not  to  terrify,  but  to  teach  and  to  bless.
Here  is  seen  the  contrast  between  the  two
dispensations,  the  Law  and  the  gospel
(comp.  Heb.  xii.  IS — 24).  A  voice  out  of
the  cloud.  It  was  the  voice  of  God  the
Father,  for  he  called  Jesus,  My  beloved  Son,
The  same  voice,  saying  the  same  words,
had  been  heard  over  the  waters  of  Jordan
when  Jesus  was  baptized  (oh.  iii.  17);  it
spake  once  again  just  before  his  Passion
(John  xii.  28) ;  at  all  times  witnessing  the
Father's  love  and  the  perfect  Divinity  of
Christ.  Now,  as  before,  the  Holy  Trinity
was  revealed,  the  Father  speaking  witii
audible  voice,  the  Son  standing  in  radiant
light,  the  Holy  Spirit  present  with  the
intense  brightness  of  the  enveloping  cloud.
The  words  heard  are  founil  in  the  earlier
Scriptures.  Thus  in  Isa.  xlii.  1  we  read,
"Behold  my  Servant,  whom  I  uphold,  my
Chosen  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth ; "  and
in  Pfl.  iL  7,  "Thou  art  my  Son;  this  day
have  I  begiitten  thee."  Hear  ye  him.  Not
Moses  and  Elias,  but  Jesus,  the  Mediator
of  a  better  covenant  (Heb.  viii.  6).  "  This
voice,"  St.  Peter  testifies,  "  we  ourselves
heard  come  out  of  heaven,  when  we  were
with  him  in  the  holy  mount"  (2  Pet.  i.  18).
As  Edersheim  remarks,  even  if  this  Epistle
is  not  St.  Peter's,  it  still  would  represent


174


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27


the  most  ancient  tradition.  "  God,  having
of  old  spoken  nnto  the  fatheli  in  the  pro-
phets, hath  at  the  end  of  these  days  spoken
nnto  UB  in  his  Son  "  (Heh.  i.  1).  The  com-
mand to  hear  him  recalls  the  saying  of
Moses  (Dent,  xviii.  15),  that  in  good  time
God  would  raise  up  from  Israel  a  Prophet
like  unto  himself,  and  that  unto  him  they
shall  hearken.

Ver.  6. — Were  sore  afraid.  The  vision
and  the  voice  overcame  them  with  awe  and
terror.  They  fell  on  their  face.  They  tried
to  shut  out  the  awful  radiance  that  blinded
them.  Man's  weakness  could  endure  no
more;  prostrate,  paralyzed  with  fear,  they
lay  on  the  ground.  Who  oould  see  God,
and  live?  Had  they  not  seen  his  glory,
and  heard  his  voice?  What  could  they  do
but  crouch  in  abject  terror?  Thus  they
knew  not  that  the  scene  was  over,  that  the
tremendous  glimpse  of  unseen  realities
Touch^iafed  to  them  had  passed  away.

Yer.  7. — Came  and  touched  them.  Jesus
gently  and  lovingly  aroused  them  from
their  stupor,  showing  that  he  was  near,  and
that  they  had  nothing  to  dread  (comp.
Isa.  vi.  5—7;  Dan.  x.  8—10;  Eev.  i.  17).
He  adds  the  assurance  of  his  own  beloved
and  well-known  voice,  Arise,  and  be  not
afraid.  Such  comfort  he  gave  to  the
affrighted  disciples  when  he  came  to  them
treading  on  the  waters  of  the  storm-tossed
sea  (oh.  xiv.  27).

Ver.  8. — No  man,  save  Jesus  only.  Moses
and  Elias  had  vanished,  Jesus  was  left
alone,  and  the  voice  Divine  said,  "Hear
him."  When  at  Christ's  touch  and  word
the  awestruck  apostles  dared  once  more  to
look  around  and  to  bethink  themselves  of
what  had  passed,  those  were  tlie  facts  of
which  they  were  conscious.  The  Law  and
the  prophets,  types  and  predictions,  are
fulfilled  in  Christ,  and  are  so  far  superseded.
The  former  were  temporary,  introductory
to  the  gospel,  which  is  to  last  for  ever.
Many  have  seen  in  the  Transfiguration  an
image  and  earnest  of  the  future  glory  of  the
dead  in  Christ,  when  the  vile  body  shall
be  olianged  into  the  likeness  of  Christ's
glorious  body,  and  they  shall  shine  as  the
sun,  and  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.
So  St.  Gregory,  "  He  ia  clothed  with  light
as  with  a  garment,  because  in  that  eternal
glory  he  will  be  oluthed  with  all  the  saints,
to  whom  it  is  said, '  Ye  are  the  light  of  the
world.'  Whence  also  it  is  said  by  the
evangelist,  that  when  the  Lord  was  trans-
figured in  the  mountain,  his  raiment  became
as  snow.  In  which  Transfiguration  what
else  is  announced  but  the  glory  of  the  final
resurrection?  For  in  the  mountain  his
raiment  became  as  snow,  because  in  the
height  of  heavenly  brightness  all  saints  will
be  joined  to  him,  refulgent  with  the  light


of  righteousness"  ('Moral.,'  xxxii.  6).  Un-
belief has  endeavoured  to  throw  discredit
on  the  historical  accuracy  of  the  accounts
of  this  great  event.  It  was  a,  dream,  an
stmospherio  disturbance,  an  unusual  play
of  light  and  shade,  a  myth,  an  allegory;
the  two  heavenly  visitants  were  two  unknown
disciples  with  whom  Jesus  conversed ;  the
three  apostles  were  rapt  in  a  trance,  and
the  vision  was  purely  subjective ;  these  and
such  like  theories  have  been  started  by
rationalists  and  enemies  of  the  supernatural,
and  even  by  the  partially  ortliodox,  as
TertuUian  ('Adv.  Marc.,'  iv.  22).  There
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  evangelists  and
the  Apostle  Peter  regarded  the  event  as  an
objective  reality,  upon  which  hung  momen-
tous truths;  and  we  are  content  to  let  it
stand  or  fall  with  the  rest  of  the  facts  of
the  gospel  narrative.  There  is  no  reason
to  eeparate.it  from  the  other  items  of  the
story.  AVhen  once  the  stupendous  miracle
of  the  Incarnation  is  allowed,  other  wonders
follow  in  natural  sequence.

Ver.  9. — As  they  came  down  from  the
mountain.  The  Transfiguration  is  supposed
to  have  taken  place  at  night,  and  the
following  conversation  to  have  passed  in
the  early  morning  of  the  next  day.  Tell
the  vision  (t^  ipa/ia,  what  had  been  seen)  to
no  man.  This  was  a  strict  and  formal
command.  The  ohosen  three  were  at
present  not  to  mention  the  occurrence  to
any  one,  not  even  to  their  feUow-disoiples.
Possibly  these  would  hardly  have  believed
the  marvellous  tale,  and  their  nnbelief
would  have  hardened  their  heart;  or,  if
they  fully  credited  it,  they  might  have  been
jealous  of  the  preference  shown  to  some  of
their  company.  At  any  rate,  neither  they
nor  others  were  prepared  to  receive  the
great  lesson  of  the  scene — that  the  old  cove-
nant had  done  its  work,  that  the  Law  and
the  prophets  were  superseded  and  mnst
make  way  for  the  new  dispensation.  Had
the  story  been  divulged  to  the  people
generally,  they  would  have  stumbled  at  the
cross  and  Passion,  which  would  seem  no
fitting  sequel  to  this  glory  (see  on  oh.  xvi.
20).  TTntU  the  Son  of  man  be  risen  again
(i.»a<rT0  from  the  dead.  When  this  great
event  happened  and  was  known  to  be  the
fact,  there  oould  be  no  doubt  that  Christ
was  God,  and  the  tale  of  the  Transfiguration
would  no  longer  be  incredible.  Thomas's
confession,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God,"  would
be  echoed  in  the  heart  and  conscience  of  all
disciples.  St.  Luke,  though  he  does  not
mention  Christ's  injunction,  notifies  that  it
was  carefully  observed,  "  They  kept  it  close,
and  told  no  man  in  those  days  any  of  those
things  which  they  had  seen."  (These  last
words,  ou8ii>  av  idpaxciv,  explain  what  St.
Matthew  above  calls  "  the  vision,"  t4  3pa/io.


OH.  ITO.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


175


the  objeotiTe  spectacle.)  The  compllanoe
with  the  isjnnctiou  shows  that  they  under-
stood something  of  the  spiritual  nature  of
the  transaction.  We  may  also  note  that
the  prohibition  itself  is  presumptive  evi-
dence against  the  supposed  mythical  cha-
racter of  the  vision.

Ver.  10. — Why  then  (oSk)  say  the  sorihes
that  Elias  must  first  oomel  The  illative
particle  "  then  "  shows  that  the  apostles'
question  arose  from  something  immediately
preceding.  The  connection  seems  to  be
this :  Elias  had  just  appeared  and  then  had
vanished  again;  how  could  this  visitation
be  reconciled  with  the  scribes'  interpretation
of  Malachi's  prophecy?  If  Elias  was  to
come  before  the  advent  of  Messiab,  and
Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  how  is  it  that  he  has
only  now  shown  himself?  It  he  has  a  work
to  do  on  earth,  how  could  he  do  that  when
his  sojnurn  was  limited  to  a  few  minutes'
duration,  and  to  the  view  of  so  few  wit-
nesses? Malachi  had  spoken  of  the  Mes-
senger who  was  to  precede  and  prepare
the  way  for  Messiah ;  he  had  said,  "  Before
the  great  day  of  the  Lord,  I  will  send  you
Elijah  the  prophet"  (Mai.  iii.  1;  iv.  5);
and  the  learned  among  the  Jews  interpreted
these  two  passages  of  his  appearance  in
person  to  herald  the  approach  of  Messiah.
Hence  the  perplexity  of  the  apostles,  they,
like  the  scribes,  not  distinguishing  the  two
advents  of  Christ,  and  the  double  allusion
111  the  prophet's  announcement — the  "  Mes-
senger" in  oh.  iii.  1  being  a  different
personage  from  "  Elias"  in  ch.  iv.  5,  though
of  the  same  power  and  spirit.  Christ  ex-
plains the  difficulty  in  the  two  next  verses.
Ver.  11. — Elias  truly  shall  first  oome
{IpXfTui,  comefh).  Many  of  the  best  manu-
scripts and  editions  omit  "  first."  The  Vul-
gate has  merely,  Eliaa  quidem  venturus  est.
It  is  probably  inserted  in  our  text  from  the
parallel  passage  in  Mark,  where  it  is  certainly
genuine.  Christ  is  hero  alluding  to  bis
own  second  coming,  which  shall  be  preceded
by  the  appearance  of  Elijah  in  person.  This
seems  to  be  the  plain  meaning  of  the
prophecy  in  Malachi,  and  of  Christ's  an-
nouncement, and  is  confirmed  by  St.  John's
statement  concerning  the  two  witnesses
(iSov.  xi.  3,  6).  That  the  paragraph  cannot
refer  to  John  the  Baptist  is  plain  from  the
tenses  used  in  this  verse  contrasted  with
those  in  the  following.  To  regard  ver.  12
as  simply  a  correction  of  ver.  10  is  to  do
violence  to  language,  and  to  leave  one-half
of  Malaohi's  prediction  unexplained.  Bestore
{iiroKaTaffiiffei)  all  things.  The  event  is  still
future,  and  was  not  fulfilled  in  the  Baptist's
preaching,  however  deep  and  extensive  may
have  been  its  influence.  Of  course,  John  iu
a  partial  degree  reproduced  the  character
•nd  acts  of  EUjah,  directing  the  people  to


the  eternal  principles  of  justice  and  right-
eousness, to  a  reformation  of  religion  and
morals ;  but  he  could  not  be  said  to  have
reconstituted,  re-established  all  things;
though  it  is  possible  that,  had  his  message
been  received  and  acted  upon,  some  such
effects  would  have  been  produced.  How
and  in  what  degree  Elijah,  again  appear-
ing and  living  on  earth,  will  effect  this
great  achievement,  we  know  not.  We  can
only  fall  back  on  the  ancient  prophecy,
which  affirms  that  "  he  shall  turn  the  heart
of  the  fathers  to  [or, '  with ']  the  children,
and  the  heart  of  the  children  to  [or,  'and  'J
their  fathers  "  (Mai.  iv.  6),  and  expect  that
in  some  way,  known  unto  God,  he  shall
convert  one  and  all,  young  and  old,  unto  the
Lord;  or  unite  the  Jews  who  are  the-
fathers  in  the  faith  to  Christians  who  are
their  children,  and  thus  embrace  Jew  and
Gentile  in  one  fold  under  one  Shepherd.

Ver.  12. — Elias  is  oome  already.  The
mystical,  not  the  real,  Elias,  even  John  the
Baptist,  who  came  in  the  spirit  and  power
of  Elias  (Luke  i.  17).  Christ  is  here  speak-
ing of  the  past,  as  in  the  preceding  verse  he
spake  of  the  future.  The  common  Jewish
interpretation  confused  the  two  events  and
the  two  personages,  reducing  them  to  one.
And  this  mistake  has  been  committed  by
many  modem  expositors.  They  knew  him
not.  They  did  not  recognize  his  true  cha-
racter and  the  importof  his  mission.  Though
they  gathered  round  him  and  listened  to  his
preaching  and  denunciations,  very  few  saw
in  him  the  precursor  of  the  Messiah,  ami
many,  misunderstanding  his  austere,  self-
denying  life,  deemed  him  to  be  possessed  by
a  devil  (oh.  xi.  18).  They  have  done  unto
him.  John  suffered  a  long  imprisonment,
and  was  eventually  murdered;  and  though
Herod  was  primaiily  answerable  for  these
doings,  the  people  were  virtually  guilty,  in
that  they  consented  to  the  injurious  treat-
ment and  made  no  effort  in  his  favour.
Likewise  . . .  also.  Taking  occasion  from  the
mention  of  the  Baptist's  fate,  Jesus  foretells
his  own  sufferings  and  death,  endeavouring
to  make  the  apostles  familiar  with  the  idea
of  a  dying  as  well  as  a  conquering  Messiah.

Ver.  13. — Then  the  disciples  understood.
Though  Jesus  had  said  publicly  concerning
John,  "  This  is  he  of  whom  it  is  written,
Behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy
face,"  and,  "  This  is  Bliaa  which  was  for  to
come"  (ch.  xi.  10,  14);  and  though  the
angel  Gabriel,  In  announcing  his  birth,  had
avowed  that  he  should  go  before  the  Christ
in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias  "  (Luke  i.
17),  the  apostles  hitherto  had  not  taken  to
heart  the  truth  thus  conveyed.  Indeed,  it
was  something  quite  new  that  they  should
thus  at  once  apprehend  Christ's  meaning,
I  BO  slow  were  they  of  faith,  so  unintelligent


176


THE  GOSPEL  AOOOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xyiu  1—27-


In  appreciating  the  full  Bignifloation  of  their
Master's  instructions.

Vers.  14 — 21. — Sealing  of  fht  demmiaa
hoy.  (Mark  ix.  16—29 ;  Luke  Ix.  37—42.)
The  account  of  the  miracle  is  much  cur-
tailed in  our  Gospel ;  the  fullest  narrative
is  given  by  St.  Mark,  to  whom  we  must
refer  for  the  complete  details.

Ver.  14. — When  they  were  come  to  the
multitude.  St.  Luke  says  this  arrival  was
on  "  the  next  day  "  after  the  Transfigurution.
If  this  event  took  place  at  night,  the  follow-
ing morning  will  be  meant  The  contrast
between  the  scene  on  the  mountain  and  that
presented  by  the  demoniac  below  has  been
seized  by  Eaphael,in  his  pictureof  theTrans-
figuratlon,  at  Rome — the  last  great  work
that  he  painted.  The  upper  part  of  this
picture  represents  Jesns  radiant  in  glory
with  the  heavenly  visitants,  while  the  lower
panel  shows  the  agonized  father,  surrounded
by  the  unbelieving  crowd,  bringing  his
tortured  son  to  the  apostles,  who  stand  help-
leas  and  discredited.  The  painter  has,
indeed,  sacrificed  fact  to  dramatic  effect  (as
the  two  events  were  not  synchronous) ;  but
the  lesson  enforced  thereby  is  most  impres-
sive, and  lays  holds  of  the  imagination,
showing  different  phases  of  the  life  of  Christ,
and  the  realms  of  light  and  darkness.  There
came  to  him  a  certain  man.  Things  had
not  gone  well  while  Jesns  and  the  three
chief  apostles  were  away  on  the  mount.  As
during  the  absence  of  Moses  at  Sinai  the
people  had  fallen  into  idolatry  (Exod.  xxxii.),
so  now,  when  their  Master  and  their  leaders
were  withdrawn,  the  nine  apostles  had
faltered  in  faith  and  failed  in  exercising
the  miraculous  powers  bestowed  upon  them.
Kneeling  down  to  him.  Directly  the  father
saw  Christ  coming,  he  disengaged  himself
from  the  crowd  and  ran  to  meet  him.

Ver.  15. — This  verse  in  the  Vulgate  is
contained  in  ver.  14.  Have  meroy  on  my
son.  According  to  St.  Luke,  the  father
makes  his  plea  more  touching  by  adding
that  he  was  his  only  sou — an  appeal  to
which  the  Saviour's  tender  heart  was  always
open,  as  when  he  stopped  the  bier  at  Nain,
and  said  to  the  childless  widow,  "  Weep
not."  He  is  lunatic  (ir6\7)>'ii£ffToi).  The
Revised  Version  most  unnecessarily  renders
the  verb,  A«  is  epileptic.  Doubtless  the  case
in  many  respects  simulated  epilepsy,  and
might  have  been  so  described ;  but  it  seems
inexpedient  to  conceal  the  actual  word  used,
which  gave  the  popular  and  probably  correct
view  of  one  phase  of  the  complaint.  Surely
a  real  fact  well  known  to  medical  science
underlies  the  term  lunaoy.  In  the  catalogue
of  the  diseased  persons  who  were  brought
to  Christ  to  be  healed  (ch.  it.  24),  we  find


a  class  called  lunatics,  distinct  from  the
paralytic  and  possessed.  It  is  by  no  means
an  exploded  fallacy  that  the  moon  has  some
mysterious  influence  on  certain  constitutions,
and  produces  an  aggravation  of  symptoms
in  accordance  with  some  of  its  changes.  It
was  from  observation  of  this  phenomenon
that  this  form  of  insanity  was  termed  seleni-
aamua  or  lunacy.  In  the  present  instance
the  disease  was  complicated  and  of  no  ordi-
nary nature.  The  other  synoptists  state
that  the  child  was  possessed  by  a  demon.
This  was  the  fact  which  differentiated  the
malady  from  any  merely  organic  sicltneBs.
It  was  in  truth  epilepsy  accompanied  by  or
occasioned  by  demoniacal  possession.  St.
Matthew  does  not  mention  the  possession  in
his  introductory  account,  but  he  afterwards
(ver.  18)  speaks  of  the  demon  departing.
Sore  vexed  {xaK&s  ird<rx€i) ',  i»  in  evil  case ;
suffers  grievously.  He  was  affected  with
terrible  paroxysms,  which  are  detailed  more
at  length  by  Mark  and  Luke.  Mattliew
narrates  some  of  the  effects  of  the  mania
upon  the  victim.  Ofttimes  he  falleth  into
the  fire.  The  fits,  coming  on  suddenly  and
without  warning,  brought  the  sufferer  into
imminent  dangers,  perhaps  produced  sui-
cidal tendencies,  which  urged  him  to  destroy
himself.

Ver.  16. — ^I  brought  him  to  thy  disciples.
He  had  come  with  the  multitude,  hoping  to
find  Jesus,  and,  being  disappointed,  he  bad
applied  to  the  nine  to  relieye  his  misery.
When  the  apostles  were  sent  forth  with
commission  to  heal  the  sick,  they  returned
with  joy  to  report  the  success  of  their  tour :
they  cast  forth  many  devils;  they  noted
with  glad  surprise  that  the  very  demons
were  subject  to  them  in  the  Name  of  Jesus
(ch.  X.  1 ;  Luke  ix.  17).  It  was  different
now.  They  oould  not  cure  him.  What
means  they  used  we  know  not ;  at  any  rate,
they  were  ineffectual.  The  writers  who
record  the  failure  must  be  allowed  to  be
truthful  and  honest.  There  had  been  much
to  depress  these  disciples.  Their  Master
was  absent,  gone  they  knew  not  whither;
how  long  he  would  be  away  they  could  not
tell ;  the  boldest  and  mobt  trusted  of  their
company  were  no  longer  present  to  cheer
them  with  sympathy,  to  repel  attacks,  to
stand  forth  as  champions.  The  scribes'  un-
compromising disbelief  (Mark  ix.  16)  had
for  the  moment  obscured  their  own  perfect
trust;  the  atmosphere  of  infidelity  had
affected  their  own  breathing;  the  memory
of  Christ's  words  concerning  hig  Passion  and
death  recurred  again  with  dispiriting  effect,
infusing  doubt  and  disquiet ;  they  had  for
the_  time  lost  the  ardour  and  confidence
which  had  animated  them  in  their  first
mission ;  retaining  belief  in  Christ's  olalmti,
they  felt  a  kentation  coneanung  tfaoir  own


CH.  XVII.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


177


ability;  and  the  consoions  weakness  in
their  exorcism  nullified  its  power,  and  they
could-do  no  mighty  work.

Ver.  17.— Jesns  -  answered.  Jesus  did
not  directly  respond  to  the  father's  appeal,
nor  repel  the  Pharisees'  scofEa.  In  sorrow
and  indignation  he  goes  at  once  to  the  root
of  the  evil.  0  faithless  and  perverse  gene-
ration !  He  seems  to  include  in  this  denun-
ciation all  who  were  present — ^the  father,
Boribeu,  people,  apostles,  especially  the  nine.
Want  of  faith  appertained  to  all.  He  often
refers  to  the  general  body  of  his  hearers  by
the  term  generation  (comp.  oh.  zi.  16;  xii.  29,
etc.).  Perverse.  The  word  is  used  by  Moses
in  his  great  song  (Dent,  zxxii.  5,  Septua-
gint)  in  reference  to  those  who  dealt  cor-
ruptly ;  here  it  applies  to  persons  who  took
a  distorted  view  of  Christ's  work  and  teadi-
ing,  and  against  light  and  knowledge  obsti-
nately persisted  in  their  infidelity.  How
long  shall  I  be  with  you  f  .  .  .  saSer  you  ?
The  sad  question  is  not  that  of  one  who
wants  his  work  finished  and  his  time  of
departure  hastened;  rather,  it  shows  his
sorrow  and  regret  at  the  slowness  of  taith,
the  hardness  of  heart,  which  yet,  notwith-
standing all  his  teaching  and  his  miracles,
had  not  been  overcome.  How  mucli  longer
was  this  to  continue  ?  Was  this  forgetful-
ness  of  the  past,  this  dulness  of  comprehen-
sion, to  last  for  ever  ?  Did  they  wish  to  wear
out  hifl  long-suffering,  to  exhaust  his  condes-
cension ?  With  Divine  Impatience  at  man's
obduracy,  he  makes  this  mournful  inquiry,
firing  Qp^pere,  bring  ye)  him  hither  to  me.
He  speaks  to  the  attendants  or  the  crowd,
and  bids  them  bring  the  boy  to  him,  not  to
thedisoiples.  The  prophet's  staffiu  Gehazi's
hand  could  not  awake  the  dead;  Elisha
himself  must  undertake  the  work  (2  Kings
iv.Sl);  so  if  the  desired  miracle  had  to  be
performed,  Christ  himself  must  do  it.  In
spite  of  his  grief  and  disappointment,  he
does  not  withhold  relief.  In  the  midst  of
wtath  he  remembers  mercy.

Ver.  18. — Jesus  rebuked  the  devil  (aiir^,
him).  Some  take  the  pronoun  as  masculine,
and  refer  it  to  the  diseased  boy ;  but  it  is
more  natural  that  the  rebuke  should  be  ad-
dressed to  the  possessing  demon.  This  is
tlie  first  place  where  St.  Matthew  mentions
the  spiritual  aspect  of  the  malady.  As  the
child  was  being  brought  to  Jesus,  a  terrible
scene  ensued,  which  is  described  with  its
horrific  details  by  St.  Mark,  wlio  also  gives
Christ's  conversation  with  the  father,  where-
by he  desired  to  arouse  faith  in  his  heart,
and  to  draw  that  assurance  from  him  which
could  not  be  obtained  from  the  irresponsible
sufferer.  He  departed  out  of  him.  In  con-
trast to  the  faltering  exorcism  of  the  apostles,
which  the  devil  had  disregarded,  Jesus
orders  with  the  calmness  of  assured  authority,

MATTHEW II.


and  is  at  once  obeyed.  After  a  final  act  of
defeated  malice,  tlie  demon  quitted  his  hold
of  the  child.  Was  cured  from  that  very
hour.  Never  more  to  fall  under  the  devil's
influence,  restored  wholly  in  body  and  mind.
There  is  something  very  mysterious  in  the
sufferings  of  this  poor  boy,  as  there  is  in  those
of  infants.  It  is  plain  that  the  description,
"  epileptic  mania,"  will  not  connote  all  the
features  of  this  case.  The  evangelists'  nar-
rative and  Christ's  words  and  actions  con-
clusively prove  that  it  had  a  demoniacal
element,  and  that  this  was  miraculously
eliminated.  For  epilepsy,  I  believe,  no  cure
is  known.  The  suddenness  and  the  perman-
ence (Mark  ix.  25)  of  the  relief  further  de-
monstrate the  reality  of  the  miracle.  We
learn  also  from  this  incident  that  all  pos-
sessed persons  were  not  morally  evil,  that
often  the  possession  appertained  to  the  phy-
sical and  psychical  nature,  and  had  no
ethical  relation.

Ver.  19. — Apart  (kut"  I'Smi').  Jesus  had
retired  to  a  house  (Mark)  when  the  disciples
came  to  him.  The  question  which  they
desired  to  ask  was  one  that  could  not  be  in-
vestigated in  the  presence  of  the  sneering,
unbelieving  crowd.  Why  oonld  not  wa
(,Ti/j.e7s,  emphatic)  cast  him  (avrh,  it)  outi
They  had  keenly  felt  their  impotence  and
failure,  so  publicly  and  distressingly  dis-
played, especially  as  they  had  received  power
to  eject  demons,  and  had  successfully  exer-
cised this  authority  (Luke  x.  17).  The
Lord's  rebuke  (ver.  17)  had  passed  over  theii
heads,  and  not  been  understood  as  applicable
to  themselves.  So  it  was  with  some  bitter-
ness that  they  asked  the  question.  The  nine
had  not  been  permitted  to  witness  the  Trans-
figuration ;  they  were  not  even  to  be  made
acquainted  with  this  wondrous  transaction
at  present.  More  preparation,  greater  recep-
tivity, was  required,  before  they  wore  fit  to
be  admitted  to  the  full  mysteries  of  the  king-
dom. They  had  still  much  to  leam,  were
still  only  pupils,  and  their  late  failure  was
permitted  in  order  to  help  them  to  attain  to
self-knowledge  and  more  entire  self-sur-
render.

Ver.  20. — Because  of  your  unbelief.  The
Revised  Version  adopts  the  reading.  Utile
faith,  in  accordance  with  the  best  authori-
ties; but  it  looks  like  a  softening  of  the
original  term  "  unbelief,"  which  corresponds
better  with  Christ's  own  censure,  "  faithless
generation."  Jesus  gives  two  reasons  for  the
apostles'  failure,  one  connected  with  their
own  moral  condition,  and  one  (ver.  21)  de-
rived from  the  nature  of  the  demons  exor-
cised. They  had,  indeed,  shown  some  faith
by  making  even  the  attempt  at  the  expulsion
of  the  devil,  and  were  not  to  be  classed  with
the  unbelieving  scribes ;  but  they  had  acted
in  a  half-heartad  manner,  and  had  n^  dis-

J


178


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvu.  1— 27


played  that  perfect  eonfidence  and  trust
which  alone  can  win  succesg  and  make  all
things  possible.  Verily  I  say  nnto  yon.
The  Lord  proceeds  to  give  that  lesson  con-
cerning perfect  faith  and  its  results,  which  he
afterwards  repeated  In  connection  with  the
withered  fig  tree  (ch.  xxi.  21,  where  see  note)
and  elsewhere  (Luke  xvii.  6).  If  ye  have
faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which,  as
he  says  (ch.  xiii.  32),  "  is  less  than  all
seeds."  He  means  a  faith  real  and  trustful,
though  it  be  small  and  weak.  The  phrase
is  proverbial,  expressive  of  littleness  and  in-
significance. The  mustard  seed  is  quite
little,  but,  grown  in  favourable  soil  and  under
sunny  skiLS,  it  becomes,  as  it  were,  a  tree
among  herbs,  so  that  birds  may  nestle  in  its
branches.  To  it  faith  is  compared,  because,
small  at  first,  it  contains  within  itself  power
of  large  development  and  increase;  from
minute  grains  copious  results  are  produced.
Ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain.  He  points
to  the  hill  of  Hermon,  where  the  Transfigu-
ration had  taken  place.  Semove  hence.  It
is  usual  to  consider  the  exprcbsion  here  as  an
Eastern  hyperbole,  not  to  be  taken  literally,
but  meaning  merely  that  the  greatest  difB-
oultiea  may  be  overcome  by  faith.  This
may  be  true,  but  it  seems  hardly  adequate
to  the  explanation  of  our  Lord's  emphatic
words.  St.  Paul  writes  in  a  similar  strain
(1  Cor.  xiii.  2),  "If  I  have  all  faith,  so  that
I  could  remove  mountains ;  "  where  there  is
nothing  necessarily  hyperbolical  in  the  sup-
position. It  seems  rather  that  Jesus  meant
his  words  to  be  received  literally,  Implying
that  if  such  a  removal  as  he  mentioned  was
ever  expedient  and  in  aoooi  dance  with  God's
will,  it  would  be  effected  by  the  power  of
faith;  not  that  he  hereby  sanctioned  an
arbitrary  and  wanton  display  of  miraculous
power,  but  he  gives  an  assurance  that,  were
such  a  measure  rendered  necessary  for  the
cause  of  religion,  it  would  be  performable
at  the  call  of  one  whose  whole  trust  was
centred  on  God,  and  whose  will  was  one  with
God's  will.  Mediaeval  writers,  followed  by
later  Koman  Oatholio  commentators,  give
instances  of  such  stupendous  effects  of  faith.
The  evidence  of  such  miracles  is,  of  course,
defective,  and  would  not  satisfy  modern  oriti-
cism,but  the  existence  of  such  legends  proves
that  a  literal  view  was  taken  of  our  Lord's
saying.  Nothing  shall  be  impossible  unto
you.  The  man  of  faith  is  practically  om-
nipotent; moral  and  material  difBculties
vanish  before  him.

Ver.  21. — This  verse  is  omitted  in  many
good  manuscripts  and  by  the  Eevised  Ver-
sion, it  being  considered  to  have  been  intro-
duced from  the  parallel  passage  of  St.  Mark.
It  gives  the  second  reason  for  the  failure  of
the  nine.  This  kind  ,  .  .  fasting.  Though
all  things  are  possible  to  faith,  some  works


are  more  difficult  of  accomplishment  tbmn
others.  I%is  hind  can  mean  only  this  kind
of  evil  spirit,  or  demons  generally.  But  the
latter  interpretation  is  excluded  by  the  fact
that  the  apostles  had  already  exercised  suc-
cessfully their  power  over  devils  without
special  prayer  or  fasting.  The  words  point
to  a  truth  in  the  spiritual  world,  that  there
are  different  degrees  in  the  Satanic  hierarchy
(comp.  ch.  xii.  45) ;  some  demons  are  more
malignant  than  others,  and  have  greater
power  over  the  souls  of  men.  In  the  present
case  the  possession  was  of  long  standing;  it
involved  a  terrible  bodily  malady ;  it  was  of
an  intense  and  unusual  character.  The
mere  word  of  exorcism,  or  the  name  of  Jesus,
spoken  with  little  spiritual  faith,  could  not
overcome  the  mighty  enemy.  The  exorcist
needed  special  preparation ;  he  must  inspire
and  augment  his  faith  by  prayer  and  self-
discipline.  Prayer  invokes  the  aid  of  God,
and  puts  one's  self  unreservedly  in  his  hands ;
fasting  subdues  the  flesh,  arouses  the  soul's
energies,  brings  into  exercise  the  higher
parts  of  man's  nature.  Thus  equipped,  a
man  is  open  to  receive  power  &om  on  high,
and  can  quell  the  assaults  of  the  evil  one.

Vers.  22,  23. — Second  official  announce-
ment of  the  Passion  and  Resurrection.  (Mark
ix.  30—32 ;  Luke  ix.  43—45.)

Ver.  22. — While  they  abode  (i,ra<rTp€<i>o-
lievav,  went  to  and  fro  ;  conversantibus,  Vul-
gate) in  Oalilee.  After  some  weeks  spent  in
the  extreme  north,  Jesus  and  his  disciples
had  returned  secretly  to  Galilee  (Mark  ix.
30),  and  were  approaching  the  neighbour-
hood of  Capernaum.  The  privacy  was  con-
nected with  the  special  instruction  which
he  was  now  giving  to  his  disciples.  The
Son  of  man  shall  be  betrayed  .  .  .  men.
There  is  a  reference  to  the  preparation  thus
mercifully  afforded  to  the  twelve  in  the
angel's  address  to  the  women  at  the  se-
pulchre, "  Kemember  how  he  spake  unto  you
when  he  was  yet  in  Galilee"  (Luke  xxiv.
6).  Jesus  reiterates  the  prediction  contin  u-
ally  in  order  to  familiarize  his  followers
with  the  unwelcome,  the  incredible,  reality.
But  the  Messiah's  Passion,  death,  and  resur-
rection were  ideas  that  tiiey  could  not  at
once  receive ;  so  impossible  they  seemed  in
the  very  nature  of  things,  so  contrary  to  all
their  hopes  and  expectetions.  Shall  he
betrayed  (ji^Wei  jrapaSiSoaSai).  Is  ordained,
in  the  counsels  of  God,  to  be  betrayed.
Tradendus  est  (Vnlgat*).  Men.  He  had  be-
fore named  the  chief  priests  (ch.  xvi.  21),
afterwards  he  mentions  the  Gentiles  (oh.
XX.  19),  as  the  agents  in  his  death.  So  St
Peter,  in  his  great  sermon  (Acts  ii.),  says  to
the  Jews,  "  Ye  have  tedsen  him,  and  by
wicked  hands  ['  by  the  hand  of  lawless  nieUj*
Beviaed  Version]  have  crucified  and  slain."


oa.  xvn.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,


179


Ver.  23. — Shall  be  raiaed  again  (iytpe^-
(Tcrai) ;  be  wakened.  This  wag  always  a  sub-
ject of  perplexity ;  and  indeed,  according  to
the  other  Bynoptists,  "they  underBtood  not
the  saying ;  it  was  hid  from  them,  and  they
perceived  it  not,  and  were  afraid  to  ask
him."  Were  exceeding  Borry.  They  no
longer  rebuke  him,  as  Peter  had  done  (ch.
xvi.  22),  or  try  to  divert  him  from  his  pur-
pose ;  they  begin  to  realize  the  position,  and
to  anticipate  with  poignant  sorrow  the  over-
throw of  their  hopes.

Vers.  24 — 27. — Thecoin  in  thefish'$  moufh.
This  is  one  of  the  three  miracles  of  our  Lord
which  are  peculiar  to  this  Gospel.  St.
Matthew  seems  to  concern  himself  particu-
larly with  matters  which  present  Jesus  as
King-Messiah ;  and  this  occurrence  was  in
his  view  specially  notable,  as  herein  Christ
claimed  for  himself  a  royal  position — Son  in
his  Father's  house.

Yer.  24.— Capemanm.  Once  more  before
the  final  scene  he  visited  the  spot  so  dear  to
his  human  heart — "his  own  city."  They
that  received  tribute  money  (pi  rk  SiSpax/ia
KafifiivovTes).  This  is  an  unfortunate  ren-
dering, as  it  may  be  taken  to  countenance
an  erroneous  view  of  the  demanded  impost,
found  in  many  ancient  and  some  mudern
commentaries,  which  vitiates  their  whole  in-
terpretation. According  to  this  opinion,  the
tribute  was  a  civil  payment,  like  the  dena-
rius of  ch.  xxii.  19,  levied  by  the  Boman
government,  or  a  capitation  tax  imposed  by
Herod,  the  Tetraroh  of  Galilee  (of  which  tax,
however,  we  have  no  hislorical  proof).  That
this  is  a  misunderstanding  is  plain  from
many  considerations.  In  the  first  pUice,  the
collectors  are  not  rcXayoi,  publicans,  but
quite  another  set  of  people,  called  they  that
received  the  didrachmas.  Again,  the  olficers
of  government  would  not  have  made  their
demand  mildly  in  an  interrogative  form,
"  Doth  not  your  Master,"  etc.  ?  but  would
have  exhibited  that  violent  and  offensive
behaviour  which  made  them  so  hated  among
the  Jews.  Tlie  political  tax  ia  never  termed
didraohrtia,  but  always  census,  as  in  ch.  xxii.
17, 19 ;  nor  could  Jesus  have  given  the  answer
which  is  reported  below,  if  the  tax  had  been
one  levied  in  the  interest  of  any  earthly
monarch,  be  it  Csosar  or  Herod.  The  di-
drachmas is  a  term  denoting  a  well-known
rate,  concerning  which  we  have  full  informa-
tion from  many  sources — biblical, Talmudio,
and  traditional.  The  didrachma  was  a
silver  coin  equal  to  two  Attic  drachms,  or,
in  Jewish  money,  to  one  half-shekel  of  the
sanctuary — something  under  our  florin  in
weight.  It  was  the  amount  of  an  ecclesias-
tical rate  levied  for  religious  purposes.
Originally  (Exod.  xix.  13,  etc)  exacted  as


an  acknowledgment  and  a  thank-offering,  a
ransom,  as  it  were,  for  the  lives  rescued
from  Bgypt,  it  had  been  used  in  the  wilder-
ness in  providing  the  framework  of  the
tabernacle  and  the  ornamentation  of  its
pillars.  Based  on  this  practice  arose  u  cus-
tom that  every  male  Israelite  of  twenty  years
old  and  upwards  should  annually  contribute
to  the  temple  treasury  the  sum  of  a  half-
shekeL  Dr.  Edersheim  reckons  the  tribute
in  OUT  Lord's  time  to  have  been  equivalent
to  £7S,000  per  annum.  The  money  was
stored  in  the  temple  treasury,  and  was  ex-
pended partly  in  the  purchase  of  the  dally
sacrifices,  viotimfl,  incense,  etc.,  in  the  pay-
ment of  rabbis  and  other  officials  connected
with  the  temple, in  maintaining  tbe  efficiency
of  the  water  supply,  and  in  keeping  in  repair
the  vast  and  magnificent  buildings  in  the
temple  area.  After  all  this  outlay,  there .
was  always  a  large  sum  in  hand,  which
proved  a  strong  temptation  to  the  greed  of
conquerors,  and  the  sacred  coffers  were  often
plundered;  and  even  after  many  previous
spoliations,  we  read  th  at  Crassus  (b.o.  64)  car-
ried otf  no  less  than  two  and  a  half  millions
sterling.  The  tax  was  due  by  the  twenty-
fifth  of  the  month  Adar  (equivalent  to  Feb
ruary-March),  and  the  collectors  who  were
appointed  to  or  took  upon  themselves  the
office,  opened  stalls  in  every  country  town
for  the  reception  of  the  money.  For  many
centuries  the  rate  was  of  a  voluntary  nature,
considered,  indeed,  a  religious  duty,  and  to
be  evaded'by  no  one,  Pharisee  or  Sadducee,
who  wished  to  be  regarded  as  an  orthodox
believer,  but  its  payment  had  not  been
secured  by  any  legal  process.  Lately,  indeed,
the  penalty  of  distraint  had  been  enacted  in
order  to  obtain  the  tax  from  defaulters ;  but
it  is  doubtful  whether  this  was  generally
enforced.  Possibly  the  appointed  day  had
now  arrived,  and  the  coUecturs  thought  right
to  stir  in  the  matter.  Came  to  Peter,  They
applied  to  Peter  instead  of  directly  to  Christ,
perhaps  out  of  respect  for  the  latter,  and
from  a  certain  awe  with  which  he  inspired
them.  Besides,  Peter  was  their  fellow-
townsman,  and  they  doubtless  knew  him  well.
His  natural  impulsiveness  might  have  in-
duced him  to  answer  the  call.  It  may  also
have  been  his  own  house,  the  other  eleven
being  apparently  staying  with  other  friends,
and  Jesus  with  him  <,"  me  and  thee,"  ver.  27).
We  may  suppose  that  Jesus  had  complied
with  the  demand  on  former  occasions,  when
sojourning  in  his  Galiliean  home,  so  that  the
present  application  was  only  natural.  Doth
not  your  Master  (4  Ai5atrKa.\os  iixuv,  your
Teacher)  pay  tribute  (flie  didrachma)  ?  Per-
haps the  form  of  the  question  mlglit  be  better
rendered,  "  Your  Teacher  pays  the  two
drachms,  does  he  not?"  The  pronoun
"  your "  is  plural,  because  they  recognized


180


THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1— 27


that  Jesas  was  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  dis-
ciples,  who  would  be  influenced  by  his  ex-
ample. 'We  may  in  this  inquiry  see  other
motlTes  besides  the  obvious  one.  If  Jesus
paid  the  rate  now  without  question,  he  would
prove  that  he  was  nothing  more  than  an
ordinary  Jew,  with  no  claim  to  a  higher
origin  or  a  Divine  mission.  Though  not  a
priest  or  Levite,  Jesus  might  have  claimed
exemption  as  a  recognized  rabbi,  and  the
collectois  may  have  desired  to  ascertain
whether  he  would  do  this.  There  was,  too,
at  this  time  a  sect  which,  in  its  furious
patriotism,  refused  to  contribute  aught  to
the  temple  so  long  as  the  holy  city  was
profaned  by  the  presence  of  the  heathen.
Did  Christ  belong  to  this  body?  And
would  he  carry  out  their  programme?  If
trom  any  cause  he  declined  tlie  contribution,
this  abstention  would  give  a  handle  to  those
wno  were  not  prepared  to  endorse  his  claims ;
the  breach  of  such  a  generally  recognized
obligation  would  raise  a  prejudice  against
him,  and  weaken  the  effect  of  his  acts  and
teaching.  ISome  such  motives  may  have
contributed  to  inspire  the  question  now
aslied.

Ver.  25. — He  saith,  Yes.  Without  con-
sulting his  Master,  or  even  letting  him
know  of  the  demand,  Peter  answered  affirma-
tively. He  knew  that  Christ  never  with-
drew from  conscientious  obligations ;  Jesus
may  have  pail  the  rate  in  former  years,  and
might  be  confidently  supposed  to  be  ready
to  do  so  again.  But  was  there  not  another
feeling  that  dictated  the  quick  reply,  and
made  him  pledge  Jesus  to  the  payment?
He  had  a  fear  at  bis  heart,  caused  by  Christ's
late  warning  and  prophecy,  that  made  him
morbidly  anxious  to  live  at  peace  with  all
men  at  this  conjuncture.  As  far  as  in  him
lay  he  would  shield  his  beloved  Master  from
the  dread  result  wluch  he  anticipated;  at
any  rate,  he  would  endeavour  to  postpone
t)ie  fatal  day ;  no  offence  that  he  could
obviate  should  be  given.  So,  thinking  only
of  present  safety,  forgetting  or  wilfully
ignoring  Christ's  true  position,  he  answered
hastily,  "  Yes."  When  he  (Peter)  was  oome
into  the  house.  The  collectors  had  ad-
dressed Peter  in  the  street  or  at  the  door,
and  the  apostle,  having  given  his  reply,
hastened  into  the  house  where  Jesus  was,
either  to  obtain  the  necessary  coins  or  to
make  tlie  demand  known.  Prevented  him.
The  Revised  Version  paraphrases,  tpake  first
to  him,  which  gives  the  meaning  (though
the  Greek  does  not  warrant  such  trans-
lation)— Jesus  anticipated  what  Peter  was
going  to  say  by  showing  that  he  knew
the  apostle's  thoughts  and  all  that  bad
passed  outside  the  house.  He  takes  the
opportunity  of  enforcing  a  needful  lesson,
making  the  listener,  in  the  Socratic  method.


teach  himself.  What  thinkest  thoB,  Simon  1
By  such  familiar  address  he  claims  his
attention.  The  kings  of  the  earth.  He
contrasts  these  with  the  King  of  heaven,  to
whom  a  reference  is  implied  in  the  Lord's
subsequent  words.  Custom  (tcAi/)  or  tribute
(.Krjvirpp').  The  former  of  these  words  (which
would  be  better  rendered  tolls')  signifies  the
customs  laid  on  goods  and  merchandise  and
other  such  payments  —  vectigalia,  as  the
Romans  called  them;  the  tribute  (not  the
same  word  as  that  so  translated  in  ver.  24)
is  the  census,  the  capitation  tax  (iirixfipi-
Xatov)  imposed  upon  every  citizen  of  the
empire.  Strangers  {aWorplinv).  The  con-
trast is  between  the  family  of  the  monarch
and  those  who  are  not  connected  with  him
by  any  relationship.

Ver.  26. — Of  strangers.  Peter  is  brought
to  the  desired  point.  He  answers,  as  any
one  would,  that  in  earthly  kingdoms  the
children  of  the  ruling  monarch  are  exempt
from  taxes,  which  are  exacted  from  all  other
subjects.  Then  are  the  children  free.  The
comparison  required  the  use  of  the  plural,
though  the  reference  is  properly  confined  to
himself.  The  deduction  leads  naturally  to
the  lesson  of  Christ's  immunity.  He  vir-
tually implies  (though  the  inference  is  not
developed  in  words),  '•  I  am  the  Son  of
God,  as  you,  Peter,  have  acknowledged;
this  tax  is  levied  for  the  house  and  service
of  God,  whose  Son  I  am;  therefore  I  am
free  from  the  obligation  of  paying  it;  it
cannot  be  required  that  I  should  pay  tribute
to  my  Father."  Looked  at  in  its  original
nature,  the  impost  could  not  with  pro-
priety be  demanded  from  him.  It  was  an
offering  of  atonement,  a  ransom  of  souls.
How  could  he  give  money  in  expiation  of
himself — he  who  had  oome  to  give  his  life  a
ransom  for  others  ?  Why  should  be  ransom
himself  from  sin  and  death,  who  had  come
to  take  away  sin  and  destroy  death  and
open  everlasting  life  to  all  men?  There
was  need  to  make  the  point  clear  now  that
Christ  had  openly  asserted  his  Meesiahship
and  his  Divine  nature.  To  pay  the  demand
without  explanation,  after  the  statement  of
his  Divinity,  might  occasion  serious  mis-
apprehension in  the  minds  of  his  followers.
So  he  gently  but  convincingly  shows  that
his  claim  of  Sonship  exempted  him  from  all
liability  of  the  impost.

Ver.  27. — Lest  we  should  offend  them ;
cause  them  to  stunible.  In  his  large  charity
he  would  not  take  the  advantage  of  his
position  to  avoid  the  tax.  Though  above
the  Law,  he  would  place  himself  under  the
Law.  Offence  would  be  given  by  the  non-
payment. His  motive  would  be  unknown
and  misunderstood  (see  on  ver.  24).  The
people  would  attribute  it  to  caprice,  secta-
rianiim,  contempt  of  religion ;  they  would


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


181


■ee  in  it  dishonoiir  to  the  temple.  Suspicion
and  animosity  would  be  aroused ;  ill  feeling,
injurious  both  to  themselves  who  encouraged
it  and  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  would  weaken
the  effects  of  his  acts  and  doctrine.  Furtlier
offence  would  supervene  if  he  did  not  confirm
Peter's  engagement  and  execute  the  promise
which  the  foremost  disciple  had  virtually
made  in  his  name ;  since  it  might  thus  appear
that  he  and  his  followers  were  not  of  one
mind  in  this  important  matter.  For  such
considerations  he  was  content  to  waive  his
prerogative,  and  to  provide  for  the  payment
by  a  miracle,  which  sliould  at  once  vindicate
his  royal  character  and  demonstrate  that,
while  he  was  obedient  to  the  Law,  he  was
superior  to  it,  was  the  Lord  of  heaven  and
earth  and  sea.  Go  thou  to  the  sea.  The  Sea
of  Galilee,  on  whose  shore  Capernaum  stood,
and  with  which  Peter  bad  been  all  his  life
familiar.  Cast  an  hook.  The  fisherinan
was  to  ply  his  trade,  yet  not  to  use  his
customary  net;  he  was  to  fish  with  line  and
hook,  that  the  miracle  might  be  more
striking.  Take  up  the  fish  that  first  oometh
up.  From  the  deep  waters  to  the  bait.  Then
shalt  find  a  piece  of  money ;  a  stater.  This
Greek  coin,  circulating  throughout  the  East,
was  about  equal  in  value  to  the  shekel,  or
two  didrachms,  and  therefore  sufficient  to
pay  the  half-shekel  for  two  persons.  That
a  fish  should  seize  a  bright  object  which
might  drop  into  the  sea  is  nothing  uncom-
mon. A  cod  has  been  found  with  a  watch
in  its  stomach,  still  going.  The  miracle  is
shown  in  the  omniscience  which  knew  what
the  fish  carried  in  its  maw,  and  in  the
omnipotence  which  drew  it  to  the  hook.
As  far  as  we  know,  and  regarding  the
present  age  as  the  sabbath  of  creation  (see
John  V.  17),  Christ  in  Ms  miracles  created
nothing  absolutely,  always  using  a  natural
and  existing  basis  as  the  support  of  the
wonder.  So  here  he  does  not  create  the
fish  or  the  stater,  but  by  marvellous  coin-
cidences makes  them  subserve  his  purpose.
Tradition  has  stereotyped  the  miracle  by
assigning  to  a  certain  tribe  of  fish  a  per-
manent mark  of  the  occurrence.  The  john-
dory,  whose  name  is  coirupted  either  from
jaune  dor£,  "  gold  colour,"  or  adore,  "  wor-
shipped," is  called  in  some  countries  Peter's
fish,  and  is  supposed  to  retain  the  impression
ef  the  apostle's  fingers  on  its  siiles.  Others
assert  that  it  is  the  haddock  which  presents
this  memorial  of  the  miracle.  But  neither  of
these  fish  is  found  in  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth.
Give  .     .  for  me  and  thee  (ovrl  iii.ou  xal


iroS),  The  form  of  expression  recalls  the
original  design  of  the  institution,  as  •>
ransom  of  souls  (comp.  ch.  xx.  28  in  the
Greek).  He  does  not  say,  "for  us;"  for,
though  he  submitted  to  the  tax,  it  was  not
on  the  same  ground  as  his  servant.  He
himself  paid,  tliough  exempt ;  Peter  paid
because  he  was  liable.  In  the  one  case  it
was  from  humility,  in  the  other  from  legal
obligation.  The  account  ends  somewhat
abruptly,  nothing  being  said  of  the  result
of  the  Lord's  command,  what  action  Peter
took,  and  what  ensued  thereon.  Jiut  we
need  no  assurance  that  all  came  to  pass  as
Christ  directed.  The  very  silence  is  sig-
nificant ;  it  is  the  sublimest  language.
Xeologian  criticism  has  endeavoured  to
explain  away  or  to  throw  discredit  on  the
miraculous  nature  of  this  "  transtwstion."
We  are  asked  to  believe  that  Christ  by  his
command  meant  only  that  Peter  was  to  go
and  catch  a  fish  and  sell  it  for  a  stater.  If
this  was  the  case,  why  did  not  the  evangelist
say  80?  Why  did  he  introduce  a  story
which  he  must  have  known  to  be  untrue  ?
Is  there  any  ground  for  suppoiing  that  St.
Matthew  was  a  writer  of  myths  and  legends,
or  one  who  intentionally  falsified  the  records
on  which  he  framed  his  history  ?  Surely  no
unprejudiced  person  could  judge  thus  of  tlie
writer  of  the  First  Gospel;  to  those  who
believe  in  inspiration  the  notion  is  sacri-
legious. The  incident  is  no  embellishment
of  a  natural  fact,  no  mere  sailor's  anecdote,
but  the  true  account  of  a  real  occurrence,
which  the  narrator  credited  and  probably
witnessed.  Another  allegation  equally  un-
founded is  that  Christ  was  rebuking  Peter
for  precipitancy  in  promising  payment
when  they  had  no  funds  in  their  possession,
as  though  Jesus  was  saying  ironically,  "  You
had  better  go  and  catch  a  fish,  and  look  for
the  money  in  its  mouth  I  "  Such  attempted
evasions  of  the  miraculous  are  puerile
and  saddening.  And  if  it  be  objected,  as
indeed  it  is,  that  the  miracle  was  unneces-
sary and  unworthy  of  Jesus,  who  never
exerted  his  supernatural  power  for  his  own
benefit,  it  is  easy  to  show  that  the  wonder
was  required  in  order  to  give  and  enforce
a  lesson  to  Peter  and  his  compauious.  In
what  better  way  could  Jesus  have  conveyed
to  them  the  truth  that,  although  for  the
nonce  he  consented  to  the  Law,  he  was
Bupe'rior  to  it  and  exempt  from  the  obliga-
tion, and  that  if  he  paid  the  tax  he  did  so
by  an  exercise  of  power  which  proved  him
to  be  the  Sou  of  God?


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  Transfiguration.     L  The  glort.     1.  The  attendant  eirann-
$tance§.     Six  days  had  elapsed  lince  the  memorable  coaversatiou  in  the  parts  of


182  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27

CsBsarea  Philippi.  That  conversation  must  have  filled  the  hearts  of  the  apostles  with
strange,  awful  thoughts.  He  with  whom  they  had  lived  so  long  in  the  intercourse  of
familiar  friendship  was  indeed  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  They  had
marked  the  dignity  of  his  Person,  the  authority  of  his  words,  the  power  of  his  miracles ;
and  they  had  felt  that  there  was  something  in  their  Master  that  was  more  than  human,
very  holy  and  majestic.  Now  he  had  accepted  the  homage  of  Peter,  and  had  asserted
the  truth  of  that  great  confession — ^he  was  the  Son  of  God.  Very  solemn  it  must  have
been  to  be  with  him  those  six  days,  looking  into  his  face,  hearing  his  words,  and  to
know,  as  the  disciples  were  beginning  to  know,  who  he  really  was.  It  must  have  been
like  the  first  moments  of  a  true  conversion,  when  the  soul  first  realizes  in  its  depth
and  blessedness  the  presence  and  the  love  of  God.  But  other  also  and  very  different
thoughts  must  have  agitated  the  apostles'  minds  during  those  six  days.  Doubtless
they  all  shared  the  feelings  of  Peter;  their  soul  recoiled  in  unspeakable  horror  from
the  prospect  which  the  Lord  had  set  before  them ;  they  could  not  associate  the
thought  of  failure  and  shame  and  death  with  the  Messiahship ;  they  could  scarcely
believe  that  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  could  suffer  such  things  at  the  hand
of  mortal  men ;  they  could  not  bear  to  think  that  the  Master  whom  they  loved  so  very
dearly  was  destined  to  drink  the  bitter  cup  of  suffering.  He  had  told  them  so  very
plainly ;  but  they  could  not  take  into  their  hearts  the  full  meaning  of  his  words.
They  only  half  believed  them ;  probably  they  did  not  wholly  believe  till  the  event
proved  their  truth.  But  yet  those  solemn  words,  even  if  only  half  believed,  must
have  caused  them  exceeding  great  distress,  and  must  have  filled  them  with  restless,
torturing  anxiety.  The,  Lord,  in  his  thoughtful  love,  would  comfort  them,  would  con-
firm their  faith,  would  prepare  them  to  face  the  tremendous  shock  which  awaited  them.
2.  The  retirement.  The  six  days  were  over.  We  long  to  know  the  secrets  of  those
days ;  they  must  have  been  days  of  deep  thought,  of  intense  prayer,  of  close  com-
munion with  the  Lord.  Now  they  were  over;  and  the  Lord. took  with  him  Peter,
Tames,  and  John,  the  chosen  three,  who  alone  had  seen  the  raising  of  the  daughter  of
Jairus,  who  alone  were  to  witness  the  mysterious  agony.  He  carried  them  up— it  is
a  remarkable  word,  the  same  word  which  is  used  (Luke  xxiv.  51)  in  describing  the
Ascension — ^into  a  high  mountain  apart.  The  locality,  the  height,  the  snow  alluded  to
in  Mark  ix.  3,  the  simple  title  used  by  St.  Luke,  "  the  mountain,"  all  seem  to  suggest
Hermon,  the  most  conspicuous  mountain  in  Palestine,  the  snow-clad  mountain  which,
with  its  towering  heights,  closed  the  prospect  to  the  north  of  Csesarea  Philippi.
Thither  the  Lord  carried  up  the  highly  favoured  three;  he  took  them  apart.  The
holiest  manifestations  of  God's  grace  and  presence  are  made  in  secret  to  those  chosen
ones  who  live  nearest  to  God ;  they  are  very  sweet  and  precious,  but  very,  very  sacred —
too  sacred  to  be  talked  about  save  in  Christian  communion  vrith  like-minded  servants
of  the  Lord.  Christian  men  do  well  to  retire  from  time  to  time  to  the  high  mountain
apart  from  the  world,  there  to  hold  close  communion  with  the  Lord  in  companionship
with  a  few  proved  and  humble-hearted  disciples.  3.  The  glorious  change.  The  Lord
was  praying,  St.  Luke  tells  us  ;  it  was  for  prayer  that  he  had  sought  retirement ;  and
"  as  he  prayed  "  he  was  transfigured.  The  effulgent  splendour  of  the  Godhead  poured
itself  through  the  earthly  tabernacle  in  which  it  dwelt,  as  in  ancient  times  the  glory
of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  house  of  the  Lord,  so  that  the  priests  could  not  stand  there
to  minister  (1  Kings  viii.  11).  The  sacred  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the
truest  temple ;  "  for  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  "  (Col.  ii.  9).
That  splendour  had  hitherto  been  concealed ;  he  had  laid  his  glory  by  in  the  tender
condescension  of  his  ineffable  love ;  but  now,  for  the  more  confirmation  of  the  faith  of
the  apostles  and,  through  them,  of  the  Christian  Church,  he  illowed  it  to  appear  for  a
brief  space  in  such  measure  as  the  human  eye  could  bear.  "  None  can  see  my  face
and  live,"  God  had  said  to  Moses  when  he  prayed,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy
glory ; "  but,  hidden  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock,  he  saw  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  as  his
glory  passed  by  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18 — 23),  Such  a  glorious  vision  was  now  vouchsafed
to  the  three  chosen'  witnesses.  Their  Master's  face  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  his
raiment  was  white  as  the  light,  glistering,  exceeding  white  as  snow.  He  is  the  Light
of  the  world,  he  is  the  Sun  of  Eighteousnes^;  night  is  not  night  to  the  Christian  when
that  Sun  shineth  upon  him.  The  darkness  of  that  night  was  dispelled  by  the  radiant
glory  that  issued  from  the  Person  of  the  Saviour.    The  vivid  recollection  of  that  glory


OH.  xvn.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  183

never  passed  away ;  the  two  apostles  who  remained  (St.  James  went  early  to  his
reward)  mention  it  in  their  writings  (John  i.  14 ;  2  Pet.  i.  18).  It  was  "  as  he  prayed  "
that  this  glorious  change  took  place.  The  humble,  faithful  Christian  is  made  by  the
grace  of  Christ  like  unto  his  Lord.  "  Beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we
are  changed  ['  transfigured ; '  the  Greek  verb  is  the  same  as  that  used  here]  into  the
same  image  from  glory  to  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  18).  And  surely  it  is  as  they  pray  that
that  blessed  change  comes  upon  the  servants  of  the  Lord.  Faithful  prayer  lifts  them
into  his  presence,  to  the  holy  mount,  as  it  were ;  they  behold  by  faith  his  glory,  the
glory  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father ;  and  that  glory  of  holiness  exerts  a  trans-
forming energy  over  those  who  in  the  power  of  prayer  by  faith  behold  the  Lord.  It  is
when  Christian  people  present  their  bodies  "  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto
God,"  that,  as  St.  Paul  (Rom.  xii.  2)  says,  using  again  the  same  word,  they  are
"  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  their  mind."  The  transfiguration  of  the  Lord  was  an
anticipation  of  the  glory  of  his  ascension ;  it  was  to  the  apostles  a  foretaste  of  the
beatific  vision ;  it  is  to  us  a  parable  of  the  great  change  which  miist  pass  over  the  soul
of  every  one  of  God's  elect.  We  too  must  shine,  if  by  his  grace  we  attain  to  any
measure  of  real  holiness,  as  lights  in  the  world  by  his  reflected  glory ;  we  too  must
wash  our  robes,  and  make  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.

"  Lord,  thy  Spirit's  power  transforming
Through  our  inmost  being  pour.
Heart  and  thought  and  wish  conforming
Xo  thine  image  more  and  more."

4.  Moset  and  Elijah.  They  were  the  central  figures  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  Law  and  the  prophets.  They  had  both  been  admitted  into  a  very
close  communion  with  God,  and  had  both,  in  the  ecstasy  of  Divine  contemplation,  been
sustained  through  the  miraculous  fast  of  forty  days.  Now  they  appeared  in  glory.  Peter
recognized  them  by  some  power  of  spiritual  intuition.  Then  surely  we  may  believe
that  there  will  be  some  means  of  mutual  recognition  among  departed  saints.  They
came  from  the  realms  of  the  blessed  to  hold  intercourse  with  the  Son  of  God.  The
tngels  desire  to  look  into  the  mysteries  of  redemption  ;  and  if  the  angels,  how  much  more
those  glorified  spirits  who  were  once  compassed  with  infirmities,  and  knew  by  their
9wn  experience  the  power  of  temptation,  and  the  deep  need  of  atonement  and  sanctifi-
sation !  They  came  to  commune  with  him  in  whom  all  the  ritual  of  the  Law  found
ts  fulfilment,  of  whom  all  the  prophets  spake ;  and  they  talked  with  him  (St.  Luke
tells  us)  "  of  his  decease  which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."  The  precious
ieath  of  Christ,  the  death  prefigured  by  the  serpent  which  Moses  long  ago  had  lifted
<»p  in  the  wilderness,  was  the  theme  of  their  high  discourse.  What  they  said,  what
4hey  heard  from  Christ,  we  cannot  tell.  The  apostles  seem  in  some  way  to  have  heard
or  apprehended  in  their  spirits  the  sacred  words.  Thus  much  we  learn,  that  there  can
be  no' higher,  holier  subject  of  thought ;  no  higher,  holier  subject  of  solemn  conversa-
tion among  Christian  men  than  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Moses  and  Elijah
longed  to  know  the  awful,  blessed  meaning  of  the  cross.  The  Lord  unfolded  to  them
the  mysteries  of  his  love.  May  we  be  filled  with  the  same  holy  desire ;  may  the  same
heavenly  Teacher  teach  us  the  deep  things  of  his  salvation  I  5.  Peter.  He  is  eager  and
impulsive  as  usual.  He  and  his  companions  had  been  heavy  with  sleep.  The  dazzling
glory  of  the  transfiguied  Lord  aroused  them.  They  kept  awake,  St.  Luke  says;  they
saw  in  full  waking  consciousness  the  celestial  sight.  They  heard,  it  seems,  something
of  the  wondrous  conversation  ;  they  found  that  his  decease,  the  mention  of  which  had
given  them  such  extreme  anguish,  was  a  theme  of  deep  interest  and  hallowed  thought
in  the  mysterious  world  of  spirits.  The  marvellous  interview  was  drawing  to  an  end,
the  glorious  visitors  were  departing,  when  Peter,  in  his  intense  excitement,  not
knowing  what  he  said,  addressed  the  Lord,  "  Lord,"  he  said,  "  it  is  good  for  us  to  be
here  " — beautiful  and  elevating.  It  was  beautiful  indeed  to  contemplate  the  glorious
form  of  Christ;  it  was  beautiful  to  see  how  those  whom  the  Jews  most  highly
honoured  came  from  their  homes  of  bliss  to  commune  with  him.  Peter  would  gladly
havo  shared  in  that  holy  intercourse ;  he  longed  to  hear  more,  to  see  more ;  they  were
depailing  too  soon,  he  thought.  "  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,"  he  said :  "  let  us  make
[or,  p>.rhapB,  according  to  the  reading  of    three  very  ancient  manuscripts,  '  I  will


184  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27.

make ']  three  tabernacles  ;  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elias."  He
knew  not  what  he  said.  He  would  have '  remained  on  the  holy  mount  m  the  enjoy-
ment of  the  heavenly  vision ;  but  it  might  not  be.  These  glimpses  of  heavenly  sweet-
ness are  not  for  long.  God  has  work  for  his  servants  upon  earth.  Sometimes  he
"bringeth  them  up  into  a  high  mountain  apart"  for  a  while.  It  seems  good  for  them
to  be  there ;  but  they  must  soon  descend,  and  work  for  his  Name's  sake  among  the
poor,  the  ignorant,  and  the  sinful.  6.  The  voice  from  heaven.  There  was  no  answer
given  to  Peter's  words.  But  there  came  a  bright  cloud,  a  cloud  full  of  light,  the
Shechinah  surely,  the  tabernacle  of  light  which  revealed  the  presence  of  God.  It
overshadowed  the  Lord  and  his  adoring  visitors;  the  disciples  feared  as  they  saw  them
enter  into  the  cloud.  And  forth  from  the  cloud  there  came  an  awful  voice, "  This  is  my
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  ;  hear  ye  him."  It  was  not  enough  that  Moses
and  Elijah  should  come  to  do  the  Saviour  honour.  The  Father  himself  bore  witness  to
the  dignity,  the  holiness,  of  the  only  begotten  Son.  The  like  words  had  been  heard
before  by  John  the  Baptist,  the  representative  of  the  ancient  Jewish  Church.  Now  the
same  attestation  is  vouchsafed  to  the  three  apostles,  the  representatives  of  the  Christian
Church.  That  voice  made  a  deep  impression  upon  them,  an  impression  which  was
never  forgotten.  St.  Peter  alludes  to  it  in  a  remarkable  passage  in  his  Second  Epistle
(i.  16 — ^18),  in  which  several  words  are  repeated  which  occur  in  the  description  of
the  Transfiguration.  It  confirmed  their  faith ;  they  could  doubt  no  longer.  He  was
indeed  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  though  he  was  to  be  rejected  and  to  suffer  and  to
die.  All  this  had  seemed  strange  and  incredible  to  men  brought  up  among  Jewish
surroundings,  with  Jewish  hopes  and  expectations.  But  it  was  true.  The  Father  was
well  pleased  in  the  Son  of  his  love,  well  pleased  in  his  voluntary'  humiliation,  in  his
self-sacrifice.  The  salvation  of  mankind  through  the  cross  and  Passion  of  the  Son  of
God  was  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness ;  but  it  was  the
purpose  of  the  all-wise,  all-holy  God.  God  was  well  pleased  in  the  Lord  Christ.  He
is  well  pleased  in  those  who  follow  Christ's  example.  He  bids  us  hear  him.  The  cross
is  the  only  way  to  everlasting  life.  The  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  life  of  the  world.
We  can  enter  into  life  only  by  following  him,  bearing  each  of  us  his  cross,  denying
ourselves,  as  the  Lord  bore  the  cross,  and  died  upon  the  cross  for  us,  and  is  exalted  to
God's  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour.  7.  The  end  of  the  vision.  The  voice  of
God  is  sweet  to  hear,  but  it  must  be  very  awful  to  sinful  flesh  and  blood.  The  disciples
fell  on  their  faces  and  were  sore  afraid.  But  the  Lord  came  and  touched  them.  It  was
a  human  touch — the  touch  of  human,  loving  sympathy.  It  told  the  apostles  that  the
high  Son  of  God,  whom  they  had  just  seen  awful  in  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead,  was
their  own  tender  human  Friend.  Still  the  touch  of  Jesus  felt  by  faith  comforts  his
people  when  the  terror  of  the  Lord  fills  their  souls  with  dread.  "  Arise,"  he  said,  "  be
not  afraid."  So  he  had  said  before,  "  It  is  I;  be  not  afraid."  So,  thank  God,  he  speaks
even  now  to  the  Christian  soul,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be
afraid."  His  touch,  his  gentle  words,  bring  peace  and  holy  calm.  It  was  so  with  the
apostles.  They  lifted  up  their  ey  s,  and  saw  Jesus  only.  The  vision  had  gone,  with
all  its  awful  splendour ;  only  the  Lurd  was  left,  looking  on  them,  as  he  was  wont  to
look,  in  love  and  tenderness,  clad  in  the  well-known  raiment,  speaking  in  the  well-
known  tones.  The  vision  was  gone.  Again  they  were  on  the  lonely  mountain-side,
the  snowy  heights  of  Hermon  towering  above  them,  the  stars  looking  down  on  them
from  heaven ;  only  Jesus  was  with  them.  The  Law  and  the  prophets  pass  away,  but
Christ  abideth  a  King  for  ever.  Earthly  hopes,  earthly  ambitions,  fade  away  and  die.
Jesus  is  still  with  the  soul  that  trusteth  in  him.  Seasons  of  high  spiritual  delight,
when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  beams  upon  the  heart,  fade  into  twilight.  But  Jesus  is
still  with  his  chosen ;  with  them  as  certainly  when  they  go  down  into  the  work  and  the
trials  and  the  temptations  of  the  commonplace  routine  of  daily  life,  as  he  was  when
they  were  with  him  on  the  mount  entranced  in  sacred  rapture.

II.  The  Lord's  lessons.  1.  They  were  to  tell  no  man.  To  tell  their  fellow-apostles
might  excite  feelings  of  self-exaltation  in  themselves,  of  envy  in  the  rest.  Perhaps
also  the  nine  were  not  yet  able  to  receive  such  a  report.  They  did  not  yet  understand
the  spiritual  nature  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom.  We  must  remember,  too,  that  Judas
was  among  them.  Still  less  was  the  outer  circle  of  the  disciples  capable  of  receiving
the  wondrous  atoiy.     The  experiences  of  the  Christian  soul  in  close  communion  with


OH.  xTn.l— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  18S


God  are  very  precious,  but  very,  very  sacred.  They  are  not  to  be  thoughtlessly
divulged ;  not  to  be  talked  about  commonly ;  they  are  too  deep  and  holy.  Free  talk
on  such  subjects  tends  to  produce  spiritual  pride  in  some,  irreverence  in  others.  The
true  Christian  will  speak  of  these  blessed  tastes  of  God's  graciousness  only  to  the  like-
minded,  and  that  with  deep  humility  and  godly  fear,  mingled  with  devout  thankfulness.
2.  Elias.  The  apostles  had  much  to  learn  and  much  to  unlearn.  They  could  not
understand  "  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean  "  (Mark  is.  10),  though  Christ
had  twice  before  spoken  of  his  resurrection  on  the  third  day.  They  were  much
perplexed  also  about  the  appearing  of  Elijah.  Could  this  transient  manifestation  which
they  had  just  seen  be  the  coming  of  wliich  they  had  so  often  heard  from  the  rabbis?
The  name  of  Elijah  was  often  on  the  lips  of  the  Jews,  as  indeed  it  is  still.  When  he
comes  (they  said)  he  shall  restore  all  tilings.  He  shall  bring  back  the  pot  of  manna
aud  the  rod  of  Aaron,  and  restore  Israel  to  its  ancient  glory.  It  was  true,  the
Lord  said,  that  Elijah  was  to  come.  But  he  had  come ;  and  they  who  had  so  long
expected  him  knew  him  not  when  he  came,  but  treated  him  according  to  their  own
evil  will.  Then  the  apostles  felt  that  the  Lord  had  spoken  of  him  who  had  gone
"before  him  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers
unto  the  children,  and  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just ;  to  make  ready  a
people  prepared  for  the  Lord."  The  forerunner  of  the  Christ  had  met  the-  martyr's
death ;  Christ  himself  would  soon  be  called  to  suffer.  The  Lord  sought  to  draw  the
thoughts  of  the  apostles  from  difiScult  and  perplexing  questions  to  what  now  lay  in  the
near  future — his  sufferings  and  death.  We  cannot  think  too  much  on  the  cross.
DifBcult  matters  of  contruversy  may  be  of  great  interest,  but  they  do  not  bear  very
closely  upon  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  Let  us  keep  the  cross  before  our  thoughts;
let  us  try  to  realize  its  awful  and  blessed  meaning  by  constant  and  earnest  meditation.
Lessons.  1.  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  sometimes  alone  with  God;  use  such  seasons
of  solitude  for  prayer  and  meditation.  2.  We  need  a  transfiguration,  a  transformation
of  the  heart  and  will ;  pray  earnestly  for  it.  3.  Moses  and  Elijah  talked  with  Christ
of  his  decease ;  we  should  commune  with  him  on  that  same  blessed  and  awful  subject.
4.  Flee  from  spiritual  pride ;  humble  silence  is  better  than  presumptuous  talk.

Vers.  14 — 21. — The  maniac  hoy,  I.  The  failure  of  the  nine  apostles.  1.  The
descent  from  the  mount.  The  morning  had  come,  and  the  Lord  with  the  three  chosen
apostles  came  down  from  the  Mount  of  the  Transfiguration  to  rejoin  those  whom  he  had
left  behind.  As  he  drew  near  to  them  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  them,  and  the
scribes  questioning  with  them  (Mark  ix.  14).  It  was  a  strange  contrast.  He  had  just
left  the  peace  of  the  mountain-side  and  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  radiance.  He  came
down  to  the  jealousies,  the  controversies,  the  miseries,  of  earth.  His  presence  was  much
needed  ;  the  nine  apostles  had  experienced  a  sad  defeat.  They  had  received  from  him
power  to  cast  out  devils ;  but  now  they  had  attempted,  and  had  failed.  Their  Master
had  left  them ;  he  had  taken  with  him  the  three  who  were  nearest  to  himself.  The
faith  of  tlie  nine  had  perhaps  been  weakened  by  the  excitement,  the  agitation,  the
distressing  predictions,  of  the  last  few  days.  So  Aaron  had  failed  in  courage  and  in
faith  when  Moses  and  Joshua  were  absent  on  Mount  Sinai,  and  he  was  left  in  charge
of  the  congregation.  The  apostles  had  failed  now.  The  scribes  were  probably  exulting
over  their  defeat,  arguing,  perhaps,  that  this  was  a  thing  which  neither  they  nor  their
Lord  could  do.  Ah!  we  are  helpless  if  we  have  lost  our  faith;  we  cannot  cast  out  the
evil  one.  Without  Christ  we  can  do  nothing.  2.  The  mating  with  the  nine  apostles.
The  Lord  was  come  at  last.  He  approached  the  scene  of  confusion  with  his  wonted
dignity.  Perhaps  some  traces  of  the  radiance  of  the  Transfiguration  still  lingered  round
him.  The  people  were  greatly  amazed,  St.  Mark  tells  us,  when  they  beheld  him ;  but
they  were  not  terrified  like  the  Israelites  when  the  face  of  Moses  shone  on  his  descent
from  Sinai.  The  Lord  did  not  hide  the  glory  of  his  countenance;  it  attracted,  it  did
not  repel.  The  people  ran  to  him  and  saluted  him.  So  we  should  run  to  Christ  in  our
troubles ;  so  we  should  salute  him.  He  comes  to  help  his  chosen  in  their  weakness.
When  we  feel  that  he  is  near,  we  are  amazed  at  our  own  want  of  faith,  at  his  glory  and
power  and  forgiving  love.

II.  The  miracles.  1.  The  father.  The  Lord's  coming  brought  confidence  to  the
perplexed  disciples,  hope  *.j  the  disappointed  suppliant.    In  that  presence  the  miserable


186  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1— 27

felt  ingtinctiTely  that  there  was  help  and  comfort.  One  man  disengaged  himself  from
the  crowd.  He  came  in  haste  to  Christ.  He  knelt  down  before  him  in  the  attitude  of
humble  and  earnest  supplication.  "  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  son,"  he  said.  He  told
all  the  sad  itoiy.  His  son  was  lunatic,  sore  vexed,  a£9ictea  with  the  worst  form  of
epilepsy.  The  fits  came  upon  him  in  wild,  fierce  onslaughts,  dreadful  to  look  upon ;
for  the  seizures  were  due,  not  to  natural  causes,  but  to  the  direct  agency  of  an  evil
spirit,  who  had  taken  possession  of  the  lad,  and  tormented  him  with  all  the  hellish
malice  of  intense  wickedness.  It  was  a  pitiable  case,  miserable  for  the  poor  boy,
agonizing  to  the  unhappy  father.  From  his  son's  childhood  he  had  watehed  these  wild
paroxysms  in  helpless  anguish.  Now  Christ  had  come  into  the  neighbourhood.  He
heard  of  his  power  and  mercy.  He  brought  his  afflicted  child.  But  the  Lord  was
absent,  on  the  Mount  of  the  Transfiguration.  The  nine  apostles  remained.  The  poor
father  brought  his  son  to  them,  and  begged  for  help.  The  case  was  beyond  their  power ;
they  could  not  cast  out  the  evil  spirit.  The  disappointment  aggravated  the  father's
distress.  Now  the  Lord  himself  had  come ;  and  the  father  knelt  before  him.  Sorrow
brings  men  to  Christ ;  sorrow  brings  them  to  their  knees.  We  must  come  ourselves
straight  to  Christ  in  the  hour  of  extremest  need.  Sometimes  his  ministers  can  help  us,
sometimes  they  cannot.  Christ  can  always  calm  the  wildest  tumults  of  the  soul.
Come  straight  to  him,  kneeling  before  him,  in  your  own  troubles,  in  the  troubles  of
those  very  dear  to  you.  2.  The  Lord's  words.  "  0  faithless  and  perverse  generation  1 "
he  said.  The  scene  before  him  was  an  illustration  of  the  general  character  of  the  men
among  whom  the  Saviour  lived.  It  is  in  some  sense  an  illustration  of  the  state  of  the
Church  now.  Human  nature  is  the  same  in  all  ages.  The.  multitude  regarded  Christ
with  some  external  reverence ;  they  were  ready  to  apply  to  him  in  perplexity  and
sorrow ;  but  they  had  no  depth  of  conviction,  no  stability.  There  were  some  open
unbelievers  among  them,  who  questioned  Christ's  authority  and  denied  his  power.
There  were  some  followers  of  the  Lord,  not  without  earnestness,  not  without  love ;  but
weak  in  faith,  unable  through  that  weakness  to  exercise  the  power  which  had  been
given  them  by  the  Lord.  The  evil  spirit,  too,  was  there ;  there  were  wild  excesses
caused  by  his  agency ;  there  was  intense  distress.  There  was  no  strength  of  faith,  no
energy  of  trustfulness  in  Christ.  Yet  there  were  three  chosen  saints,  the  nearest  to
the  Lord,  who  had  gone  up  with  him  into  the  holy  mount,  and  were  now  returning
with  him  to  the  labours  and  the  sorrows  of  this  sinful  world.  That  generation  was
faithless;  it  was  perverse,  crooked,  warped  by  invincible  prejudices  and  inveterate
obstinacy.  The  Lord  had  been  long  with  them ;  but  how  little  the  result  seemed  to
be  !  how  few  had  chosen  the  good  part  I  He  would  not  remain  much  longer  among
them ;  his  tender  forbearance  must  have  an  end  at  last.  We  must  be  patient,  when  the
Lord  most  holy  had  so  much  to  bear ;  we  must  not  repine  when  our  work  seems
disheartening,  unsatisfactory.  The  servant  is  not  above  his  Lord.  But  mark  the
Saviour's  calm  consciousness  of  power.  "  Bring  him  hither  to  mej"  he  said.  The
disciples  might  fail;  he  could  not  fail  when  it  pleased  him  to  exercise  his  healing
energy,  for  he  was  God  Almighty.  3.  The  evil  spirit  cast  out.  St.  Mark  gives  us,  as  his
wont  is,  the  deeply  interesting  details :  the  conversation  with  the  father;  the  great  word,
"  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth ; "  the  answer  of  the  intensely  anxious
parent,  so  often  echoed  since  by  trembling  souls  coming  to  Christ  in  earnest  entreaty
and  utter  self-abasement,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  Then  came  the
word  of  power,  "Thou  deaf  and  dumb  spirit"  (for  the  demon  had  destroyed  the  poor
lad's  power  of  hearing,  and  his  only  utterances  were  wild,  inarticulate  cries),  "  I  charge
thee,  come  out  of  him,  and  enter  no  more  into  him."  We  notice  the  tone  of  authority,
the  emphatic  "  I,"  especially  in  the  original.  The  demon  despised  the  nine  apostles ;
he  must  obey  the  Lord.  He  must  never  again  dare  to  enter  the  heart  from  which  the
Lord  himself  had  driven  him.  He  let  loose  his  fury  on  the  lad ;  he  cried,  and  rent  him
sore ;  but  he  came  out  of  him  at  once.  The  L»rd  gently  raised  the  poor  boy.  He  was
exhausted,  and  to  all  appearance  lifeless ;  but  Jesus  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  lifted
him  up,  and  delivered  him  again  to  his  father.  We  mark  the  gentleness  of  the  Lord
Jesus.  Very  gentle  he  was  to  the  unhappy  boy,  to  the  afflicted,  almost  despairing
father.  We  mark  his  power.  He  can  drive  out  the  devil,  even  from  those  over  whom
he  has  the  firmest  hold.  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  to  God  by
him."  Let  us  come.    The  father  came,  though  he  was  almost  hopeless ;  the  evil  spirit


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDlNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  187

was  ao  fierce,  bo  strong.  So  we  may  pray  for  cases  that  seem  almost  desperate.  The
poor  lad  could  not  pray  for  himself ;  the  Lord  listened  to  the  father's  prayer.  Let  ua
pray  for  others,  for  our  relations  and  near  friends,  for  all  who  need  our  prayers.  Only
let  us  take  heed  that  our  prayers  are  lifted  up  in  faith.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  power
of  a  true  and  living  faith,  for  it  is  limited  only  by  the  power  cf  God,  which  is  without
limit.  And  if  we  feel  (and  who  does  not  ?)  that  our  faith  is  wanting  in  depth  and
earnestness,  then  pray  we  again  in  the  words  of  that  memorable  cry,  which  seemed
wrung  from  the  very  heart  of  the  almost  despairing  father,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou
mine  unbelief."

IIL  The  oonvbesation  with  the  nine  apostles.  1.  They  came  to  Christ.  They
came  to  him  privately,  into  the  house,  St.  Mark  says ;  and  asked  him  the  reason  of
their  failure.  He  had  given  them  power  to  cast  out  evil  spirits :  why  could  they
not  cast  this  one  out  V  We  should  come  to  Christ  in  our  spiritual  disappointments,
when  we  have  failed  to  conquer  this  or  that  sin  in  ourselves,  to  convince  this  or  that
sinner  of  his  danger.  We  should  come  to  him  in  secret  prayer,  asking  him  the  reason
of  our  failure.  He  will  tell  us,  if  we  come  in  humility  and  sincerity.  But  let  us  not
be  satisfied  till  we  have  discovered  the  cause  of  our  want  of  success,  and  set  ourselves
seriously  to  overcome  it.  2.  The  LorcPs  answer.  The  cause  of  their  failure  was  simple ;
it  was  want  of  faith.  Possibly  the  three  apostles  who  were  nearest  to  the  Lord  might
have  been  able  to  cast  the  devil  out ;  the  nine  could  not.  Some  saints  are  stronger
than  others ;  some  can  do  more  than  others  in  converting,  souls ;  their  strength  is  in
proportion  to  their  faith.  Faith  is  strength ;  for  it  is,  in  truth,  the  strength  of  God  that
worketh  in  his  people,  and  that  strength  is  manifested  in  those  who  trust  wholly  and
absolutely  in  him.  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me."  It
is  only  in  union  with  Christ  that  the  Christian  can  do  all  things.  "  Without  me  ye  can
do  nothing."  The  victory  which  overcometh  the  world  is  the  strength  of  Christ,  but
in  another  sense  it  is  our  faith ;  for  faith  maintains  a  living  union  with  Christ,  and
thus  the  strength  of  Christ  is  ours.  Our  faith  may  be  small,  like  a  grain  of  mustard
seed,  but  if  it  be  only  true,  it  can  remove  mountains  (the  Lord  seems  to  have  pointed
to  the  towering  mass  of  Hermon  as  he  said  the  worils) — mountains  of  difficulties,
mountains  of  perplexities,  mountains  of  sin.  Faith  is  realized  in  different  degrees.  To
a  true  and  perfect  faith,  the  Lord  says,  nothing  is  impossible ;  for  a  true  and  perfect  faith
reflects  the  almightiness  of  God.  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith."  3.  The  special  difficulty
of  the  case.  There  was  this  to  be  said  in  palliation  of  the  apostles'  failure.  The  evil
spirit  was  one  of  exceptional  energy  and  malignity.  Christians  who  would  fight  against
such  enemies  must  be  doubly  armed ;  by  constant  fervent  prayer  they  must  keep
themselves  in  the  love  of  God,  in  that  close  communion  with  him  which  is  the  secret
of  spiritual  strength ;  by  continued  and  voluntary  self-mortification  they  must  fortify
themselves  against  the  temptations  of  sensual  pleasure.  In  prayer  and  fasting  the
Lord  overcame  Satan  for  us  ;  in  prayer  and  fasting  the  true  disciple  follows  the  Lord's
example  and  shares  his  victory.  In  the  sermon  on  the  mount  the  Lord  enumerates
almsgiving,  prayer,  and  fasting  as  three  principal  exercises  of  devotion ;  here  he
describes  prayer  and  fasting  (the  reading,  however,  is  doubtful)  as  the  chief  weapons  of
the  Christian  warrior  in  the  holy  fight  against  the  deadly  enemy.

Lessons.  1.  We  cannot  always  be  on  the  mount  in  a  rapture  of  devotion ;  we  must
work  for  Christ  among  scenes  of  sin  and  sorrow.  2.  Come  to  Christ  in  your  troubles,
come  with  tears,  come  kneeling  before  him;  he  can  save.  3.  Pray  for  continually
increasing  faith ;  pray  for  yourself,  pray  for  others.  4.  Tell  Christ  of  past  failures  j
search  out  the  cause ;  seek  his  strength  for  the  future.

Vers.  22 — 27. — Return  to  Oalilee.  I.  Reiterated  pbedictions  of  the  comino
Passion.  1.  The  Lord  alone  with  the  twelve.  He  returns  to  Galilee,  but  no  longer
for  teaching.  He  revisits  the  old  familiar  spots  with  the  shadow  of  death  closing  round
him.  He  was  not  followed  by  multitudes  as  of  old.  He  "  passed  through  GalUee  ;  and
he  would  not  that  any  man  should  know  it "  (Mark  ix.  30).  He  confined  hid  teaching
to  the  little  circle  of  his  apostles.  He  sought  to  prepare  them  for  the  awtul  scenes
which  lay  before  them.  2.  He  forewarns  them  of  his  death.  He  repeats  in  Galilee
the  prophecy  of  Caesarea  Philippi ;  he  adds  one  important  detail,  "  The  Son  of  man  shall
be  hstrayed  into  the  hands  of  men."    He  hints  at  the  treacheiy ;  he  tells  them  not


188  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDmO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27.

yet  of  the  traitor.  He  predicts  his  approaohiiig  death ;  he  predicts  his  resurrection  on
the  third  day.  They  were  exceeding  sorry ;  they  understood  not  that  saying,  says  St.
Mark,  and  were  afraid  to  ask  him.  The  Lord  had  now  told  them  of  his  death  twice,
and  that  very  plainly ;  but  they  could  not,  they  would  not,  take  it  into  their  hearts.
It  so  dashed  all  their  hopes,  it  was  so  utterly  different  from  all  their  expectations.
It  seemed  so  strange,  so  impossible,  that  One  who  had  manifested  such  wondrous
power,  whom  some  of  them  had  lately  seen  radiant  with  the  glory  of  heaven,  could
suffer  death  at  the  hands  of  men.  They  were  exceeding  sorry ;  they  could  not  believe,
and  yet  perhaps  they  could  not  wholly  disbelieve.  They  feared  to  ask  him.  Their
love  for  him  was  mingled  with  a  profound  reverence  and  awe  which  late  events  had
greatly  increased.    They  were  filled  with  grief  and  mysterious  forebodings.

II.  The  temple  dubs.  1.  The  question  put  to  Peter.  All  adult  Jews  paid  a  half-
shekel  yearly  for  the  expenses  of  the  temple  service.  The  payment  was  originally
made  (Exod.  xxx.  12 — 16)  only  when  the  people  were  numbered.  It  was  called  a
ransom  for  souls.  The  same  sum  was  paid  by  all,  rich  and  poor  alike,  to  show  that  the
souls  of  rich  and  poor  are  of  equal  value  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  collectors  now  came
to  Peter.  They  felt,  it  may  be,  something  of  the  awful  dignity  which  surrounded  the
Person  of  the  Lord.  "  Doth  not  your  Master  pay  the  half-shekel  ?  "  they  said.  Peter
at  once  assented ;  he  thought  that  his  Master,  so  zealous  for  the  honour  of  the  temple,
would  readily  and  gladly  pay  the  temple  dues.  2.  Peter's  conversation  with  the  Lord.
Peter  came  into  the  house,_perhaps  his  own  house,  which  had  been  usually  honoured
with  the  Saviour's  presence'  during  his  residence  at  Capernaum.  Jesus  spoke  first  to
him.  He  knew  what  had  happened,  for  he  knew  all  things.  He  drew  from  Peter  the
acknowledgment  that  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  tribute  from  their  subjects,  but  not
from  their  own  children ;  the  children  are  free.  The  inference  was  obvious.  Peter  had
not  long  before  confessed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  Then
he  was  under  no  obligation  to  pay  the  customary  dues  for  the  maintenance  of  the  temple
service,  for  he  was  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  invisible  King,  who,  though  the  heaven
and  the  heaven  of  heavens  could  not  contain  him,  deigned  to  regard  that  temple  as  his
earthly  sanctuary.  Again,  Christ  was  greater  than  the  temple ;  he  himself  was  the
Temple  of  God  in  the  fullest,  holiest  sense.  All  this  Peter  had  forgotten.  3.  The  pay-
ment. It  was  not  of  obligation ;  the  Lord  was  plainly  exempt.  But  he  will  pay  it  for
example's  sake,  to  avoid  wounding  consciences.  It  was  right  for  Israelites  to  maintain
the  temple  services.  It  is  right  that  Christians  should  give  freely,  cheerfully,  for  the
support  of  the  Church.  It  would  have  caused  grave  offence  if  the  people  of  Capernaum,
who  knew  the  Lord  so  well,  had  heard  that  he  refused  to  contribute  for  a  purpose  so
sacred.  They  would  not  understand  the  deep  reasons  which  he  gave  to  Peter.  They
would  simply  suppose  that  a  great  Babbi,  a  famous  Teacher,  declined  to  pay  the  temple
dues.  The  example  would  be  evil ;  it  would  be  seized  as  an  excuse  by  the  avaricious  ;
it  would  cause  idle  and  malicious  talk.  The  Lord  would  pay  the  sum  demanded,
though  he  was  not  really  liable.  He  is  here,  as  always,  an  Example  to  us — our  great
Example.  We  must  avoid  shocking  the  feelings  of  others,  even  the  prejudices  of  the
ill  instructed.  We  must  be  careful  not  to  do  things  which,  though  lawful  in  them-
selves, may  lead  others  astray.  We  must  not  stand  upon  our  strict  rights  when  to  do
so  might  be  misunderstood,  and  might  wound  the  consciences  of  weak  brethren.  We
must  give  willingly,  not  only  to  the  poor,  but  also  for  the  service  of  the  Church.  The
half-shekel  paid  annually  for  the  service  of  the  temple  was  regarded  as  given  to  GtoA.
So  are  our  poor  gifts  now,  if  we  give  in  faith  and  love.  We  must  learn  humility  of  our
lowly  Lord.  He  came  to  be  baptized,  though  he  was  without  sin.  He  paid  the  temple
dues,  the  ransom  for  souls,  though  he  was  the  Son  of  God.  "  Thus  it  beoometh  us  to
fulfil  all  righteousness."  4.  The  means  for  providing  the  payment.  It  may  be  /.hat
the  bag  which  Judas  kept  was  empty.  It  may  be,  though  the  sum  was  so  small,  that
Peter  had  rashly  promised  more  than  the  slender  means  of  the  little  company  could
then  furnish.  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  wished  to  teach  Peter  that,  though  he  sub-
mitted to  this  demand  like  an  ordinary  Israelite,  he  was  indeed  the  Lord  of  creation,
that  even  the  fishes  of  the  sea  would  wait  upon  his  will.  Peter  was  to  resume  his  old
occupation.  He  was  to  go  to  the  sea.  The  first  fish  that  came  up  would  furnish  the
necessary  money,  a  stater,  enough  for  both  the  Lord  and  Peter.  The  Lord  teaches  us
a  lesson  of  trustfulness     He  bids  us  fulfil  the  duties  of  our  calling.     In  the  humble


OH.  xvn.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  189

discbarge  of  those  daily  duties  we  shall  find  all  that  we  need ;  for  he  will  provide  for
those  who  trust  in  him.  We  are  not  told  the  result.  Doubtless  the  stater  was  found.
The  two  half-shekels  were  paid.  The  Lord  does  not  mock  bis  people  with  commands
which  cannot  be  obeyed.  He  who  ffyes  the  commandment  enables  them  to  fulfil  it.
He  directed  the  fish  to  the  hook  of  Peter.  He  makes  all  things  work  together  for  good
to  them  that  love  him.  He  will  help  us  in  small  difficulties  as  well  as  in  great
emergencies.  He  teaches  us  by  this  miracle,  as  he  taught  afterwards  by  the  mouth  of  hia
apostle,  "  Be  careful  for  nothing ;  but  in  everything  by  piayer  and  supplication  with
thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God."

Lessons.  1,  The  apostles  were  reverent  in  their  relations  with  Christ ;  so  must
we  be.  2.  They  feared  to  ask  him  about  his  approaching  death ;  they  understood  him
not.  We  know  more  than  they  knew  then ;  let  us  meditate  constantly  in  reverent
love  upon  the  Saviour's  cross.  3.  Let  us  give  freely  for  all  good  works ;  let  us  not
make  excuses  for  ourselves,  but  imitate  the  Lord's  example.  4.  Our  almsgiving  wil'
not  impoverish  us ;  "  the  Led  will  provide."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AXJTHOBa.

Vers.  1 — 8. — 2%e  FransfigwraMon.  Raphael's  famous  picture  at  the  Vatican  gives
us  an  external  representation  of  this  wonderful  event.  But  we  want  to  get  behind
the  canvas  and  discover  the  meaning  of  it,  if  it  is  to  be  something  more  to  us  than
a  theatrical  transformation  scene,  something  better  than  a  spectacular  display.

I.  The  glory  of  Chbist,  The  external  splendour  had  a  meaning.  If  it  was  not
a  purely  artificial  radiance  created  in  order  to  dazzle  the  eyes  of  the  disciples,  it  must
have  corresponded  to  a  wonderful  illumination  and  glory  in  the  soul  of  Jesus.  Moses'
face  shone  after  he  had  been  communing  with  God  on  Sinai  (Exod.  xxxiv.  29).  The
face  of  Stephen  took  on  an  angelic  lustre  in  view  of  martyniom  (Acts  vi.  15).  Jesus
had  been  speaking  of  his  approaching  death  quite  recently  (oh.  xvi.  21),  and  of  the  victory
of  self-sacrifice  (ch.  xvi.  25),  During  the  Transfiguration  his  death  was  the  topic  of  his
conversation  (Luke  ix,  31).  Then  we  may  justly  infer  that  the  splendour  that  shone
out  from  him  corresponded  to  his  exaltation  of  spirit  in  devoting  himself  to  death.
It  was  the  glory  of  sacrifice.  Jesus  is  most  glorious  in  freely  giving  himself  up  for
the  salvation  of  the  world.

IL  The  heavenly  visitobs.  It  is  commonly  assumed  that  Moses  and  Elijah  had
come  to  complete  the  picture  that  was  displayed  before  the  wondering  eyes  of  the
chosen  three.  But  would  they  have  been  sent  for  so  slight  an  object  ?  It  is  more
probable  that,  like  the  angels  who  ministered  to  him  on  other  occasions,  they  were
sent  to  cheer  Jesus  himself.  He  bad  looked  for  sympathy  from  his  disciples  when  he
had  confided  in  them  the  dark  secret  of  his  doom,  but  he  had  failed  to  receive  it,  and
instead  he  had  heard  the  voice  of  the.  tempter  in  the  impatient  reply  of  one  of  his
most  intimate  friends  (ch.  xvi.  22,  23).  Thus  he  was  left  alone  in  his  meditations  of
death.  But  the  sympathy  which  failed  him  on  earth  was  afforded  by  the  founder
of  Judaism  and  the  leader  of  the  prophets — both  men  whose  end  on  earth  was
mysterious — ^returning  from  the  heavenly  world.

III.  The  perplexed  diboipi.es.  The  splendour  overwhelmed  the  three.  Two  were
speechless.  The  third  had  not  the  gift  of  silence;  and  wishin<;  to  say  something
when  he  had  nothing  to  say,  he  made  a  foolish  remark.  This  showed,  again,  how  far
ihe  Master  was  above  his  disciples,  how  little  they  could  enter  into  his  life.  But  it  also
showed  a  measure  of  right  feeling  in  St.  Peter.  It  was  good  to  he  on  the  mount  with
Christ.  We  cannot  retain  the  ravishing  moments  of  heavenly  rapture.  But  we  can
cherish  them  if  ever  we  are  visited  with  them.     At  least  we  can  learn  that  it  is

.  good  to  be  anywhere  with  Jesus,  good  to  meditate  on  his  Passion,  good  to  behold  his
glory.

IV.  The  Divine  voroB.  The  voice  which  had  been  heard  before  at  the  baptism
(ch.  iii.  17)  is  heard  again  on  the  mount,  but  with  an  adilition  to  its  message,
1.  Ood  ownt  hit  Son  with  delighi.  Was  this  voice  for  the  cheering  of  Jesus  as  well
as  for  the  guidance  of  the  disciples?  Under  the  circumstances  this  seems  probable.
God  was  not  only  pleased  with  Jesus  because  he  was  his  Son,  but  also  because  his  Son


190  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xtii.  1—27

pleased  him.  At  first  this  was  on  account  of  the  innocent  character  of  Jesus,  and  hii
resolve  to  dedicate  himself  to  his  work  in  baptism ;  now  it  is  because  of  the  courage
and  devotion  with  which  he  will  face  death.  2.  God  commends  his  Son  to  men.  "  Hear
ye  him."  This  is  the  addition.  Christ  has  disciples  now ;  and  Christ  has  proved
his  right  to  be  heard.  It  is  not  enough  to  adore  him  in  his  glory ;  we  must  listen
to  his  voice  of  teaching  and  obey  his  word  of  command. — ^W.  F.  A.

Yers.  10^^13. — ITie  Elijah-ministry  of  John  the  Baptist.  The  disciples  were
perplexed  a  what  they  saw  on  the  Mount  of  the  Transfiguration.  There  Elijah
appeared  with  Moses  in  conversation  with  Christ,  and  the  vision  recalled  to  mind
tbe  familiar  expectation  of  the  Jews  that  the  prophet  should  precede  the  advent
of  Christ.  Was  this  the  coming  of  Elijah  ?  Surely  not,  for  it  was  but  a  momentary
visit  in  a  solitary  place.  Yet  if  Elijah  had  not  come  first,  how  could  the  Christ  have
come  ?  Thus  the  disciples  were  troubled  in  mind  till  their  Master  explained  the  situation
by  pointing  to  the  mission  of  John  the  Baptist.

L  The  advent  op  Christ  needed  to  be  heralded  bt  an  Eluah-ministbt.  The
word  "  must "  points  to  more  than  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  There  was  a  necessity
in  the  very  nature  of  the  case.  Except  Elijah  came  first  Christ  could  not  come.
1.  Inferior  ministries  prepare  for  higher  ministries.  Elijah  was  great,  but  not  so  great
as  Christ.  The  prophets  were  all  of  them  less  than  tbe  Saviour.  The  Law  was  not
equal  to  the  gospel.  Yet  the  lower  and  earlier  ministries,  with  which  all  of  these  were
associated,  made  the  way  ready  for  the  coming  of  Christ  2.  Awakening  must
precede  regeneration.  Christ  came  to  bring  new  life  to  the  world.  No  Elijah  could
confer  such  a  gift  on  his  fellow-men.  But,  in  order  to  receive  it,  men  must  be  awake
and  attentive.  The  earlier  ministry  rouses;  it  breaks  up  the  fallow  ground;  thus
it  prepares  for  the  later  seed-sowing.  3.  Repentance  must  come  before  forgiveness.  The
grace  of  the  gospel  is  not  for  the  impenitent.  Some  influence  must  melt  the  stubborn
heart  if  the  kindly  blessings  of  Christ  are  to  be  received  into  it.

II.  The  Eijjah-mihistbt  hay  come  and  yet  be  bejeoted.  It  was  so  in  the  case
of  John  the  Baptist,  at  least  on  the  part  of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Jews.
1.  There  is  no  compulsion  in  the  Divine  ministries.  We  may  accept  them,  and  then
they  will  bring  us  blessings.  But  we  may  reject  them,  though  to  our  cost.  After
all,  man  is  more  than  the  soil  through  which  the  plough  is  driven ;  for  he  may  arrest
the  instrument  that  would  prepare  him  for  the  seed-sowing,  or  he  may  harden  himself
against  it.  2.  The  most  needed  Divine  ministry  may  not  come  in  the  form  we  are
expecting.  The  people  looked  for  Elijah,  and  Elijah  came ;  yet  they  did  not  recognize
him.  We  may  read  the  Bible  too  literally.  Prophecy  is  not  fulfilled  in  pedwtic,
verbal  exactitude.  The  spirit  of  the  prediction  is  verified  in  the  event,  but  not
in  the  form  in  which  the  prediction  was  first  recorded.  We  blunder  in  blindness
if  we  fail  to  welcome  the  Baptist  because  we  are  looking  for  Elijah

III.  Oheist  opens  hib  disciples'  eyes  to  the  fulfilment  op  Qod'b  purposes  in
THE  Eluah-ministby  OF  JoHN  THE  BAPTIST.  1.  It  is  Well  to  bring  our  difficulties
to  Christ.  The  disciples  were  not  ashamed  to  own  their  perplexity,  nor  too  proud
to  ask  for  light.  Our  Lord  will  accept  confidence  in  regard  to  the  doubts  that  trouble
us.  2.  Jesus  Christ  understands  the  Divine  purposes.  They  were  obscure  to  the
disciples ;  but  to  him  they  were  quite  clear.  Therefore  when  we  cannot  see  all  we  may
trust  him.  The  captain  knows  the  route  over  the  seas  that  are  all  unknown  to  the
passengers.  3.  Our  Lord  reveals  needful  truths  concerning  t?u  Divine  purposes.  He
gave  his  disciples  an  explanation.  His  whole  life  and  teaching  are  luminous  with
revelation.— W.  P.  A.

Vers.  14 — 18. — The  disciple f  failure.  It  has  often  been  pointed  out — as  Raphael
has  shown  in  his  famous  picture — that  the  distressing  occurrence  of  the  disciples'  failure
happened  just  when  Christ  was  away  from  them,  transfigured  on  the  mountain.  Then
clearly  it  would  not  have  been  good  to  build  three  tabernacles,  and  so  retain  the
heavenly  vision.  The  world  needs  Christ;  it  was  well  that  he  returned  to  the
world.

L  A  PARENT  IN  trouble.  This  parent  is  greatly  distressed  because  his  son  ia
grievously  afflicted,  and  he  seeks  relief  for  hinj.    Parents  not  only  feel  for  their  children :


OH.  xva.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  191

*hey  will  do  for  them  what  they  would  never  attempt  for  themselves.  It  is  not
enough  to  have  compassion  for  a  great  affliction.  Love  will  search  for  remedies.
1.  The  parent  brings  his  child  to  Ohrisfs  disciples.  He  is  not  to  hiame  for  this,
because  (1)  Christ  himself  was  out  of  reach;  and  (2)  the  disciples  had  received  a
commission  to  work  miracles  (ch.  x.  8).  The  people  of  Christ  should  be  helpers  of  the
distressed.  The  Church  is  the  natural  home  of  the  helpless.  It  is  sad  to  sea  the
miserable  so  disappointed  by  the  failure  of  the  Church  to  help  them  that  they  turn
aside  to  the  new  offers  of  "  Secularists."  2.  When  disappointed,  the  parent  appeals
to  Christ.  He  does  not  despair ;  he  does  not  give  up  all  efforts  to  have  his  child
healed.  Nothing  in  the  world  is  so  persevering  as  love.  When  the  Church  fails,  Christ
may  yet  be  appealed  to.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  allow  our  disappointment  with
Christians  to  blind  us  to  the  goodness  and  power  of  Christ.  We  have  to  learn  to  turn
from  Christ's  imperfect  followers  to  the  Lord  himself.
II.  The  disciples  humiliatbd.    They  tried  to  cure  the  lunatic  boy,  but  they  failed.

1.  Good  men  are  not  always  successful  men.  We  may  be  true  Christians,  and  yet
we  may  meet  with  bitter  disappointments  in  our  efforts.  The  servant  of  Christ  is  often
humiliated  at  the  failure  of  his  attempts  to  serve  his  Master  or  benefit  his  fellow-men,

2.  Christians  are  weak  in  the  ahsence^  of  their  Master,  If  Christ  had  been  with  them,
the  encouragement  of  his  presence  would  have  fortified  his  disciples.  They  who  would
do  effective  work  for  Christ  must  cleave  close  to  Christ.  3.  The  failure  of  work
is  due  to  the  failure  of  faith.  St.  James  tells  us  that  faith  without  works  is  dead.
The  absence  of  the  fruit  is  the  sign  of  its  deadness.  If  there  is  no  sap  in  the  tree,  the
branches  must  wither.  To  do  effective  service  in  this  world  we  must  live  much  in
the  unseen.  4.  Difficult  Christian  work  is  only  possible  when  accompanied  by  prayer.
The  mistake  of  the  disciples  may  have  been  that,  while  they  lost  faith  in  God,  they
were  too  confident  of  their  own  powers.  We  always  fail  when  we  are  trusting  to
ourselves  alone.

in.  Christ  to  thb  nEsam.  He  came  when  he  was  most  needed.  1.  Christ  rebukes
unbelief.  He  sees  a  defective  condition  of  mind  in  the  disciples  and  in  the  people  gene-
rally. The  atmosphere  is  not  congenial  to  miracle-working.  But  this  is  a  sign  of  some-
thing wrong.  A  general  state  of  unbelief  is  like  the  prevalence  of  a  malaria.  It  must
not  be  acquiesced  in  as  a  normal  condition.  2.  Christ  makes  up  for  the  failure  of  his
disciples.  They  may  fail ;  he  never  fails.  If  he  seems  to  fail  in  some  cases  (as  at
Nazareth,  ch.  xiii.  58),  this  is  not  because  bis  power  is  insufficient,  but  because  men
are  not  receptive.  He  takes  up  our  imperfect  work,  broken  and  marred  as  it  is,  and
he  perfects  it  for  us. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  20. — The  power  of  faith.  This  was  tfce  comment  of  our  Lord  on  the  failure  of
the  disciples  to  cure  the  lunatic  boy,  and  on  his  own  subsequent  success.  The  difference
was  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  disciples  had  not  faith,  while  Christ  possessed  it.
On  another  occasion,  when  there  was  no  question  of  any  attempt  of  his  disciples,  our
Lord  answered  the  amazement  caused  by  on*  of  his  miracles  by  pointing  in  a  similar
way  to  the  power  of  faith  (ch.  xxi.  21).

I.  The  faith.  1.  Its  existence.  "If  ye  have  faith."  These  words  imply
uncertainty.  Many  people  have  much  reli^on,  hut  no  faith.  They  have  a  creed,
but  not  faith.  They  do  hot  really  and  actively  trust  God.  Faith  begins  in  us
when  we  put  our  belief  into  action.  2.  Its  smallness.  It  may  be  but  as  a  grain
of  mustard  seed.  It  is  sad  to  think  of  its'being  so  minute ;  certainly  there  is  no  virtue
in  its  meagreness.  Yet  even  a  small  faith  may  do  great  things  if  it  is  indeed  a  real
faith.  The  great  question  is  not — How  many  things  do  we  believe  ?  but — How  firm
is  our  grasp  upon  the  objects  of  faith  ?  The  area  of  belief  may  be  vast  as  a  wind-
itwept  desert,  and  faith  may  be  small  as  a  shepherd's  cot.  Then  it  is  that  little  hut
of  faith  that  saves  us,  while  the  storm  passes  overhead.  3.  Its  life.  The  mustard
need  is  better  than  a  grain  of  sand.  It  is  alive,  and  therefore  it  can  grow.  The  living
ifaith  will  not  be  always  small.  But  even  while  it  is  small  it  is  capable  of  wonderful
jpoBsibilities.

II.  The  wobk  of  faith.  1.  An  active  work.  Christ  here  speaks  of  what  faith
does,  and  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  recites  achievements  of  faith
(Heb.  xi.).  Faith  not  only  affords  shelter  in  trouble,  it  is  an  inspiration  for  service.  The


192  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1— 27,

man  of  faith  is  the  man  of  action,  for  he  has  within  him  a  fountain  of  eneisy.  It  is,
therefore,  an  utter  mistake  to  suppose  that  "  believing  "  is  to  be  instead  of  "  doing."
Faith  is  given  to  enable  us  to  do  great  things  which  we  could  not  accomplish  without
it.  2.  A  great  work.  This  small  faith  is  to  accomplish  grand  results.  The  mustard
seed  is  to  remove  a  mountain.  Only  a  foolish  literalism  can  occasion  any  perplexity
in  the  reading  of  Christ's  words.  His  disciples  were  too  familiar  with  Oriental  metaphors
to  fall  into  the  absurd  mistake  of  supposing  that  Jesus  really  expected  them  to  toss
mountains  of  rock  and  earth  from  one  place  to  another.  It  was  customary  for  the
Jews  to  refer  to  a  great  rabbi  as  a  remover  of  mountains,  and  therefore  Christ  was
employing  proverbial  language  which  would  be  well  understood  by  his  hearers.  But
this  does  not  mean  that  his  words  contained  no  statement  of  impot'tance.  What
it  teaches  is  that  faith  can  accomplish  stupendous  achievements,  such  as  the  strongest
men  would  fail  in  attempting  without  it.  3.  A  work  of  removing  difficulties.  The
forerunner  of  Christ  was  to  lower  mountains  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  King
(Isa.  xl.  4).  There  are  many  hindrances  in  the  path  of  Christian  work.  Some  of  these
seem  to  be  insuperable.  Sultans  frown  on  the  gospel ;  empires  bar  their  gates  against
it  But  faith,  working  by  prayer,  has  removed  many  such  a  mountain  of  difficulty,
and  it  will  do  so  again. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  24 — 2T. — Christ  paying  tribute.  I.  The  questioning  demand.  The  collectors
of  tribute  asked  with  uncertainty,  but  perhaps  also  with  suspicion  and  a  desire
to  entrap  St.  Peter,  whether  Christ  paid  the  regular  temple-tiibute.  This  was
expected  of  our  Lord  because  he  was  a  Jew.  St.  Peter  answered  in  the  affirmative
without  a  moment's  hesitation.  This  uonSdence  of  the  apostle  then  induced  Jesus
to  discuss  the  question.  It  is  not  reasonable  to  submit  to  any  demand  of  men
until  its  claim  has  been  justified.  Many  people  are  singularly  believing  and  compliant
among  men,  while  they  are  full  of  doubts  and  objections  in  regard  to  the  demands  made
on  them  by  God.

II.  The  boyal  libebtt.  If  Christ  was  indeed  the  Son  of  God,  it  could  not  be  right
to  require  the  tribute  from  him  which  went  from  other  men  as  from  servants  and
stewards.  1.  Observe  our  Lord^s  calm  claim.  It  is  sometimes  assumed  that  the  first
three  Gospels  do  not  record  any  great  claims  on  the  part  of  Christ;  that  his  lofty
demands  are  only  to  be  found  in  the  Fourth  Gospel.  Thus  it  is  attempted  both  to
discredit  that  Gospel  and  to  reject  the  claims  themselves.  But  here  we  have  a  most
exalted  assumption  of  dignity.  Could  a  mere  man  speak  thus  ?  And  Jesus,  let  us
always  remember,  was  lowly  and  unselfish.  2.  Consider  his  great  rights.  He  should  not
be  liable  even  to  a  tax.  He  has  a  right  to  receive  all.  Yet  he  was  treated  as  though  he
were  a  subject  and  an  inferior.  His  submission  to  indignities  should  not  blind  us  to  the
majesty  of  his  lights.

III.  The  gbaciods  acquiescence.  Though  he  might  have  stood  upon  his  rights,
Jesus  was  satisfied  with  explaining  the  situation  to  his  over-hasty  disciple.  Then
he  yielded.  1.  The  lover  of  peace  will  not  always  insist  upon  his  rights.  A  man  may
be  perfectly  justified  in  resisting  a  certain  demand,  and  yet  it  may  be  wisest  for  him
to  submit.  When  it  is  a  question  of  principle  there  must  be  no  compromise  for  the
«ake  of  peace,  and  when  others  are  involved  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  permit  their  rights
to  be  trampled  on  through  our  meek  submission.  A  Hampden  is  justly  honoured
as  an  unselfish  patriot.  But  when  it  is  only  aquestion  of  our  own  personal  convenience,
it  is  often  wisest  and  most  Christ-like  not  to  stand  up  stiffly  for  every  rightful  claim
which  we  might  make.  2.  The  unselfish  man  will  sacrifice  his  rights  for  the  good  of
others.  Jesus  had  great  rights ;  but  he  let  them  go,  because  he  had  not  come  to  please
himself,  but  to  give  himself  up  for  others.  This  is  the  great  example  and  pattern  for
Christians.

J.  V .  The  8TEANOE  MiBAOUB.  We  cannot  understand  this  miracle.  But,  then,  we
cannot  really  understand  any  miracle.  It  is  simplest  to  think  of  it  as  a  miracle
of  knowleflge.  At  all  events,  it  has  its  lessons.  1.  Christ  was  poor.  He  had  not
even  the  half-shekel  when  this  was  demanded.  2.  Christ  devised  a  new  way  of
satisfying  the  demands  made  upon  him.  He  put  himself  about  for  the  sake  of  peace.
Ho  did  not  wish  to  provoke  opposition.  His  conduct  was  most  conciliatory.  3.  Christ
displayed  his  kingly  power.    While  submitting  to  the  wrongful  treatment  of  him  as


OH.  xvn.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDINd  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  193

a  lubject,  he  revealed  his  true  kingly  supiemaoy  eren  over  nature,  in  the  fish  of  tha
sea.— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Tht  Trwnsfiffwration.  The  intention  of  this  scene  seems  to  have  been
to  inaugurate  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  to  set  him  apart  as  the  Lamb  of  God  who
was  to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  Being  a  public  event,  it  behoved  that  it
should  be  witnessed,  and  the  same  three  men  are  chosen  as  witnesses  of  the  rehearsal
of  his  sufferings  who  are  afterwards  witnesses  of  the  sufferings  themselves  in  Geth-
sernane — the  three  most  closely  bound  to  him  in  affection.  On  both  occasions  their
conduct  proved  how  utterly  helpless  we  are  in  the  matter  of  our  own  salvation.  One
would  have  expected  they  would  have  been  forward  to  aid  their  Master,  or,  if  not  to  aid,
at  least  to  sympathize  with  him.  But  on  both  occasions  they  foil  asleep.  The  world's
redemption  had  really  to  bo  transacted  in  spite  of  the  world ;  the  best  men  of  the  world
were  indifferent,  were  asleep,  when  the  crisis  of  the  battle  was  passing,  when  its
Redeemer  was  agonizing  on  its  behalf.  To  our  Lord  the  strength  received  from  the
Father  by  prayer  was  more  needful  than  the  restoring  sweetness  of  sleep.  In  it  was
to  be  found  more  veal  detachment  from  care,  more  vital  renewal  of  energy.  It  was
probably  for  his  encouragement  and  that  of  the  disciples  that  this  earnest  was  given
of  his  triumph  over  death,  and  of  his  glorified  condition.  The  signiBcance  of  the
reappearance  of  Moses  and  Elias  is  not  hard  to  discern.  They  came  as  representatives
of  the  two  great  economies  through  which  God  had  dealt  with  men,  and  guided  them
to  himself  J  to  lay  down  their  office,  and  recognize  Christ  as  the  One  in  whom  the  Law
and  the  prophets  were  fulfilled.  Every  acceptable  sacrifice  of  the  Mosaic  economy  was
acceptable  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Every  hope  kindled  by  the  prophets  rested
for  its  fulfilment  on  him.  And  how  do  they  testify  their  homage  ?  "  They  spake,"
says  Luke,  "  of  his  decease  which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."  The  Law  was
to  find  its  highest  fulfilment  in  the  most  lawless  of  transgressions ;  prophecy  found  its
richest  in  that  which  seemed  to  destroy  hope  itself.  In  the  persons  of  these  two  our
Lord  would  see  as  at  one  view  all  who  had  put  their  trust  in  God  from  the  foundation
of  the  world ;  all  who  had  put  their  faith  in  sacrifice,  believing  that  God  would  find  a
true  Propitiation ;  all  who  had  hoped  in  his  tender  mercy,  and  through  dark  and
troublous  times  had  strained  to  see  the  Consolation  of  Israel.  The  whole  anxiety  of
guilty  consciences,  the  whole  longing  sigh  for  the  promised  Messiah  that  had  breathed
through  the  ancient  Church,  at  once  becomes  audible  to  his  ear,  and  confirms  his
resolution  that  their  trust  shall  not  be  put  to  shame.  Steadfastly  does  he  set  his  face
to  go  to  Jerusalem,  more  than  ever  determined  that  the  glorified  state  which  Moses  and
Elias  have  attained  shall,  by  his  shame  and  death,  be  secured  to  them,  and  to  all  those
of  whom  they  are  the  firstfruits.  To  complete  the  act  of  installation  it  was  requisite,
not  only  that  the  former  mediators  should  resign  their  office,  but  that  the  real  Mediator
should  be  definitely  nominated ;  and  therefore  a  voice  is  heard  from  the  cloud  saying,
*'  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased ;  hear  ye  him."  And  so,  with  no
witnesses  but  these  disciples,  the  world's  history  is  transacted.  It  is  summed  up  in
these  three,  God  commanding,  God  encouraging,  God  fulfilling ;  and  these  three  are
summed  up  in  one — God  saving.  "  When  the  disciples  lifted  up  their  eyes,  they  saw
no  man,  save  Jesus  only."

L  First,  we  learn  that  Christ  is  now  the  one  Mbdiatoe  between  God  and  man.
The  one  command  now  is,  "  Hear  ye  him."  When  Moses  and  Elias  retired,  and  the
disciples  saw  no  man,  save  Jesus  only,  the  whole  burden  of  legal  ceremonial  fell  from
their  shoulders.  With  the  one  temple  of  the  Lord's  body  left  to  view,  how  simple
must  all  religion  and  service  have  seemed,  consisting  simply  in  their  loving  and  cleav-
ing to  their  Lord,  and  Master — the  compassionate,  considerate,  righteous  Lord  Jesus
Christ  1  We  are  often  satisfied  with  the  means  of  grace,  the  things  that  lead  to  Christ.
But  God  calls  you  to  come  to  Christ's  self.  "  Hear  ye  him."  You  have  a  life-and-
death  question  to  settle,  and  for  the  settling  of  it  there  is  for  you,  in  the  world,  "  no
man,  save  Jesus  only."

II.  Chbist  18  OUR  SUFFICIENT  Savioub.  If  your  troubles  and  difficulties  seem  the
most  real  things  in  the  world  to  you,  remember  him  who  chose  suffering  for  his
portion,  that  you  might  be  partakers  of  his  glory.  If  you  are  despondent  on  account
of  your  spiritual  condition,  remember  this  sure  fouu'fation  of  all  preaching,  this  procla-

MATXHEW — n.  0


194  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xvn.  1—27.

mation  of  Christ  by  God  himself.  The  one  utterance  of  God  in  New  Testament  times
is  this  intimation,  three  times  heard  by  Christ,  that  by  laying  down  his  life  for  sinnerg
God  was  well  pleased  with  him.  Only  by  coming  can  you  please  him.  Indifference
to  the  voice  would  have  been  guilt  in  the  apostles;  it  is  equal  guilt  in  yon.

III.  The  conduct  of  Petbb  warns  us  against  too  uuuh  deead  of  buffering,  ob
OF  BEiNO  CALLED  TO  ENTEB  A  CLOUD ;  and  against  too  much  desire  to  rest  in  any  one
experience  or  state.  The  darkest  cloud  your  Lord  calls  you  to  enter  will  be  irradiated
by  his  presence.  And  if  by  any  experience  you  have  obtained  stronger  faith  or  a  more
lively  sense  of  Christ's  worth,  be  not  anxious  to  build  a  tabernacle  for  sweet  experiences,
while  there  are  countless  works  of  charity,  patience,  energy,  awaiting  you.  Believe  that
the  whole  line  of  earthly  experiences  can  be  lit  up  with  God's  present  &vout. — D.

Vers.  14 — 21. — The  Iwnatic  lad.  This  incident  is  memorable  chiefly  on  account  of
three  truths  it  impresses  on  the  mind.

L  The  APPARENTiiY  UNLIMITED  RANGE  ouB  LoBD  GIVES  TO  FAITH.  Promise,  robuke,
and  surprise  are  mingled  in  his  reply,  "  If  thou  canst,  all  things  are  possible,"  etc.  As
if  h«  said,  "  You  do  not  surely  question  my  power ;  it  is  no  question  of  power,  it  is  a
question  of  foith ;  have  you  faith  to  receive,  to  evoke  the  power  ?  "  As  clenrly  as  possible
He  says  to  this  man, "  The  cure  depends  on  yourself."  We  are  continually  tempted  to  ask
—Why  should  it  be  so  ?  Why  could  not  God  overcome  our  unbelief  by  producing  within
Its  such  manifest  results  of  his  health-giving  power  that  we  should  find  it  impossible  to
doubt?  The  reason  seems  to  be  that  our  assuming  our  permanent  relation  to  God  is
of  more  importance  than  any  single  blessing  which  results  from  it.  Our  trust  in  God
and  acceptance  of  him,  as  higher  than  all  worldly  power,  are  more  than  any  other  help
we  can  receive  firom  him,  and  therefore  he  first  of  all  demands  faith.  And  though  it
seems  as  if  faith  would  be  easier  after  receiving  wliat  we  need,  yet  there  can  be  nu
doubt  it  is  the  anxiety  and  restless  thuughtfulness  produced  by  trouble  and  difficulty
which  chiefly  compel  men  to  strive  to  ascertain  for  themselves  what  is  the  truth  about
Qrod.  in  his  helpfulness.  The  visible  and  tangible  blessings  he  bestowed  were  so  far
from  being  all  he  bad  to  give,  that  he  allowed  no  one  to  go  away  with  only  these.

II.  The  power  oub  Lord  ascribes  to  faith.     Here,  too,  are  difficulties.     God  will
not,  we  feel  sure,  contradict  himself  by  reversing  in  our  favour  any  law  of  nature.
But  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  prayer  to  ask  for  such  things  as  we  cannot  get  but  by
prayer.    Prayer  is  the  acknowledgment  that  we  have  to  do,  not  with  nature  only,  but
with  one  who  can  govern  and  use  nature  freely,  and  to  whom  all  things  are  possible.
There  is  a  way  of  speaking  of  natural  law  as  if  it  were  a  thing  sacred  and  not  to  be
tampered  with,  whereas  a  great  part  of  our  time  is  spent  in  averting  the  consequences
of  natural  law,  and  nothing  gives  ampler  scope  to  our  free-will  and  reason  and  active
powers  than  the  guiding  of  nature  to  happier  issues.     The  man  who  says  he  cannot
suppose  God  will  depart  from  those  great  lines  of  action  he  has  laid  down  ought  on
the  same  ground  humbly  to  submit  to  sickness  and  use  no  remedy  against  it ;  for
surely  it  is  more  presumptuous  to  fight  against  the  natural  law  of  disease  than  to  pray
God  that  if  he  sees  fit  he  would  figlit  against  it  for  us.    No  doubt  natural  law  is  one
expression,  nay,  the  fundamental  expression,  of  God's  will ;  and  when  day  by  day  a  man
sees  that  the  sun  rises  and  sets  with  a  regularity  undisturbed  by  national  disasters
or  personal  necessities,  he  becomes  convinced  that  it  is  God's  will  that  sunrise  and
sunset  be  invariable.     But  though  everything  in  nature  may  be  as  rigidly  bound  to  its
own  cause  as  sum  ise  and  sunset,  it  does  not  follow  that  everything  if  as  necessary,  as
important,  as  unalterable.     By  the  arrest  of  the  natural  course  of  disease  in  this  boy
no  shock  was  given  to  the  needful  belief  of  men  in  the  constancy  of  nature.     While
holding  fast,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  truth  that  all  things  are  possible,  we  cannot  but
consider,  on  the  other  hand,  that  some  things  are  so  extremely  improbable  that  it  is
vain  to  ask  God  to  perform  them.     Scientific  men  assure  us  that  there  is  a  region  into
which  we  cannot  see,  but  in  which  the  most  powerful  of  all  causes  resides.    This  is  the
region  we  claim  for  God,  and  out  of  which  he  can  send  forth  influences  in  answer  to
those  who  appeal  to  him.    There  are  other  effects  possible  than  those  we  contemplate,
because  there  are  other  causes  in  operation  than  those  we  see.     We  may  always  be
leaving  out  of  view  something  that  is  known  to  the  only  wise  God,  our  Saviour.

III.  There  abe  kinds  of  bin  which  call  fob  tskatuxnt  of  jl  bpsoiaUiT  bevkjui


OH.  XVII.  1—27.]    THE  aOSPlL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  198


KIND.  The  harping  of  David  may  be  enough  to  oaat  out  some  dovila,  but  others  laugh
to  scorn  the  exorcism  of  nine  apostles.  What  of  your  equipment  in  this  warfare?  You
have  a  faith  that  has  proved  itself  equal  to  some  duty  and  fit  for  service  of  a  kind.
But  are  there  not  sins  in  you  which  sometimes  assume  a  very  alarming  shape ;  and
how  areyou  equipped  against  these?  Look  first  at  the  sin,  at  its  inveterate  hold  on
you,  at  its  rootedness  in  the  deepest  part  of  your  nature,  at  the  skill  with  which  it
assails  you  all  day  long  and  In  so  many  difierent  ways ;  look  with  what  ease  it  has
survived  any  assaults  you  have  made  on  it ;  and  then  look  at  the  means  you  are  using
for  its  destruction,  and  say  if  it  is  likely,  nay,  if  it  is  possible,  that  such  sin  can  yield
to  such  means.  Were  we  to  tell  each  other  our  experience,  would  not  some  of  us  have
to  say, "  Unless  there  be  some  better  remedy  than  those  I  have  tried,  I  fear  to  think  what
may  become  of  me  and  my  sin  "  ?  Learn  from  this  incident  that  your  safety  lies,
not  with  subsidiary  means,  but  with  the  Master,  the  one  living  Spring  of  life. — D.

Vers.  24 — 27. — The  stater  in  theJuKt  mouth.  This  was  not  an  entangling  question,
such  as  was  afterwards  put  by  the  scribes,  who  asked  if  it  was  lawful  to  pay  tribute
to  Caesar.  There  was  no  question  of  the  lawfulness  of  this  tax,  and  all  that  the
collectors  wished  to  know  was  whether  Jesus  wished  to  pay  the  tax  at  Capernaum  or
at  xTerusalem,  or  whether  perhaps  he  had  not  some  special  claim  for  exemption.
Peter,  as  usual,  does  not  stop  to  think,  but  promptly  assures  them  that  his  Master
certainly  considered  himself  taxable.  No  sooner  does  Peter  come  in  than  Jesus,
without  further  introduction,  says,  "  What  thinkest  thou,  Simon  ?  the  kings  of  the
earth,  from  whom  do  they  receive  toll  or  tribute  ?  from  their  sons,  or  from  strangers  ?  "
Peter  promptly  answered,  "  From  strangers."  "  Therefore,"  says  our  Lord,  "  the  sons
are  free."  The  heavenly  King  could  obviously  require  no  tax  from  him  whom  Peter
had  only  a  day  or  two  ago  acknowledged  to  be,  in  a  special  sense,  the  Son  of  God.  He
had  no  intention,  however,  of  standing  on  his  right,  and  claiming  exemption.  His  whole
life  was  a  foregoing  of  his  rights  as  God's  Son.  He  submitted  to  this  tax,  therefore,  as
he  submitted  to  baptism.  But  that  Peter  at  least  might  clearly  understand  that  this
payment  and  every  act  of  his  human  life  was  a  voluntary  humiliation,  he  provides  the
money  in  a  manner  which  is  meant  to  exhibit  him  as  the  Lord  of  nature.  When  Peter
went  down  to  the  lake,  and  found  all  as  his  Master  had  said,  he  cannot  but  have
thought  with  himself,  "  Certainly  our  Master  is  as  humble  as  he  bids  us  be.  He  has
all  nature  at  command,  and  yet  makes  no  sign  to  these  tax-gatherers.  He  bids  us
accommodate  ourselves  to  the  ignorance  and  prejudice  of  those  about  us,  as  he  himself
stoops  to  the  smallest  child."  This  miracle,  then,  was  meant  to  instruct ;  especially  to
illustrate  the  humility  of  Jesus.  It  was  intended  to  follow  up  the  teaching  of  the
Transfiguration  and  of  Peter's  confession;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  put  in  a  con-
crete and  visible  form  the  teaching  regarding  humility  which  our  Lord  at  this  time
gave  to  his  disciples.  Peter  was  to  be  helped  to  see  that  the  most  Divine  thing  about
our  Lord  was  his  becoming  man,  and  submitting  day  by  day  to  all  that  was  involved
in  that.  And  in  this  miracla  he  had  his  first  easy  lesson ;  for  in  it  he  was  himself  the
instrument  at  once  of  his  Lord's  Divinity  and  of  his  submission.  Our  Lord  himself
assigns  a  reason  for  the  payineot :  "Lest,"  he  says,  "  we  should  offend,"  or  become  a
cause  of  stumbling.  To  all  followers  of  Christ,  then,  this  action  of  our  Lord  says,
"  Forego  your  rights  rather  than  cause  any  ignorant  person  to  stumble  at  your  conduct."
We  are  very  apt  to  justify  ourselves  by  maintaining  that  it  was  not  we,  but  the  person
who  stumbled,  who  was  in  fault ;  if  he  was  so  narrow-minded,  so  weak,  he  would  have
stumbled  at  something  else  if  not  at  that.  "  Yes,"  says  oar  Lord,  "  it  is  quite  true ;  it
must  needs  be  that  offences  come,  but  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  they  come  I "  All
men  die,  but  murder  ia  not  on  that  account  a  venial  sin.  Our  Lord  miraculously  paid
Peter's  tax  as  well  as  his  own.  He  supplied  him  out  of  his  Father's  treasury,  giving
him  an  inkling  of  the  truth  afterwards  to  be  set  in  the  clearest  light,  that  in  Christ  we
are  all  children  of  God,  and  that  in  him  wo  get  from  God  far  more  than  ever  we  can
give  to  him.— D.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  JVanafiguration,  "  And  six  days  after."  This  note  refers  to  the
conversation  Jesus  had  with  his  disciples,  in  which  he  said,  "  The  Son  of  man  shall
oome,"  etc.  (quote  oh.  xvL  27,  28).    But  the  apostles  are  all  dead,  and  the  kingdom


19ft  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xvii.  1— 27.

is  stUl  future.  The  Transfiguration,  then,  must  be  viewed  as  a  symbolic  anticipation
and  pledge  of  the  kingdom,  and  Peter  and  James  and  John  were  those  referred  to  who
should  not  taste  death  until  they  had  seen  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  hia  kingdom ;
and  they  saw  this  when  they  were  "  eye-witnesses  of  his  majesty  on  the  holy  mount."
We  propose  to  show —

I.  That  the  spikituai,  glory  of  the  EmaDOH  of  Ghbist  ib  set  fobth  in  the
Tbansfigubation.  1.  It  exhibits  the  signs  of  a  new  dispensation.  (1)  Here  is
humanity  the  shrine  of  Deity.  This  as  a  fact  existed  in  the  Incarnation.  It  is  manifest
in  the  Transtiguration.  This  is  a  new  thing.  Formerly  the  Holy  Spirit  was  with
men,  now  he  is  in  them  (see  John  xiv.  17).  The  indwelling  of  the  witnessing  Spirit
characterizes  this  dispensation.  (2)  Moses  and  Elijah  shine  in  the  glory  of  Jesus.
The  Law  is  illustrated  by  the  light  of  the  gospel.  Its  sacrifices  and  ablutions  now
become  full  of  glorious  meaning.  So  are  the  prophets  illustrated.  Their  personal
history  is  seen  to  have  been  typicaL  Their  predictions  of  Messiah  are  fulfilled.
(3)  Christ  is  the  source  of  gospel  law.  The  "  voice  "  rebuked  Peter's  mistake  in  pro-
posing to  make  equal  tabernacles.  "  Hear  ye  him."  No  longer  listen  to  Moses  and
the  prophets  otherwise  than  as  they  are  heard  in  the  accents  of  Jesus.  2.  It  exhibits
the  signs  of  a  spiritual  dispensation.  (1)  Here  is  a  remarkable  concurrence.  Moses
fasted  forty  days  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai.  So  did  Elijah.  Jesus  likewise  fasted
forty  days  in  "  the  wilderness  " — ^probably  the  same.  Of  no  other  is  this  recorded.
Here  are  all  those  together  in  glory.  (2)  The  life  of  those  forty  days  proclaimed  that
"  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  " — the  precept  and  the  promise —
"  of  God."  This  spiritual  life  may  be  studied  in  the  history  of  that  remarkable  forty
days  of  the  life  of  Jesus  after  his  resurrection.  We  are  "  risen  with  Christ."  (3)  While
they  fasted  from  natural  food,  they  feasted  on  spiritual.  While  the  Israelites  fasted
during  their  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  they  feasted  on  the  bread  from  heaven,
^■i)  So  the  sun-clothed  woman — the  true  Church  of  Christ — was  nourished  in  the
wilderness  by  the  pure  Word  of  God  during  these  "  forty  and  two  months  "  in  which
she  fled  from  the  face  of  the  Jezebel  of  Rome.  The  counterpart  of  this  was  the  feeding
of  the  prophets  in  the  caves  by  good  Obadiah,  when  they  fled  from  the  persecutions
of  the  mereiricious  Queen  of  Samaria.      3.  It  exhibits  the  tokens  of  gospel  grace.

(1)  However  glorified,  Jesus  still  remembers  Calvary.  The  matter  of  the  conversation
in  the  mount  of  glory  was  "  the  decease  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem."  And
now  he  is  in  the  height  of  heaven  he  lives  there  to  make  intercession  for  us.  (2)  Calvary
is  the  theme  of  celestial  rapture.  It  is  the  burden  of  the  song  of  the  redeemed.  Huly
angels  take  up  the  strain.  (3)  Prejudices  are  dissipated  in  the  light  of  eternity.
"  Peter  answered,"  viz.  to  the  conversation  about  the  decease,  "  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us
to  be  here."  This  was  the  same  Peter  who,  six  days  earlier,  had  the  presumption  to
rebuke  Jesus  for  referring  to  the  same  decease  (see  cb.  xvi.  22).

II.  That  the  physical  qloby  of  the  kikodom  of  Christ  is  set  fobth  ih  the
Tbansfigubation.  1.  Jesus  will  yet  appear  in  royal  state.  (1)  In  the  visions  of  the
prophets  the  two  advents  of  Messiah  are  blended;  and  it  is  only  in  the  fulfilment  of  the
circumstances  of  the  first  advent  in  humiliation  that  we  get  clear  views  of  those  of
the  second  advent  in  glory.  (2)  Of  this  glory  there  were  riamarkable  prophetic  antici-
pations in  the  glorious  Divine  forms  or  similitudes  of  Old  Testament  times.  (3)  The
Transfiguration  is  a  still  clearer  anticipation.  For  here  we  have  not  only  the  semblance
of  a  beatified  humanity ;  we  have  the  true  humanity  of  Jesus  beatified  by  the  glory  cf
the  Godhead.  2.  The  bright  cloud  manifested  the  presence  of  angels.  (1)  If  we  com-
pare the  passages  in  which  the  glorious  advent  of  Christ  is  described,  we  shall  see  that
those  which  mention  the  "  clouds  "  omit  the  mention  of  accompanying  angels ;  and
so  contrariwise,  those    which  mention  the  "  angels "  omit  the   mention  of  clouds.

(2)  Wherever  Christ's  presence  is  promised,  the  presence  of  his  retinue  of  angels  is
understood,  if  not  expressed.  They  are  ever  present  with  him  in  the  assemblies  of  his
saints  (see  Eooles.  vii.  6 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  10).  (3)  Clouds  and  angels  are  promiscuously  the
chariots  of  God.  The  clouds  of  angels  were  with  him  in  his  ascension  (cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.
17, 18 ;  Eph.  iv.  8 — 10 ;  see  also  Ps.  xviii.  10 ;  civ.  1—4).  3.  Moses  represented  the
sainted  dead.  (1)  His  appearance  upon  the  mount  was  a  kind  of  specimen  of  the
resurrection.  He  had  a  grand  death  when,  on  the  mountain-summit,  God  bowed  his
august  head  out  of  heaven  and  kissed  away  the  soul  of  his  servant.    His  body  was


OH.  XTii.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  191

buried.  Then  there  was  a  contention  about  this  (see  Jude  9).  Was  it  with  respect  to
the  appearance  of  Moses  in  this  scene  ?  (2)  It  was  a  sample  of  the  first  resurrection.
The  resurrection  of  the  just  will  take  place  in  two  acts  (see  Rev.  xx.  4 — 6).  In  the
first  resurrection  the  "ancients  "  will  appear  in  glory  with  Christ  (cf.  Isa.  xxiv.  23;
Dan.  xii.  1 — 3).  (3)  May  we  hope  for  this  distinction  (see  Phil.  iii.  8 — 11)  ?  Let  us
strive.  4.  Elijah  represented  the  Uving  who  shall  he  changed.  (1)  Paul  had  special
revelation  on  this  subject  (cf.  1  Cor.  xv.  51 — 54 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13 — 18).  (2)  These
transfigurations  will  occur  during  the  course  of  the  reign  of  Christ  over  the  earth.
Sinners  will  die  off  quickly.  Saints  will  be  changed — translated  (see  Luke  xvii.
34 — 37).  (3)  Of  these,  Elijah  was  a  specimen.  He  was  translated  to  heaven  in
a  fiery  chariot,  and  must  have  been  transfigured  in  his  transit.  Flesh  and  blood
cannot  enter  heaven.  (4)  What  a  mingled  scene  is  here  1  Christ  with  the  glory  of  the
Father.  Clouds  of  angels.  Elijah  representing  the  quick.  Moses  representing  the  dead.
The  apostles  representing  the  Church  on  earth.  Heaven  and  earth  will  be  thus  blended
in  the  kingdom  of  Messiah.  (5)  Have  we  not  a  note  of  the  time  of  the  kingdom  in  the
"  six  days'  "  interval  ?  Does  it  not  correspond  with  the  six  ages  of  Barnabas  mentioned
in  his  Epistle  ?  Is  this  wholly  without  countenance  from  Scripture  (c£  Dan.  xii.  12,
13;  Hos.  vi.  2;  Heb.  Iv.  9;  2  Pet.  iii.  8)?  There  is  a  wonderful  future  for  the
Christian. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  9 — 13. — The  harbinger.  After  the  Transfiguration,  Jesus  and  his  disciples
came  down  the  mountain-side.  Ecstasies,  even  in  religion,  have  their  sombre  inter-
ludes. But  in  these  we  may  still  remain  in  the  blessed  company  of  Jesus.  As  they
descended,  Jesus  "  commanded  his  disciples,  saying.  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man,  until
the  Son  of  man  be  risen  from  the  dead."  This  command  astonished  them.  Inter-
preting the  prophets,  the  scribes  expected  Elijah  to  come  as  the  harbinger  of  Messiah.
As  Elijah  had  now  appeared,  the  disciples  were  eager  to  proclaim  this  as  the  accomplish-
ment of  the  prophecy.  But  they  were  now  further  surprised  to  learn  that  the  prophecy
had  already  been  fulfilled  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist.  Our  Lord  had  before
spoken  to  this  effect  (see  oh.  xi.  14);  but  these  disciples,  Peter,  James,  and  John,
appear  then  to  have  been  absent  on  a  preaching  excursion.  Note :  It  is  the  fate  of
prophecy  to  be  fulfilled  without  being  noticed  by  the  world.  "But  the  wise  shaU
understand."     Let  us  consider —

I.  The  coming  op  Elijah  in  the  pkeson  of  the  Baptist.  1.  The  scribes  looked  for
the  Tishhite.  (1)  They  did  so  as  the  recognized  public  interpreters  of  prophecy.  Isaiah
spoke  of  a  harbinger  of  Messiah  (see  Isa.  xl.  3 — 5).  This  harbinger  is  mentioned  again,
and  distinguished  as  "  Elijali  the  prophet "  (see  Mai.  iv.  5,  6).  The  scribes  concluded
that  Elijah  the  Tishbite  literally  should  appear.  (2)  They  "knew  not"  John  the
Baptist  in  the  character  of  Elijah.  He  did  not  answer  their  expectations  as  the  literal
Elijah.  Neither  did  his  testimony  to  Jesus  suit  their  prejudices.  Jesus  did  not  come
as  that  secular  king  whom  they  fondly  hoped  to  see.  So  does  the  spirit  of  the  world
blind  the  spiritual  vision.  (3)  The  disciples  of  Jesus  were  influenced  by  the  teaching
of  the  scribes.  They  therefore  rejoiced  to  see  here  in  the  holy  mount  the  literal  Elijah ;
and  fain  would  they  conclude  that  this  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy.  They
were  accordingly  eager  to  bear  testimony  to  what  they  had  seen.  It  had  not  occurred
to  them,  any  more  than  to  the  scribes,  to  identify  the  Baptist  as  the  Elijah  of  the
prophet.  2.  Tet  was  the  Baptist  the  Elijah  of  prophecy.  (1)  Gabriel  announced  him
in  this  quality.  To  Zacharias  the  angel  said  of  John,  "  He  shall  go  before  the  face  of
the  Lord  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah,  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the
children,  and  the  disobedient  to  walk  in  the  wisdom  of  the  just;  to  make  ready  for
the  Lord  a  people  prepared  for  him  "  (Luke  i.  17).  The  reference  here  to  the  Prophet
Malachi  cannot  be  mistaken.  (2)  Zacharias,  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  confirmed  the
testimony  of  Gabriel.  "  And  thou,  child,  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  of  the  Most  High :
for  thou  shalt  go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  to  make  ready  his  ways"  (Luke  i.  76).
(3)  John  came  accordingly  "  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah."  Like  that  prophet,
his  dwelling  was  in  the  wilderness ;  his  attire  was  rough ;  and  his  habits  were  simple
and  severe  (cf.  2  Kings  i.  8  j  ch.  iii.  4).  His  preaching  was  repentance.  "  To  turn  the
■  heart  of  the  [believing]  fathers  to  the  [unbelieving]  children,  and  the  heart  Of  the
children  to  their  &ther8,"  and  thus  to  avert  the  curse  of  God  from  the  land.    (4)  Johi


198  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1-27.

roundly  announced  himself  to  be  that  voice  in  the  wilderness  of  which  Isaiah  spake
(see  John  i.  23).  3.  In  ihia  quality  John  was  recognized  by  Jestts.  (1)  He  did  so
practically,  for  he  did  not  commence  his  preaching  until  John  had  ended  his  public
ministry.  Thus :  "  When  he  heard  that  John  was  delivered  up,  he  withdrew  into
Galilee,"  and  it  is  arlded,  "  From  that  time  began  Jesus  to  preach  (cf.  oh.  iv.  12 — 17 ;
Mark  i.  14, 15).  (2)  The  importance  of  this  question  of  time  is  evident  also  from  the
reference  to  it  again  by  Peter  when  he  came  to  preach  the  gospel  to  Cornelius  (see
Acts  X.  36, 37).  Peter  evidently  viewed  it  as  an  important  mark  of  Messiah.  (3)  Jesus
in  his  teaching,  as  well  as  in  his  conduct,  acknowledged  John  as  the  Elijah  of  prophecy.
He  did  so  to  the  multitude  after  the  retirement  from  him  of  certain  disciples  of  John
who  came  to  him  with  a  message  from  John  in  his  prison.  "  This  is  he  of  whom  it  is
written,  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger  before  thy  face,  who  shall  prepare  thy  way
before  thee.  .  .  .  And  if  ye  will  receive  it,  this  is  Elijah,  which  is  to  come  "  (see  ch,
li.  10 — 14).  In  this  passage  our  Lord  refers  to  both  the  prophets  who  mention  the
harbinger  of  Messiah,  Isaiaband  Malachi,  and  applies  their  prophecies  to  John.  In
the  text  also  Jesus  declares  John  to  be  "  that  Elijah  "  as  "  come  already."

II.  The  oominq  op  Elijah  as  the  bebald  of  the  judgment.  1.  8ueh  a  coming
may  he-  presumed.  (1)  For  Christ  is  yet  to  come  in  judgment.  Before  his  Transfigura-
tion he  announced  this  solemn  fact  (see  ch.  ivi.  27).  The  Transfiguration  was  itself  a
symbolic  anticipation  of  that  coming.  As  the  first  advent  of  Christ  was  heralded  by
an  Elijah,  so  may  we  presume  that  the  second  advent  also  will  be.  (2)  Daniel  dis-
tinguishes the  first  and  second  advents  of  Messiah;  otherwise  the  comings  are  so
blended  in  the  visions  of  prophecy  that  they  appear  as  one.  The  distinction  is  now
fully  manifest  since  the  first  advent  has  taken  place.  By  parity  of  reasoning  we  may
infer  that  the  prophecies  concerning  the  harbinger  are  to  be  fulfilled  in  two  acts.
(3)  Differences  may  be  presumed  in  the  two  appearances  of  the  harbinger  to  corre-
spond to  the  differences  of  the  two  advents  of  Messiah.  The  Baptist  came  in  symbols
of  sorrow,  without  miracle,  to  introduce  Messiah  as  a  Priest  coming  to  sufiier  for
(in.  The  coming  Elijah  may  be  expected  to  appear  in  symbols  of  power,  working
miracles,  to  introduce  Messiah  in  his  quality  of  King.  (4)  To  anticipate  this  second
coming,  Elijah  appeared  in  glory  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  Trypho  objects  to
Justin  Martyr  that  Messiah  can  have  no  power  until  anointed  by  Elijah.  He  over-
looked the  fact  that  Jesus  was  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  when  he  was  baptized  by
John  (cf.  ch.  iii.  16 ;  Luke  iv.  18 ;  Acts  x.  37, 38).  That  anointing  was  to  inaugurate
Christ  as  a  Prophet.  But  when  Elijah  was  present  in  the  holy  mount,  Jesus  received
his  further  anointing  as  a  King.  2.  The  presumption  is  now  confirmed.  (1)  John's
disclaimer  that  he  was  Elijah,  while  he  declared  himself  to  be  the  voice  crying  in  the
wilderness  (see  John  i.  21 — 23),  can  only  be  reconciled  on  the  understanding  that
Elijah  was  yet  to  come  in  another  form.  Mede  makes  John  the  Baptist  to  come  again
instead  of  Elijah  in  full  form.  The  disclaimer  of  John  would  rather  point  to  Elijah  in
person.  The  appearance  of  the  literal  Elijah  in  the  holy  mount  would  also  point  this
way.  The  Jews  say,  "  When  Elijah  comes  he  will  solve  hard  questions."  His  coming
will  solve  this.  (2)  The  coming  of  the  Baptist  has  not  fully  satisfied  prophecy.  He
came  not  immediately  "  before  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord  "
(Mai.  iv.  5).  For  that  day  is  yet  future.  He  came  more  in  pursuance  of  the  prophecy
of  Isaiah  than  of  that  of  Malachi.  Yet  is  there  a  second  fulfilment  also  for  the  words
of  Isaiah.  (3)  In  affirming  that  Elijah  had  come  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist,  our
Lord  did  not  say  that  there  was  no  future  coming  of  Elijah.  When  the  disciples  quoted
the  scribes,  Jesus  did  not  say  that  they  were  wrong  in  expecting  Elijah  to  come,  but
in  not  discerning  that  the  Baptist  had  come  in  the  character  of  Elijah.  (4)  Par  from
this,  our  Lord  says  plainly,  "  Elijah  indeed  cometh,  and  shall  restore  all  things."  This
coming  of  Elijah  in  the  future  is  all  the  more  remarkable  in  that  it  was  spoken  after
John  had  been  beheaded.  (5)  This  Elijah  of  the  future  is  to  "  restore  all  things."  This
did  not  John.  He  restored  sonu  things.  He  preached  repentance,  and  his  doctrine  is
still  restoring.  But  the  "  time  of  the  restoration  of  all  things "  is  that  of  the  second
advent  of  Christ  (see  Acts  iii.  19 — ^21).

Why  did  Jesus  command  his  disciples,  saying,  "  Tell  the  vision  to  no  man,  until  the
Bon  of  man  be  risen  from  the  dead "  ?    1.  One  of  the  purposes  of  the  vision  was  to*
intimate  that  the  Old  Testament  must  give  place  to  the  New.    Th«  time  for  the  aboil-


OH.  XVII.  1—27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  199


tion  of  the  Law  of  commandmeDts  contataed  in  ordinances  was  not  ripe  until  aftei
the  Eesurreotion.  _  2.  The  glory  of  the  Kesurreotion  would  render  more  credible  the
testimony  concerning  the  Transfiguration.  Had  the  testimony  been  given  earlier,  the
sufferings  of  Christ  would  probably  bo  urged  against  ite  credibility.  3.  The  earlier
•testimony  might  imperil  the  witnesses.  The  heads  of  the  nation  appear  to  have  been
implicated  in  the  martyrdom  of  John.  "They  knew  him  not,  but  did  unto  him
whatsoever  they  listed."  If  they  did  not  imprison  John,  they  made  no  effort  to  pro-
cure his  release.  They  rejoiced  in  his  death.  Having  tasted  the  blood  of  John,  they
thirsted  for  the  blood  of  Jesus.  "Even  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  also  suffer  of  them"
(see  Acts  xii.  1 — 3).    Christ'b  times  are  best  for  us. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  14 — 21. — The  secrets  of  faith.  A  blended  good  and  evil  characterizes  the
present  state  of  man.  Ever  since  our  first  parents  ate  of  the  "  tree  of  knowledge  (tf
good  and  evil "  their  children  have  been  eating  of  it.  The  hovel  is  found  under  the
very  shadow  of  the  palace.  What  a  scene  of  glory  was  that  of  the  Transfiguration  I
What  a  scene  of  misery  is  this  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  I  "  And  when  they  were
come  to  the  multitude,"  etc.     Learn —

I.  That  thk  poweb  of  faith  is  uslimitbd.    1.  For  Ommipoience  is  pledged  to  it.

(1)  Witness  the  miracle  of  faith  on  the  waters  of  the  Bed  Sea  (see  Exod.  xiv.  13,  14).
The  distance  across  the  arm  of  the  Bed  Sea  at  Fihahiroth  is  about  twelve  miles;
while  the  average  depth  of  the  water  there  is  about  eighty-four  feet.  The  weight
of  the  vast  ocean  sets  into  it.  Tet  was  that  world  of  waters  controlled  by  the
faith  of  Moses.  (2)  So,  had  the  disciples  of  Jesus  "  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,"
they  might  have  routed  the  devil  from  this  boy.  And  the  case  of  the  demoniac  may
bo  taken  as  a  sample  of  the  moral  condition  of  man  under  the  tyranny  of  Satan,  (3)
No  limit  is  set  to  the  promise  here  given  to  faith  (cf.  cb.  sxi.  21 ;  Luke  xvii.  5).
Things  great  or  small  are  equally  easy  to  the  Prbmiser.  Properly  speaking,  to  God
nothing  is  miraculous.  A  rustic,  witnessing  the  experiments  of  an  electrician,  may
conclude  that  he  is  a  magician.  To  the  scientist  these  experiments  have  no  more
of  miracle  in  them  than  the  rustic  may  see  in  the  furrow  he  cuts  with  his  plough.
"  Things  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God."  2.  But  Omnipotence  is  not  pledged
to  caprice.  (1)  In  the  heathen  mythology  there  is  one  Phaethon,  the  son  of  Apollo,
who  was  ambitious  to  guide  the  chariot  of  the  sun,  and  importuned  his  father  to
entrust  him  with  the  reins.  He  soon  found  his  arm  too  feeble  to  restrain  the  fiery
steeds ;  and  the  sun  was  rushing  down  upon  the  earth.  Jupiter,  seeing  the  danger,
launched  a  thunderbolt  at  Phaethon  and  dislodged  him  from  his  seat,  upon  which  the
chariot  came  back  into  abler  hands,  and  the  world  was  saved  from  conflagration.  If,
then.  Omnipotence  be  pledged  to  faith,  may  not  ambition  and  folly  destroy  the  world  ?

(2)  The  answer  is  that  faith  is  the  gift  of  God  (see  ch.  xvi.  17 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  9 ;  2  Cor.
iv.  13;  Bph.  ii.  8,  9;  Phil.  i.  29;  Col.  ii.  12;  2  Pet.  i.  1).  God  will  not  inspire  faith
in  the  interests  of  folly.  (3)  Hence  quality  rather  than  quantity  is  the  thing  required.
"  Faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed."  The  idea  of  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  dislodging
a  mountain !  Abstractedly,  faith  is  impotent ;  it  becomes  omnipotent  as  it  is  asso-
ciated with  God.  A  small  band  slipped  over  a  wheel  sets  a  factory  in  motion,  because
it  links  the  machinery  with  the  steam-engine.  Faith  may  link  the  machinery  of  the
universe  to  the  great  power  of  God.  (4)  True  faith  is  distinct  from  mere  credence.
Some  are  Christians  from  the  accident  of  birth,  as  others  are  Mohammedans,  Papists,
or  pagans.  Some  are  Christians  from  conviction,  having  studied  and  approved  the
evidences.  But  saving  faith  is  a  thing  of  the  heart— an  inspiration  from  God ;  it
works  by  love,  and  purifies  the  heart  and  life.

II.  That  moral  oonsideeations  detbbminb  the  subjects  of  the  gift  of
faith.  1.  Divine  seriousness  is  a  cmdition  of  the  faith  of  mirade-worhing.  (1)  This
our  Lord  declared  (see  Mark  ix.  38,  39).  And  Paul  says,  "No  man  can  say  Jesus  is
Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost"  (1  Oor.  xii.  3).  (2)  Simon  the  magician  was  mistaken
in  thinking  that  the  gift  of  God  could  be  purchased  with  money  (Acts  viii.  20).  The
sons  of  Sceva  found  to  their  cost  that  they  must  not  trifle  with  the  name  of  Jesus
(see  Acts  xix.  13 — 16).  (3)  The  miracle-working  faith  was  given  to  autheiiticate  the
gospel  That  end  is  now  answered.  Yet  may  it  be  given  again  at  any  time  when
God  aeee  sufficient  reason.    2.  Bepentanoe  is  the  condition  of  saving  faith.    (1)  Christ


200  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvii.  1—27.

came  to  save  his  people  from  their  sins.  So  the  promise  is,  "  In  the  day  that  ye  seek
me  ye  shall  find  me,  when  ye  search  for  me  tuith  your  whole  heart."  (2)  Then  seize
the  candle  of  the  Lord,  and  search  your  heart  to  see  what  has  hindered  your  salvation.
Have  you  made  restitution  in  that  you  have  robhed  ?  Have  you  made  reparation  in
that  you  have  injured  (see  ch.  v.  23,  24.)?  (3)  The  faith  that  saves  is  a  higher  gif£
than  the  faith  of  miracle-working.  "  Bejoice  not  that  the  spirits  are  subject  unto  you ;
but  rejoice  that  your  names  are  written  in  heaven  "  (Luke  z.  20).  Bejoice  not  so
much  that  you  have  the  miracle-working  faith  as  that  you  have  the  faith  that  saves.
"  If  I  have  all  laith,  so  as  to  remove  mountains,  but  have  not  love,  I  am  nothing "
(1  Cor.  xiii.  2).  Miracle-working  faith  is  as  nothing  compared  with  that  which  is
saving.  3.  Oodliness  is  essential  to  the  faith  of  usefulness.  (1)  The  goodness  of
Barnabas  is  significantly  assuciated  with  his  "  faith  "  and  usefulness  (see  Acts  xi.  24).
This  also  may  be  noted  in  respect  to  persons  eminently  useful  in  the  Church  in  follow-
ing ages.  (2)  But  what  are  we  to  say  to  the  usefulness  of  those  who  are  far  from
goodness  ?  Not  that  they  are  useful  in  consequence  of  their  faith ;  for  they  have
none.  The  truth  God  may  bless,  whoever  uses  it.  No  credit  in  this  case  is  due  to  the
ungodly ;  nor  wiU  they  receive  any  reward.  (3)  For  the  faith  of  usefulness  we  must
pray.  "  This  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer."  Because  without  prayer  we  cannot
have  that  goodness  which  renders  us  eligible  for  the  gift  of  faith.  (4)  Fasting  also
is  helpful  to  faith.  Our  Lord  gave  us  his  example  in  this  (see  ch.  iv.  2).  He  also
gives  us  directions  as  to  the  spirit  in  which  we  should  fast  (see  ch.  vi.  16).  Apostles
associated  fasting  with  their  special  prayer  (see  Acts  xiii.  2,  3). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  22 — 27. — Greatness  in  submission.  The  originality  of  Jesus  meets  us  at
every  turn.  The  men  of  this  world  seek  greatness  in  self-assertion  and  resistance — ^by
force  and  cunning.     Christ  exhibits  it  in  condescension  and  patience.

I.  The  geeatnbss  or  Jesus  is  seen  in  his  Passion.  1.  Sis  submission  there  was
voluntary.  (1)  He  foresaw  it.  (a)  It  was  predicted.  He  was  perfectly  conversant
with  the  prophets.  (6)  He  enlarged  upon  their  anticipations.  How  circumstantial
are  his  words  (see  vers.  22,  23)  I  (c)  His  clear  foresight  was  an  ante-Passion.  (2)
He  could  have  avoided  it.  (o)  For  he  was  "  the  Son  of  man."  As  the  true  Adam —
the  innocent  and  perfect  Man — he  might  have  claimed  Eden.  He  was  under  no  obliga-
tion to  suffer.  (6)  But  he  was  also  "the  Son  of  God."  In  this  quality  he  was
acknowledged  at  his  I'ransfiguration  (see  ver.  5).  Under  these  titles  alike  equally
glorious  attributes  of  Divinity  are  ascribed  to  Jesus,  He  was  the  Arbiter  of  life.  His
own  life  could  not  be  forfeited  without  his  consent.  (3)  Yet  he  died.  The  "  betrayed  "
of  the  Old  Version  is  "delivered  up"  in  the  New  (ver.  22).  His  manhood  was  sur-
rendered by  his  Godhead.  The  voluntariness  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  superlative,
infinite.  2.  Behold  now  his  greatness  in  the  grandeur  of  his  purposes.  (1)  In  the
Passion  of  Christ  we  have  the  most  wonderful  revelation  of  God.  Where  else  can  we
find  an  equal  exhibition  of  the  greatness  of  his  love?  It  is  also  the  most  glorious
vindication  of  his  truth  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  24 ;  Acts  ii.  23 ;  iii.  18).  (2)  Atonement  is
made  for  human  sin.  "  They  shall  kill  him."  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is
no  remission."  (3)  The  gospel  has  to  be  authenticated  in  the  resurrection.  "  And
the  third  day  he  shall  be  raised."  Death  was  the  necessary  prelude  to  a  resurrection.
Note  the  occasion  of  the  sorrow  of  the  disciples.  The  prospect  of  the  death  of  their
Master  swallowed  up  as  it  were  that  of  the  resurrection,  of  which  also  they  had  been
pre-informed.  So  do  the  trials  and  sufTeringB  of  this  life  so  fill  our  miuds  as  to  prevent
our  rejoicing  in  the  blessedness  of  the  glories  that  are  to  follow.  (4)  To  all  these
great  purposes  of  the  Passion  of  Christ  add  this,  viz.  that  in  it  he  is  our  Pattern.
The  believer  is  crucified  with  Christ.  And  that  union  with  Christ  which  he  finds  at
the  cross  carries  him  back  into  the  life  of  his  earlier  history,  and  forward  into  the  life
of  his  resurrection.    Men  are  at  their  greatest  in  this  wonderful  union  with  their  Lord.

II.  The  geeatness  of  JsaDS  is  seen  in  his  submission  to  taxation.  1.  Look
at  the  fact  assuming  the  tax  to  have  been  a  Soman  impost.  (1)  Beza  and  Jerome  were
of  opinion  that  the  tax  here,  as  in  ch.  xxii.  7,  was  paid  to  Csesar.  On  that  supposition
the  inquiry  may  have  been,  "  Is  your  Master  of  the  opinion  of  Judas  of  Galilee,  that
tribute  should  not  be  paid  to  Caesar  ?  "  (2)  Peter  took  it  as  matter  of  course  that
hia  Master  would  pay  the  tax ;  but  Jesus  put  the  matter  to  him  in  an  unexpected


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDmG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  201

light.  We  know  Christ  only  as  he  reveals  himself.  The  revelation  was  given,  not  to
the  tax-gatherer,  but  to  Peter.  Truth  is  variously  seen  as  it  is  viewed  in  relation  to
the  world  and  in  relation  to  Christ.  The  Word  gives  a  distinct  testimony  to  the
worldly  and  to  the  spiritual.  (3)  But  where  is  the  point  of  the  reference  to  the
"  kings  of  the  earth  "  ?  Might  not  Jesus,  as  the  "  Son  of  David  "  and  rightful  Heir  to
the  throne  of  Israel,  have  contested  the  matter  of  the  tribute  to  Csesar  ?  As  the  "  Son
of  man,"  was  he  not  Heir  to  the  royalty  of  the  whole  earth  (of.  Gen.  i.  26 ;  Ps.
viii.  4—6  ;  Heb.  ii.  6 — 9)?  In  this  he  is  "higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth."  (4)
Had  Jesus  urged  these  things  upon  the  tax-gatherer  and  contested  the  matter  with
Caesar,  he  would  have  sought  greatness  as  the  men  of  the  world  seek  it.  But  to  that
he  would  not  stoop.  God  is  in  no  haste.  At  the  proper  time  "  he  will  take  to  himself
his  great  power."  (5)  So  can  the  sons  of  God  afford  to  wait  for  the  great  day  of  their
public  honour  when  they  shall  claim  the  freedom  of  the  universe.  2.  Look  at  the  fact
understanding  the  tribute  to  hdong  to  the  temple.  (1)  This  is  the  sense  in  which  it  is
generally  taken.  A  half-shekel  was  expected  from  every  master  of  a  Hebrew  family
to  provide  salt  for  the  offerings  and  other  things  not  otherwise  provided  for  (see  Exod.
XXX.  11 — 16 ;  Neh.  x.  32).  (2)  According  to  this  view,  then,  our  Lord  refers  to  the
"  kings  of  the  earth "  as  in  contrast  to  the  King  of  heaven.  The  temple  for  whose
service  the  tribute  was  expected  was  the  house  of  God ;  but  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God
— the  Prince  (cf.  Dan.  ix.  25,  26).  So  was  he  Lord  of  the  temple,  and  free  (of.  Mai.
iii.  1 ;  John  ii.  16 ;  Heb.  iii.  6).  Jesus  might  have  claimed  exemption  upon  higher
ground  than  that  on  which  exemption  was  conceded  to  the  priests  who  ministered  in
the  temple.  (3)  Those  who  are  Christ's  share  in  his  rights  as  the  song  of  God.  Hence
the  manner  in  which  Jesus  associates  Peter  with  himself  in  this  matter  of  the  tribute.
"  For  me  and  thee  "  (ver.  27).  The  disciples  of  Jesus,  like  the  priests  that  ministered
in  the  temple,  should  be  free.  And  here  is  a  hint  that  disciples  of  Jesus  should  be
released  from  Levitical  obligations  in  general.  (4)  Instead  of  arguing  this  question
with  the  collector,  Jesus  left  it  to  be  disposed  of  by  the  issue  of  events.  How  truly
great  is  he  in  his  calm  self-possession  I    3.  Now  look  at  the  manner  of  his  submission.

(1)  He  waives  his  claim  in  tenderness  toward  the  prejudices  of  men.  "  Lest  we
should  offend  them."  Note  :  Men  occupied  in  worldly  concerns  are  most  ready  to  be
offended  with  the  saints  in  money  matters.  Lest  these  persons,  being  ignorant  of  his
Divine  character,  should  impute  his  refusal  to  impiety.     Love  will  conciliate  prejudice.

(2)  Consider  further  the  extent  to  which  he  carried  that  tenderness.  A  miracle  is
wrought  to  avoid  giving  offence.  How  original  is  the  conduct  of  Christ  in  this  1  How
great  is  he  in  that  originality  I  (3)  Here,  then,  is  our  Example.  The  loving  Spirit
will  do  anything  for  peace  but  sacrifice  justice  and  truth  (cf.  1  Cor.  viii.  13 ;  Rom.
xvi.  13).  Note :  The  business  of  Christians  is  with  the  morals  of  the  world  rather
than  with  the  politics  of  nktions.  In  improving  the  morals  of  the  world  they  go  to
the  very  root  of  the  evils  in  the  politics  of  nations.  4.  View  the  greatness  of  Jesus  in  his
superiority  to  the  world.  (1)  He  elected  poverty.  What  poverty  is  this  I  He  has  not
in  possession  fifteen  pence  to  satisfy  a  collector  of  tribute.  Note :  The  original  dis-
ciples did  not  follow  him  for  worldly  gain.  His  high  example  may  reconcile  his  dis-
ciples to  privation.  (2)  But  what  resources  are  associated  with  this  poverty!  The
miracle  of  the  fish  showed  omnipotence  and  omniscience  in  many  ways.  The  fish
must  be  taken ;  it  must  be  taken  immediately ;  it  must  bring  up  money ;  the^rs^  fish
must  bring  it  up ;  the  coin  must  be  a  stater.  Note :  The  disciples  of  Jesus  in  their
poverty  may  trust  his  providence.  He  can  as  surely  supply  their  needs  without  as  by
miracle.  (3)  The  poverty  of  Jesus  was  voluntary.  The  power  which  commanded
that  stater  could  have  summoned  boundless  wealth.  It  is  Clirist-like  to  forego  oppor-
tunities of  wealth  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake.  (4)  When  will  men  discern  it
practically,  that  there  are  better  things  than  money  ? — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  1. — The  mission  of  the  selected  ones.  On  three  occasions  it  is  reported  that  omr
Lord  took  three  of  the  disciples  apart  with  him ;  and  it  was  always  the  same  three.
We  need  not,  however,  assume  that  the  reported  cases  were  the  only  cases.  Observing
them,  we  note  that  they  were  representative  instances.  In  the  first  case,  the  raising
of  the  little  maid,  special  witnesses  were  needed  for  the  surprising  miracle,  the  restora-
tion of  the  dead.    In  the  other  two  cases — Transfiguration  and  Gethsemane — ^we  have


202  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvil  1—27.

glimpses  of  the  private  life  and  experience  of  Jesua  with  which  the  ordinary  disciples
had  no  direct  concern.  It  need  not  have  been  told  ua  how,  or  when,  or  where  Jesus
conducted  his  private  devotions,  or  what  happened  on  such  occasioas.  Jesus  had  these
three  with  him  for  two  reasons.  1.  For  company.  2.  That  the  revelation  of  his
mystery  might  be  kept  for  a  while,  and  revealed  when  the  life-maDifestation  was  com-
plete, and  his  Divine  Person  and  mission  could  be  understood.  The  reason  for  the
selection  of  these  three  is  to  be  found  in  our  Lord's  estimate  of  character.  He  illustrates
the  Divine  election,  which  is  always  a  Divine  selection,  in  view  of  fitness  for  position.
In  these  three  men  we  can  see  a  power  of  faith,  and  a  power  of  enthusiastic  personal
attachment,  which  sufSce  to  account  for  their  selection.

I.  Theib  mission  was  to  keep  theib  Satioub  coupaht.  It  is  strange  that  in
times  of  distress  and  excitement  we  both  crave  to  be  ^lone,  and  crave  to  have  some  one
trustworthy  with  us.  We  have  mingled  feelings — we  want  to  be  alone ;  we  cannot  bear
to  be  alone.  In  his  fellowship  with  us  in  this  peculiarity  we  gain  a  full  impression  of
our  Lord's  humanity.    It  comes  out  even  in  a  more  striking  way  in  Gethsemane.

II.  Theib  mission  was  to  receive  impbessionb  from  our  Lord's  private  life.
It  would  not  have  been  a  private  scene  if  all  the  disciples  had  been  on  the  mount.
Our  Lord  had  a  private  life  quite  distinct  from  that  public  life  which  was  the  common
property  of  disciples.  Our  Lord  had  right  to  that  private  life  undisturbed.  And  yet
some  of  the  best  revelations  of  his  "  Person "  and  "  mission  "  came  to  view  in  such
strictly  private  experiences  as  Gethsemane  and  Transfiguration ;  so  a  selection  from  the
apostolate  was  permitted  to  invade  his  privacy.

m.  Their  mission  was  to  keep  secret  fob  a  time  theib  impbessionb.  The
twelve  would  never  have  kept  such  a  secret.  The  three  might,  especially  as  they
really  did  not  understand  the  scene.  They  had  to  keep  it  as  a  mystery  which  time
would  unfold.

IV.  Theib  mission  was  to  bevbal  the  mystery  of  Christ's  pbiyatb  lifk
WEEN  'THAT  coiTLD  BE  MADE  EFFECTIVE.  See  St.  Peter's  use  of  his  experiences
(2  Pet.  i.  16— 18).— R.  T.

Ver.  3. — The  reappearance  of  Moses  and  Elias,  St.  Luke  materially  adds  to  our
knowledge  of  this  scene  when  he  tells  us  the  subject  of  the  conversation  of  this
mysterious  company.  They  "spake  of  his  decease  which  he  should  accomplish  at
Jerusalem."  It  may  be  seeing  deeper  into  the  mystery  of  the  scene  if  we  can
apprehend  that,  for  the  time,  Jesus  was  out  of  the  bodily  and  within  the  spiritual  sphere
to  which  Moses  and  Elias  belonged.  Instead  of  thinking  that  they  came  down  to  him,
it  is  better  to  think  be  was  with  them.  That  Transfiguration  was  the  temporary
freedom  of  the  Son  of  God  from  his  body  limitations;  a  temporary  resumption  of
heavenly  conditions  in  a  heavenly  sphere ;  a  freedom  from  the  human  for  the  sake  of  a
time  of  Divine  and  spiritual  communion.  The  scene  lay  in  that  region  of  the  super-
natural which  was  the  proper,  the  eternal,  sphere  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  Transfigura-
tion cannot  be  understood  apart  from  a  careful  estimate  of  Christ's  circumstances  and
moods  of  mind  at  this  time.  He  had  been  virtually  rejected  in  Galilee.  His  work
there  was  finished.  He  retired  northward,  depressed  in  spirit.  The  failure  in  Galilee
seemed  a  foreshadowing  of  the  great  failure.  He  was  beginning  to  tread  the  pathway
at  whose  end  was  a  cross  of  shame.  But  why  did  Christ  anticipate?  Why  did  he
not  do  the  duty  of  the  hour,  and  leave  the  morrow  to  take  care  of  the  things  of  itself  ?
Explain  that  the  virtue  of  Christ's  death  lay  in  its  being  a  voluntary  surrender ;  no
mere  accident — a  real  sacrifice.  Then  it  must  be  known,  distinctly  thought  about,  and
accepted  beforehand.  The  glory  came  whou  he,  in  prayer,  was  wrestling  to  gain  a  full
acceptance  of  this  will  of  God  that  ht  should  suffer.  A  part  of  his  comforting  came
from  the  commtmion  of  representative  moii.

I.  The  LIGHTER   VIEW  OF   THE   BEAPPBABAWOB   OF   MOSEB   AND   ElIAS.      There   is  •

view  with  which  we  are  so  familiar  thati,  maybe,  we  have  never  even  thought  of
criticizing  it.  All  the  comment&rieg  say,  "  The  representatives  of  the  Law  and  the
prophets,"  though  the  reason  for  choosing;  Blijah  to  represent  the  prophets  is  never
wggested.  These  two  men  are  assumed  to  have  given  the  witness  of  the  Jewish
Church  to  our  Lord's  death.

II.  The  d?sepeb  tjbw  of  thk  mafpeajanob  of  Moseb  and  Euab.    "  The  presence


OH.  xvn.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  203

of  MoseB  and  Elias  suggests  far-off  unknown  relations  to,  and  vibrations  of  joy  to,  the
pre-Messianic  children  of  light."  "  He  conversed  with  his  great  predecessors,  Moses
and  Elias,  who  could  thoroughly  sympathize  with  him,  and  whose  work  his  death  was
to  fulfil."  These  were  the  two  men  most  profoundly  interested  in  the  recovery  and
redemption  of  men.  And  therefore  they  were  so  supremely  interested  in  the  work  of
Christ.  Even  these  three  disciples  could  not  give  Jesus  full  sympathy.  St.  Peter's
foolish  talk  showed  that  they  could  not.  Jesus  found  sympathy  in  glorified  asints. —
R.  T.

Yer.  5. — A  repetition  of  the  Divine  approval.  The  Transfiguration  does  not  stand
alone  in  our  Lord's  life.  There  are  two  other  scenes  with  which  it  may  be  compared.
"  The  one  is  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  him,  under  the  symbol  of  a  brooding
dove,  after  his  baptism."  The  other  is  the  sound  as  of  thunder,  and  the  responding
voice  of  the  Father,  saying  of  his  Father-Name,  "I  have  both  glorified  it,  and  will
glorify  it  again."  And  it  should  be  noticed  that  the  first  direct  manifestation  of  God
to  Christ — at  his  baptism — Kjccurred  as  the  beginning  of  his  active  mission  as  a  Teacher.
The  second — at  the  Transfiguration — occurred  as  the  starting  of  Christ  on  the  suffering
portion  of  his  mission.  And  the  third — the  thunder-voice — as  a  precise  assurance  and
encouragement  when  our  Lord  was  entering  upon  his  Passion.

L  The  -key-note  of  Christ's  life  was  doing  his  Fathee's  will.  See  his  words
at  twelve  years  of  age.  He  would  not  only  do  his  Father's  will,  but  do  it  in  the
Father's  way ;  and  bear  it,  if  it  involved  bearing.  Otu:  Lord's  meat  and  drink  were  to
do  the  will  of  his  Father.

II.  The  joy  or  Chbist's  life  was  to  bboeivb  signs  of  the  Divine  appboval.
We  can  hardly  imagine  how  delightful  to  the  obedient  Son  must  have  been  these  voices
out  of  heaven.  And  never  was  the  voice  more  strengthening  than  when  our  Lord  was
proposing  to  himself  a  full  surrender  to  the  Father's  will,  which  involved  humiliation,
suffering,  seeming  failure,  and  death.  Christ  purposed  to  "  accomplish  a  decease."  The
term  is  a  striking  and  suggestive  one.  Christ's  death  was  something  he  did,  "  accom-
plished ; "  it  was  not  merely  something  he  suffered.  His  own  will  was  in  it.  He  laid
down  his  life.  He  gave  himself  for  us.  He  offered  in  sacrifice  his  obedient  Sonship,
trhat  saves  us.  That  Moses  and  Elias  approve.  That  God  the  Father  approves.
The  Transfiguration  was  chiefly  intended  for  our  Lord  himself.  "  It  was  a  great  gift  of
his  Father,  an  acknowledgment  of  his  faithfulness  up  to  this  point,  and  a  preparation
for  what  lay  before  him."  "  To  Jesus  the  recognition  of  his  Father's  voice  must  have
been  a  repetition  of  the  transcendant  joy  of  the  baptismal  greeting.  Must  we  not  say
that  for  the  moment  all  else  was  forgotten,  or  in  that  absorbed ;  that

**  He  heard  not,  saw  not,  felt  not  aught  beside,

Through  the  wide  worlds  of  pleasure  and  of  pain.
Save  the  full  flowing  and  the  ample  tide
Of  that  celestial  strain  "  ?

B.T.

Ver.  8. — 2%e  transitory  and  the  permanent.  It  almost  seems  as  if  St.  Peter's  foolish
speech  spoilt  the  scene.  It  is  said  that  "  while  he  yet  spake,  behold,  a  bright  cloud
overshadowed  them."  It  might  be  a  "bright  cloud,"  but  it  effectually  shut  out  firom
view  the  glorified  visitors  and  the  transfigured  Lord.  True,  out  of  it  came  the
marvellous  voice,  which  so  alarmed  the  disciples  that  they  "  fell  on  their  face,  and
wers  sore  afraid."  But  when  the  cloud  paased,  and  Jesus  bade  them  "arise,"  the
glory  was  all  gone;  there  was  only  Jesus,  and  he  was  just  as  they  were  accustomed
to  see  him.  It  is  a  peculiarity  of  Mount  Hermon  that  a  cloud  wiU  be  seen  to  form
with  extreme  rapidity  on  its  summit,  and  with  equal  rapidity  disperse  and  disappear.
The  point  on  which  we  dwell  is,  that  St.  Peter  made  a  grave  mistake  when  he  wanted  a
special  scene  to  be  made  a  permanent  one.  The  transitory  and  the  permanent  each
have  their  mission  and  their  proper  relations.  There  is  no  wisdom  in  wishing  to
confuse  them.     Take  each  in  its  place.    Illustrate  this.

I.  The  tbansitoey  is  the  globified  Chbist;  the  pebmanent  is  the  human
Chbist.  Only  for  a  little  while  could  the  earth-bonds  be  loosened,  and  the  glory  which
Christ  waa,  shine  fireely  out.    That  was  not  fitting  for  the  continuous  earth-relations.


204  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27.

i
For  th«  present  the  permanent  thing  was  the  human  body,  with   its   limitations,
endurances,  and  sufferings.     But  the  relief-moments  must  have  brought  holiest  joy.
(For  Christ's  voluntary  limitations,  see  Phil,  ii.)

II.  The  transitoky  is  tub  season  of  hiqh  bkvelation  ;  the  permanent  I8  the
coMMONPLAOE,  EVERYDAY  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE.  Christian  biographies  preserve
records  of  ecstatic  scenes  and  experiences  enjoyed  by  Christ's  people.  In  their  very
nature  such  things  must  be  transitory.  They  would  not  be  what  they  are  if  they
continued.  But  what  a  help  and  cheer  they  are  to  us  in  the  wearing  and  wearying
experieace  of  everyday  Christian  life  1  Yet  is  not  this  the  fact — we  might  oltener
have  the  cheer  of  vision  and  revelation  if  we  set  ourselves  in  the  way,  and  climbed  the
lonely  mount  for  prayer?

III.  The    TRANSITORY    18  THE   BBLIBF-TIMB ;    THE    PERMANENT    IS    THE   WOEK-TIME.

But  a  man  cannot  permanently  work  unless  he  secures  his  transitory  reliefs.  The
restings  of  life  are  not  idlings  or  wastings.  Transfiguration  means  soul-preparation?
for  Calvary.

IV.  The  transitory  is  the  tbiomph-time  ;  thk  permanent  is  the  butfebing-
TiME.  What  makes  life  so  hard  is  that  successes  are  so  brief.  Right  upon  them  wt>
have  to  be  down  in  the  valleys  of  toil  and  suffering. — B.  T.

Ver.  9. — Holy  reticence.  Some  of  those  with  whom  our  Lord  had  to  do  wrought
much  mischief  by  failing  in  wise  reticence.  -Told  to  keep  their  secrets,  they  bls^ed
abroad  their  matter,  and  created  a  public  excitement  which  our  Lord  felt  bound  to
avoid.  Reserve  is  said  to  be  the  "  bane  of  friendship ; "  but  reserve  may  be  a  sign  of
wise  self-control  and  skilful  estimate  of  circumstances  and  responsibilities.  Beticence
must  be  distinguished  from  untruthfulness.  We  should  always  tell  the  truth,  but  it
is  often  our  duty  to  say  nothing.  This,  however,  sometimes  becomes  distressing,
because  of  our  fear  that  saying  nothing  will  leave,  or  will  sustain,  a  false  impression.
Here  our  Lord  commanded  reticence.  The  three  apostles  were  not  to  talk  to  the  rest
of  the  apostolic  company  of  what  they  had  seen  and  heard.  They  were  to  say  nothing
whatever  about  it  outside  their  company.  Let  us  see  what  may  make  reticence
appropriate,  right,  and  wise.

I.  Betioencb  relattvb  to  pbivacy.  It  cannot  be  too  forcibly  impressed  that  the
Transfiguration  is  not  an  event  in  the  public  life  of  Jesus.  It  belongs  to  his  private
heart-history  and  experience,  and  only  for  very  special  reasons  is  any  report  of  it  given.
If  we  do  come  to  know  some  great  passage  in  a  brother  Christian's  private  experience,
we  properly  keep  the  secret,  at  least  so  long  as  he  lives.  It  would  be  bad  lor  him,  and
bad  for  all  who  know  him,  if  it  were  talked  about.  Much  mischief  Is  done,  much
bloom  is  taken  off  Christian  life,  by  too  great  readiness  to  talk  about  what  belongs  to  a
man's  private  feeling.    Jesus  shrank  from  common  talk  about  his  transfiguration.

II.  Ketioenoe  belative  to  timeliness.  This  is  brought  out  by  our  Lord's
limiting  silence  "until  the  Sou  of  man  be  risen  again  from  the  dead."  There  are
times  and  seasons  for  everything.  The  wise  man  watches,  and  fits  his  ways  to  times ;
the  impulsive  man  is  always  upsetting  things  by  simple  untimeliness.  This  was
St.  Peter's  mistake,  and  our  Lord  may  have  designed  the  caution  specially  for  him.
Happy  they  who  can  keep  silence  till  the  time  to  speak  I

III.  Betiobnob  BELATiVE  TO  CAPACITY.  The  narrative  of  the  Transfiguration  might
have  been  given  to  the  other  apostles  if  they  had  been  on  a  sufficiently  high  spiritual
plane  to  have  entered  into  it.  But  it  is  only  too  evident  that  they  could  not  receive
any  references  to  our  Lord's  decease.  The  report  of  the  vision,  if  then  made,  would
only  have  bewildered  them.  Keep  it  back.  Wait  until  the  complete  circle  of  historical
facts  relating  to  Christ  is  complete ;  then,  maybe,  they  will  see  the  meaning  of  the
Transfiguration. — ^B.  T.

Ver.  11. — The  coming  qf  Miai,  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  the  general  conviction
of  our  Lord's  time,  that  the  Prophet  Elijah  was  about  to  reappear,  "  Elijah  was  the
prophet  for  whose  return  in  later  years  his  countrymen  have  looked  with  most  eager
hope.  ...  It  was  a  fixed  belief  of  the  Jews  that  he  had  appeared  again  aud  again,  as
an  Arabian  merchant,  to  wise  and  good  rabbis  at  their  prayers  or  on  their  journeys.  A
■eat  is  still  placed  for  him  to  superintend  the  circumcsaioD  if  the  Jewish  children*


OH.  iVii.  1— 27.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  206


Passover  after  Passover  the  Jews  of  our  own  day  place  the  Paschal  cup  on  the  table,  and
set  the  door  wide  open,  believing  that  that  is  the  moment  when  Elijah  will  reappear.
When  goods  are  found  and  no  owner  comes,  when  difficulties  arise  and  no  solution
appears,  the  answer  is,  '  Put  them  by  till  Elijah  comes ' "  (Stanley).  Edersheim  tells
us  that  Babbi  Eliezer  closes  a  curious  chapter  on  repentance  with  these  words,  "  And
Israel  will  not  make  great  repentance  till  Elijah^-his  memory  for  blessing — comes."
The  question  of  the  apostles  was  suggested  by  the  fact  that,  on  the  mount,  Elijah  had
come,  but  had  not  stayed,  so  as  to  accomplish  anything.  Our  Lord  intimates  that  the
appearance  they  had  seen  was  not  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Elijah's  coming ;
for  that  they  must  look  elsewhere.  John  the  Baptist  reproduced  Elijah,  and  may  be
thought  of  as  Elijah  come  again.

L  EiiiJAH  ASS  John  wbbe  both  fbepasebs.  There  was  nothing  like  completion
in  the  work  of  either.  Both  were  mere  beginners.  Both  would  have  been  failures  if
their  work  had  not  been  followed  up  by  others.  Compare  the  work  of  civilizing  a  new
country.  The  hunter  with  his  rifle  goes  first ;  then  comes  the  woodman  with  his
axe ;  and  then  the  farmer  with  his  plough.  So  in  the  moral  world.  There  are  men
who  only  prepare.  Theirs  is  trying  work,  because  its  results  cannot  be  counted  or
measured.  Yet  their  praise  is  sure,  if  they  prepared  well.  Estimate  the  work  of
Elijah  as  preparing  for  the  return  of  the  people  to  Jehovah  ;  and  of  John  as  preparing
the  minds  of  men  for  receiving  a  spiritual  Messiah.

II.  Elijah  and  John  week  pbeachbbb.  Proclaimers  of  messages  from  God.  Both
had  virtually  the  same  message — Repent,  return  to  God.  Change  your  minds  con-
cerning God  and  the  claims  of  God.  But  the  true  preacher  is  a  witness  as  truly  as  a
herald,  Elijah  witnesses  for  the  "living  God  before  whom  I  stand."  John  witnesses
to  the  "  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." — R.  T.

Ver.  16. — Causet  of  fafhiirp  in  spiritual  potoer.  "  1  brought  him  to  thy  disciples,
and  they  could  not  cure  him."  Now,  these  very  disciples  had  been  able  to  heal  and
cure  and  restore,  when  on  their  trial-mission.  They  had  returned  to  their  Lord  greatly
excited,  and  saying,  "  Even  the  devils  are  subject  to  us  in  thy  Name."  It  does  not.
however,  appear  that  they  had  healing  powers  when  their  Master  was  present.  True,
he  was  not  present  on  this  particular  occasion,  but  he  wan  only  temporarily  absent,  and  he
had  left  them  with  no  particular  commission.  It  is  easy  to  find  excuses  for  their  failing
and  their  feeling.  Jesus  does  not  so  much  reprove  them  as  mourn  over  them.  They  did
not  come  up  to  the  standard  he  desired;  they  did  not  grow  spiritually.  Their  failure
showed  failure  to  attain  spiritual  power.  It  is  plain  that  the  disciples  were  not  fitted  to
receive  news  of  the  glorious  but  mysterious  scene  of  the  Transfiguration.  Our  Lord  sug-
gests two  explanations  of  the  failure  of  the  disciples :  they  were  "  faithless  and  perverse."

L  One  obeat  cause  is  belf-oektbedness.  This  is  the  mood  which  is  indicated  by
their  question,  "  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  t"  It  really  was  not  a  question  of
their  casting  out.  It  was  a  question  of  their  Lord's  power  to  cast  out,  and  of  their
Lord's  gracious  willingness  to  make  them  his  agents  in  the  casting  out.  They  had
come  to  be  interested  in  what  tfiey  could  do;  and,  like  the  man  who  walks  on  a  giddy
height,  they  began  to  turn  giddy  as  soon  as  they  looked  down  to  watch  the  goings  of
their  own  feet.  The  greatest  secret  of  failure  in  spiritual  power  is  still  the  growing  up
of  self-centredness ;  the  turning  of  our  eyes  in  upon  ourselves;  the  supreme  interest  iu
what  we  can  be,  or  in  what  we  can  do.  If  these  disciples  had  been  able  to  cure,  they
would  have  been  proud  of  their  power ;  and  that  would  have  been  ruinous  to  their
Christian  standing.  Humbling  lessons  of  failure  are  necessary  to  break  as  off  from
dangerous  self-centralizing.

II.  Anotheb  great  oausb  IB  XTNBELiEF,  But  this  is  not  to  be  taken  in  its  active
form.  What  is  meant  here  is  weakness,  ineffectiveness  of  faith.  It  was  not  there,
ready  for  an  emergency.  An  unexpected  demand  was  made  on  faith,  and  faith  was
caught  at  unawares.  It  was  no  question  of  denying  truths.  It  was  a  question  of
daily  reliance,  mood  of  trust,  the  life  of  faith,  the  state  of  mind  and  heart  that  finds
such  noble  expression  in,  St.  Paul's  words,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  him  who
Btrengtheneth  me."  These  disciples  should  have  had  an  established  faith  which  linked
them  to  the  Divine  power  of  their  Master,  and  would  have  given  them  power  to  us«  his
power  to  heal.— R.  T.


206  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvn.  1—27.


Vor.  21. — Self-discipline  the  secret  of  moral  power.  "  Howbeit  this  kind  goeth  noi
out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting."  There  is  some  uncertainty  about  the  word  "  fasting."
The  Revised  Version  omits  the  verse  altogether.  It  is  found,  however,  in  Mark's
Gospel,  and  introduces  a  valuable  topic,  which  finds  other  expression  in  our  Lord's
teaching.  A  man  can  only  be  ready  for  a  time  of  strain  by  constant  and  careful
training.  A  man,  to  be  always  ready,  must  be  always  disciplining  himself.  And  if  his
work  is  to  take  specially  serious  forms,  his  trainings  and  preparations  must  be  specially
adapted.  Carefully  distinguish  between  the  moral  character  of  self-discipline,  which  aims
at  gaining  acceptance,  and  of  self-discipline,  which  aims  at  faithfulness,  and  power  to  serve.

I.  SBLF-DisciPLiNii,  ITS  0HARACTBRI8TI0  FBATUEBS.  Character  is  the  product  of
self-discipline.  Our  natural  dispositions  are  not  our  character ;  it  needs  to  be  more
clearly  seen  that  character  is  something  that  a  man  wins  by  effort,  or  fails  to  win  by
wilfully  making  no  effort.  The  measure  of  a  man's  self-discipline  is  the  measure  of  his
nobility ;  it  is  the  sign  of  his  manhood.  This  is  true  in  the  lower  sphere,  but  it  is
much  more  true  in  the  higher  sphere.  Self-discipline  provides  an  infallible  test  of
the  Christian  man,  whose  moderation,  whose  self-restraint,  should  be  known  in  all
things.  The  terms,  "  prayer," "  fasting,"  classify  the  characteristic  features  of  Chris-
tian self-discipline.  1.  Prayer  heads  and  represents  all  the  positive  forms.  2.  Fasting
heads  and  represents  all  the  negative  forms.  Self-discipline  is  often  misconceived,
because  it  is  represented  only  by  fasting.  It  is  thought  of  as  only  self-restraints,
personal  deprivations,  bodily  austerities,  stern  dealings  even  with  our  pleasant  things.
Fasting  represents  bodily  subduings  and  humiliations.  The  Christian  self-discipline
is  more  vigorous  on  the  positive  side.  Prayer  represents  putting  life  into  good  shape ;
ordering  our  habits ;  making  and  using  all  pious  opportunities ;  laying  hold  of  the
strength  of  God.    There  is  so  much  to  do  as  well  as  so  much  to  undo.

II.  SELr-DisciPLiNB,  ITS  CHABACTERiSTio  EFFBOTS.  The  Weak  man  is  the  undis-
ciplined man,  who  is  mastered  by  himself.  A  man  gains  moral  power  as  he  gains
control  over  himself.  A  man  never  finds  a  harder  foe  to  conquer,  when  he  has
mastered  his  own  habits  and  passions.  And  our  Lord  here  shows  that  no  man  can
possibly  have  power  to  influence  others  unto  noble  attainments  until  he  has  won
power  over  himself.  The  parent  does  no  good  with  his  children  while  he  keeps  his
own  character  undisciplined. — ^E.^T.

Ver.  23. — Hints  concerning  the  coming  Besurrection.  "The  third  day  he  shall  be
raised  again."  Our  Lord  tried  to  prepare  his  disciples  for  his  resurrection  by  frequent
allusions  to  it,  and  yet  they  never  seemed  to  be  able  to  take  it  into  their  souls.
Perhaps  they  thought  he  was  only  speaking  in  his  usual  figurative  and  paradoxical
way,  though  what  he  really  meant  they  were  unable  to  guess.  The  disciples  would
not  allow  themselves  to  contemplate  their  Lord's  violent  death ;  and  they  could  not
rise  to  conceive  of  his  abiding  spiritual  presence  ai  altogether  more  important  than  his
temporary  bodily  presence.  Our  Lord  made  much  of  hU  coming  resurrection.  Can  we
understand  what  it  was  to  him  ?

I.  The  Rbsdbbection  estimates  the  olosb  of  a  habd  life.  Our  Lord's  human
life  was  a  hard  life.  That  is  the  best  word  for  it,  because  human  life  is  hard  that
involves  constant  humiliation  and  self-restraint.  We  should  avoid  exaggeration  in
speaking  of  Jesus  as  "a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  Life  is  hard  for
the  man  who  is  "  cribb'd,  cabined,  and  confined,"  and  has  always  to  be  forcing  his
will  into  subjection  to  a  superior  will.  Our  Lord's  trouble  was  the  power  of  the  body
to  affect  the  wiU ;  but  that  would  be  done  away  with  in  the  Resurrection.

II.  The  Bbsubeeotion  lifts  his  thought  oveb  the  last  btbugolb.  Illustrate  by
the  patient  anticipating  a  serious  operation.     The  best  thing  you  can  do  to  cheer  him

s  to  lift  his  thoughts  over  that  time,  away  beyond  that  time,  to  the  time  of  con-
valescence, and  what  is  to  be  done  then.  So  Jesus  had  Gethsemane,  judgment-halls,
and  Calvary  to  go  through,  and  his  best  cheer  was  to  slip  over  them,  and  think  of  the
glorious  resurrection-life  beyond.

ni.  The  Besubbbotion  was  thb  sign  of  thk  aockptancb  of  his  wobk.  His
release  from  the  grave  was  the  intimation  of  Divine  approval,  and  the  occasion  for
giving  him  his  trust  of  the  work  of  saving  humanity.  To  think  of  that  acceptance
assured  Christ  that  the  Father's  smile  was  on  him  while  he  was  working  and  guh'ering.


OH.  xvin.  1—35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


207


rV.  The  Bebubbection  was  the  time  when  he  could  become  thb  spibitual
powEB  HE  WASTED  TO  BE.  TMs  point  will  Open  out  with  some  freshness.  Jesus
always  wanted  to  be  a  spiritual  power  in  the  sonls  of  men.  While  he  was  in  the  body,
the  body  seemed  both  to  help  and  to  hinder  both  him  and  them.  It  was  a  necessary
help  for  a  time,  but  Jesus  longed  for  the  risen  and  ascended  life,  in  whioh  he  could  be
unhindered  spiritual  power  to  redeem  and  save. — R.  T.

Ver.  27. — JTie  avoidance  of  needless  offence.  The  miracle  of  the  stater  in  the  fish's
mouth  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  miracles  to  deal  wisely  with ;  and  that  for  this  reason-
it  seems  to  be  opposed  to  the  principle  our  Lord  adopted,  and  so  readily  carried  through,
that  he  would  work  no  miracle  for  the  supply  of  his  own  needs.  All  Christ's  miracles
are  acts  of  service ;  sometimes  evidently  the  service  of  teaching  moral  and  spiritual
truth  to  his  disciples.  But  if  this  incident  be  carefully  observed,  it  will  be  seen  that,
though  the  supernatmral  element  is  clearly  present,  the  precisely  miraculous  element
is  absent.  Christ,  by  supernatural  power,  knew  which  fish  would  first  seize  St.  Peter's
hook,  and  what  would  be  found  in  that  fish ;  but  not  a  word  is  said  which  intimates
that  Christ  put  forth  miraculous  power  in  order  to  place  that  stater  in  the  fish's  mouth.
There  is,  indeed,  no  miracle  to  explain  to  those  who  believe  in  the  Divine-human
nature  of  Christ.  The  point  we  take  is  the  reason  given  by  Jesus  for  allowing  this
tax-money  to  be  paid — "Lest  we  should  offend  them."  Those  who  note  the  finer
shades  of  language  can  scarcely  fail  to  trace  in  these  words  the  tone  of  what  we  should
describe  in  a  human  teacher  as  a  half-playful,  half-serious  irony.

L  Thebe  abb  times  when  we  do  well  to  STAND  TO  ODB  BIGHTS.  There  were  such
times  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  Standing  on  our  dignity  is  a  very  doubtful  thing.  A
man's  dignity  is  but  a  poor  thing  if  it  cannot  take  care  of  itself.  But  every  man  has
rights.  He  ought  to  be  prepared  to  assert  them  on  all  fitting  occasions.  A  man's
rights  represent  his  trust,  liis  mission  for  God,  and  he  must  be  jealous  of  them.

II.  Thbee  abb  timeb  when  we  do  well  not  to  pkesb  otjb  BIGHTS.  It  may  be  that
men  do  not  recognize  them,  or  do  not  admit  them,  as  in  the  case  of  Christ.  Then  we
do  better  to  live  them  rather  than  assert  them.  It  may  be  that  those  around  us  are
unsympathetic  and  prepared  to  object,  as  in  the  case  of  Christ.  Then  Christian  pru-
dence advises  a  careM  reticence,  lest  we  offend  them.

III.  The  skill  of  Christian  living  is  seen  in  disoebninq  the  time  to  aot,  and
the  time  to  befbain  from  acting.  Many  things  are  not  abstractly  right,  but  are
relatively  right.  We  have  to  act  in  view  of  existing  circumstances,  in  ways  we  should
not  adopt  if  all  the  circumstances  were  according  to  our  mind.  A  Christian  should  not
hesitate  to  give  offence,  but  he  should  avoid  giving  needlms  offence. — B.  T.


Exposrrioiir.


OHAPTEE  XVni.


Vers.  1 — 35. — Diseowrse  eoneeming  the
greatett  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the
mutual  ditties  of  Chrietiam.  (Mark  ix.  33—
50 ;  Luke  ix.  46—50.)

Vers.  1 — 1. — The  greateet  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven.

'  Ver.  1. — At  the  same  time ;  literally,  tn
thai  hour.  The  narrator  connects  the  follow-
ing important  discourse  with  the  ciroum-
Btanoes  just  previously  related.  Peter  had
completed  the  business  of  the  didraohma,
and  had  rejoined  the  body  of  disciples.
These,  according  to  St.  Mark,  had  disputed
about  precedency  on  the  way  to  Capernaum.
Fired  with  the  notion  that  their  Master


would  ere  long  publicly  assert  his  Messianio
claims,  which,  in  their  view,  implied  tem-
poral sovereignty  and  secular  power,  they
looked  forward  to  becoming  dignitaries  in
this  new  kingdom.  Three  of  them  had  been
honoured  with  special  marks  of  favour;  one
of  them  had  been  pre-eminently  distin-
guished :  how  would  it  be  when  the  coming
empire  was  established?  This  had  been
the  subject  of  conversation,  and  had  given
rise  to  some  contention  among  them.  Christ
had  marked  the  dispute,  but  had  said  nothing
at  the  time.  Now  he  gives  them  a  lesson
in  humility,  and  teaches  the  spiritual  nature
of  his  kingdom,  in  which  earthly  pride  and
ambition  find  no  place.  Vrom  St.  Mark  we
learn  that  Jesus  himself  took  the  initiative
in  the  discourse,  asking  the  disciples  con-
cerning their  disputation  on  the  road ;  and.


208


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvm.  1— S5.


when  they  were  aaliamed  to  answer,  he
added,  "  If  any  man  desire  to  be  first,  the
same  shall  be  last  of  all,  and  servant  of  all."
Our  Gospel  here  takes  up  the  story.  The
paradox  seemed  Incomprehensible;  bo  they
put  the  question,  Who  is  the  greatest  in  the
kingdom  of  heaven  1  The  Greek  is,  Tls  &pa
lift((iiy  i(FTlv,  K.T.\.!  Who  then  i»  greater  i
Vulgate,  Quit,  pviai,  major  esti  The
illative  pai  tide  "  then "  refers  to  what  is
recorded  in  St.  Mark  (ix.  34),  or  to  some
such  difficulty  in  the  querists'  mind.  They
make  the  inquiry  in  the  present  tense,  as
though  Christ  had  already  selected  the  one
who  was  to  preside ;  and  by  the  kingdom  of
heaven  they  mean  the  Messianic  kingdom  on
earth,  concerning  which  their  notions  did
not  yet  rise  aboTe  those  of  their  contempo-
raries (comp.  Acts  i.  6).  The  comparative
in  the  orip;iDal,"greater,"  is  virtually  equiva-
lent to  the  superlative,  as  it  is  translated  in
the  Authorized  Version.  Such  a  question
as  the  above  could  not  have  been  asked  had
the  apostles  at  this  time  recognized  any
absolute  pre-eminence  in  Peter  or  acknow-
ledged his  supremacy,

Ver.  2. — A  little  child.  Our  Lord  teaches,
not  only  by  spoken  parables,  but  by  sym-
bolical actions  also.  This  was  not  a  mere  in-
fant, as  Christ  is  said  to  have  called  him  nnto
him.  A  tradition,  mentioned  by  Nicephorus
('  Hist.  Eccl.,'  ii.  35),  asserts  that  this  child
was  the  famous  martyr  Ignatius.  Set  him
in  the  midst  of  them.  Taking  him  in  his
arms,  as  St.  Mark  tells.  What  a  picture  of
Christ's  tenderness  and  human  love  I  From
the  boy's  trustfulness  and  submission  he
draws  a  needed  lesson  for  the  ambitions
apostles.

Ver.  3. — Except  ye  he  converted  (o-t/jo-
0qTc);  i.e.  turned  from  proud,  ambitious
thoughts  of  worldly  dignity.  There  is  no
question  here  about  what  is  popularly  known
as  conversion — the  change  from  habitual  sin
to  holiness.  The  conversion  here  spoken  of
is  confined  to  a  change  in  the  present  state
of  mind — in  a  new  direction  given  to  the
thoughts  and  wishes.  The  apostles  had
ehown  rivalry,  jealousy,  ambition :  they  must
turn  away  from  such  failings,  find  learn  a
different  lesson.  Become  as  little  children.
Christ  points  to  little  children  as  the  model
to  which  the  members  of  his  kingdom  must
assimilate  themselves.  The  special  attri-
butes of  children  which  he  would  recommend
are  humility,  unworldlinees,  simplicity,
teachableness, — the  direct  contraiies  of  self-
seeking,  worldliness,  distrust,  conceit.  Te
shall  not  enter.  In  the  sermon  on  the  mount
Christ  had  said,  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in
spirit :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "
(ch.  T.  8).  To  all  who  are  not  such  the  gate
opens  not.  That  virtue  which  was  unknown
to  pagan  antiquity,  the  opposite  oharaoter


to  which  was  npholden  as  the  aome  of  ex-
cellence, Christ  here  asserts  to  be  the  only
passport  to  his  ideal  Church  on  earth  or  its
eternal  development  in  heaven.  Not  the
self-esteeming,  proud  man  (jtfya\irfiuxot)  ot
Aristotle's  worship  ('  Bth.  Nio.,'  iv.  8),  but
the  humble  (T07reivbs)i  ^^  lowly,  the  self-
depreoiatlng,  is  the  man  who  can  realize  his
position  in  the  spiritual  world,  and  shall  be
admitted  to  its  blessings  and  benefits,  St.
Paul  has  summarized  the  ideal  character  of
the  members  of  the  kingdom  in  1  Cor.  xiii.,
especially  vers.  4,  5,  and  7.

Ver.  4. — Whosoever  therefore.  This  verse
gives  a  direct  application  of  the  principle
just  enunciated,  and  supplies  an  answer  to
the  apostles'  question.  Shall  hnmble  him-
self. Not  that  a  child  oonsoinnsly  humbles
itself,  but  is  bumble  by  nature.  The  disoiple
must  become  that  by  deliberate  choice  which
the  child  is  by  reason  of  his  constitution  and
natural  disposition.  The  same  is  greatest;
rather,  greater  (jiel^av),  Christ  using  the
same  term  as  the  questioners  in  ver.  1.  The
more  a  man  annihilates  self  and  casts  away
pride,  conceit,  obstinacy,  the  fitter  is  he  to
become  a  living  member  of  Christ's  king-
dom. "  Quanto  humilior,  tanto  altior,"  says
Thomas  Aquinas.  But  this  ia  a  joint  work.
St.  Gregory  says  well,  •'  The  good  which  a
man  doeth  ia  both  the  work  of  God  and  thf.
work  of  man :  of  God,  as  heing  the  Author,
in  giving  grace ;  of  man,  as  being  actor,  in
using  grace,  yet  so  that  he  co-operate  with
grace  by  grace  "  (quoted  by  Ford,  in  loo.).

Vers.  S — 14. — The  treaiment  du»  to  tuoh.

Yer.  5. — Shall  receive  (tt  tiir  Uhrrai).  The
word  is  pregnant  with  meaning.  It  includes
not  only  the  showing  of  tender  affection  and
the  giving  of  material  succour,  such  as
hospitality,  shelter,  etc.,  but  alio  the  bestowal
of  help  and  support  in  spiritual  things,  en-
couragementinholineas,instrnotion in  Divine
lore.  One  snob  little  ebUi.  Primarily,  Jesus
refers  to  children,  pure  and  confiding  as  the
one  he  had  placed  in  the  midst;  but  his
words  are  applicable  to  all  who  have  the
childlike  spirit  and  oharaoter,  the  graces
which  he  specially  loves  and  rewards.  The
expressions  here  and  in  the  next  verse  must
be  understood  to  belong  in  some  eases  to  the
symbol,  and  in  others  to  the  symbolized.  In
my  Name  (^irl  t^J  ivSfLarl  /lov) ;  for  the  take  of
my  Name ;  because  he  belongs  to  me ;  not
merely  from  natural  affection  and  pity,  but
from  a  higher  motive,  because  the  child  hai
in  him  somewhat  of  Christ — is  the  child  of
God,  and  a  member  of  Christ.  Beoeiveth
me.  That  which  is  done  to  his  little  ones
Christ  regards  as  done  to  himself  (oomp.  oh.
X.  40 — 42).  What  a  blessing  waits  on  those,
who  teach  the  young,  working  laboriously
in  schools,  and  training  souls  for  heaven  I


OH.  XTin.  1— 35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


209


Thii  "receiving"  Christ  is  a  far  higlier  and
better  thing  than  being  "greattat"  in  an
earthly  kingdom,

Ver.  6. — There  ia  an  opposite  side  to  thig
picture.    Shall  offend;   cause  to  stumble —
giTe  occasion  for  a  fall,  i.e.  either  in  faith  or
morals.    This  is  done  by  evil  example,  by
teaoliing  to  sin,  by  sneers  at  piety,  by  giving
soft  names  to  gross  offences.     One  of  these
little  ones.    Whetlier  child  or  adult,  a  pure,
simple  Boul,  which  has  a  certain  faitli,  thuugh
it  be  not  strong  enough  to  resist  all  attack.
Even  the  heathen  recognized  the  respect  due
to  the  young :  "  Maxima  debetur  puero  rcve-
rentia  "  (Juvenal, '  Sat.,'  xiv.  47) ;  and  guile-
■  lessness  and  purity,  wherever  found,  win
some  regard, even  from  worthless  and  careless
observers.    To  wilfully  lead  one  such  astray
is  a  deadly  sin,  which  the  Lord  denounces
in  solemn  terms.    Christ  affectiouiitely  calls
his  disciples  "  little  ones  "  (oh.  x.  42).    Be-
lieve in  (fis)  me.      We  must  always  dis-
tinguish between  "  believe  in  "  (Tnariiiiv
eis,  or  iv ;  credo  in)  and  "  believe "  witli
the  simple  dative ;  the  former  is  applied  to
faith  In  God  alone.    Says  St.  Augustine,
"  C^edimus  Paulo,  sed  non    credimus   .in
Panlum."    In  the  present  passage  the  phrase
implies  the  Divinity  of  Christ.     It  were
better ;  literally,  i(  i»  profitable.   The  crime
speoifled  is  so  heinous  that  a  man  had  better
incur  the  most  certain  deatli,  if  by  this  means
lie  may  avoid  the  sin  and  save  the  soul  of
ills  possible  victim.    A  millstone;  a  gnat
millstone — such  a  one  as  required  an  ;iss  to
inove.      The  upper,  or  movable,  stone  is
neant,  which  was  usually  turned  by  the
«And.    Drowned.    Wedo  not  know  that  the
Jj'flB  punished  criminals  by  drowning  ((cara-
irak-Ti8'|uis),  though  it  is  probable  that  it  was
practised  in  some  cases ;  but  by  other  nations
this  penalty  was  commonly  exacted.  Among
the  Bomans,  Greeks,  and  Syrians,  it   wa^
certainly  the  practice.  Commentators  quote
Suetonius,  '  Aug.,'  Ixvii. ;  Died.  Sic,  xvi.
35 ;  Livy,  i.  51 ;  Aristophanes,  '  Schol.  ad
Equit.,'  1360.    The  punishment  seema  to
have  been  reserved  for  the  greatest  crimi-
nals ;  and  the  size  of  the  stone  would  prevent
any  chance  of  the  body  rising  again  to  the
surface  and  being  buried  by  friends — a  con-
sideration which.  In  the  minds  of  lieathens,
greatly  increased  the  honor  of  this  kind  of
death,

Ver.  7. — This  and  the  preoedlng  verse
occur  in  St.  Luke  (xvii.  1,  2)  in  an  inverted
order.  Woe  unto  the  world  I  The  Lord
thinks  of  the  deadly  evil  brought  into  the
world  by  offences  given,  such  as  bad  ex-
ample, unholy  lives  of  Christians,  per-
secutions, scoffs,  thoughtlessness— things
which  lead  so  many  astray.  For  it  must
needs  be.  While  men  are  what  they  are,
such  consequences  must  be  expected.    This

MATTHEW — II.


ia  not  an  absolute,  .but  a  relative,  necessity.
Man's  heart  is  evil,  his  temle'  oica  are  evil,
temptation  is  strong,  Satan  is  active;  all
these  forces  combine  to  bring  aliout  a  fatnl
result.  Thus  St.  Paul  say.-i  (1  Cor.  li.  19),
"There  mnst  be  heresies  nmong  yon,  that
they  which  are  approved  m-iy  be  made  mani-
fest among  you."  So  these  offences  of  which
Christ  speaks  are  overruled  and  permitted
for  wise  purposes,  that  by  them  tlie  righteous
may  be  proved  and  purifioil,  and  the  chaif
sepcirated  from  the  wheat.  But  woe  to  that
man!  Because  of  this  evil  principle  wliinli
is  rife  in  tlio  world,  no  man  is  exonerated
from  the  guilt  of  giving  offi.nce.  He  has
free-will ;  he  can  choose  good  ;  he  can  use
the  means  of  grace;  he  cun  strengthen  his
natural  weakness,  control  his  pcrversenesa,
overcome  corruption,  by  the  help  of  God
always  ready  to  be  given  to  tlum  who  seek.
The  first  "  woe"  is  a  cry  of  pity  lor  a  world
in  danger;  the  second  "  woe  "  is  a  denuncia-
tion of  the  sinner  as  being  responsible  for
the  evil  which  he  introduces.  We  are  all
in  some  sort  our  brothers'  keepers,  and  are
bound  to  hi'lp  forward  their  salvation,  and
to  do  nothing  which  may  tend  to  endanger
their  souls'  health.

Ver.  8.— Wherefore,  The  Lord  teaches
how  to  avoid  this  sin  of  giving  olfcnco,  re-
peating the  solemn  words  already  delivereil
in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  though  with
some  variation  and  a  different  context  (ch.  v.
29,  30).  The  reference  on  the  furmer  occa-
sion was  especially  to  breaches  of  the  serentli
commandment;  here  the  Lord  speaks  of
offences  in  general,  of  that  external  oomip-
tion  among  mankind  which  is  the  fruitful
source  of  temptation  and  sin.  The  only
remedy  for  this  is  the  sternest  self-denial,
the  strictest  watchfulness.  Or  thy  foot.
Christ  did  not  name  this  member  in  his
previous  discourse.  Literally,  the  hand  or
foot  leads  iuto  sin,  when  it  is  directed  to
forbidden  objects,  moves  towards  the  acquisi-
tion of  things  contrary  to  the  Law  of  God.
Metaphorically,  the  expression  signifies  all
that  is  as  d'itr  and  as  necessary  as  these
importiint  members.  Such  occa.sions  of  sin
we  must  at  once  and  absolutely  cast  a»ide
It  includes  also  persons  as  well  as  things
Friends  the  dearest  must  be  jiarted  from
if  their  presence,  or  conversation,  or  habits
cause  evil  thoughts  or  encourage  evil  acts.
In  the  presence  of  such  offences,  tics  the
nearest  must  be  snapped  asunder.  Loneli-
ness, isolation,  is  better  than  companionship
in  wickedness.  It  has  been  well  said  by
Olshausen  that  the  hand  and  the  foot  may
denote  mental  powers  and  dispositions ;  and
the  waruing  is  given  that  their  over-cultiva-
tion may  prove  an  obstacle  to  the  spiritual
life,  and  must  be  accordingly  checked.  We
may  also  descry  in  the  paragraph  an  admoni-


210  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvin.  1— 35.


tion  against  makings  too  much  of  skill.dexter-
ity,  andadroitness  in  bnsinesB  and  occupation.
There  is  a  subtle  snare  in  them ;  they  may
draw  the  heart  away  from  God,  and  must  be
restrained  and  modified,  so  as  not  to  inter-
fere witli  the  cultivation  of  religion  and  the
care  of  the  soul.  Enter  into  life.  This  is
an  addition  not  found  in  the  Hermon  on  the
mount;  it  refers  to  the  eternal  life  which,
beginning  on  earth,  is  consummated  in
heaven.  Everlasting  fire  (rb  irvp  rh  aidviov).
This  is  the  first  time  that  this  phrase  occurs.
Whatever  these  words  may  mean,  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  they  signify,  and  are  in-
tended to  signify,  some  awful  kind  and  ex-
tent of  punishment,  the  fear  of  which  may
deter  from  such  sins  as  incur  it.  It  is  not
morally  expedient  to  minimize  the  force  of
such  terms  by  disputing  about  the  exact
connotation  of  "seouian."  When  we  re-
member that  the  words  are  spoken  by  the
loving  and  pitiful  Saviour,  we  must  allow
that  they  point  to  some  dreadful  reality,  the
import  of  which  he  knew,  and  which  he  thus
mercifully  veiled  from  us  as  not  able  to  bear
the  full  revelation  (see  on  ch.  xxv.  46).

Ver.  9. — Hell  fire.  A  synonym  for  the
"  everlasting  fire  "  of  the  previous  verse,  and
the  "unquenchable  fire"  of  the  Baptist's
warning  (ch.  iii.  12),  and  to  be  understood  in
the  same  sense.  It  is  good  to  be  saved  even
with  the  loss  of  all  that  makes  earthly  life
h;ippy  and  precious.

Ver.  10. — Fjom  this  verse  to  the  end  of
the  chapter  we  find  no  parallel  in  the  other
evangelists.  The  Saviour  here  returns  to
the  subject  of  children,  whether  literally  or
metaphorically  so  called,  and  proclaims  the
high  appreciation  which  is  their  due.  Take
heed  {ipaTe;  see)  that  ye  despise  not  one
(ivis)  of  these  little  ones.  God's  care  is
minute;  it  extends  to  each  individual  of
the  class.  The  contempt  denounced  might
arise  in  various  ways  and  from  various  con-
siderations. The  advanced  believer  might
despise  children  as  not  competent  to  enter
into  covenant  with  God  or  fit  to  receive
Church  privileges,  wliereas  circumcision
under  the  old  dispensation  and  infant
baptism  under  tlie  gospel  afford  a  very
different  view.  Again,  to  say  or  do  unseemly
tilings  in  the  presence  of  children  is  a  mode
of  "  despising  "  which  may  prove  a  deadly
offence.  Or  the  contempt  may  be  on  the
side  of  tho  ambitious  and  self-seeking,  who
cannot  understand  the  simple  and  obildlike
spirit  which  seeketh  not  its  own.  The  Lord
gives  two  proofs  of  the  high  consideration
due  to  his  little  ones.  The  first  proof  is
that  which  follows ;  the  second  is  given  in
vers.  11 — 14.  Their  angels.  Not  "their
spirits  after  death,"  as  some  oonimentntors
erioneously  interpret  (for  the  term  "  angel "
is  not  so  used,  and  Christ  speaks  in  the


present  tense,  do  always  behold),  but  the
angels  especially  appointed  to  watch  and
protect  them — their  guardian  angels.  This
doctrine  (which,  as  of  very  solemn  import,
the  Lord  introduces  with  his  usual  formula,
I  say  onto  yon),  that  each  soul  has  assigned
to  it  by  God  a  special  angel,  is  grounded  on
this,  and  supported  by  many  other  passages
of  Scripture  (comp.  Heb.  L  14 ;  Ps.  ixxiv.
7;  xci.  11;  Luke  xv.  7,  10).  It  has  been
questioned  how  angels  can  be  said  to  succour
us  on  earth,  while  in  heaven  they  are  always
looking  on  the  face  of  the  Father.  The
difliculty  has  been  answered,  among  others,
by  St.  Gregory,  who  writes,  "  Tliey  never  so
go  forth  apart  from  the  vision  of  God,  as  to
be  deprived  of  the  joys  of  interior  contempla-
tion. They  are  both  sent  from  him,  and
stand  by  him  too,  since  both  in  that  they  ure
circumscribed,  they  go  forth,  and  in  this  that
they  are  also  entirely  present,  they  never  go
away.  Thus  they  at  the  same  time  always
behold  the  Father's  face,  and  yet  come  to  us ;
because  they  both  go  forth  to  us  in  a  spiritual
presence,  and  yet  keep  themselves  there,
whence  they  liad  gone  out,  by  virtue  of
interior  contemplation  "  ('  Moral.,'  iL  3).  It
is  probable  that  the  highest  order  of  angels
is  here  signified,  such  as  among  the  Jews
was  called,  "  the  augels  of  the  presence,  or
of  the  face."  To  behold  the  king's  face
means,  in  Eastern  parlance,  to  be  admitted
to  his  immediate',  presence — to  enjoy  his
special  favour  and  confidence  (see  2  Kings
xxv.  19;  Esth.  i.  14;  Jer.  Iii.  25).  It  is  to
these  supreme  beings,  who  draw  their  know-
ledge and  love  directly  from  Almighty  God,
and  receive  their  commands  from  his  mouth,
that  the  tender  lambs  of  Christ's  flock  are
committed.  This  fact  demonstrates  their
dignity  and  the  great  heinousness  of  setting
•  stumbling-block  in  their  way.

Ver.  11. — Tliis  verse  is  omitted  by  the
Sinaitic  and  Vatican  Manuscripts,  and  many
modem  editors,  e.g.  Lachmann,  Tisohendorf,
Trcgelles,  Weslcutt  and  Hort,  and  the  Be-
vised  Version ;  but  is  retained  in  many  good
uncials,  nearly  all  the  cursives,  the  Vulgate,
Syriac,  etc.  It  is  supposed  to  be  an  inter-
polatioa  from  Luke  xix.  10;  but  one  does
not  see  why,  if  this  is  the  case,  the  inter-
polater  should  have  left  out  the  striking
verb  "to  seek,"  which  would  naturally  have
coincided  ?rith  "  seeketh  "  in  ver.  12.  For
expository  use,  at  any  rate,  we  may  consider
the  verse  as  genuine,  and  take  it  as  the
commencement  of  the  second  argument  for
the  dignity  of  the  little  ones — the  simple  and
humble,  whether  children  or  others.  This
proof  is  derived  from  the  action  of  God
towards  them.  The  Son  of  man  is  come  t*
save  that  which  was  lost  (rb  lmo\oi\6s).
How  can  ye  despise  those  whom  Christ  hath
so  luved  and  deemed  so  precious  that  he


CH.  xvm,  1—85.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


211


emptied  himeelf  of  his  glory  and  became
man  in  order  to  save  them  7  The  general
term, "that which  was  lost," is  expresged  by
the  nenter  participle,  to  enow  that  there  is
no  exception  to  the  wide  scope  of  Christ's
mercy.  The  race  of  man  is  lost ;  infants
are  bom  in  sin ;  all  need  redemption.  Every-
body, poor,  helpless,  ignorant,  tempted,  comes
under  this  category,  and  to  save  such  Christ
came  down  from  heaven.  Therefore  their
souls  are  very  precious  in  his  sight.

Ver.  12. — The  parable  that  follows  teaches
the  same  lesson  as  the  preceding  verse.
It  is  found  in  Luke  xv.  1 — 7,  with  some
variations,  delivered  to  a  different  audience
and  under  different  circumstances,  as  Jesus
often  repeated  his  instmctions  and  teaching
according  to  the  occasion.  How  think  ye  1
What  say  ye  to  the  following  case  ?  Thus
the  Lord,  engages  the  disciples'  attention.
An  hundred  sheep.  A  round  number,  repre-
senting a  considerable  flock.  If  but  one  of
these  stray,  the  good  Shepherd  regards  only
the  danger  and  possible  destruction  of  this
wanderer,  and  puts  aside  every  other  care
in  order  to  secure  its  safety.  The  ninety  and
nine.  These  must  be  left  for  a  time,  if  he
is  to  conduct  the  search  in  person.  It  may
be  that  some  idea  of  probation  is  here  in-
tended, as  when  Jesus  let  the  disciples
embark  on  the  lake  while  he  himself  re-
mained on  the  shore.  Many  of  the  Fathers
Interpret  the  ninety-nine  a*  representing
the  sinless  angels,  the  lost  sheep  as  man,  to
seek  and  save  whom  Christ  left  heaven,  i.e.
became  incarnate.  This,  indeed,  may  be  a
legitimate  application  of  the  parable,  but  is
inexact  as  an  exposition  of  the  passage,
which  regards  the  whole  flock  as  figuring
the  human  race.  The  sheep  that  remained
safe  and  true  to  their  Master  are  the  right-
eous; the  errant  are  the  sinners,  which,
however  few,  are  the  special  care  of  the
merciful  Lord.  Into  the  mountains  (iir\  rik
Spii').  There  is  much  doubt  whether  these
words  are  to  be  joined  with  goeth  (iropevBeh),
as  in  both  our  versions,  or  with  leave  (it^fls),
as  in  the  Vulgate,  Nonne  relinquit  nonaginta
novem  in  montibut  ?  In  the  former  case  we
have  a  picture  of  the  toil  of  the  shepherd
traversing  the  mountains  in  search  of  the
lost.  But  this  does  not  seem  to  be  the
particular  point  contemplated,  nor  is  any
special  emiihasia  assigned  to  this  part  of  the
transaction.  In  the  parable  as  recounted  by
St.  Luke  (XV.  i\  we  read,  "  Doth  he  not
leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wilderness,
and  go  ?  "  So  here  it  is  best  to  render,  Doth  Tie
not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  upon  the  moun-
tains 1  The  shepherd  is  not  regardless  of
the  safety  and  comfort  of  the  flock  during
his  temporary  absence;  he  leaves  them
where  they  are  »ure  to  find  pasture,  as  they
roam  over  (^irJ  with  aoousative)  the  hill-tops,


which,  catching  clouds  and  dew,  are  never
without  fresh  grass.  So  Ps.  cxlvii.  8,  "  Who
covereth  the  heaven  with  clouds,  who  pre-
pareth  rain  for  the  earth,  who  maketh  grass
to  grow  upon  the  mountains."  Seeketh.
The  lost  sheep  would  not  return  of  itsell
Such  erring  souls  Jesus  seeks  by  the  in-
spiration of  his  Spirit,  by  allowing  distress
and  sorrow,  by  awakening  conscience  and
memory,  by  ways  manifold  which  may  lead
the  sinner  to  "come  to  himself."

Ver.  18.— If  BO  be  that  he  find  it.  The
quest  is  not  sure  to  be  rewarded.  Man's
perversity  makes  the  result  uncertain.  No
one  may  safely  go  on  sinning,  or  living  in
careless  unconcern,  with  the  expectation  of
being  finally  found  and  -saved.  There  is  a
limit  to  the  patience  of  the  Lord.  If  a  nian
will  not  open  his  heart  to  good  iuspirations
and  co-operate  with  preventing  grace,  he
will  not  be  found  and  brought  home.  God
forces  no  one  to  be  saved  against  his  will.
Bejolceth  more.  A  natural  feeling.  Thug
a  mother  loves  better  an  afSicted  child
whom  she  has  nursed  through  a  long  malady,
than  the  strong  and  healthy  children  who
have  caused  her  no  trouble  and  anxiety.
The  joy  at  the  recovery  of  the  strayed  sheep
is  proportional  to  the  sorrow  oocasioQed  by
its  loss  and  the  pains  and  trouble  expend^
in  the  search;  and  this  pleasure. would  at
the  moment  be  greater  than  the  satisfaction
vrith  which  the  other  members  of  the  flock
are  regarded.

Ver.  11. — Even  so.  The  teaching  of  the
parable  is  summed  up ;  the  conduct  of  the
earthly  shepherd  is  a  figure  of  that  of  the
heavenly  Shepherd.  The  will  of  your  Father
,  .  .  perish.  To  scandalize  one  of  these
little  ones,  or  lead  him  into  sin  (which  is
to  cause  to  perish),  is  to  fight  against  God's
will,  who  would  have  all  men  to  be  saved
(1  Tim.  ii.  i).  "  When  the  dignity  of  the
little  ones  was  asserted,  it  w^s  Ilarpdy  /lov,
•my  Father;'  now  that  a  motive  directly
acting  on  the  conscience  of  the  Christian  is
urged,  it  is  Harphs  i/ieSv,  your  Father "
(Alford).  St.  Paul  teaches  that  Christ  died
for  the  weak  brethren  (Eom.  xiv.  15;  1  Cor.
viii.  11).  With  this  text  (ver.  14)  before
him,  it  is  inconceivable  that  any  one  can
hold  the  doctrine  of  the  eternal  reprobation  of
certain  souls.  The  whole  passage  is  opposed
to  the  theory  of  irrespective  predestination
and  irresistible  grace.

Vers.  IS — 20.— Correction  of  an  offending
brother.

Ver.  16.  — Hitherto  the  discourse  has
warned  against  offending  the  young  and
weak  ;  it  now  teaches  how  to  behave  when
the  offence  is  directed  agaiast  one's  self.
Moreover  (5^,  "now,"  introducing  a  new  sub-
ject) if  thy  brother  shall  trespass  against


212         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    [0=- ^cvin.  1— 85.


thee  (ets  ai).  The  brnther  is  a  brother  In
the  faith,  a  fellow-Ohristian.  The  words,
"  against  thee,"  are  omitted  in  the  Sinaitio
and  Vatican  Manuscripts,  and  by  some
modern  editors,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  a
gloss  derived  from  Peter's  question  (ver.  21).
The  words  are  retained  by  the  Vulgate  and
other  high  authorities.  Without  them,  the
passage  becomes  oueofa  general  nature,  ap-
plying  to  all  offences.  Betaining  them,  we
find  a  direction  how  to  treat  one  who  offers
personal  offenoe  to  ourselves — which  seems
to  suit  thecontext  best.  In  the  case  of  private
quarrels  between  individual  Christians,  with
the  view  of  reoouciliation,  there  are  tour  steps
to  be  taken.  First,  private  remonstrance :
Oo.  Do  not  wait  for  him  to  come  to  you ;
make  the  fiist  advances  yourself.  This,  as
being  the  more  difScult  course,  is  expressly
enjoined  on  one  who  is  learning  the  lesson
of  humility.  Tell  him  his  fault ;  e\6y{o;'
ai)T6v;  Dortipe  eum.  Put  the  fault  plainly
before  him,  show  him  how  he  has  wronged
you,  and  how  he  has  offended  God.  This
must  be  done  in  private,  gently,  mercifully.
Buoh  treatment  may  win  the  heart,  while
publio  rebuke,  open  denunciation,  might
only  incense  and  harden.  Plainly,  the  Lord
primarily  contemplutes  quarrels  between
individual  Ohristians ;  though,  indeed,  the
ndvicc  here  and  in  the  sequel  is  ap-
plicable to  a  wider  sphere  and  to  more
important  occasions.  Ihon  hast  gained  thy
brother.  If  he  shall  own  his  fault,  and  ask
for  pardon,  thou  hast  won  him  for  God  and
thyself.  A  quarrel  is  a  loss  to  both  parties ;
a  reconoiliation  is  a  gain  for  both.  Ttie  verb
"to  gain"  (_Kfpiatra)  is  used  elsewhere  in
this  Jiigb  eendu  (see  1  Cor.  ix.  19;  1  Pet.
iii.  1).

Ver.  16. — This  gives  the  second  step  or
stage  in  discipline.  Take  with  thee  one  or
two  more.  It  tlie  offender  is  obdurate  to
secret  remonstrance,  do  not  yet  resort  to
publio  measures,  but  make  a  fresh  effort  ac-
companied by  a  friend  or  two,  who  will  sup-
port your  view  and  confirm  your  expostula-
tion, which  might  otherwise  be  considered
partial  or  self-inlerested.  In  the  mouth  of
two  or  three  witnesses.  The  idea  is  derived
trom  the  requirement  of  the  Jewish  Law
in  a  case  of  litigation  (see  Deut.  zix.  15 ;
John  viii.  17 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  1).  By  the  testi-
timony  of  these  witnesses,  every  word  that
has  passed  between  you  may  be  fully  certi-
fied. There  will  be  forthcoming,  if  neces-
sary, the  regular  legal  evidence,  should  the
matter  come  to  other  ears.

Ver.  17.— Tell  it  unto  the  Church  (rp
iiiK\Ti<ritj).  Tills  is  the  third  step  to  take.
Our  Lord  is  contemplating  a  visible  society,
possessed  of  certain  powers  of  discipline  and
correction,  such  as  we  find  in  the  history  of
the  apostolic  Church  (see  1  Cor.  v.  1,  etc. ;


vi.  1,  etc.  J  1  Tim,  i.  20).  Christ  had  already
spoken  of  his  Ecolesia  in  his  commenda-
tion of  Peter's  great  confession  (oh.  xvi.  1 8) ;
BO  the  twelve  were  prepared  for  this  use
of  the  word,  and  would  not  confound  the
body  here  signified  with  the  Jewish  syna-
gogue. To  the  latter  the  expressions  in
vers.  18 — 20  could  not  apply.  The  custom
and  order  of  procedure  in  the  synagogue
would  afford  an  idea  of  what  the  Lord  meant;
but  the  congregation  intended  was  to  be
composed  of  Ohristians,  the  followers  of
Clirist,  who  were  delivered  from  the  narrow-
ness of  rabbinical  rules  and  definitions.  The
institution  of  ecclesiastical  tribunals  has
been  referred  to  this  passage,  but,  as  under-
stood by  the  apostles,  it  would  denote,  not
so  much  ecclesiastical  rulers  as  tl  le  particular
congregation  to  wliich  the  delinquent  be-
longed; and  the  offence  fur  which  he  is
denounced  is  some  private  scandal  or  quarrel.
The  course  of  proceeding  enjoined  would  bo
Impracticable  in  a  large  and  widely  extended
community,  ami  could  not  be  applied  under
our  present  circum  stances.  If  he  neglect  to
hear  the  Church.  Now  comes  the  final  stage
in  corrective  discipline.  An  heathen  man
(6  idviKbs,  the  Gentile)  and  a  publican  (li
Te\iivris,  the  puhlican).  'I'he  class,  not  the
individual,  is  meant.  If  he  turns  a  deaf  ear
to  the  authoritative  reproof  of  the  Church,
let  him  be  regarded  no  longer  as  a  brother,
but  as  a  hcatlieu  and  an  outcast,  Christ,
without  endorsing  the  Jews'  treatment  of
Gentiles  and  publicans,  acknowledges  the
fact,  and  uses  it  as  an  illustration.  The
obdurate  offender  must  be  deprived  of
Church-membership,  and  treated  as  those
without  the  Jewish  pale  were  commonly
treated.  The  traditional  law  enjoined  that
a  Hebrew  might  not  associate,  eat,  or  travel
with  a  lieathen,  and  that  if  any  Jew  took
the  office  of  publicanut,  he  was  to  be  virtu-
ally excommunicated.  In  later  times,  there
naturally  arose  in  the  Christian  Church  the
punishment  of  offenders  by  means  of  ex-
clusion from  holy  communion,  and  excom-
munication. But  even  in  this  extreme  case
oliarity  will  not  regard  the  sinner  as  hope-
lessly lost;  it  will  seek  his  salvation  by
prayer  and  entreaty.

Ver.  18. — The  following  words  are  ad-
dressed, not,  as  the  preceding  verse,  to  the
offended  Christian,  but  to  the  apostles,  as
possessed  of  some  superior  powers  above
those  of  any  individual  congregation.  Verily
X  say  unto  yon.  The  Lord  solemnly  confers
the  grant  maJe  to  Peter  (ch.  xvi.  19)  on  the
whole  apostolate.  The  binding  and  loosing,
in  a  restricted  sense,  and  in  logical  connec-
tion with  VI  hat  precedes,  refer  to  the  confirma-
tion and  authorization  of  the  sentence  of  the
Eoclesia,  which  is  not  valid,  so  to  speak,  in
the  heavenly  court  till  endorsed  by  Christ's


CH.  xvm.  1—35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATl-fiEW.  21S


representaHveB — the  apostles.  Whether  the
verdict  was  the  excommunication  of  the
offender  ("  bind  ")  or  his  pardon  and  re-
storation ("loose"),  the  ratification  of  the
apostles  was  required,  and  would  be  made
good  in  heaven.  The  treatment  of  the  in-
cestuons  Christian  by  St.  Paul  is  a  practical
comment  on  this  passage.  The  congrega-
tion decides  on  the  man's  guilt,  but  St.  Paul
"binds"  him,  retains  his  sins,  and  delivers
him  to  Satan  (1  Cor.  v.  1 — 5) ;  and  when  on
his  repentance  he  is  forgiven,  it  is  the  apoatle
who  "  looses  "  him,  acting  as  the  represen-
tative of  Christ  (2  Cor.  ii.  10).  In  a  general
sense,  the  judicial  and  disciplinary  powers
of  the  Christian  priesthood  have  been  founded
on  this  peissage,  which  from  early  times  has
been  used  in  thr  service  of  ordination.  Each
body  of  Christians  has  its  own  way  of  inter-
preting the  promise.  Wliile  some  opine
that,  speaking  in  Christ's  name  and  with  his
authority,  the  priest  can  pronounce  or  with-
hold pardon ;  otliei-s  believe  that  external
discipline  is  all  that  is  intended ;  others
again  think  that  the  terms  are  satisfied  by
the  ministration  of  the  Word  and  sacraments,
as  a  physician  gives  health  by  prescribing
remedies.

Ver.  19.— Again  I  say  unto  yon.  The
following  paragraph  has  been  thought  by
many  to  be  addressed  especially  to  the
apostles  in  confirmation  of  the  powers  con-
ferred on  them  above ;  b"ut  from  ver.  20  we
should  judge  the  promise  to  be  general.
Herein  is  set  forth  the  privilege  of  united
prayer.  God  confirms  the  sentence  of  his
authorized  ambassadors ;  he  gives  special
heed  to  the  joint  intercessions  of  all  Chris-
tians. Two  of  you.  Two  of  my  followers,
even  the  smallest  number  that  could  form  an
association.  Shall  agree  (^aviitpuvliaaiTui),
Be  in  complete  accord,  like  the  notes  of  a
perfect  strain  of  music.  Here  one  man's  in-
firmity is  upheld  by  another's  strength ;  one
man's  short-sightedness  compensated  by
another's  wider  view ;  this  man's  little  faith
overpowered  by  that  man's  firm  confidence.
Anything.  Of  course,  this  is  to  be  under-
stood with  some  restriction.  The  thing  asked
must  be  reasonable,  good  in  itself,  expedient
for  the  petitioner;  the  prayer  must  be  earnest,
faithful,  persevering.  If  such  conditions  are
satisfied,  the  desire  will  be  granted  in  some
form,  though,  perhaps,  not  in  the  way  or  at
the  time  expected.  Thus  the  Lord  sanctions
guilds  or  bodies  of  Christians  united  together
to  ofler  up  supplications  for  special  objects
or  with  some  definite  intention  in  which  all
are  agreed.

Ver.  20. — The  promise  is  applied  to  the
public  prayer  of  the  congregation,  as  we  see
In  what  is  called  "  the  prayer  of  St.  Ohry-
Bostom"  in  the  English  Prayer-book.  Are
Kathereil   together.     For   the   purpose  of


worship.  It  is  a  simpler  form  of  the  word
used  in  Heb.  x.  25,  "Not  forsaking  the
assembling  of  ourselves  together."  In  my
Kame  (tli  rh  i/iiy  Svo/io) ;  literally,  into  my
Name;  l.e.  with  love  to  me,  yearning  for
union  with  me,  and  acting  for  my  ^ory.
This  would  imply  decent  and  orderly  meet-
ing for  the  highest  ends.  There  am  I  in  the
midst  of  them.  Christ  promises  a  real,
actual  presence,  though  invisible,  as  true  as
when  he  appeared  to  his  disciples  after  his
KBurrection,  as  true  as  when  the  Shechinah
shone  in  tabernacle  or  temple.  The  rabbis
had  a  saving  that  if  two  sat  at  table  and  con-
versed about  the  Law  of  God,  the  Shechinah
rested  upon  them.  The  promise  in  the  text
of  course,  implies  Christ's  omnipresence  and
omniscience.  This  is  his  blessing  on  united
congregational  prayer.

Vers.  il—SS.—Ths  pardon  of  injuria,  and
the  parable  of  the  unmeroiful  lervanl.

Ver.  21. — Peter  was  greatly  struck  with
what  Christ  had  just  said  about  recon-
ciliation of  enemies;  and  he  wanted  to
know  what  limits  were  to  be  imposed
on  his  generosity,  especially,  it  might  be,
if  the  offender  made  no  reparation  for  his
offence,  and  acknowledged  not  his  wrong-
doing. My  brother.  As  ver.  15,  fellow-dis-
ciple, neighbour.  Till  seven  times  T  Peter
doubtless  thought  that  he  was  unusually
liberal  and  generous  in  proposing  such  a
measure  of  forgiveness.  Seven  is  the  number
of  complc  teuess  and  plurality,  and  our  Lord
had  used  it  in  giving  his  sentence  about
forgiveness:  "If  he  trespass  against  thee
seven  times  in  a  day,  and  seven  times  in  a
day  turn  to  thee  again,"  etc.  (Luke  xvii.  4).
Some  rabbis  had  fixed  tliis  limit  from  au
erroneous  interpretation  of  Amos  i.  3 ;  ii.  1 ,
"  For  three  trausgressions,  and  for  four,"
etc.;  but  tlie usual  precept  enjoined  forgive-
ness of  three  offences  only,  drawing  the  line
here,  and  having  no  pity  for  a  fourth  offence.
Ben-Sira  bids  a  man  admonish  an  offending
neighbour  twice,  but  is  silent  as  to  any
further  forgiveness  (Ecclus.  lix.  13 — 17).
The  Jews  were  very  fond  of  defining  and
limiting  moral  obligations,  as  if  they  could
be  accurately  prescribed  by  number.  Christ
demolishes  this  attempt  to  define  bylawtlie
measure  of  grace.

Ver.  22. — I  say  not  unto  theo.  Jesus  gives
the  full  weight  of  his  authority  to  his  pre-
cept, in  distinction  from  Peters  suggestion
and  rabbinical  glosses.  Seventy  times  seven.
No  specific  number,  but  practically  un-
limited. There  is  no  measure  to  forgive-
ness ;  it  must  be  practised  whenever  occasion
arises.  Some  translate,  "seventy-seven
times,"  making  an  allusion  to  the  retribution
exacted  liom  Lamech:    "If  Cain  shall  be


214  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xviii.  1— 85.


avenged  sevenfold,  trujy  Lnmech  seventy
and  Beveufold"  (Gen.  iv.  24).  Oliristian
forgiveness  must  be  extended  as  far  as  old-
world  vougeanco.  Meroy  rejoices  against
j  udgment.  But  the  genius  of  the  language
supports  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized
Version.  St.  Paul  has  caught  the  spirit  of
his  Master  when  he  writes,  "  Forgiving  one
another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  bath
forgiven  you  "  (Bph.  iv.  32).  In  the  Mosaic
dispensation  there  was  some  foreshadowing
of  the  doctrine  of  forgiveness  in  the  enact-
ments which  enjoined  tender  treatment  of
debtors,  and  in  the  terms  of  the  jubilee  law ;
but  there  were  no  rules  concerning  the  pardon
of  personalinjuries;  the  tendency  of  many
prominent  Injunctions  was  to  encourage  re-
taliation. Herein  is  seen  an  important  dis-
tinction between  the  Law  and  the  gospel,  the
institutions  antecedent  to  the  death  and
atonement  of  Christ,  and  those  8ubse(^uent
thereto.

Vers.  23 — 35. — Christ  illustrates  hit  pre-
cept by  the  parable  of  the  unmerciful  servant,
and  the  stem  letson  which  he  himself  enun-
ciates at  its  dose,

Ver.  23. — ^Therefore ;  i.e.  because  such  is
the  infinite  nature  of  the  pardon  to  be  meted
out  to  an  offending  brother.  The  kingdom
of  heaven.  The  rule  observed  in  the  govern-
ment of  Christ's  kingdom  with  regard  to
forgiveness  is  represented  by  the  procedure
of  a  certain  earthly  king.  The  picture  sup-
poses some  great  Oriental  potentate,  with
numerous  viceroys  or  satraps,  who  have  to
render  to  him  an  account  of  revenues  re-
ceived. These  are  called  servants  in  the
sense  that,  though  they  are  high  officials,
they  are  the  monarch's  subordinates  and  de-
pendents. Both  Herodotus  and  Xenophon
apply  the  term  "  slave  "  (8oS\os)  to  the  great
officers  of  state.  Immense  sums  of  money
would  pass  through  their  hands.  This
accoants  for  the  enormous  debt  of  the  officer
in  the  parable.  Webster  and  Wilkinson  com-
pare the  East  India  Company's  collectors,  who
are  high  civil  servants  of  the  company,  that
is,  now,  of  the  government.  If  we  regard
the  parable  in  a  general  light,  as  illustrating
God's  dealings  with  sinful  man,  we  must  see
in  the  "  taking  account  of  his  servants,"  not
the  judgment  of  the  last  day,  but  those  many
occasion!  when  God  makes  a  man  turn  his
eyes  inward  and  learn  how  he  stands  in  the
sight  of  his  Lord.  Such  occasions  are  sick-
ness, misfortune,  great  change  of  circum-
stances, a  new  year,  reproach  of  conscience,
however  aroused, — these  and  such  like  in-
cidents awaken  a  man  to  his  true  position,
■how  him  his  delinquencies  and  misery.

Ver.  24. — When  he  had  begun  to  reckon,
This  is  the  same  word  which  is  rendered
**  take  account "  in  the  previous  verse,  and


means  to  compare  receipts,  expenditure,  and
balance.  One  was  hronght  unto  him.  The  de-
faulter did  not  come  of  himself  and  own  hia
delinquency,  but  was  brought  into  his  lord's
presence,  probably  by  some  who  had  dis-
covered his  defalcations,  and  desired  to  see
him  punished.  Otherwise  the  phrase  may
refer  merely  to  Oriental  etiquette,  according
to  which  no  one  can  enter  the  royal  presence
without  being  formally  allowed  the  inter-
view, and  ceremoniously  introduced.  len
thousand  talents.  It  is  uncertain  what  is
here  meant  by  a  talent,  whether  of  silver  or
gold,  of  Jewish,  or  Attic,  or  Syriao  standard ;
and,  of  course,  the  amount  intended  is
variously  understood.  We  must  refer  to  the
Bible  dictionaries  for  an  explanation  of  the
term  "talent,"  merely  remarking  here  tliat
the  highest  estimate  would  give  six  millions
of  our  pounds,  and  the  lowest  more  than  half
that  amount.  This  huge  sum  must  repre-
sent the  total  revenues  of  •  province,  and
the  debtor  must  have  been  a  high  and  much-
trusted  official.  It  is  used  by  our  Lord  to
signify  the  infinite  debt  the  sinner  owes  to
God.  Thus  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  we  have,
"  Forgive  ns  our  debts,  as  we  also  have  for-
given our  debtors"  (ch.  vi.  12).

Ver.  25. — He  had  not  to  pay.    He  was
absolutely  bankrupt,  and   had    no    means
whatever  of  meeting  the  deficit.    To  be  sold.
The  Jewish  Law  ordered  such  process  in  the
case  of  an  impecunious  debtor  (see  Exod.
xxii.  3 ;  Lev.  xxv.  39,  41 ;  and  the  concrete
case  in  2  Kings  iv.  1 ;  comp.  also  Isa.  L  1 ;
Fs.  xliv.  12).    But  tills  law  was  mitigated
by  the  enactment  of  the  jubilee,  which  in
the  course  of  time  restored  the  bondinan  to
liberty.    The  instance  in  the  parable  ap-
pertains rather  to  Oriental  depotism  than
to  the  proceedings  under  Mosaic  legislation
(see  ver.  34,  which  is  not  in  accordance  with
Jewish  practice).  The  king,  by  this  severity,
may  have  desired  to  make  the  defaulter
feel  the  weight  of  his  debt,  and  to  bring  him
to  repentance,  as  we  see  that  he  was  ready
to  accept  the  submission  of  the  debtor,  and
to  grant  him  forgiveness  (St.  Chrysostom).
Payment  to  be  made.    The  verb  is  put  im-
personally.   Of  course,  the  sale  of  himself,
wife,  family,  possessions,  would  not  produce
enough  to  satisfy  the  debt ;  but  the  command
is  to  the  effect  that  the  proceeds  should  be
taken  on  account  of  the  debt.    The  parable
must  not  be  pressed  in  all  its  details ;  a
false  impression  is  often  produced  by  fixing
spiritual  or  allegoricul  meaning  upon  the
unimportant    accessories,    which,   in    fact,
merely  give  vividness  to  the  offered  picture.
The  sale  of  wife  and  children  is  of  this
character,  though  it  may  be  said  generally
and  experimentally  that  a  man's  sins  react
on  his  family  in  some  sort,  lowering  position
and  reputation,  and   reducing  to  poverty,


OH.  xvm.  1— 35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


215


eto. ;  but  this  resnlt  has  no  bearing  on  the
lessening  of  the  original  debt.

Ver.  26. — ^Worshipped  him.  Prostrated
himself  before  the  monarch,  and  in  this
abject  attitude  sued  for  mercy.  Have  patience
with  me.  Be  long-suffering  in  my  case ;  give
me  time.  And  I  will  pay  thee  all.  In  hia
terror  and  anguish,  he  promises  impossible
things;  even  the  revenues  of  a  province
would  not  in  any  convenient  time  supply
this  deficiency.  The  scene  is  very  true  to
life.  To  save  himself  from  a  present  diffi-
culty, a  debtor  will  make  any  promise  that
occurs  to  him,  without  considering  whether
he  will  ever  be  in  a  position  to  fulfil  it.  The
defaulter  in  the  parable  must  have  thought
well  of  the  king's  generosity  and  tender-
heartedness to  make  such  a  proposition  at
this  extreme  moment.  If  we  take  the  spiritual
sense  of  the  parable,  we  see  that  no  sinner
could  offer  to  pay,  much  less  pay,  the  debt
due  from  him  to  his  Lord,  "so  that  must  be
let  alone  forever"  (Ps. xlix.  8).

Ver.  27 Was  moved  with  compassion.

The  earthly  circumstance  has  ite  counter-
part in  God'B  dealings  with  sinners.  Humi-
lity, confession,  prayer,  are  accepted  by  him
as  payment  of  the  delit.  Loosed  him  from
arrest,  from  being  sold  as  a  slave.  This  was
the  first  favour  accorded.  The  second  was
even  greater.  Forgave  him  the  debt.  The
servant  had  asked  only  for  time  ;  he  receives
acquittance  of  the  enormous  sum  which  he
owed.  The  king's  severity  had  brought
home  to  the  debtor  his  full  guilt  and  its
consequences ;  when  he  realizes  these,  and
throws  himself  on  his  lord's  mercy,  he
receives  more  than  he  had  asked  or  hoped
for.  But  (to  revert  to  the  spiritual  interpre-
tation) the  pardoned  sinner  must  not  forget
the  past ;  he  must  live  as  one  forgiven.  Says
tlie  penitent  psalmist,  "  I  acknowledge  my
transgressions,  and  my  sin  is  ever  before
me  "  (Ps.  li.  3).

Ver.  28. — Went  out— straightway  from  his
lord's  presence,  where  he  had  been  so  merci-
fully treated,  while  the  remembrance  of  his
free  and  undeserved  forgiveness  must  have
been  still  fresh.  '  Found.  Lighted  upon  by
chance,  as  it  were.  Here,  rather,  was  provi-
dentially offered  an  opportunity  of  showing
that  his  lord's  goodness  was  not  thrown
away,  but  had  entered  his  heart  and  con-
trolled hia  conduct  towards  others.  One  of
his  fellow-servants.  An  official  of  the  king,
but  probably  in  an  inferior  position  to  that
wliich  he  himself  occupied.  Seeing  this
man,  he  is  reminded  of  a  paltry  debt  whicb
this  person  owed  him.  He  remembers  this
fact;  he  forgets  his  late  experience.  An
hundred  pence  (denarii ;  see  on  ch.  xx.  2) ;
equivalent  to  some  £3  of  our  money,  and  a
sum  not  a  millionth  part  of  his  own  debt  to
his  master;   the  proportion,  aa  some  say,


may  be  stated  more  accurately  as  1  to
1,250,000.  The  enormous  difference  between
these  two  amounts  represents  the  dispro-
portion between  the  offences  of  our  neigh-
bours against  us  and  those  of  which  we  are
guilty  towards  Godj  and  how  small  is  the
forgiveness  on  our  side  compared  with  that
which  God  freely  accords  to  our  infinite
debt  to  him  I  We  must  consider  also  the
parties  to  whom  these  debts  are  owing — on
one  side,  the  worm  man ;  on  the  other,
Almighty  God.  Took  hun  by  the  throat
(tTTwye) ;  was  throttling  him.  Thus  preclud-
ing all  prayer  and  remonstrance.  Such
brutal  treatment  was  not  what  he  himself
had  experienced.  Fay  me  that  thou  owest ;
3  Ti  4(/)e(\eis:  quod  deies.  Many  manu-
scripts and  late  editors  (e.g.  Lachmann,
Tregelles,  Tisohendorf,  Alford,  Westoott  and
Hort)  soften  the  demand  by  reading  ef  n
o<pel\ets,  li  quid  debet,  "if  thou  owest
aught,"  as  though  the  creditor  were  ashamed
of  mentioning  the  paltry  sum  due ;  or  else
it  is  simply  a  fashion  of  speaking,  not  to  be
pressed  as  If  any  doubt  was  intimated  con-
cerning the  debt.  It  might  almost  be
rendered,  "Pay,  since  thou  owest  some-
thing." Not  thus  had  his  lord  addressed
him  in  the  first  instance.

Ver.  29.— FeU  down  at  his  feet.  The
fellow-servant  repeated  the  action  and  the
very  plea  which  he  himself  had  but  now
used  so  succosisfully.  Besought  Not  "  wor-
shipped," as  in  the  former  case,  where  the
superiority  was  more  marked.

Ver.  30.— And  he  would  not.  The  piteous
appeal    made  no  impression  on  his  hard
heart.    "  He  did  not  even  regard  the  words
by  which  he  himself  had  been  saved  (foi
on  saying  these  same  words  he  had  been
delivered  from  the  ten  tliousand  talents),
nor  recognize  the  port  by  whicli  he  had
escaped  shipwreck;  neither  did  the  attitude
of  supplication  remind  him  of  his  master's
kindness ;  but  putting  aside  all  such  con-
siderations by  reason  ofcovetousness,  cruelty,
and  revenge,  he  was  fiercer  than  any  wild
beast "  (St.  Chrysostom,  in  loc).    He  went
and  oast  him  into  prison.  He  either  himself
dragged  the  wretched  debtor  to  prison,  or
was  not  satisfied  till  he  had  seen  the  door  of
the  gaol  close  upon  him.  Far  from  forgiving
the  debt,  he  would  not  even  grant  an  exten-
sion of  time;  he  must  have  payment  im-
mediately, or  he  will    exact   the    utmost
punisliment  till  the  debt  is  fully  discharged.
Ver.  31. — Fellow-servants.     Those  in  the
same  condition  of  life  as  the  incarcerated
debtor.      Mystically,   they  would    be    the
angels,  who^  like  those  in  the  parable  of
the  tares,  tell  the  Lord  what  was  done;  or"
the   saints    who   plead   with  God  against
oppression  and  injustice.    They  were  very
sorry.    It   is    well   remarked    that  angei.


216  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDlNd  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oa.  xvm.  1— 35,


against  sin  is  God'a  attribute  (ver.  84),
sorrow  appertains  to  men.  These  have  a
fellow-feeling  for  the  sinner,  in  that  they
are  oonsoious  that  in  their  own  heart  there
are  germs  of  evil  which,  nnohecked,  may
develop  into  similar  wickedness.  Told
(Sie(r<£(f>>|(roi');  told  olearly.  They  took  the
part  of  their  comrade,  aud^  not  in  revenge  or
malice,  but  as  an  act  of  justice,  gave  their
lord  full  information  of  what  had  happened.
The  just  cannot  hold  tlicir  peace  at  the
sight  of  oppression  and  wrong,  and  God
confirms  their  judgment

Yer.  32.— After  that  he  had  called  him.
A  second  time  ho  is  brought  before  his  lord,
not  now  to  receive  forgiveness,  but  to  have
the  enormity  of  his  guilt  exhibited  to  him,
and  to  Buffer  well-deserved  punishment.
In  a  mystical  sense  this  call  is  the  summons
of  death,  whicli  is  virtually  judgment.  0
thon  wioked  servant.  The  lord  had  not  so
addressed  liim  when  he  had  come  cringing
into  his  presence  on  the  former  occasion ;
he  had  spoken  no  words  of  reproach,  but
simply  leit  him  in  the  hands  of  justice.
Now  he  calls  liim  "  wioked,"  because  he  is
unmerciful ;  he  deserves  the  epithet,  because
he  has  been  guilty  of  a  crime  as  heinous  as
theft  or  murder.  Tlien  the  lord  places  in
strong  contrast  the  mercy  which  he  had
received  and  the  unmercifulness  which  he
had  shown.  All  that  debt.  Great  as  it  was.
Thou  desiredst  me  (iro/JCKoAEiras) ;  hesoughtett
me;  calkdst  on  me  for  aid.  The  debtor  had
not  askeil  or  hoped  for  remission  of  his  debt,
and  hail  been  largely  and  most  unexpectedly
blessed.

Ver.  33. — Compassion  .  . .  pity.  The  same
vei'b  is  used  in  both  places.  Bhouldett
not  thou  alto  liave  had  mercy  on  thy  fellow-
servant,  even  at  1  had  viercy  on  thee  ?  (Re-
vised Version).  The  man's  guilt  lies  in  his
nnmercifuliiebs  in  the  face  of  mercy  received.
The  fact  is  patent;  it  stands  fur  itself ;  it
needs  no  amplilicalion  or  enforcement.  The
king  says  no  more,  and  the  delinquent  is
equally  silent ;  he  has  no  excuse  to  offer.
Convicted  by  his  own  conscience,  he  knows
it  is  useless  to  sue  for  pardon  or  to  expect
further  leniency.  So  in  the  day  of  judgment
no  excuse  can  be  admitted  ;  it  is  too  late  to
plead  or  argue  when  the  sentence  is  past.

Ver.  34. — Was  wroth.  This,  as  we  said
above,  ia  the  prerogative  of  God.  Man  is
pained  and  grieved  at  sin;  God  is  angry.
Tormentors  ;  PaaavurTois :  t-irtoribut.  These
are  not  the  gaolers,  prison-keepers,  but
persons  who  put  prisoners  to  the  torture.
Neither  Jewlth  nor  Roman  law  at  that
time  recognized  any  such  officials ;  neither
were  those  in  confinement  treated  thus  in
either  community.  The  idea  is  taken  from
the  practice  of  Oriental  despotism,  which
might  thus  punish   an  ofi'ence  considered


supremely  detestable.  In  s  mystical  sense
these  are  the  ministers  of  Divine  vengeanco
who  carry  out  the  behests  of  the  King.  Till
he  should  pay;  tmtil  he  thould  have  paid
(ias  ol  imoS^).  Some  editors  omit  oi
bracket  oS,  but  the  sense  is  the  same  with
or  without  the  relative.  The  debt  never
could  be  paid,  so  practically  the  punishment
would  last  for  ever.  Commentators,  medi-
iBval  and  modern,  see  here  an  argument  for
the  eternity  of  future  punishment ;  others
see  in  the  clause  an  intimation  that  sin  may
be  forgiven  in  the  other  world,  though  not
repented  of  or  pardoned  in  this  present  life.
The  words  give  no  support  to  the  latter
interpretation.  Until,  etc.,  does  not  neces-
sarily signify  that  the  condition  specified  is
certain  to  be  fulfilled.  As  Bengel  says,  on
oh.  i.  25,  "  Non  sequitur  ergo  post."  And
in  the  present  oiise  there  could  be  no  pos-
sibility of  payment.  A  criminal  delivered  to
the  tormentors  would  have  no  opportunity
or  means  of  raising  the  necessary  funds.
If  this  ia  a  picture  of  the  final  judgment,  it
is  parallel  to  our  Lord's  statement  in  ch.  v,
26,  "Thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out
thence  till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost
farthing;  "  for,  as  the  Preacher  says, "  There
is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor
wisdom,  in  the  grave  whither  thou  goest"
(Eccles.  ix.  10).  All  that  was  due  [unto  him]
{irav  rh  o(p€iK6fievov  auT^').  Modern  editors
reject  aln^:  Vulgate,  univereum  debitutn.
This  is  more  general  than  "  all  that  debt "
in  ver.  32.  It  is  usually  taken  to  refer  to
the  old  debt  now  redemanded.  But  a
difficulty  has  been  found  in  the  fact  that
this  old  debt  had  been  freely  forgiven  and
utterly  done  away,  and  therefore  could  not,
in  equity,  be  again  exacted.  Hence  some
commentators  have  explained  the  clause  as
referring  not  at  all  to  the  former  debt,  but
to  a  new  debt  incurred  by  a  new  offence,
viz.  ingratitude  and  unmercifulness.  But
the  spiritual  truth  seems  to  be  that,  although
sins  once  absolutely  forgiven  are  not  again
impuled,  they  make  subsequent  sins  mora
heinous,  as  in  a  human  law  court  previous
conviction  increases  the  penalty  of  a  fresh
transgression.  Falling  from  grace,  a  man
passes  into  enmity  with  God,  and  so  far
cancels  his  pardon,  and  is  in  a  state  of  oon-
demuatiou  (see  Ezek.  xviii.  24,  26).

Ver.  3.). — So  likewise.  This  points  to  the
moral  of  the  parable  intended  by  Christ.
It  is  not  a  lesson  against  ingratitude,  but
against  unmercifulness.  "Blessed  are  the
merciful :  for  they  shall  obtain  meroy."  But
want  of  charity  makes  a  man  incapable  of
retaining  God's  pardon;  the  Holy  Spirit
cannot  abide  in  an  unforgiving  soul.  Uy
heavenly  Father.  He  says,  not  "your"
(oh.  vi.  14, 26),  nor  "  imr,"  but"  my  heavenly
Father,"  the  Father  of  Christ,  the  God  of  all


OH.  XVIII.  1— 3fi.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


217


mercies.  He  cannot  Join  himself  in  mention
with  such  Hs  are  not  children  of  Qod.  From
yonr  hearts.  Forgivenuss  must  be  real,
sincere,  not  pretaided,  nor  merely  outward.
There  must  noi  only  be  no  outward  act  of
revenge,  but  no  malice  in  the  heart,  no
storing  up  of  evil  piissions  for  future  outlet,
as  occasion  may  arise.  The  heart  must  be
in  haimouy  with  the  conduct,  and  both
must  evidence  a  true  spirit  of  charity.  This
alone  enables  one  to  continue  in  a  state  of


grace  and  in  reconciliation  with  Gnd  ;  this
alone  makes  prayer  acceptable  ;  ami  we  are
assured  that,  as  our  heavenly  Father  requires
ns  to  forgive  without  limit,  go  his  mercy  is
infinite  and  will  be  extended  to  us  in  mea-
sure unbounded.  Their  trespasses.  These
words  are  omitted  by  many  mauuaoripts,
the  Vulgate,  and  most  modern  editors;  and
they  are  not  required  by  the  sense.  They
li;ive  been,  perhaps,  added  to  obviate  a  certain
abruptness  in  tho  conclusion  of  tlio  parable.


HOMILETIOS.

Ven-l—U.—The  littlt  ones.  1.  Their  example.  1.  The  quesUon  of  the  ajpostUi.
They  had  not  yet  learned  tho  great  lesson  of  humility.  Perhaps  the  favour  shown  to
Peter,  James,  and  John  had  excited  jealousies  among  them.  On  their  way  to  Caper-
naum they  had  disputed  who  should  be  the  greatest.  After  all  the  Lord's  teaching
they  did  not  yet  understand  the  spiritual  nature  of  his  kingdom.  There  are  rivalries  and
animosities  in  earthly  states;  there  should  be  none  in  that  kingdom  where  the  lowliest
are  the  highest.  But  this  is  a  hard  lesson  to  learn,  and  the  apostles  were  long  in  learn-
ing it.  At  Capernaum  they  asked  Christ,  "  Who  ia  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven?"  Who  should  be  greater  (the  words  literally  mean)  than  others?  Who
should  stand  above  others  in  the  hierarchy  of  the  Church  that  should  be  built  upon  the
Eock?  Who  should  be  nearer  than  others  to  the  King  in  the  kingdom  which  Christ
bad  come  to  establish?  2.  The  little  child.  The  Lord's  estimate  of  greatness  diS'ered
wholly  from  that  current  among  men.  He  had  said  once  before  that  of  all  that  had
been  born  of  women  there  had  never  risen  a  greater  than  John  the  Bapti.st.  He  put
the  holy  martyr  above  all  the  monarchs,  warriors,  and  statesmen  of  ancient  times.  But
he  had  then  said,  "  He  that  is  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater  than  he."
And  now,  in  answer  to  the  question  who  should  be  greater  than  others  in  tliat  king-
dom, he  called  a  little  child  unto  him.  The  little  one  came  willingly,  drawn  by  the
gentle  words,  the  loving  looks,  of  the  Master.  The  Lord  set  him  in  the  midst,  in  the
place  of  honour ;  he  took  him  in  his  arms,  St.  Mark  tells  us.  The  Lord  always  loved
the  little  children;  he  bade  them  come  to  him;  he  watched  their  innocent  [day  with
kindly  interest,  and  drew  spiritual  lessons  from  it  (oh.  xi.  16,  17).  Now  the  liitle  one
lay,  restful  and  happy,  in  the  Lord's  embrace.  Thither  we  would  lead  our  children —
to  the  Lord,  to  share  his  love  and  teaderness.  And,  ah  I  if  he  should  call  them  away
from  our  sight,  we  must  learn  to  trust  them  in  faith,  though  it  cannot  be  without
tears,  to  those  everlasting  arms.  "  He  shall  jrather  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and  carry
them  in  his  bosom."  Happy  child  1  we  knuw  not  whether  he  grew  up,  as  a  late  and
doubtful  tradition  says,  to  be  the  famous  Bishnp  Ignatius.  That  holy  martyr  bore
God  in  his  heart,  as  the  name  Theopborus  imports ;  doubtless  he  was  borne  up  in  his
sufferings  by  the  gracious  help  of  God.  Wo  know  not  whether  in  his  infancy  he  was
borne  in  the  arms  of  Christ.  That  child  was  greatly  blessed.  He  would  never  lorgut,
one  thinks,  the  encircling  arms  of  Christ.  But  doth  not  the  Scripture  say  to  us,  "  The
eternal  God  is  thy  Refuge, "and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arras"?  and,  alas!  how
often  we  forget  the  gracious  presence  of  God  in  our  unbelief  and  selfish  fears !  Now,
the  Lord  called  the  attention  of  the  apostles  to  the  little  one.  3.  The  Lord's  answer :
the  lowliest  are  the  greatest.  (1)  The  necessity  of  conversion.  The  deep  and  awful
question  which  we  ought  to. put,  each  one  to  his  own  soul,  is  not — Who  is  the  greatest
in  the  kingilom  of  heaven?  but — ^Ara  we  ourselves  true  loyal  members  of  that  king-
dom? We  cannot  be  in  the  kingdom  at  all  except  in  the  sense  in  which  the  withered
fruitless  branches  still  for  a  short  time  hang  on  to  the  vine ;  we  cannot  be  in  the  king-
dom in  any  holy  and  blessed  sense  unless  we  are  converted ;  we  cannot  enter  into  the
kingdom  of  glory  at  the  last  unless  we  are  converted.  The  word  "  conversion  "  occurs
only  once  in  the  New  Testament ;  the  verb,  in  its  various  forms,  nine  times ;  but  four
of  those  passages  are  quotations  of  Isa.  vi.  10.  Sometimes  the  passive  form  of  the  verb
is  used,  some  times  the  active.    And  it  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the  four  quotations  of


218  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xviii.  1— 35i

Isa.  vi.  10,  the  active  Irturrph^airtv  is  used  three  times,  the  passive  arrpaipSittir  once.
God  sometimes  commands  his  people,  "Turn  ye  even  to  me  with  all  your  hearts;"
and  sometimes  we  pray  to  God,  "  Turn  thou  us  unto  thee,  0  Lord,  and  we  shall  be
turned."  There  are  two  aspects  of  the  great  change — the  human  and  the  Divine.
Both  are  real  and  true;  neither  excludes  the  other.  What  we  need  is  the  actual
knowledge  of  that  blefesed  change  from  our  own  inward  experience;  if  we  have  that,  we
need  not  distress  ourselves  about  the  deep  things  of  God,  the  relations  between  the
human  and  the  Divine,  between  the  sovereignty  of  God  and  the  free-will  of  man.  We
must  turn  with  all  our  hearts  unto  the  Lord,  praying  earnestly  and  humbly,  "  Turn
thou  us,  0  Lord."  The  apostles  must  turn,  the  Lord  said,  from  their  earthly  ambition,
from  their  rivalries  and  jealousies.  We  must  turn,  each  one,  from  his  besetting  sin,
or  we  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  We  must  all  turn  away  from  the
world  to  God,  away  from  self  to  Christ.  We  must  look,  not  to  the  things  which  are
seen,  but  to  the  things  which  are  not  seen ;  the  line  of  vision,  so  to  speak,  must  be
changed ;  the  eye  of  the  soul  must  be  directed,  not  to  the  earth,  but  to  heaven.  The
circumstances  of  this  great  change  vary  in  different  individuals ;  in  some  it  is  sudden,
in  others  slow  and  gradual.  Some,  like  St.  Paul,  can  point  to  a  great  startling  crisis
in  their  spiritual  life ;  some  few,  like  Samuel,  have  lived  from  childhood  in  the  lelt
presence  of  God,  growing  continually  in  grace, — not  without  many  sins,  not  without
continual  repentance,  but  without  any  strong  boundarj -line  marking  the  decisive
change  from  evil  to  good.  But  in  some  form  or  other,  in  some  way  or  other,  that
change  must  take  place  in  every  true  Christian  life.  We  may  not  be  able  to  describe
it  exactly,  to  fix  its  exact  moment,  its  circumstances.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it
listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and
whither  it  goeth."  But  the  change  must  be  felt  in  its  results  ("  thou  hearest  the  sound
thereof"),  if  we  cannot  define  its  action.  We  must  be  conscious  that  our  heart  is  turned
towards  God,  that  our  thoughts,  desires,  motives,  hopes,  point  towards  heavenly  things.
If  we  have  that  happy  consciousness,  we  may  humbly  hope  that  he  which  hath  begun
a  good  work  in  us  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  we  have  it  not,  let
us  not  rest  until  by  God's  grace  we  gain  it ;  for,  except  we  be  converted,  we  cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  and  ohl  what  must  be  the  misery  of  those  who  lose
that  great  reward  1  (2)  The  necessity  of  childlike  humility.  There  is  no  true  con-
version vrithout  humility;  a  man  whose  thoughts  are  filled  with  self  cannot  turn  to
tJhrist.  Pride  concentrates  the  regards  of  the  soul  on  self;  and  while -the  soul  is
occupied  with  self  it  cannot  see  the  surpassing  beauty  of  the  Lord,  it  cannot  turn  to
him.  Those  who  would  follow  Christ  must  become  as  little  children ;  they  must  be
like  the  little  ones  in  their  simplicity,  their  trustfulness,  their  humility.  The  little
chUd  is  simple ;  it  shows  its  true  nature ;  it  has  no  hypocrisy,  no  desire  to  seem  other
than  it  is;  it  is  humble  and  modest;  it  does  not  aim  at  display  and  show;  it  is  full  of
affectionate  trustfulness  in  those  whom  it  loves.  And,  the  Lord  Jesus  says,  they  shall
be  greater  than  others,  they  shall  have  the  higher  places  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
who  humble  themselves  as  that  little  child  who  then  lay  in  his  arms  was  humble ;
that  is,  with  an  unaffected  humility,  with  a  simple  and  genuine  lowliness.  Then  the
Christian  must  not  set  his  heart  upon  gaining  the  high  places  of  life;  if  God  puts  him
there  he  must  do  his  duty  simply  and  humbly ;  if  others  are  set  above  him  he  must  be
willing  to  take  the  lowest  place,  content  and  happy,  remembering  the  blessed  Master's
words.

II.  The  dignity  of  Chbist'b  little  ones.  1.  The  blessing  of  receiving  them.  Christ
loved  the  little  children ;  he  proposes  their  character  to  his  followers  as  a  model  for
imitation.  His  words  shed  a  new  dignity,  a  new  glory,  on  innocent  childhood.  He  was
thinking  probably  not  only  of  children  in  years,  but  also  of  the  childlike  in  heart  and
mind.  He  deigns  to  regard  such  a»,  in  some  sense,  representatives  of  himself.  Those
who  care  for  little  children  because  Christ  cared  for  them,  in  his  name  and  for  his  sake,
care  for  Christ.  These  words  give  a  very  holy  meaning  to  single-hearted  work  in
Sunday  schools ;  they  shed  a  blessing  upon  orphanages,  upon  all  Christian  work  done
for  children's  sake,  all  Christian  love  and  thought  for  little  children.  And  they  pro
ziounce  a  blessing  upon  all  those  who  in  Christ  s  name  receive  into  their  affections  or
into  their  homes  true  Christian  men  who  have  learned  of  Christ  the  childlike  simplicity
and  lowliness  which  he  exalts  so  highly.    Those  who  receive  luch  receiya  Christ,  as


CH.  xvm.  1— 35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  219

Abraham  received  angels  unawares.  Let  us  love  and  cherish  Christian-minded  friends ;
they  bring  a  precious  blessing  to  our  houses,  for  they  bring  the  gracious  presence  of
Christ.  2.  The  guilt  of  causing  them  to  stumble.  A  heathen  poet  tella  us  that  the
greatest  reverence  is  due  to  childhood ;  he  bids  us  exclude  carefully  from  the  sight  of
children  everything  that  is  coarse  and  evil.  The  Lord  enforces  the  same  duty  under
more  awful  sanctions.  The  simplicity,  the  receptivity,  of  little  children  expose  them
to  evil  iufluences.  In  Christian  homes  they  are  taught  to  believe  in  Christ.  Among
their  companions,  in  their  schools,  they  are  sometimes  exposed  to  manifold  temptations.
But  woe  to  those  who  purposely  set  stumbling-blocks  in  their  way  1  Woe  to  those,
schoolfellows  or  others,  who  try  to  entrap  the  innocent  and  simple-hearted  into  pro-
fanity and  neglect  of  their  souls  1  Such  are  acting  the  part  of  the  devil ;  they  are  doing
his  work;  they  are  the  enemies  of  Christ,  the  murderers  of  souls  for  which  Christ  died.
Better  that  they  had  died  before  they  came  to  this  pitch  of  guilt.  For  souls  are  very
precious  in  the  sight  of  Christ ;  he  sheil  his  precious  blood  for  them.  How  must  he
regard  those  who  entice  them  to  ruin  and  death?  3.  There  must  he  off enees.  Human
nature  being  what  it  is,  the  power  of  the  devil  being  what  it  is,  there  must  be  always
in  the  world  meu  who  set  an  evil  example,  who  are  as  stumbling-blocks,  as  snares.
It  is  a  necessity,  part  of  the  great  mystery  of  the  existence  of  evil.  This  necessity  is
not  absolute ;  it  follows  from  the  existence  of  sin  ;  and  sin  is  voluntary,  or  it  would
not  be  sin.  Sin  is  voluntary  in  individuals ;  but  while  the  world  remains  as  it  is,
there  must,  as  a  fact,  be  sin  in  the  world,  as  there  must  be  heresies  (1  Cor.  li.  19);
aud  where  there  is  sin  there  must  be  offences.  But  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the
offence  oometh  1  The  guilt  of  sin  is  increased  by  its  contagious  character.  The  sinner
sins  against  his  own  soul ;  he  sins  also  against  the  souls  of  others ;  for  his  sin  becomes
a  centre  of  evil  influence,  spreading  its  foul  attractions  among  hearts  rendered  only  too
susceptible  by  the  inherited  corruption  of  human  nature.  None  can  tell  the  mass  of
moral  disease  which  may  spring  from  one  source  of  infection.  Then  woe  to  that  man
by  whom  the  offence  cometh  1  He  knows  not  what  fearful  mischief  may  follow  from
his  wicked  or  thoughtless  act.  He  may  repent,  thank  God ;  but  his  repentance  must
be  dpep>  his  sorrow  great ;  he  may  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  4.  They  must  he  avoided  at  all  costs.  Those  who
ensnare  others,  who  cause  them  to  stumble,  have  first  been  ensnared,  have  stumbled
themselves.  The  first  occasion  of  stumbling  must  be  avoided.  The  danger  is  great,
the  consequences  are  fearful ;  better  any  sacrifice,  any  self-denial.  Self-denial  leads  to
heaven,  self-indulgence  to  hell.  We  must  out  off  the  causes,  the  occasions  of  sin,
though  they  be  as  closely  bound  up  with  our  life  as  the  hand,  or  foot,  or  eye.  The
Lord  repeats  the  lesson  which  he  had  already  given  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount
(ch.  V.  29,  30).  There  are  some  cautions  which  must  be  given  again  and  again-r
enforced  with  all  manner  of  illustrations,  "  precept  upon  precept,  line  upon  line."  And
surely  this  warning  of  the  deep  necessity  of  real  self-denial  is  one  which  needs  the
most  constant  repetition,  one  which  must  be  urged  again  and  again,  even  uuto  weari-
ness. And  it  must  be  urged  very  strongly  and  forcibly.  The  hand,  the  foot,  the  eye,
are  very  valuable  to  us.  The  loss  of  one  such  member  would  be  very  serious.  To
cut  it  off  or  to  pluck  it  out  would  be  a  great  sacrifice,  involving  much  pain,  requiring
very  stern  self-denial.  But  any  self-denial,  the  Lord  himself  tells  us,  is  better  than
the  risk  of  suffering  that  eternal  fire  which  must  be  the  end  of  sin  and  self-indulgence.
Eternal  fire  I  soften  the  awful  words  as  far  as  you  dare ;  say  that  there  is  a  possibility,
a  bare  possibility,  that  the  word  "eternal"  may  not  necessarily  involve  that  endless-
ness which  is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  less  correct  rendering  "everlasting;"  say
that  the  word  "  fire  "  is  figurative,  ttat  the  Lord  did  not  mean  a  material  fire,  corporeal
torments ; — after  aU,  there  remains  enough  of  most  fearful  meaning  in  the  words  of
Christ  (and  let  us  remember  that  it  was  Christ,  the  most  gentle,  the  most  loving
Saviour,  who  used  those  words)  to  make  us  feel  what  must  be  the  dreadful  danger  of
those  who  entice  others  into  sin,  to  make  thoughtful,  believing  Christians  willing  to
deny  themselves  in  every  way,  if  so  be  they  may  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and
save  their  souls  alive  in  the  great  day  of  God.  5.  Offences  come  from  contempt ;  con-
tempt of  the  little  ones  is  a  grievous  sin.  To  despise  others  was  characteristic  of  the
Pharisees ;  it  is  very  sinful  in  Christians.  The  Lord  is  loving  unto  every  man ;  the
Saviour  died  for  all.    Christiaas  may  not  dare  to  despise  those  whom  the  Lord  loved.


220  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvra.  1—35.

for  whom  he  gave  himself  to  die.  To  speak  contemptuously  of  those  whom  we  think
beneath  us  in  rank,  in  riches,  in  intellect,  in  refinement,  is  sinful  in  the  sight  of  God.
"  Honour  all  men,"  is  the  lesson  of  Holy  Scripture ;  for  all  were  made  by  God  the
Father;  all  were  redeemed  by  God  the  Son;  all  may,  if  they  will,  come  to  God  in  faith
and  prayer,  be  sanctified  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Men  think  that  there  is  no  harm
in  contemptuous  thoughts  and  words ;  but  these  things  are  sins  against  the  law  of
love,  sins  against  God,  who  bids  us  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves;  they  greatly
injure  the  soul.  Then  honour  all  men ;  especially  take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one
of  the  little  ones,  the  little  children  whom  the  Lord  loves,  or  the  childlike  in  heart
whom  he  commends.  Despise  them  not,  for  they  are  dear  to  Almighty  God ;  he  cares
for  them;  he  giveth  his  angels  charge  over  them;  he  assigns  to  them  their  angel-
guardians  ;  "  their  angels,"  the  Lord  says,  the  angels  appointed  to  watch  over  them,  whose
special  duty  it  is  to  keep  them  in  all  their  ways,  who  are  sent  forth  to  minister  for
their  sake.  Men  may  despise  these  little  ones ;  hut  holy  angels  tend  them — angels
great  in  power  and  might,  angels  who  are  near  to  the  throne,  who  stand  in  the  presence
of  God,  who  in  heaven  do  always  behold  the  face  of  God.  The  Lord's  words,  "  I  say
unto  you,"  give  an  emphatic  sanction  to  this  sweet  and  blessed  doctrine  of  the  ministry
of  angels.  As  the  angel  Gabriel  watched  by  God's  appointment  over  the  holy  Child
Jesus,  80  surely  do  the  angels  of  God  watch  over  the  little  children  now ;  so  surely  do
they  watch  over  us,  if  we  are  childlike  in  heart,  if  we  are  among  those  little  ones  who
believe  in  Christ.  To  the  believer  this  world  is  still  a  Bethel,  the  house  of  God,  the
gate  of  heaven.  The  ladder  which  Jacob  saw  in  the  vision  of  tlie  night  is  still  set  on
the  earth,  and  the  top  reacheth  to  heaven ;  and  still  do  the  angels  of  God  ascend  and
descend,  bringing  help  and  strength,  messages  of  peace  and  love  to  the  little  ones  of
Christ,  bearing  the  prayers  of  the  saints  into  the  Divine  presence,  carrying  the  souls
of  the  holy  dead  into  the  paradise  of  God.  6.  The  little  ones  are  precious  in  the  sight
of  Ood.  They  must  be  so,  for  the  Son  of  man  came  to  save  them.  None  are  so  small,
so  insignificant,  as  to  be  left  out  of  the  Lord's  loving  care;  for  it  was  to  save  the  lost
that  he  came— to  save  that  which  seemed  utterly  lost,  lost  beyond  the  power  of  saving
(rb  4ToXajA((v).  (See  Luke  xix.  10,  where  the  words  are  certainly  genuine ;  they  are  of
doubtful  authority  in  this  place.)  It  was  an  evil  time  when  the  Saviour  came  into  the
wQfld.  All  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth ;  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  the
lust  of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life  were  everywhere  dominant.  The  world  seemed
lost  to  all  that  was  good — a  mass  of  corruption.  But  to  save  that  lost  world  the  Son
of  God  came  down  from  heaven  and  becanie  the  Son  of  man.  His  incarnation,  his
sacrifice  of  himself  upon  the  cross,  has  given  a  new  value,  a  higher  dignity,  to  human
nature.  None  may  dare  to  despise  those  souls  of  men  which  the  Lord  Jesus  loved  so
dearly.  The  blessed  angels  care  for  Christ's  little  ones;  they  encamp  around  them  to
protect  them,  because  they  are  his  angels,  his  messengers  (oh.  xiii.  41),  and  they  mu.st
cire  for  those  who  are  so  very  precious  in  the  sight  of  their  blessed  Lord.  7.  Parable
of  the  hundred  sheep.  One  is  gone  astray.  The  shepherd  leaves  the  ninety  and  nine
upon  the  mountains,  and  seeketh  that  which  is  gone  astray.  Does  it  mean  that  the
Lord  leaves  the  countless  host  of  angels  on  the  heavenly  heights,  and  goeth  after  the
one  lost  sheep  of  humanity  (comp.  Heb.  ii.  16)?  So  many  have  understood  it.  But
it  seems  more  natural  to  inteipret  the  parable  as  intended  mainly  to  teach  the  deep
love  of  God  for  each  individual  soul.  "  The  Son  of  man  came  to  save  that  which  was
lost."  His  great  love  was  not  merely  a  general  love  for  sinful  humanity  as  a  mass ;
it  was  an  individual  love  for  each  perishing  soul.  If  all  but  one  had  been  gathered  in,
he  would  have  gone  after  that  one  lost  sheep,  seeking  on  and  on  until  he  found  it.
Human  love  is  limited  in  its  range.  We  cannot  love  all  mankind  as  we  love  one  who
is  very  dear  to  us.  It  is  not  so  with  the  infinite  Love.  The  love  of  God  is  all-embracing
in  its  extent  and  fulness,  perfect  and  complete  in  its  individual  affection.  He  loves  all
and  each.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  who-
soever believetb  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  The  shepherd,
if  so  be  that  he  finds  the  lost  sheep,  rcjoiceth  more  of  that  one  than  of  the  ninety  and
nine  which  went  not  astray.  The  ninety  and  nine  are  precious  to  the  shepherd;  in
some  sense  tliey  must  be  more  precious  than  one.  But  they  are  safe.  They  do  not
awaken  the  same  emotion,  the  same  intense  longing,  as  the  one  that  went  astray.  The
joy  of  recovery  is  proportioned  to  the  sorrow  of  the  loss.    Such  would  be  the  feelinfs


OH.  xvm.  1-35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  221

of  a  human  shepherd.  It  U  -an  illustration  (as  far  as  Divine  truths  can  he  shadowed
by  human  things)  of  the  love  of  God  for  each  separate  human  souL  It  is  not  his  will
that  one  should  perish ;  he  willeth  that  all  men  should  he  saved.  Then  let  not  any
Christian  man  dare  to  despise  one  of  those  u  hotn  God  so  greatly  loved.  The  Lord
repeats  this  precious  parable  in  Luke  xv.  under  different  circumstances,  with  a  some'
what  different  application.    It  cannot  be  repeated  too  often  or  studied  too  deeply.

Lessons.  1.  Even  apostles  had  their  rivalries :  how  earnestly  we  ought  to  strive
ngainst  envy  and  jealousy  I  2,  A  true  conversion  i*  of  all  blessings  the  greatest ;  seek
it  with  all  your  might.  3.  There' is  no  true  conversion  without  a  humble,  childlike
spirit.  4.  An  evil  example  involves  fearful  guilt;  avoid  it  at  any  coat.  6,  Honour  all
men,  especially  helieyers ;  each  one  is  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.

Vers.  15 — '20.^ — The  method  of  dealing  with  offence*.  I.  Tkb  dutt  of  pbivate
Chbibtians.  1.  Beoret  admonition.  The  Lord  had  warned  the  apostles  that  offences
must  come;  be  had  urged  the  necessity  of  exceeding  carefulness  against  giving
offence  to  others ;  now  he  tells  us  how  to  act  when  others  put  a  stumhling-block  in  our
way  by  their  trespasses.  Go  and  tell  thy  hrotber  his  fault,  he  says;  speak  to  him
secretly,  do  not  publish  his  transgression,  do  not  make  a  talk  of  it ;  charity  endureth
all  things,  charity  hideth  a  multitude  of  sins.  Speak  to  him ;  it  is  better  to  tell  him
his  fault  than  to  brood  over  it.  But  speak  to  him  gently  for  his  own  soul's  Hake.  If
he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  hrother-^gained  him  to  Christ,  gained  his
soul ;  for  he  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  soul
from  death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins.  And  oh  I  what  is  the  exceeding  great
privilege  of  gaining  a  soul  which  Christ  loved,  for  which  he  came  down  from  heaven
that  he  might  seek  it  I  2,  TA«  second  step,  admonition  irfore  two  or  three  witnesses.
If  the  first  attempt  fails,  still  publicity  should  be  avoided  as  far  as  possible  ;  a  second
should  be  made  with  the  help  of  one  or  two  Christian  friends.  They  may  bring  the
erring  brother  to  a  sense  of  his  own  guilt,  of  the  offence  which  he  is  causing  to  others,
of  the  wrong  which  he  is  doing  to  the  Church  of  which  he  is  a  member  hy  his  wilful-
ness and  obstinacy.

II.  Thb  office  of  the  Chubch.  1.  Its  discipline.  If  the  sinful  brother  again  ana
again  refuses  to  listen  to  Christian  reproof  in  private,  the  sin  which  is  causing  offence
to  the  brethren  must  be  brought  before  the  Church.  By  the  word"Church"  the  Lord
must  mean  the  Christian  Church,  that  Church  of  which  he  had  spokun  for  the  first
time  at  Csssarea  fhilippi,  which  be  was  building  upon  the  Bock.  He  was  speaking
*  prophetically,  looking  forward  to  the  growth  and  increase  of  the  Church.  "  Tell  it
unto  the  Church."  This  is  the  last  resort ;  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  Church  he  must  be
regarded  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  i>ublican,  no  longer  a  brother  in  the  full  Christian
sense  of  the  word.  But  we  must  remember  that  the  Lord's  mercy  extended  to  heathen
and  publicans.  He  came  to  call  sinners  to  repentance.  The  sinful  brother  may  repent,
he  may  be  forgiven  and  saved.  The  censure  itself  is  inflicted  not  only  for  example's
sake,  not  only  that  the  cause  of  ot^ence  may  be  removed,  but  also  for  the  sake  of  the
offender,  "that  the  si'irit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  (I  Cor.  v.  6).  2.
Its  authority.  The  Lord  here  confers  upon  all  the  apostles  as  representatives  of  the
Church  that  authority  which  he  had  already  (cb.  xvi.  19)  given  to  St.  Peter  as  the
representative  of  the  apostolic  college.  The  Church,  then,  hath  authority  in  contro-
versies of  faith--=authQrity  to  declare  what  is  of  faith  and  what  is  not,  what  is  of  obliga-
tioti  and  what  is  indifi'erent,  what  is  allowed  and  what  is  forbidden.  Christians  are
bound  to  regard  the  decisions  of  the  Church  with  respect  and  reverence,  for  if  rightly
maile  they  are  ratified  in  heaven.  Yet  St.  Peter  certainly  erred  (Gal.  ii.  11);
Churches  may  err,  and  alasl  have  eired.  It  is  only  while  the  Church  stands  firm  upon
the  Kock,  which  is  Christ ;  only  wJien  the  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  the
name  of  Christ,  and  he  hin)self  according  to  his  promise  is  in  the  midst  of  them ;  when
those  two  or  three  are  men  who  have  turned  to  God  in  the  simiilioity  and  lowliness  of
little  children ;  it  is  only  then  that  the  conditions  are  fulfilled  on  which  this  promise
depends.  What  a  tremendous  responsibility  rests  upon  those  who  are  called  to  guide
»nd  rule  the  Church  of  God  I  All  Christian  men  should  feel  for  them  in  the  many
difficulties  of  their  arduous  work,  should  pray  for  them  constantly  and  earnestly.  3  •
The  strength  of  the  Ghurch.    That  strength  lies  in  prayer.    The  power  of  united  prayei


222  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvul  1—35

is  Buch  that  if  any  two  true  believers  agree  as  touching  anything  that  they  shall  ask,
it  shall  be  done  for  them.  They  pray  on  earth,  our  Father  hears  in  heaven.  United
prayer  brings  to  their  help  the  almighty  power  of  God.  That  union  of  human  wills
into  concordance  with  the  holy  will  of  God  must  be  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the
hearts  of  the  suppliants ;  and  when  the  Holy  Spirit  prompts  the  prayer,  the  prayer  is
always  heard,  the  petition  is  always  granted.  Only  let  us  not  misunderstand  the
Lord's  promise,  as  perhaps  the  sons  of  Zebedee  did  at  the  time  (comp.  Mark  x.  35,
where  they  almost  quote  these  words  of  Christ's).  Instructed  Christians  will  ask  for
spiritual  blessings,  which  alone  are  blessings  always  and  under  all  conditions ;  or,  if
they  sometimes  ask  for  earthly  things  (and  they  are  encouraged  to  do  so  in  the  Lord's
Prayer  itself),  it  will  always  be  with  the  Lord's  own  condition,  "  Nevertheless,  not  my
will,  but  thine  be  done."  The  strength  of  the  Church  lies  in  prayer,  and  the  strengtli-
of  prayer  lies  in  the  presence  of  Christ.  The  union  of  only  two  Christians  in  real
earnest  prayer  represents  the  Church.  For  Christ  himself  is  present  wherever  two  or
three  are  gathered  together  in  his  name,  or  rather,  as  the  literal  rendering  is,  into  his
Name.  Christians  are  united  by  the  one  Spirit  into  one  body,  into  that  spiritual  unity
which  is  called  by  the  one  name  (1  Cor.  xii.  12).  Believers  are  gathered  together  into
that  name,  into  that  spiritual  fellowship  which  can  only  be  realized  by  those  who  walk
in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light  (1  John  i.  7).  And  wherever  that  fellowship  is,  there
is  Christ  the  Lord  manifesting  himself  to  those  who  meet  in  his  name  and  are  gathered
together  into  his  name.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  that  little  gathering,  for  he  is  God,
omnipresent,  ready  to  hear  his  servants  in  whatever  corner  of  the  world  they  lift  up
their  prayers  to  him,  ready  to  grant  their  petitions,  to  guide  their  counsels,  to  ratify
the  decisions,  to  give  effect  to  the  sentence  issued  in  his  name  by  those  who  met
together  in  his  name  in  the  simple  earnestness  of  childlike  Christians,  in  the  energy  of
that  faith  which  has  turned  wholly  to  the  Lord.

Lessons.  1.  It  is  a  difficult  task  to  reprove  a  sinful  brother ;  it  is  sometimes  our
duty ;  it  must  be  done  with  gentleness  and  wisdom.  2.  To  gain  a  brother's  soul  is  an
exceeding  great  reward ;  it  is  worth  much  prayer,  much  thought,  much  time.  3.  The
Lord  hiis  us  hear  the  Church  ;  the  Christian  must  respect  the  authority  of  the
Church.

Vers.  21 — 35.-23^  law  of  forgiventi*.  I.  Thb  odnvbbsation  with  8t.  Pbtbr.
1.  Peter's  question.  The  Lord  had  intimated  the  duty  of  gentleness  in  dealing  with
offences.  Every  effort  was  to  be  used  to  reconcile  the  offending  brother ;  he  was  to
be  approached  with  all  gentleness,  with  all  Christian  tact,  if  so  be  that  he  might  be
won  back  to  Christ  and  to  the  Church.  Peter  wished  for  a  definite  rule  to  guide  him
in  carrying  out  the  Lord's  directions.  According  to  the  rabbis,  an  erring  brother
should  be  forgiven  three  times.  Peter  suggested  a  larger  number,  the  sacred  number
seven,  as  the  limit  of  Christian  forgiveness.  2.  The  Lord's  answer.  "  I  say  not  unto
thee,  Until  seven  times :  but.  Until  seventy  times  seven."  There  seems  to  be  a  refer-
ence to  the  words  of  Lamech  (Gen.  iv.  24).  Lamech  desired  a  seventy  and  sevenfold
vengeance.  The  Lord  commands  a  seventy  and  sevenfold  forgiveness.  There  is
some  doubt  as  to  the  numerical  value  of  the  words.  But  it  is  of  little  importance
which  rendering  we  adopt,  "seventy  times  seven,"  or  "seventy-seven  times," for  the  Lord
certainly  means  that  acts  of  forgiveness  are  not  to  be  counted.  _  It  is  a  question  not
to  be  settled  by  arithmetic,  but  by  Christian  love  and  by  the  grace  of  God.  "  Forgive
us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us."

XL  The  parable  of  thb  king  and  the  unmbbcipul  sebvant,  1.  The  account.
The  Lord  illustrates  the  duty  of  forgiveness  by  the  parable  of  a  human  king  and  his
servants.  The  king  would  take  account  of  his  servants.  God  takes  account  from  time
to  time.  There  are  preliminary  reckonings  preparatory  for  the  great  day  of  account.
In  the  visitations  of  his  providence,  in  dangerous  sickness,  in  the  hour  of  deep  and
heartfelt  penitence,  the  Lord  brings  home  to  our  hearts  the  exceeding  guilt  of  our  sins,
the  greatness  of  our  debt.  A  servant  was  brought  who  owed  ten  thousand  talents.
The  reckoning  had  only  just  begun ;  there  may  have  been  other  even  greater  debts  to
come.  It  was  a  terrible  beginning.  The  servant  was  brought  j  he  would  not  have
come  of  his  own  will.  The  sinner  shrinks  in  terror  from  the  awful  presence  of  the
Judge.    Adam  and  Eve  hid  themselves  when  first  the  King  came  to  take  account.


OH.  XVIII.  1—35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  823

But  he  was  brought.  We  cannot  escape,  we  must  come,  when  he  requires  our
presence.  The  debt  was  enormous,  far  more  than  we  can  even  represent  to  our
imagination.  Such  is  the  awful  debt  of  sin ;  we  may  well  say  every  day,  and  many
times  every  day,  "  Forgive  us  our  debts."  2.  The  mercy  of  the  king.  The  servant  was
to  be  sold,  be  and  his  family,  and  all  that  he  had.  In  his  agony  he  fell  down  before
his  lord  and  worshipped  him ;  "  Lord,"  he  said,  "  have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will  pay
thee  all."  He  could  not  pay,  he  never  could  have  paid,  that  vast  debt.  But  in  his  pre-
sumption, or  in  his  deceitfulness,  or,  it  may  be,  in  the  frenzy  of  his  abject  ti  rror,  he
promised  the  imjiossible.  The  king  was  moved  with  compassion ;  he  loosed  him,  and
forgave  him  the  debt.  It  is  a  parable  of  the  infinite  compassion  of  the  heavenly  King ;
"he  pardoneth  and  absolveth  all  them  that  truly  repent."  "If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is
faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."
3.  The  cruelty  of  the  servant.  He  went  out  from  the  king's  presence.  'We  are  only
safe  while  we  abide  li.  union  with  the  Lord.  He  is  the  Source  and  Fountain  of  love,
and  apart  from  him  there  is  no  true  and  holy  love.  When  men  go  out  from  his
presence,  from  the  sphere  of  his  influence,  they  cease  to  love ;  they  become  selfish,
hard,  unfeeling.  That  forgiven  servant  found  a  fellow-servant  who  owed  him  a
hundred  pence,  a  trifling  sum  compared  with  his  own  enormous  debt.  He  caught  him
by  the  throat ;  he  would  not  listen  to  his  prayer  (though  the  prayer  was  that  very
same  prayer  which  he  himself  had  just  before  poured  forth  in  the  bitterness  of  his
soul);  he  cast  him  into  prison  till  he  should  pay  the  debt.  So  now  men  forget
their  own  guilt,  their  own  danger  j  they  are  hard  and  unforgiving  to  others,  forgetting
their  own  deep  need  of  mercy  and  forgiveness,  4.  The  condemnation.  His  fellow-
servants  were  very  sorry.  The  sins  of  others  will  cause  real  sorrow  to  the  true
Christian ;  he  will  grieve  over  the  hard-hearted  and  impenitent,  as  the  Lord  wept  over
Jerusalem.  "  Rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes,"  said  the  psalmist,  "  because  men
keep  not  thy  Law."  They  told  their  lord.  The  all-seeing  God  needs  no  information
from  men  or  angels ;  yet  in  their  prayers  his  saints  lay  before  him  the  oppression  and
Bufferings  of  his  people,  as  Hezekiah  laid  the  letter  of  Sennacherib  before  the  Lord,  as
the  disciples  "  went  and  told  Jesus"  of  the  death  of  the  holy  Baptist.  The  king  was
wroth:  "  0  thou  wicked  servant,"  he  said.  He  had  not  called  him  wicked  because  lie
owed  the  ten  thousand  talents;  he  pitied  him  then;  now  he  upbraids  him.  His  want  of
mercy  showed  the  utter  hardness  and  selfishness  of  his  lieart;  it  showed  that  his  own
cry  for  mercy  implied  ho  sense  of  the  greatness  of  his  debt,  but  only  fear  of  punish-
ment. The  king  was  wroth  ;  he  delivered  him  to  the  tormentors  till  he  should  pay  all
that  was  due  to  him.  His  cruelty  cancelled  the  forgiveness  which  had  been  granted
him.  His  last  state  was  worse  than  the  first.  Those  who,  having  been  onot
enlightened,  fall  away  from  grace  are  in  awful  danger.  "  It  had  been  better  for  them  not
to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,  than,  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from
the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto  them."  The  unhappy  man  could  never  pay
that  tremendous  debt ;  he  could  not  had  he  remained  free,  how  much  less  when  he  was
in  the  hands  of  the  tormentors  1  Those  words  are  very  awful;  they  represent  awful
possibilities ;  they  sound  in  our  ears  in  tones  of  awful  warning.  "  So  likewise  shall  my
heavenly  Father  do  also  unto  you,  if  ye  from  your  hearts  forgive  not  every  one  his
brother  their  trespasses."  The  unloving  cannot  abide  in  Christ,  who  is  Love ;  the  hard-
hearted and  unmerciful  cannot  continue  in  union  with  him  who,  though  he  was  rich,
yet  for  our  sakes  became  poor ;  the  unforgiving  cannot  dare  to  use  the  prayer  which
the  Lord  himself  hath  taught  us,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that
trespass  against  us."  "Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  There
is  no  mercy  for  the  merciless.  We  may  repeat  again  and  again  the  words  of  prayer,
"  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us  1 "  but  countless  repetitions  will  not  win  mercy  for  those
who  have  not  mercy  in  their  hearts.  And  oh  I  we  shall  need  mercy  in  the  great  day.
Then  let  us  be  merciful  now :  "  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender-hearted,  forgiving
one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven  you."

Lbsbonb.  1.  Let  us  always  remember  the  great  account ;  God  has  given  us  work  to
do,  let  us  work  out  our  own  salvation  in  fear  and  trembling.  2.  Our  debt  is  immense ;
let  the  remembrance  of  our  sins  keep  us  humble.  8,  God's  mercy  is  infinite ;  let  us
trust  in  his  forgiving  love.  4.  He  is  wroth  with  the  unforgiving ;  let  us  learn  mercy
of  the  most  Merciful    5.  We  say  the  Lord's  Prayer  daily  j  let  us  ever  strive  by  God'i


i2i  THE   GOSPEL  ACCOBDIN0  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvin.  1— 3S.

grace  to  translate  that  prayer  into  practice,  to  live  aa  we  pray,  to  forgive,  as  wo  hops
for  forgiveness.

HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 8. — TTie  kingdom  of  the  childlike.  Jesus  Christ  not  only  resorted  to
parables  in  order  to  make  his  teaching  vivid ;  sometimes  he  made  use  of  object-lessons.
Thus  he  answered  the  question  as  to  who  was  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by
pointing  to  the  little  child  whom  he  had  called  to  himself,  and  set  up  in  the  midst  of
his  disciples.  The  child  himself  was  a  visible  embodiment  of  the  reply  our  Lord  wished
his  questioners  to  receive.

I.  Thb  type  of  the  kingdom.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  the  kingdom  of  the  child-
like. When  Ve  look  on  a  little  child  we  see  a  typical  citizen  of  that  glorious  kingdom.
Let  ns  consider  what  there  is  in  childlikeness  to  be  thus  representative.  We  must
approach  this  subject  from  the  ground  from  which  Christ  and  his  disciples  came  to  it.
The  question  of  primacy  being  in  the  minds  of  the  disciples  some  contrast  to  their  feel-
ings and  dispositions  is  vividly  suggested  by  the  sight  of  the  S'mple,  unconscious,
unworldly  child.  1.  Unamhitiout  simplicity.  This  would  be  the  first  impression
produced  by.  the  sight  of  the  child,  when  suddenly  he  was  called  by  Jesus  to  confront
self-seeking  ambition.  Even  if  we  may  believe  that  there  was  no  self-seeking  in  the
minds  of  the  disciples,  and  that  their  inquiry  was  general,  not  personal,  still  the
spirit  of  ambition  was  roused  by  it.  But  the  little  child  does  not  possess  ambition.
The  subtle  calculations  by  which  men  scheme  for  pre-eminence  are  all  unknown  to
him.  He  is  pre-eminent  without  knowing  it.  They  are  the  highest  saints  who  think
least  of  their  own  sanctity.  2.  Vnworldliness.  The  little  child  is  quite  unconventional.
He  knows  nothing  of  the  ways  of  the  world.  Of  course,  it  is  not  desirable  to  imitate
his  defects,  to  go  back  to  childish  ignorance.  But  knowledge  is  dearly  bought  when  it
is  acquired  at  the  cost  of  spirituality.  Wordsworth  tells  us  that  heaven  lies  about  us
in  our  childhood.  3.  Trustfulness.  The  child  came  to  Jesus  as  soon  as  he  was  called.
A  look  of  the  Saviour  was  enough  to  dispel  fear.  We  need  the  irnocent  confidence  of
the  child  to  come  into  right  relations  with  Christ.

II.  The  doob  to  the  kingdom.  1.  Z%e  entrance.  The  disciples  had  forgotten  this.
Busying  themselves  about  the  rank  of  those  who  were  in  the  kingdom,  they  neglected
to  consider  how  to  enter  it.  Tet  this  is  the  first  question,  and  all  else  is  unpractical
till  this  step  has  been  taken.  But  when  it  has  been  taken,  all  else  becomes  unimportant.
It  is  everything  to  be  privileged  to  enter  the  kingdom,  even  though  in  its  lowest  region.
Moreover,  the  true  citizen  of  the  kingdom  will  have  lost  the  ambition  that  busies  itself
about  questions  of  pre-eminence.  2.  The  twrning.  We  are  all  selfish  and  self-seeking
until  we  learn  to  repent  and  take  a  better  course.  No  one  can  enter  the  kingdom  of
heaven  while  he  remains  worldly  and  ambitious.  The  very  spirit  which  seeks  a  first
place  in  the  kingdom  excludes  from  the  kingdom.  We  need  grace  to  turn  back  to  child-
likeness.  We  must  be  converted  into  little  children.  The  greed  and  ambition  must
be  taken  out  of  our  hearts,  and  the  simplicity,  unworldliness,  and  trust  of  the  child
received  in  place  of  those  ugly  attributes. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  offending  member.  A  moment's  reflection  will  convince  us  that
these  stem  sentences  of  Christ's  are  unanswerable.  If  the  alternative  lay  between
losing  a  limb  and  losing  his  life,  who  would  hesitate  with  hia  decision  ?  "  All  that  a
man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."

I.   It  IB  POSSIBLE   FOB  WHAT   IB   VEBT  NKAB  TO   08  TO   BB  FATALLY  HUBTFTJL  TO   CB.

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  meant  that  under  any  circumstances
self-mutilation  would  be  a  duty.  The  causes  of  stumbling  are  not  bodily,  although
the  body  may  be  the  instrnment  of  temptation  j  they  are  in  the  thoughts  and  desires
of  the  heart  (Jas.  i.  14,  16).  But  there  may  be  things  precious  as  parts  of  our  very
selves,  or  friends  dear  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,  or  useful  as  the  right  hand,  and  yet
spiritually  hurtful  to  us.  Our  own  daily  occupation,  to  which  we  have  grown  until  it
has  become  as  a  part  of  ourselves,  may  be  a  source  of  temptation  and  danger.  Our
habits,  which  are  our  second  nature,  may  b«  a  very  bad  second  natoro.


OH.  xvm.  1— 35,]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  226

II.  It  is  nipoRTANT  not  to  let  mwbb  ihterestb  bldtd  us  to  oitk  highest  good.
Byes,  hands,  and  feet  are  good  and  useful  thiogs  in  themselves.  A  maimed  creature
who  has  lost  any  of  these  valuable  organs  and  limbs  is  certainly  a  pitiable  object.
Naturally  and  rightly  we  desire  to  keep  our  body  Sound  and  whole.  Many  possessions,
though  less  intimately  connected  with  onr  persons,  are  still  justly  valued  when  con-
sidered by  themselves.  But  this  valuation  only  touches  a  part  of  life,  and  that  the
lower  part.  If  the  enemy  can  seize  the  outworks  and  turn  them  against  the  citadel,  it
is  desirable  to  demolish  them,  excellent  as  they  may  he  in  form  and  Structure,  because
the  principal  object  is  to  keep  the  citadel.  The  great  necessity  in  spiritual  things
is  to  guard  the  very  life  of  God  within.  If  anything  threatens  this  it  threatens  qui
hi«[hest  interest.  Selfish  people  are  their  own  worst  enemies,  because,  while  pandering
to  the  outer  self,  they  starve  and  poison  the  true  self.

III.  It  is  wise  to  make  ant  sacbifiob  to  save  the  tbue  life.  We  admit  this  in
bodily  disease.  The  shattered  limb  must  be  amputated  to  preserve  the^patient's  life.
The  same  principle  applies  in  spiritual  regions.  The  pain  of  losing  what  is  very  near
and  dear  to  us  may  be  great.  But  we  dare  not  be  cowardly.  A  greater  evU  is  the
alternative.  We  may  spare  our  friendship,  our  wealth,  our  pleasure,  and  yet  destroy
onr  souls.  Then  at  best  these  things  can  but  decorate  the  tomb  of  the  dead  spiritual
nature.  We  have  to  rise  to  the  stern  severity  of  life.  Sin  is  so  terrible  that  it  cannot
be  laid  aside  as  one  would  put  off  a  superfluous  garment.  It  has  eaten  its  way  like  a
cancer  into  our  very  being.  We  shrink  from  the  knife,  but  we  must  submit  to  it  if
we  would  live.  Desperate  efforts  are  needed— or  rather  a  patient  submission  to  the
great  Deliverer  of  souls  v^ho  sometimes  saves  by  terrible  means.  Yet  he  does  save  1 —
W.F.A-

Vers.  12, 13.-3^  lost  iheep  and  the  good  thepherd.  This  parable  is  here  associated
with  Christ's  care  for  little  children  (see  vers.  10—14).  But  in  St.  Luke  it  is  applied
to  the  recovery  of  publicans  and  sinners  (Luke  xv.  1,  4 — 7).  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  St.  Luke  connects  it  with  its  most  evident  and  general  lesson.  Still,  there  is  aa
a  fortiori  at^ment  in  the  use  of  the  parable  in  St.  Matthew.  If  Christ  cares  for  the
most  abandoned  sinners,  much  more  will  he  save  little  children  when  they  begin  to
wander,  especially  as  this  is  too  often  the  case  just  because  the  negligence  or  evil
example  of  older  people  causes  them  "  to  stumble."

L  The  sheep.  1.  Tht  hundred.  We  start  with  the  picture  of  a  complete  flock.
All  men  belong  by  nature  to  God.  We  begin  life  with  God.  If  we  sin  we  fall.  Sin
is  losing  our  first  estate,  wandering  from  the  fold.  2.  The  ninety  and  nine.  Many
are  here  represented  as  faithful.  We  might  think  of  many  worlds  of  angelic  beings  in
contrast  of  our  own  fallen  world,  or  of  many  members  of  a  Church  or  family  when  con-
trasted with  a  single  defaulter,  A  parable  cannot  be  pressed  in  all  its  details  in  order
to  extort  from  it  the  exact  statistics  Of  a  religious  census.  It  is  enough  that  under  certain
circumstances  one  is  seen  to  fall  away  from  the  fidelity  preserved  by  his  companions.
Now  the  ninety  and  nine  are  left.  Absolutely  Christ  does  not  leave  his  true  sheep.
But  a  special  care  is  needed  to  find  the  lost  one.  There  is  a  common  selfishness  in
religious  people  who  would  enjoy  the  luxuries  of  devotion  in  such  a  way  as  to  hinder
the  work  of  Saving  the  lost.  Churches  are  filled  with  worshippers,  who  in  some  cases
hold  their  pews  as  private  possessions,  so  that  the  wayfaring  man  and  the  stranger
feel  that  they  are  not  welcome.  Yet  if  the  gospel  is  for  any  one,  it  is  for  them.
3.  The  lost  sheep.  There  is  but  one.  Yet  it  is  a  great  trouble  that  one  should  go
astray.  (1)  This  shows  the  value  of  an  individual  soul.  (2)  It  reveals  the  awful  evil
of  sin.  The  lapse  of  but  one  man  into  so  fearful  a  fall  is  enough  to  disarrange  the
whole  order  of  the  community,

II,  The  Shepherd.  1.  Bis  depwrtwre.  He  leaves  the  flock;  but  they  are  safe;  for
they  are  in  the  fold.  Moreover,  the  sight  of  his  departure  to  save  the  lost  is  a  warning
to  those  left  at  homo  of  the  evil  of  straying.  2.  His  Journey.  He  must  travel  far  in  a
waste  and  difficult  country.  Sin  leads  its  votaries  into  hungry  solitudes  and  among
fearful  dangers.  Christ  follows  the  wandering  soul.  His  advent  to  this  world  was  his
following,  and  his  hard  life  and  death  his  journeying  over  wild  mountains.  He  follows
each  one  now.  He  vrill  not  leave  the  lost  to  their  fate.  3.  His  siuxess.  He  finds  the
lost  sheep.    He  is  a  good  Shepherd — energetic,  persevering,  self-sacrificing.    Therefore

MATTHEW — II,  %


2Sa        THE  QOStEL  ACOOIlt)INa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oa.  xvm.  1—35.

he  succeeds.  Christ  brings  back  souls  who  have  wandered  into  the  lowest  abysses  of
sin.  4.  Eisjoy.  This  is  proportionate  (1)  to  his  love  for  the  lost  sheep;  (2)_to  its
distress,  danger,  evil  condition ;  (3)  to  the  toil  and  difficulty  involved  in  findiag  it.
The  joy  of  Christ  is  the  joy  of  saving  the  lost. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  15 — 18. — The  offending  h-oiher.  The  wise  advice  which  our  Lord  here  gives
is  rarely  follow^,  and  yet  it  is  not  at  all  impracticable,  and  if  obeyed  it  would  prevent
an  immense  amount  of  distress  and  ill  feeling.  Let  us  consider,  first  the  general
principles  of  his  advice,  and  then  its  special  details.

I.  General  PEINOIPLES.  1.  The/actnftJie  brother's  offence  it  admitted.  This  is  very
important.  Too  often  men  quarrel  and  accuse  one  another  without  justly  apportioning
the  faults.  The  innocent  man  is  blamed  by  his  guilty  brother.  Wo  must  not  put  in
force  the  process  indicated  by  Christ  until  we  have  discovered  that  our  brother  is  really
in  the  wrong.  2.  The  aim  must  he  to  recover  the  offending  brother.  It  is  not  to  crush
and  humiliate  him.  It  ia  not  to  have  our  revenge  on  him.  It  is  to  restore  him  to  a
better  condition  of  mind,  and  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation.  3.  The  method  must
be  kind  and  generous.  The  slowly  advancing  stages  show  a  reluctance  to  proceed  to
extreme  measures.  Inasmuch  as  our  end  is  not  to  vindicate  our  own  rights,  but  to
recover  our  brother,  our  method  must  be  tender  and  considerate.

II.  Special  details.  It  is  important  to  observe  that  Christ  is  treating  of  the  rela-
tion of  true  Christian  people  to  one  another.  If  either  party  does  not  recognize  the
claims  of  Christian  brotherhood,  the  process  must  be  difierent,  although  the  generous
spirit  of  Christ's  mathod  must  be  observed  with  all  men.  Let  us  now  note  the
successive  steps.  1.  We  are  to  see  the  offending  brother  alone.  This  is  just  the  very
last  thing  some  people  will  do.  In  pride  or  fear  they  shun  the  verj'^person  they  should
seek.  They  refuse  to  speak  to  him,  when  it  is  their  duty  to  be  frank  with  him.  Yet
too  often  they  spread  tlie  tale  of  their  wrong  among  their  neighbours.  Thus  a  train  of
idle  gossip  is  started,  and  vast  mischief  originated.  He  who  so  behaves  reveals  him-
self in  an  unchristian  light ;  he  becomes  an  offending  brother,  and  gives  the  man  who
has  offended  him  a  just  cause  of  complaint.  Immense  mischief  would  be  stayed  if
Christ's  method  were  pursued.  We  have  to  seek  out  the  person  who  has  wronged  us,
and  be  simple  and  frank  with  him ;  then  very  often  a  little  quiet  talk  will  bring  us  to
a  mutual  understanding  and  end  the  quarrel.  2.  If  the  first  step  fails,  we  are  to  call  in
the  help  of  two  or  three  other  Christians.  This  is  also  to  be  private.  The  calm
impartiality  of  outsiders  may  settle  the  dispute.  The  gravity  of  their  advice  may  con-
vince the  offending  brother  that  he  is  in  the  wrong.  3.  If  this  process  fails,  we  are  to
appeal  to  the  Church.  Christ  assumes  the  exercise  of  Church  discipline.  With  us  thi.H
has  fallen  very  much  into  abeyance.  It  can  only  be  restored  in  a  Christ-like  spirit.
4.  Finally,  if  all  these  processes  fail,  we  mutt  cease  to  regard  the  offender  as  a  Christian
brother.  He  has  excommunicated  himself.  God  does  not  forgive  the  impenitent,  and
he  does  not  expect  us  te  do  so.  Tet  we  should  never  hate  the  offender,  but  always
desire  to  restore  him — as  we  should  desire  to  convert  "  the  Gentile  and  the  publican." —
W.F.A.

Vers.  19,  20. — The  power  of  united  prayer.  The  point  of  this  verse  is  in  the  idea  of
the  association  of  two  people  in  prayer.  Elsewhere  we  often  read  of  the  value  of  prayer
in  general.  Here  a  special  efficacy  is  ascribed  to  the  united  prayer  of  two  Christian
people.  Let  us  consider  the  meaning  of  this.  Why  is  Christ  most  present  to  help  in
united  prayer  ?

I.  It  is  UNSELrxBH.  Two  people  might  be  plotting  together  for  some  mutual
advantage  of  a  low  order.  But  we  cannot  conceive  of  their  having  a  prayer-meeting
about  it.  Many  of  our  personal  prayers  are  shamefully  selfish.  They  do  not  seek
that  God'i  will  may  be  done ;  they  simply  demand  a  concession  to  our  own  will.  The
same  fatal  evil  may  be  found  in  a  united  prayer,  but  it  is  less  likely  there.

IL  It  is  bbotherlt.  We  must  be  on  friendly,  even  on  brotherly  terms  before  wo
can  really  pray  together.  The  union  of  two  alone  in  prayer  implies  very  deep  mutual
confidence.  They  must  agree  together.  The  reason  why  earth  is  so  cut  off  from
heaven  is  that  earth  is  too  often  a  scene  of  discord.  When  there  is  agreement  on  earth,
earth  is  more  like  heaven,  and  the  wish  expressed  on  earth  may  be  granted  in  heaven.


M.  xvm.  1-35.]     THE  GOSfEL  ACCOHMNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         227

III.  It  IB  DELiBEBATE.  The  conference  and  agreement  of  the  two  imply  a  careful
consideration  of  the  subject  of  the  prayer.  Many  prayers  are  too  hasty  and  incon-
siderate to  deserve  any  attention.  But  the  grave  conference  in  prayer  here  described
by  our  Lord  would  give  the  weight  of  deliberation  to  the  petition.  Probably  it  would
be  less  foolish  than  many  private  prayers.

IV.  It  honours  the  idea  of  the  Chiiboh.  Christ  encoiuraged  secret  prayer  in  private
devotion  (oh.  vi.  6).  This  should  be  a  daily  practice.  But  there  are  reasons  when  more
is  required,  viz.  in  general  public  worship  and  in  prayer  for  special  objects.  Now,
while  Christ  deals  with  individual  souls  in  the  first  instance,  he  is  also  interested  in
social  religion.  He  did  not  found  an  order  of  hermits,  he  founded  a  Church.  He  is
present  in  his  Church  in  a  peculiar  way.  This  is  the  real  secret  of  the  answer  to
united  prayer.  It  is  difficult  to  break  through  the  reserve  which  too  often  keeps  us
back  &om  the  prayer  which  our  Lord  here  encourages    But  it  is  our  duty  to  do  bo.

V.  It  shows  the  powbb  of  the  few.  We  are  not  heard  for  our  much  speaking,
our  many  words;  neither  are  we  heard  on  account  of  our  numerical  strength.  In
listening  to  prayer  God  does  not  count  heads ;  be  weighs  hearts.  One  Elijah  stands
for  more  in  prayer  than  a  cathedral-ful  of  listless  worshippers.  The  ideal  Church  is
not  the  large  Church,  but  the  Christ-like  Church.  Eeligious  statistics  encourage  a  most
unspiritual  way  of  valuing  Christian  work  and  estimating  Church  progress.  The
Church  of  but  two  members  cannot  be  a  weak  Church,  if  those  two  members  are  imited  ■
in  prayer.  Further,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  value  of  a  prayer-meeting  cannot  be
measured  by  the  numbers  that  attend  it.  A  small  meeting  may  be  a  very  real  one,
and  if  it  is  truly  united  it  must  have  power  with  God.  It  is  foolish,  therefore,  to
despair  of  such  a  meeting  because  it  is  sparsely  attended.  The  prayer-meeting  of  but
two  is  here  commended  by  Christ.  If  it  be  a  meeting  at  all,  though. reduced  to  the
numerical  minimum,  it  may  issue  in  incalculable  results, — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  21, 22. — The  duty  of  unlimited /orgiveneiB.  Jesus  once  required  forgiveness  to
be  repeated  seven  times  (Luke  xvii.  4).  St.  Peter  now  asks  what  is  to  be  done  when
these  seven  times  of  pardon  are  passed.  Our  Lord  simply  multiplies  them  by  seventy.
There  is  to  be  no  arithmetic  in  the  matter ;  there  is  to  be  no  limit  to  forgiveness.

I.  It  is  a  mistake  to  search  fob  the  minimum  of  duty.  Why  should  St.  Peter
want  to  know  what  to  do  when  he  had  forgiven  seven  times  ?  Was  there  any  law
which  he  might  transgress  if  he  went  too  far  in  the  generosity  of  pardon  ?  His  question
was  one  that  should  never  have  been  asked.  It  savours  of  rabbinical  casuistry.  Now,
one  of  the  great  defects  of  casuistry  is  that  it  is  too  often  pursued  in  the  interest  of
those  who  wish  to  do  no  more  good  than  is  absolutely  required  of  them.  But  the  spirit
of  such  a  desire  is  immoral.  He  who  seeks  a  limit  to  forgiveness  has  not  really  a
forgiving  spirit  at  all.  He  only  forgives  under  compulsion,  that  is  to  say,  he  does  not
really  forgive  in  his  heart.  So  it  is  with  all  other  duties.  When  we  ask  how  far  must
we  go,  with  how  little  will  God  be  satisfied,  we  betray  a  spirit  out  of  sympathy  with
our  duty.  If  we  loved  it  we  should  not  anxiously  search  for  the  line  of  obligation,  we
should  rather  press  on  to  the  utmost  with  an  enthusiastic  desire  to  do  our  best.

II.  FoROiVBNESB  CANNOT  HAVE  A  LIMIT.  Some  duties  are  limited,  although  we  are
free  to  exceed  the  limit.  This  is  the  case  with  honesty.  We  have  simply  to  pay
what  we  owe,  to  give  a  just  price  for  what  we  buy,  to  refrain  from  stealing,  and  we  have
discharged  the  whole  of  our  obligation  in  this  direction.  Thus,  at  all  events  in  the
pecuniary  world,  it  is  possible  to  be  absolutely  honest,  and  hosts  of  people  have  reached
the  stage  of  absoluteness  in  regard  to  this  duty.  But  there  are  other  duties  that  run  out
to  the  infinite;  we  can  never  entirely  compress  them.  All  our  spiritual  education
only  enables  us  to  reach  towards  a  little  more  of  their  boundless  possibilities.  Of  such
a  nature  is  forgiveness.  We  may  be  called  at  any  moment  to  carry  this  further  than
we  have  yet  gone.

III.  The  LIMITIiESB  OHABACTEB  OF  FOBOIVENEBS  SPRINGS   FROM    ITS   DiVINE   ORIGIN.

Forgiveness  is  God-like.  It  belongs  to  the  ethics  of  heaven.  It  cannot  be  enforced  in
the  law  courts  of  earth,  where  Shylock  is  awarded  his  pound  of  flesh.  In  strict  right
and  law,  forgiveness  cannot  be  enacted.  Forgiveness  is  above  law,  as  the  sovereign
who  pardons  in  clemency  is  above  the  judge  who  is  compelled  to  condemn  in  justice.
(jod  forgiyea  without  limit,     He  requires  the  condition  of  repentance,  and  this  we


228  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvm.  1-35.

have  a  right  to  demand  also  (see  Lute  xvii.  3).  But  when  that  is  present  he  for^vea
hardened  old  offenders,  who  have  grieved  his  Spirit  many  and  many  a  time  before.  It
is  only  the  limitless  forgiveness  of  God  that  makes  it  possible  for  ua  to  be  pardoned  by
him.  Then  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  show  the  same  spirit  towards  our  fellow-men. —
W.  P.  A.

Vers.  23 — 35. — The  hard  debtor.  This  parable  follows  onr  Lord's  answer  to  St.  Peter's
question  about  the  limits  of  forgiveness.  The  great  reason  why  we  should  forgive
freely  is  that  we  have  been  freely  forgiven  much  more  than  any  men  owe  to  us.

I.  The  oTiEAT  DEBT.  Thls  represents  what  the  sinner  owes  to  God.  We  pray  that
God  will  fiirgive  us  our  debts  (oh.  vi.  12).  Deficiencies  of  duty  are  like  debts  con-
sidered as  arrears  of  payments.  Positive  transgressions  are  like  debts,  through  our
having  wilfiilly  appropriated  what,  was  not  our  own  without  paying  for  it.  The
accumulated  omissions  and  offences  make  up  the  one  consolidated  debt  of  guilt.  1.  Its
immense  size.  Christ  names  a  fabulous  sum.  There  is  no  couuting  the  accumulated
sins  of  a  lifetime.  2.  Its  full  exposure.  The  miserable  debtor  had  been  postponing
the  evil  day.  Perhaps,  as  he  had  been  left  long  to  himself,  he  had  begun  to  hope  that
he  would  never  be  caUed  to  account.  But  the  day  of  reckoning  came.  That  day  will
come  fur  every  soul.    Long  delay  means  an  aggravated  debt.

n.  The  DBEADFiTL  FUNiBHMENT.  It  was  according  to  the  stem  legislation  oi
antiquity,  and  Christ  bases  his  parables  on  familiar  aspects  of  life  without  thereby
justifying  the  facts  and  usages  that  he  describes.  In  the  spiritual  world  great  punish-
ment is  the  due  of  great  sin.  A  reaction  against  the  physical  horrors  of  the  medinval
hell  has  blinded  our  age  to  this  fearful  truth.  Yet  Christ  frequently  afBrms  it  in  calm,
terrible  language.

m.  The  generous  poboivbness.  In  his  dismay  the  debtor  grovels  at  the  feet  of
his  lord,  and  foolishly  offers  to  repay  all  if  only  the  king  will  be  patient  and  give  him
time.  That  is  impossible,  and  the  king  knows  it.  We  can  never  repay  what  we
owe  to  God.  If  his  mercy  only  took  the  form  of  staying  execution,  at  best  it  would
only  lead  to  a  postponement  of  our  doom.  But  the  king  forgave  the  debtor — forgave
him  completely.  God  forgives  freely  and  fully.  He  acts  royally.  He  does  not  spoil
his  gift  by  making  it  but  half  a  pardon.  The  great  debt  is  completely  cancelled  to
the  penitent  soul.

lY.  Thb  subsequent  obubltt.  The  debtor's  conduct  was  doubly  odious.  He  had
just  been  forgiven  himself,  and  his  debt  was  vastly  greater  than  his  rellow-serrant's.
Yet  he  treated  the  poor  ihan  with  brutal  insistence,  with  cruel  harshness.  Nothing
could  be  more  odious  than  this  conduct.  But  is  it  not  just  the  conduct  of  every  Christian
who  will  not  forgive  his  brother  ?  The  Christian  should  be  melted  by  the  sight  ol
God's  boundless  clemency,  by  his  own  reception  of  it,  and  by  the  knowledge  that
God  has  forgiven  him  far  more  than  anything  he  can  ever  have  to  forgive  his  brother.

T.  The  final  doom.  The  king  is  justly  angry.  He  recalls  the  pardon.  He  even
has  his  wretched  debtor  put  to  torture.  There  are  degrees  of  punishment  in  the  future
world,  and  the  worse  torment  .is  reserved  for  those  who,  haying  accepted  the  mercy  of
God  for  themselves,  have  had  no  mercy  on  their  brother-men. — ^W.  F.  A<

Vers.  1 — 14, — Necessity  of  iecoming  like  little  children.  To  discuss  in  the  abstract
the  question  who  shall  be  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  a  profitable  employ-
ment. But  when  discussed  with  personal  reference,  and  in  view  of  present  competing
claims,  there  must  inevitably  he  jealousies  and  rivalries,  vanity  and  hatred.  That  his
reply  might  lod^'o  in  their  minds,  and  be  audible  to. all  generations,  our  Lord  gives  it
dramatically.  Ha  calls  a  little  child  to  him,  perhaps  one  of  Peter's  children.  "Here,"
gays  he,  "  is  tlio  one  excellence  on  which  my  kingdom  is  founded,  and  by  which  alone
it  can  be  exiendod — the  excellence  of  not  knowing  you  have  any  excellence  at  all."  It
was,  in  short,  a  true  humility — an  humility  that  did  not  know  itself  to  be  humility,
and  was  thereby  humble.  To  become  humble  is  a  change  that  must  bo  wrought  upon
you  while  yourself  unconscious;  it  is  like  a  new  birth.  A  man  feels  that  of  idl  things
this  is  beyond  him.  We  cannot  humble  ourselves  to  serve  a  purpose ;  if  we  do  so  our
humility  cannot  be  genuine.  Look  at  one  or  two  instructive  features  of  childhood.
1.  What  delights  us  in  children  is  very  much  their  inability  to  conceal  their  thoughts,


CH.  xnn.  1-^3S.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  tO  ST.  .^aTTHBW.         229

their  artless^  love,  ihelr  general  simplicity.  '•  They  are  naked,  and  not  ashamed  ; "
assume  no  disguise,  because  they  are  unconscious  of  the  need  of  any.  2.  Their  ready
hdiefhi  everything  they  are  told.  The  child  hears  of  the  world  and  its  wonders  with
a  reverential  awe.  As  we  grow  older  we  clothe  ourselves  in  scepticism,  and  guard
ourselves  against  deception,  till,  as  the  climax  of  wisdom  and  safety,  we  believe  nothing,
and  are_  like  the  heavy-mailed  knights  of  old,  stifled  in  our  own  armour.  We  train
our  spirits  to  believe  in  nothing  but  the  tooat  obvious  commonplace  physical  things,
which  by  their  own  nature  are  destined  to  decay.  And  the  end  is,  we  cannot,  if  we
would,  believe  in  the  most  tremendous  realities.  Well  may  we  pray  that  God  would
dip  us  in  the  waters  of  his  regeneration,  that  so  the  hard,  foul  crust  in  which  this
world  encases  us  may  drop  off,  and  our  flesh  become  soft  and  fresh  as  a  child's  again.
8.  Their  rmdineis  to  receive  instruction,  information,  gifts.  The  whole  life  of  a  child
is  reception.  He  takes  gifts  naturally,  and  without  distressing  himself  as  to  his  right
to  them.  He  is  to  be  fed  because  he  is  hungry,  made  happy  becauas  his  nature  craves
it.  Whereas  we  must  ever  be  trying  to  give  to  God  what  will  satisfy  him.  But  God
selh  nothing.  The  highest  and  best  things  he  has  to  give  we  must  accept  at  his  hand,
simply  because  we  need  them,  and  he  is  willing  to  give.  In  Christ's  own  life  we  see
this  childlike  dependence  beautifully  exemplified.  Clearly  apprehending  his  own
position  and  work,  he  was  yet  as  one  under  age.  Carrying  into  manhood  the  faith  of
the  child,  he  lived  as  one  who  was  well  cared  for,  and  on  whom  the  care  of  providing
for  himself  did  not  rest.  4.-  It  is,  above  all,  the  child's  unconsciousness  that  he  has
anything  to  commend  him  that  makes  him  our  model.  The  production  of  this
humility  is  en  invariable  and  essential  accompaniment  of  conversion.  Formerly  a
man  lived  on  his  own  strength  and  for  himself.  How  he  feels  he  is  not  his  own,  but
God's ;  born  of  God,  kept  by  God,  for  God's  uses,  beginning  from  God  and  ending  in
QoA.  In  presence  of  that  Being,  glorious  in  holiness  and  love,  he  abhors  his  own
sensual  and  selfish  life,  and  abases  himself  utterly.  He  has  no  claims  to  urge,  no
promises  to  make,  no  pretensions,  nothing  at  all  to  show.  What  this  child  seemed  to
say  to  these  helpless  disciples,  he  aays  to  all-^You  must  turn,  you  must  strive  with
your  whole  soiils,  you  must  pray,  but  convert  yourselves  you  cannot ;  it  is  God  only
can  give  you  a  new  heart.  Have  you  been  brought  to  a  true  dependence  on  God,  so
feeling  the  guilt  of  your  past  life  and  the  evil  of  your  natural  character  that  you  can
but  leave  yourself  in  the  hand  of  God  and  his  grace  for  pardon  and  renewal  ?— D.

Vers.  21 — 35. — The  unmerciful  servant.  The  form  of  Peter's  question  shows  that
he  still  considered  that  to  forgive  was  not  the  law  of  the  kingdom,  but  a  tentative
measure  which  might  at  any  moment  be  revoked,  that  Underneath  the  forgiveness
there  lies  the  right  to  revenge.  We  also  know  this  feeling  of  Peter's,  that  in  forgiving
we  are  doing  something  more  than  could  be  demanded  of  us.  And  this  feel  ng,
wherever  it  exists,  shows  that  we  are  living  with  retaliation  for  the  law,  forgivenes!^  for
the  exception.  It  is  to  marl;  with  reprobation  the  unforgiving  and  self-seeking  spirit
that  our  Lord  utters  this  parable.

I.  The  first  result  of  this  spirit  is  that  it  leads  to  dishohottbablb  otrn.AT  Dpon
OCBSELVES  or  WHAT  GoD  HAS  oiVBN  OS  roB  BBTTBH  UBEB.  The  man  whose  great
motive  in  life  is  the  desire  to  get  all  the  good  out  of  it  he  can  for  himself  will  contract
debt  to  God,  that  is,  will  contract  real  guilt,  exactly  In  proportion  to  his  opportunities
of  doing  good  and  playing  a  high  part  in  life.  Whether  the  pow»  be  great  or  little,
the  guilt  contracted  Is  the  same,  if  we  lay  out  on  ourselves  what  should  In  simple
honesty  have  been  laid  out  on  God,  if  we  habitually  divert  from  God  the  revenues
which  truly  belong  to  him.

II  But  still  more  strongly  does  the  parable  point  to  Thb  HATEFULirXBS  of  ak  ukfob-
•ivlNa  BPaiT.  The  man  was  not  softened  by  the  remission  of  ills  own  great  debt.  So
it  often  is  with  the  sinner  deadened  by  long  sin.  There  is  no  deep  contrition  in  his
cry  for  pardon,  only  a  desire  to  escape,  as  selfish  as  the  desire  to  sin  was.  If  the
forgiving  love  of  God  does  not  humble,  it  hardens  ns.  If  we  take  it  as  a  mere  trifle,
and  are  not  thoroughly  humbled  by  it,  we  are  only  too  apt  to  show  our  zeal  in
exposing  and  reproving  the  faults  of  other  men,  or  by  violent  and  unrelenting  con-
demnation of  those  who  offend  us.  The  hatefulness  of  this  spirit  is  signalized  by  one
«r  two  added  partioulart.    1.  2%«  petty  amount  of  the  debt  he  eieacts  as  set  over  aqainst


230         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xvm.  1— «5.

the  enormity  of  that  which  had  been  remitted  to  himself.  There  Is  something  almost
incredibly  mean  as  well  as  savage  in  this  man's  quick  remembrance  of  the  pence  that
are  due  to  himself,  while  he  so  easily  puts  from  his  mind  the  ten  thousand  talents  he
owes.  But  our  incredulity  gives  way  when  we  think  of  the  debt  we  owe  God  and  the
trifles  committed  against  us  which  we  find  it  so  hard  to  forget.  What  are  the  causes
of  quarrel  among  men  ?  Often  a  word,  a  look,  an  expression  unwittingly  dropped.  Or
measure  even  the  deepest  injury  that  has  ever  been  done  to  you ;  the  wrong  that  has
darkened  or  obstructed  yoirr  whole  life  with  that  for  which  you  yourself  need  to  ask
forgiveness  of  God,  and  say  whether  you  ought  still  to  be  implacable.  No  doubt  you
may  detect  in  the  injuries  done  to  you  more  malice  and  intention  to  wound  than  in
your  own  sins  against  God ;  but  you  will  certainly  not  fiad  more  dishonouring  neglect,
more  culpable  repudiation  of  what  was  due.  And  what  was  the  harm  done  in  com-
parison with  giving  false  impressions  about  God  or  counterworking  his  will  ?  Is  our
shame  for  sin  against  God  as  intense  and  as  real  as  our  indignation  at  injuries  done  to
ourselves  7  2.  But  the  chief  aggravation  of  this  man's  conduct  lay  in  the  fact  that  he
had  just  been  forgiven.  He  thought  mercy  a  good  thing  so  long  as  he  was  the  object
of  it,  but  in  the  presence  of  a  debtor  he  is  deaf  to  the  reasons  that  filled  his  own  mouth
immediately  before.  And  how  hard  do  we  all  find  it  to  deal  with  others  as  God  has
dealt  with  us  1  We  go  from  his  presence,  where  we  have  felt  it  is  mercy,  which  is  the
most  needful  gift  in  a  world  like  this — it  is  mercy  which  gives  us  hope  at  all — and  we
go  straight  to  our  fellow-servant  and  exact  all  our  due.  Here,  then,  our  Lord  enounces
the  law  of  unlimited  forgiveness  as  one  of  the  essential  laws  of  his  kingdom.  Men  are
to  be  held  together,  not  by  external  compulsion,  but  by  the  inward  disposition  of  each
member  of  the  society  to  forgive  and  be  on  terms  of  brotherly  kindness  with  every
other  member.  We  lose  much  of  the  power  and  practical  benetit  of  Christ's  teaching
by  refusing  to  listen  to  what  he  says  about  his  kingdom  as  cordially  as  to  what  he  says
about  individuals.  We  are  not,  perhaps,  too  much,  but  too  exclusively  taken  up  with
the  saving  of  our  own  souls,  neglecting  to  consider  that  the  Bible  throughout  takes  to
do  with  the  Church  and  people  of  God,  with  the  kingdom  ;  and  with  the  individual
only  as  a  member  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  so  it  is  not  for  the  individual  Christ
legislates.  To  vmite  us  individually  to  God  he  recognizes  as  only  half  his  work.  Our
salvation  consists,  not  only  in  being  brought  into  reconciliation  with  God,  but  in  our
becoming  reconciled  to  men.  The  man  who  is  content  if  he  is  sure  his  own  soul  is
safe  has  great  cause  to  believe  it  in  danger,  for  in  Christ  we  are  knit  one  to  another.
But  how  are  we  to  get  into  a  right  state  of  feeling  towards  other  men ;  to  find  it
natural  to  forgive' always,  not  to  stand  on  our  rights  and  exact  our  dues,  but  to  be
moved  by  the  desire  to  promote  the  interests  of  others  ?  The  true  way  to  a  forgiving
spirit  is  to  be  forgiven,  to  go  back  again  and  again  to  God,  and  count  over  our  debt  to
him,  though  the  man,  whose  mind  is  filled  with  a  true  view  of  his  own  wrong-doing,
always  feels  how  much  more  he  has  been  forgiven  thfin  he  can  ever  be  called  on  to
forgive.    We  must  begin,  therefore,  with  the  truth  about  ourselves. — ^D.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Heavenly  greatness.  As  they  journeyed  to  Capernaum  the  disciples  ot
Jesus,  like  their  countrymen,  ever  disposed  to  regard  the  kingdom  of  Messiah  as
secular,  reasoned  and  disputed  together  as  to  which  of  them  should  be  the  greater  in
that  kingdom  (of.  Mark  ii.  33,  34).  The  knowledge  of  this  contention  probably
influenced  the  conduct  of  Jesus  in  the  matter  of  the  tribute,  in  which  he  astonished
them  with  an  exemplification  of  supreme  greatness  in  submission  (see  ch.  xvii.  22 — ^27).
A  similar  lesson  is  embodied  in  the  discourse  now  before  us.     Note —

I.  The  disoiples  knew  that  there  are  grades  op  heavenly  greatness.  1.  This
was  assumed  in  their  reasoning.  (1)  It  was  the  basis  of  that  reasoning  and  the
stimulus  of  the  ambition  which  prompted  it.  (2)  It  was  itself  based  upon  the  analogy
of  secular  kingdoms  in  general,  in  which  there  are  princes  and  nobles,  ministers  of
state  and  civic  magnates.  2.  The  fact  was  not  disputed  hy  the  Lord.  (1)  He  did  not
say  they  were  mistaken,  much  less  assert  that  all  saints  in  light  stand  upon  an  equal
platform.  (2)  The  arguments  lu'ged  in  favour  of  this  view  are  far  from  being  satis-
factory. There  is  no  relevancy  in  the  inference  from  the  fact  that  every  Hebrew
gathered  an  omer  of  manna,  neither  more  nor  less.  Every  labourer  receiving  exactly
•  penny,  whether  he  had  worked  one  hour  or  had  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the


CH.  xTm.  1— 35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOUDlNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         231


day,  looks  more  like  an  argument ;  yet  this  element  was  introduced  into  the  parable
for  another  purpose,  viz.  to  evince  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  God.  3.  O.i  the  contrary,
he  recognized  it.  (1)  For  he  asserted  it,  thou>;h  in  a  sense  very  different  from  that  in
which  the  disciples  had  conceived  of  it.  (2)  It  is  the  very  doctrine  of  the  parable  of
the  talents.  Christ,  like  David,  his  type,  has  worthies  of  various  grades  of  merit.
(3)  The  anticipations  of  the  great  judgment  make  this  very  clear  (cf.  Dan.  xii.  3 :
1  Cor.  XV.  41, 42).  6        j    s  j  v

II.  They  had  to  learn  that  the  hiohbb  gbades  or  greatness  are  rewards
OP  CHILDLIKBNB88.  1.  Tkey  Were  influenced  by  secular  ideas,  in  which  goodness  hut
little  to  do  vnth greatness.  (1)  In  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  someare  born  to  greatness.
So  Simon  and  Jude  may  have  based  their  hopes  of  future  distinction  upon  their  mar
relationship  to  Christ.  (2)  Some  have  promotion  through  length  of  service.  So
Andrew,  the  first  called  to  the  discipleship  of  the  kingdom,  might  have  hoped  for
precedency  on  the  ground  of  that  priority.  (3)  Some  have  greatness  thrust  upon  them.
So  the  natural  covetousness  of  Judas  may  have  led  him  to  exaggerate  the  importance
of  his  money  trust,  as  keeper  of  the  bag.  Much  of  the  greatness  of  this  world  is
imaginary.  Peter  had  the  keys,  and  may  have  rested  his  contention  for  greatness
upon  that  distinction.  His  fellows,  however,  were  unwilling  to  accept  that  as  con-
ferring permanent  dignity,  much  less  supremacy.  (4)  Jame^  and  John  sought  the
chief  place  in  the  kingdom  by  petition  and  influence,  after  the  custom  of  the  world.  The
ten  were  displeased  with  them,  probably  because  they  cherished  the  same  desire  to  be
superior  (see  ch.  ix.  20 — 24).  It  is  unworttiy  in  those  to  contenrl  for  privileges  who
shrink  from  work  and  suffering.  2.  Jesus  humbled  them  before  the  greatness  of  a  little
child.  (1)  Jesus  taught,  like  the  ancient  prophets,  impressively  by  signs.  His  lesson
here  was  the  greatness  of  humility.  The  lesson  was  difficult,  for  the  world  sees  no
greatness  in  lowliness.  The  teaching  must  be  impressive.  (2)  The  great  Teacher
sought  not  his  symbol  of  greatness  in  the  warrior,  like  Cassar,  to  make  whom  great
millions  of  men  must  die.  His  sign  was  not  the  statesman,  the  philosopher,  the  poet,
or  even  the  theologian.  It  was  the  infant.  How  original  was  his  teaching  !  (3)
Great  men  should  not  disdain  the  company  of  children.  They  may  receive  instruction
from  infants.  Whenever  we  look  upon  a  little  child  we  may  remember  the  toachini;
of  Jesus.  3.  Ee  preached  an  impressive  sermon  from  his  text.  (1)  He  insisttd  upon
the  necessity  of  conversion :  "  Except  ye  turn,"  etc.  (ver.  3).  Note  :  Conversion  makes
men  like  little  children,  (o)  Not  foolish,  nor  fickle,  nor  sportive,  but  (6)  innocent,
humble,  and  docile.  (2)  To  become  like  little  children,  sinners  must  be  born  anew.
The  love  of  dominion,  which  led  the  disciples  to  contend  for  the  higher  places  in  the
kingdom,  unfitted  them  even  for  the  lower.  The  new  man  is  exalted  upon  the  humi-
liation of  the  old.  (3)  Heaven  most  intimately  dwells  in  innocency.  All  heavenly
virtues  crystallize  round  innocency.  'J'he  Lord  so  dwells  in  innocency  that  whoever
receives  a  little  child  receives  him.  (4)  As  innocency  is  the  essence,  so  is  humility
the  soil  of  every  grace.  True  humility  is  the  only  way  to  advancement  in  the  kingdom
of  Christ  (cf.  Luke  xiv.  H).  "  Climbing  is  performed  in  the  same  posture  as  creeping  "
(Swift).  (5)  As  the  world  sees  no  greatness  in  lowliness,  so  are  those  who  do  see  it
greater  than  the  world.  The  humble  are  therefore  fittingly  honoured  with  the  rewards
of  greatness.  (6)  They  have  the  special  care  of  Christ.  The  beat  men  have  often
the  worst  treatment  from  the  world.  But  Christ  promises  recompense  to  those  who
show  kindness  to  him  in  his  humble  followers,  and  retribution  to  those  who  refuse
it. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  6 — 9. — Occasions  of  stumbling.  To  stumble  is  so  to  trip  as  to  be  hindered  in  faith
or  to  be  turned  out  of  the  way  (cf.  ch.  v.  29,  30 ;  xi.  6 ;  xiii.  21 ;  xv.  12 ;  xxiv.  10  ;
xxvi.  31,  33 ;  John  vi.  61,  62,  66 ;  xvi.  1).  Occasions  of  stumbling  are  evil  influences
— allurements,  persuasions,  temptations,  bad  example,  calumnies,  insults,  persecutions.
The  text  teaches —

I.  That  Christ  holds  the  wicked  responsible  fob  the  injury  thev  may
OCCASION  TO  THE  GOOD.  The  addition  of  the  words,  "  which  believe  on  me,"  shows
that  Christ  is  here  speaking,  not  of  "little  ones  "  in  age,  but  of  his  disciples,  who  are
of  a  humble  spirit.  Observe:  1.  There  is  no  infallible  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.
(1)  The  recognition  of  this  truth  is  the  very  inspiration  of  this  pathetic  discourM.


232  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.    [cK-  ^^ai.  1—35

These  woes  would  never  have  been  denounced  upon  men  for  the  doing  of  what,  othei-
mso,  would  be  impossible.  (2)  Let  not  the  believer  in  Christ  be  high-minded.  Let  him
fear.    Let  him  watch.    Let  him  pray.     2.  "  It  must  needs  be  that  the  occasions  come."

(1)  They  are  permitted  as  part  of  the  neceasnry  discipline  of  our  probation.  They
come  from  the  abuse  of  free  agency.  (2)  To  the  faithful  they  prove  blessed  means
of  grace.  They  educate  passive  virtues.  The  habit  of  resisting  temptation  makes
a  strong  character.  3.  The  instigator  to  evil  is  still  respons^le,  (1)  Where  he
succeeds  in  causing  the  saint  to  stumble  he  will  have  to  answer  lor  tbe  soul  damaged
or  ruined.  There  is  no  impunity  for  those  who  turn  the  simple  from  their  integrity
by  teaching  them  to  imbibe  sentiments  subversive  of  the  doctrines  of  genuine  truth,  or
to  indnlge  in  evil  practices  which  destroy  or  injure  the  capacity  lur  receiving  the  graces
of  the  kingdom.  (2)  Where  the  tempter  fails  he  is  still  responsible  for  liis  wickedness.
4.  r/iese  things  need  to  be  empliasized.  (1)  Because  the  wicked  are  too  apt  to  transfer
the  blame  of  their  irreligion  to  the  account  of  the  good,  by  accusing  them  of  apathy
and  negligence.  The  good  are  undoubtedly  responsible  for  the  faithfulness  of  their
testimony.  They  are  not,  however,  beyond  this,  responsible  for  results.  Noali's
testimony  was  at  once  his  own  justification  and  the  condemnation  of  the  world.

(2)  Because  the  wicked  are  too  slow  to  recognize  their  responsibility,  not  only  for  their
own  non-reception  of  Christ,  but  for  the  injury  they  do  in  hindering  others,  and
especially  for  damaging  the  good.    To  offend  the  innocent  is  to  offend  innocence.

II.  That  buoh  offenders  ake  wabned  by  tub  tkrrob  of  fokmidablk  punish-
ment. 1.  The  Sufferings  o/  an  tichrisliun  nations  are  admonitory,  "Woe  Unto  the
world  because  of  occasions  of  stumbling !  "  (1)  The  Jews  filled  up  the  measure  of  their
iniquity  in  crucifying  Christ  and  persecuting  his  disciples,  and  wrath  came  upon  them
to  the  uttermost.  (2)  Degradation  and  ruin  have  overtaken  or  are  pursuing  those
nations  which  have  persecuted  the  witnesses  for  Christ.  The  atheism  of  Prance,  with
its  horrors  and  the  decadence  of  that  nation,  are  the  reaction  of  the  superstition  and
wickedness  of  earlier  persecutions.  Prosperity  smiles  upon  the  natioQs  that  have
accepted  the  Beformation.  They  have  been  enriched  by  industries  brought  to  them
by  Protestant  refugees.  (S)  All  autichristian  nations  are  doomed  in  theajiticipations
of  prophecy.  "  Woe  "  hangs  over  "  the  world  "  in  the  larger  sense.  2.  Individuals
also  are  admonished.    "  Woe  to  that  man  through  whom  the  occasion  cometh ! "

(1)  The  retribution  upon  those  who  offend  the  disciples  of  Christ  is  worse  than  death.
Jerome  says  that  Christ  here  speaks  according  to  the  custom  of  the  province  in  punishing
the  greatest  criminals  with  drowning.    The  woe  here  denounced  is  worse  (ver.  6).

(2)  Tiie  retribution  is  as  crushing  as  it  is  sudden.  'I'he  culprit  had  no  strength  to
release  himself  from  the  weight  of  the  "  great  millstone,"  to  turn  which,  supported  in
position,  required  the  strength  of  an  ass.  "It  seems  to  have  grown  into  a  proveib
with  the  Jews  for  total  ruin  "  (Doddridge).  (3)  The  more  terrible  punishment  is
described  as  a  "Gehenna  of  fire,"  in  allusion  to  tbe  sufferings  of  the  victims  of  Molocli
(cf.  2  Ciiron.  xxxiiL  6).  Burning  there  is  more  dreadful  than  drowning  in  the
Lake  of  Galilee  hard  by  (cf.  Bev.  xix.  20).  Those  who  play  the  devil  in  tempting
saints  may  tremble  with  the  devils.  3.  Hut  there  is  yet  space  for  repentance.  (1)
The  offending  hand  must  be  cut  off.  Wrong-doin^  must  cease.  However  useful  as
tlie  right  hand.  However  dear.  (2)  The  offending  foot  must  be  out  off.  Wrong-
going  umst  cease.  However  natural  it  may  have  become  through  habit  as  the  use  of
the  right  foot.  (3)  The  offending  eye  must  be  plucked  out.  Illicit  desire  must  cease,
whether  instigated  by  covetousness,  envy,  pride,  or  passion  (see  Mark  Vii.  22).
(4)  These  must  be  cast  away.  Tlie  hand  or  foot  or  eye  refer  to  those  sins  of  honour.
Interest,  or  pleasure,  which  men  are  prone  to  spare.  The  godly  in  this  world  are
lame,  deaf,  dumb,  blind,  both  to  themselves  and  to  others  (see  Ps.  xx&viii.  14).  The
members  most  mortified  here  will  shine  with  the  greater  lustre  hereafter. — J.  A,  M.

Vers.  10 — 14. —  Warning  for  the  contemptuous.  The  "  little  ones  "  here  are  childlike
followers  oi  Christ  (cf.  ver.  6).  Beference  to  the  infants  to  whom  humble  Christiana
are  likened  is  not  excluded.  The  infant  seed  of  the  faithful  are  of  the  family  of  Jesus.
Neither  the  disciple  nor  the  infant  must  be  despised.

I.  They  ake  the  reverbk  of  dkspioable  who  are  the  sPEctAL  oharqe  of  holy
AKOiUB,    1.  Hie  universe  is  dual,  having  materiai  and  spiritwd  eomj^mentt,    (1)


OH.  xvnt.  1—35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDmG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW  1SS

Matter  ]ias  characteristic  properties.  The  properties  of  spirit  are  no  less  characteristic
and  distinct.  (2)  Between  the  complements  subsist  mutual  relations  and  interactions.
The  cojjflioti  of  the  moral  and  invisible  are  propagated  outward  into  the  physical  and
visible.  So  contrariwise.  2.  In  this  system  holy  angels  have  special  relations  to  good
men,  (Ij)  Angels  have  a  commission  of  guardianship  (cf.  Ps.  xxxiv.  7 ;  xoi.  IX ;
Heh,  1, 14),  Probably  they  see  the  countenance  of  the  Father  in  the  countenance  of
the  children.  Note;  Evil  angels  sustain  corresponding  relations  to  bad  men.  (2)  The
ancient  notion  may  have  countenance  here,  viz.  that  each  individual  has  a  peculiar
guardian  angel.  Corresponding  to  the  holy  guardian  is  the  "  familiar  spirit "  of  the
wicked.  3.  They  cannot  with  impunity  be  despised  whose  guardians  are  so  inflmntial.
(1)  Special  favourites  only,  according  to  Oriental  custoni,  came  into  a  monarch's  pre-
sence (cf,  1  Kings  X,  8 ;  xii.  6 ;  Esth.  i.  14 ;  Ps.  ciii.  21 ;  Jer.  ii.  15 ;  Tobit  xii.  16 ;  Luke
i.  19).  (2)  It  is  perilous  to  be  at  enmity  with  those  who  are  so  attended,  "Angels
that  excel  in  strength."  The  stronger  angels  have  charge  of  the  weaker  saints.  Those
who  would  not  offend  the  holy  angils  should  imitate  them  in  their  care  of  little  ones.

II.  They  are  the  reverse  of  despicable  who  enjoy  the  special  favour  of  Gop.
1.  Those  who  have  the  angels  of  Ood/or  their  angels  have  the  Ood  of  angels  for  their
Qod.  This  honour  is  superlative.  2.  Some  interpret  the"  angels"  of  the"  lUtU  ones"
to  he  the  disembodied  spirits  of  the  saints,  whioh  "  do  always  behold  the  /ace  of  the
Father  which  is  in  heaven."  (1)  They  argue  that  guardian  angels  cannot "  always  "  be
"  in  heaven  "  and  yet  ministering  to  their  charge  on  earth.  (2)  What  the  disciples  in
John  Mark's  prayer-meeting  thought  to  be  Peter's  spirit,  they  called  "  his  angel "
(Acts  xii.  15).  (3)  The  reason  why  we  should  not  despise  the  little  ones,  viz.  that
their  angels  see  God,  reminds  us  that  the  pure  in  heart  alone  can  see  God.  (4)  In  this
view  the  "angels  of  God,"  in  whose  presence  "  there  is  joy  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth  "
(Luke  XV.  10),  will  be  "  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  For  the  context  in  Luke
shows  that  this  is  a  parallel  case.  3.  Those  whose  disembodied  spirits  would  be  honoured
with  the  vision  of  Qod  cannot  be  despised  with  impunity.  (1)  The  little  ones  of  Christ
are  despised  by  corrupting- them.  By  failing  to  edify  them.  They  are  despised  when
innocency  and  simplicity  are  treated  as  weaknesses.  (2)  Those  guilty  of  despising
them  will  encounter  the  resistance  of  the  will  of  God.  "  It  is  not  the  will,"  etc,  (of,  ver.
14;  Ezek.  xviii.  2.S).  If  there  be  joy  in  heaven  for  the  finding  of  one  of  the  little  ones
turned  out  of  the  way,  there  is  wrath  in  heaven  for  the  offending  of  them.  (3)  "  As
God  will  be  displeased  with  the  enemies  of  his  Church  if  they  wrong  any  of  the
members  of  it,  so  he  is  displeased  with  the  great  ones  of  the  Church  if  they  despise  the
little  ones  "  (Henry),

III.  They  are  the  bevbksb  op  despicable  who  are  the  special  solicitude  ob
Christ.  In  the  parable  of  the  gheep  we  have;  1,  The  flock.  (1)  Holy  angels  are
included  in  its  unity  (cf,  Heb.  xii.  22).  These  are  by  some  accounted  to  be  the
"ninety  and  nine  who  went  not  astray."  (2)  The  ministration  of  angels  is  founded  on
the  mediation  of  Christ.  This  is  expressed  in  the  words,  "  For  the  Son  of  man,"  etc.,
relegated,  however,  to  the  margin  in  the  Eevised  Version.  So  in  the  vision  of  Jacob's
ladder  (cf.  den.  xxviii.  12 ;  John  i.  51).  Through  Christ  the  holy  angels  are  reconciled
to  us.  (3)  The  ninety  and  nine  who  went  not  astray  may  be  such  as  the  scribes  and
Pharisees  of  the  better  sort ;  not  the  hypocrites,  but  those  who,  like  the  elder  brother,
never  left  their  Father's  house — those  whose  respect  for  the  Law  kept  them  from  com-
mitting gross  offences.  2.  The  wanderer.  (1)  The  sheep  sees  better  herbage  at  a
distance,  and  wanders  after  it ;  then  discovers  more  yet  further  off;  wanders  by  degrees
further  and  further ;  mistakes  the  way  back,  and  is  lost  in  the  wilderness.  So  the  soul
wanders  from  pleasure  to  pleasuie,  and  gets  lost,  (2)  Now  the  sheep  is  exposed  to
the  dangers  of  the  lion  or  the  wolf,  the  ditch  or  the  precipice,  and  is  in  wretchedness
and  terror.  3.  The  Shepherd.  (1)  He  cares  for  those  in  the  fold.  They  have  bis  care
in  the  provision  of  food,  as  well  as  shelter  and  protection,  We  should  sympathize
with  Christ  in  striving  to  keep  his  sheep  (see  Rom.  xiv,  15;  1  Cor.  viii.  11, 12),  As
he  is  the  great  Shepherd,  having  many  sheep,  so  is  he  the  good  Shepherd,  knowing
each  lamb.  (2)  He  cares  especially  for  the  wanderer.  It  is  the  shepherd's  duty  to
look  more  particularly  after  the  stray  sheep  than  after  those  abiding  in  the  fold.  Jesus,
who  came  to  save  a  world,  makes  special  efforts  to  save  even  one.  The  whole  flock
fuffers  when  one  sheep  winders.    (3)  "If  so  be  that  be  find  it."    The  finding  of  a


234  TEE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xviii.  1— 35.

sinner  Is  a  contingent  event.  Grace  is  not  irresistible.  Yet  the  wanderer  should
know  that  the  Shepherd  is  very  near  him.  Are  we  as  anxiously  seeking  Jesus  as  he
is  seeking  us?  (4)  The  tender  sheep  is  not  driven,  but  carried  by  Christ.  "And
when  he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders"  (see  Luke  xv.  5).  He  carries
us  and  our  sins,  (5)  Jesus  rejoices  over  the  conversion  of  a  sinner,  as  a  shepherd  over
a  recovered  sheep ;  as  a  woman  over  a  recovered  piece  of  silver ;  as  a  father  oyer  a
recovered  son.  The  rejoicing  affects  heaven  as  well  as  the  Church  on  earth.  It  is
natural  to  feel  unoomnion  joy  at  the  fortunate  accomplishment  of  an  unexpected  event.
4.  The  enemy.  'I'hose  who  would  injure  the  sheep  of  Christ  are  special  objects  of  his
displeasure.  (1)  The  nations  that  injured  Israel  of  old  were  severely  reckoned  with.
(2)  The  antichrii-tim  nations  who  persecuted  his  people  are  doomed  to  a  fearful
retribution.  (3)  E^ery  contemptuous  son  of  pride  will  be  confronted  at  the  judgment
of  the  last  day.— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  15 — 20. —  Christian  Judgment.  From  dealing  with  the  offended,  our  Lord  here
passes  on  to  the  offending,  and  he  shows  us  how  we  should  deal  witli  a  guilty  brother,
for  our  own  sake,  for  his  sake,  for  the  sake  of  the  Church,  and  ultimately  for  the  sake
of  the  world.     Christian  judgment  should  be  faithful,  loving,  spiritual.

I.  Faithful.  1.  The  Christian  will  tell  his  brother  his  fault.  (1)  "  If  thy  brother
sin  against  thee."      By   fraud,  defamation,   affront,  contempt  (see  Lev.  vi.  1 — 7).

(2)  "If  thy  brother  sin."  Some  ancient  authorities  omit  "against  thee"  (see  New
Version  margin ;  see  also  Lev.  xix.  17).  (3)  "  Tell  hirn  bis  fault."  This  is  fidelity  to
thyself,  also  to  thy  brother.  How  salutary  to  David  was  the  reproof  of  Nathan !
2.  Ee  will  tell  it  him  before  witnesses.  (1)  Not  in  the  first  case.  But  he  will  not
consider  his  soul  clear  if  the  offending  brother  be  not  gained  by  the  private  reproof
without  proceeding  further.  (2)  The  witnesses  chosen  should  be  persons  of  credit  and
reputation.     True  men  will  not  refuse  to  serve  as  witnesses  in  the  interests  of  justice.

(3)  This  precaution  is  due  to  tlie  Church.  The  courts  of  the  Church  should  not  be
trifled  with  by  moving  them  with  cases  which  are  not  ripe.  '3.  He  will  tell  it  to  the
Church.  This  when  the  minor  means  have  been  tried  and  failed.  (1)  But  what  is
the  Church?  Amongst  the  Jews  ten  men  were  deemed  sufficient  to  constitute  a
synagogue.  Any  number  of  persons  met  in  the  name  or  by  the  authority  of  Christ
will  constitute  a  Christian  Church  (see  ver.  20).  Tell  it  to  the  wise  among  the  Church.
Paul  speaks  ironically  when  he  says,  "Set  them  to  judge  who  are  least  esteemed  in
the  Church."  (2)  Tell  it  to  the  Church  in  justice  to  the  Church,  that  its  purity  may
be  preserved.  Scandalous  persons  must  be  separated  from  the  Church  on  earth,  which
is  the  type  of  the  purer  Church  in  heaven.  (3)  Tell  it  to  the  Church  in  justice  to  the
obstinate  offender,  that  he  may  be  reproved  before  many  and  repent.  (4)  That  if  he
be  excommunicated  he  may  be  treated  as  a  heathen  and  publican.  Those  cast  out  of
the  kingdom  of  Christ  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  Satan.  Church  discipline  i»  for
Church  members.  The  Christian  is  not  forbidden  to  use  civil  courts  against  out-
siders.

II.  LoviNO.  1.  Love's  reason  for  telling  a  brother  his  fault  i$  to  gain  him.  (1)  This
is  love's  reason  for  going  to  the  offender  rather  than  waiting  for  him  to  come.  "  Go  and
tell  him."    It  will  give  him  opportunity  for  explanation.     The  sense  of  injury  is  often

•  the  result  of  sensitive  self-love.  (2)  Thisis  love'sreason  for  going  to  him  2?rti;a<eiy.  It
will  save  him  the  exasperation  of  an  unnecessary  public  reproach.  (3)  The  manner  will
accord  with  the  object.  The  truth  is  told  in  love.  The  fault  is  not  unduly  niagnified.
There  is  no  resentment.  2.  Love's  reason  for  calling  witnesses  is  still  to  gain  the
brother.  (1)  "  Take  with  thee  one  or  two  more."  To  avoid  unnecessary  publicity,  the
smallest  number  required  to  attest  evidence  is  called  in  (cf.  Deut.  xix.  15  ;  John  viii.  17  ;
2  Cor.  xiii.  1).  (2)  'i'he  witnesses  may  add  persuasion.  The  offender  may  listen  to  the
pleadings  of  disinterested  persons.  (3)  The  witnesses  have  the  double  functiun  of
seeing  that  the  reproof  is  administered  without  malignity,  and  that,  in  rejecting  it,  the
reproved  is  incorrigible.  3.  Love  also  has  reasons  for  then  telling  it  to  the  Church.
(1)  The  offender  may  hear  the  Church  and  be  gained.  (2)  Church  courts  are  preferred
to  those  of  the  world,  as  more  competent  to  deal  with  offences  against  Christian  law.
The  more  so  when  civil  rulers  were  notoriously  enemies  of  the  saints.  (3)  The  purity
of  the  Christian  brotherhood  must  be  preserved.    The  Church  that  condones  things


OH.  xvTii.  1— 35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  235

Bcandalons  transgresses  the  reason  for  its  existence.    (4)  A  scandalous  Church  can  be
of  little  service  to  the  world,

ni,  Spibitdal.  1.  /*  recognizes  the  presence  of  Ood.  (1)  The  sanctuary  of  God
is  the  assembly  of  his  saints  (of.  Exod.  xl.  2i;  2  Chron.  v.  14;  Ps.  oxxxii.  14;  ch.
xxviii.  20;  Rev.  ii.  1).  (2)  That  presence  is  here  promised  in  relation  to  maintenance
of  discipline.  God  is  with  his  Church  to  quicken  prayer,  to  answer  petition,  to  guide
in  counsel.  (3)  "  If  two  of  you  shall  agree,"  etc.  "  God  sometimes  stands  upon  a
number  of  voices  for  the  carrying  of  some  public  mercy,  because  he  delighteth  in  the
harmony  of  many  praying  souls,  and  also  because  he  loves  to  gratify  and  oblige  many  in
the  answer  "  (Plavel).  2.  It  recognizes  his  ratification.  (1)  "  Binding  and  loosing."
When  the  Jews  set  apart  any  to  be  a  preacher,  they  said,  "  'J'ake  thou  liberty  to  teach
what  is  bound  and  what  is  loose,"  i.e.  what  is  binding  or  obligatory  and  what  is  not.  (2)
Here  the  question  has  relation  to  discipline  rather  than  to  doctrine.  It  is  concerned
also  with  things  rather  than  persons.  "  Whatsoever,"  etc.  "  In  the  primitive  Church
absolution  meant  no  more  than  a  discharge  from  Church  censure  "  (Wesley,  tn  toe).
(3)  The  ratification  in  heaven  of  the  decisions  of  the  Church,  in  the  strict  sense,  applied
to  apoBtolio  times  when  plenary  inspiration  was  with  it  (see  John  xvi.  24 — 26 ;  Acts  ix.
29 — 31).  (4)  In  a  qualified  sense  it  still  holds  good,  viz.  when  the  rules  laid  down  in
Scripture  are  observed.  (5)  If  through  error  or  envy  any  be  cast  out  of  the  Church,
Christ  will  find  that  soul  in  mercy  (cf.  John  ix.  34,  35).  The  instructions  of  the  text
come  to  us  with  the  force  of  law.  We  have  no  option  to  pursue  any  different  course
with  an  offender,  or  any  different  order  to  that  here  prescribed.  In  the  whole  compass
of  pagan  ethics  there  is  no  rule  at  once  so  manly,  so  benevolent,  so  wise,  bo  practical.
— J.A.  M.

Vers.  21 — 35. — The  limits  of  mercy.  Peter's  question  here  was  suggested  by  his
Lord's  doctrine  concerning  Christian  judgment  (vers.  15 — 20).  "  Then  came  Peter,"  etc.
The  form  of  Peter's  question  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  custom  of  the  rabbins
who  from  Amos  i.  3 — "  For  three  transgressions,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away
wrath  " — ^held  that  three  offences  were  to  be  forgiven,  and  not  the  fourth;  or,  uniting
the  two  numbers,  made  "  seven  times "  the  extreme  limit  ol  their  forgiveness.  The
Lord's  reply  teaches  us —

I.  That  the  claims  of  bbothekhood  are  the  limits  o»  merot.  1.  Forgive-
ness should  never  be  refused  when  sought  with  repentance.  (1)  That  repentance  is
understood  here  is  evident  from  the  illustrative  parable  of  the  two  debtors  (vers.  26, 29).
Also  from  the  parallel  place  (see  Luke  xvii.  4).  (2)  To  gain  a  brother  is  more  noble
than  to  ruin  him.  Mercy  is  nobler  than  sacrifice.  (3)  The  gaining  of  a  brother  is
greater  than  the  recovery  of  property.  Life  is  more  than  meat.  How  much  is  a  man
better  than  a  sheep  ?  2.  Forgiveness  is  no  mercy  to  the  impenitent.  (1)  It  leaves  his
evil  nature  still  unchanged.  (2)  It  encourages  and  hardens  him  in  his  perversity.  (3)
It  offends  public  justice.  The  feUow-serrants  of  the  oppressor  were  "  exceeding  sorry."
They  looked  to  their  lord  for  his  judgment  upon  the  tyrant.

II.  That  the  mercifulness  of  the  Lord  is  our  inoitant  to  mbroy.  1.  God's
mercy  is  boundless.  (1)  Offences  against  God,  as  compared  with  oflences  against  our
fellows,  are  as  "ten  thousand  talents"  to  "one  hundred  pence."  We  should  regard
ourselves  as  debtors  to  God  in  all  we  have  and  all  we  are.  (2)  It  is  folly  in  us  to  say
to  him,  "I  will  pay  thee  all."  He  that  goes  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness
is  guilty  of  this  folly  of  attempting  with  nothing  to  pay  all  (cf.  ver.  25 ;  Bom.  x.  3).
(3)  The  parable  teaches  that  the  only  way  to  forgiveness  is  to  acknowledge  our  debt
and  appeal  only  to  mercy.  The  promise  to  pay  may  express  the  desire  of  the  contrite
Aeart  to  make  amends.  (4)  The  Lord  does  not  exact;  he. forgives  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  38,
40).  His  mercy  is  limited  neither  to  "  seven  times  "  nor  to  "  seventy  times  seven."
2.  We  must  forgive  as  we  are  forgiven.  (1)  This  is  required  (cf.  oh.  vi.  12 ;  Mark  xi.
25,  26).  It  was  at  the  close  of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  that  the  jubilee  trumpet
sounded  a  release  from  debts  (see  Lev.  xxv.  9).  (2)  To  the  merciless  God  will  show
no  mercy.  A  claim  pushed  to  an  extremity  becomes  a  MTong.  Mercilessness  is  great
wickedness.  "  Thou  wicked  servant ! "  "  To  be  beggars  to  God  and  tyrants  to  our
brethren  is  the  height  of  depravity "  (Helfrich).  3.  Forgiveness  must  be  "from  the
heart."    (1)  God's  reasons  of  mercy  are  from  himself.    "  He  wiU  have  mercy  upoa


236  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xvin.  1—35,

whom  he  will  have  mercy ; "  "  He  was  moyed  with  compasBion.''  (2)  So  the  wisdom
which  is  from  above,  true  religion,  is  "  easy  to  be  entreated."  The  returning  prodigal
child  will  find  a  relenting  heart.  The  insolvent  debtor,  a  compassionate  creditor.
The  distressed  tenant,  a  lenieat  landlord.  Gratitude  to  God  will  make  it  so.  "  I  am
thy  servant ;  for  thou  haat  loosed  my  bonds."  (3)  This  is  a  forgirenesa  which  leaves
no  pique  behind,  no  refusal  of  friendship.  We  should  keei;  no  account  of  the  ofTences
of  a  brother,  but  pass  them  over,  and  so  forgive  and  furget  until  it  becomes  a  habit
to  do  so.
III.  That  thk  maqnitudb  of  God's  mekoy  is  also  the  mbasubb  of  his  wbath.

1.  There  m  a  time  for  reckoning  mlh  the  King.  (1)  The  King  reckons  with  his  servants
when  their  regeneration  commences.  Then  they  reflect  upon  their  spiritual  state,  and
upon  their  liability  to  ruin.  (2)  Tliere'  are  retributions  and  rewards  in  the  order  of
God's  providence  in  this  world.  (3)  The  grand  reckoning  will  be  in  the  day  of
judgment  at  the  end  of  the  age.  To  this  end  God  keeps  account  (see  Deut.  xxxii.  34),
Every  sin  we  commit  is  a  debt  to  God,    The  aggregate  is  the  "  ten  thousand  talents."

2.  Ilit  pardonf  will  he  retracted  from  the  unmerciful.  (1)  The  same  servant  went  out
and  throttled  his  fellow-servant,  "  Went  out."  How  different  may  bo  our  conduct
when  we  go  out  into  the  world  from  what  it  is  when  we  go  into  our  closet  1  Went
out ;  not  immediately,  perhaps,  but  when  by  degrees  the  spirit  of  the  world  replaced
the  grateful  emotion.  (2)  Those  who  have  experienced  God's  mercy  have  the  greater
reason  to  deprecato  his  wiath.  They  will  find  the  "seventy- times  seven"  of  the
mercy  transformed  into  wrath  (of.  Gen,  iv.  24).  How  serious,  then,  may  be  the  con-
sequences of  the  difference  between  the  attitude  of  the  closet  and  that  of  the  world  I

3.  How  fearful  are  the  treasures  of  vorath  I  (1)  There  are  the  sufferings  of  loss.  The
debtor  is  sold  up.  He  forfeits  wife,  children,  property.  All  ennobling  excellences  of
his  nature  are  removed.  His  talents,  his  trusts,  are  taken  away  (cf.  ch,  xxv.  15,  28).
•'  Those  who  sell  themselves  to  work  wickedness  must  be  sold  to  make  satisfaction "
(Henry).  (2)  The  Bufferings  of  reproach.  "  Thou  wicked  servant."  This  expresses
a  perception  which  God  will  give  to  the  sinner  of  the  enormity  of  his  conduct.  "  I
forgave  thee  all  that  debt."  It  is  terrible  to  be  upbraided  with  the  mercy  we  have
abused.  "  Shouldst  not  thou  also,"  etc.  ?  What  a  contrast  is  here  with  the  mercy  that
is  given  liberally  without  upbraiding  (Jas.  i.  5)  1  (3)  Torment.  Eastern  prisons  wero
places  of  torment  (of.  ch.  xxv,  46 ;  2  Pet,  ii,  4,  17 ;  Jude  6).  The  prison-keepers  are
the  tormentors  (of,  Bev,  xiv,  10—12).  The  tortures  are  the  worm  that  dieth  not  and
the  fire  that  is  not  quenched,    (4)  The  sufferer  has  no  voice  to  reply. — J.  A,  M.

Ver.  3. — Christ's  type  of  the  truly  great.  We  treat  this  as  an  abstract  question.
What  is  true  greatness"?  Who  is  the  truly  great  man?  But  the  disciples  asked
a  practical  question,  bearing  immediate  relation  to  their  temporal  expectations.  They,
and  their  conversations,  can  never  be  understood  unless  we  keep  in  mind  their  earthly
ideas  of  their  Lord's  mission.  Judns,  with  the  graHpinp;  disposition,  was  anticipating
his  chances  in  the  new  kingdom;  and  even  James  and  John  were  scheming  to  secure
a  promise  of  the  right  and  left  hand  places  in  the  new  court.  Over  the  expected  ofSoes
in  the  new  kingdom  those  disciples  quarrelled,  until  at  last  they  brought  their  dispute
to  Jesus,  for  him  to  decide  it  by  his  authority.  When  they  asked,  "  Who  is  the
greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? "  they  meant,  "  Who  is  to  have  the  principal
office  in  the  new  Davidic  kingdom  which  thou  art  about  to  set  up  ?  "  Their  quegtion
was  childish;  it  would  have  been  framed  very  differently  if  it  had  been  childlike.
As  Christ  corrected  false  notions,  we  look  at  those  false  notions  first,

I.  Men's  ideas  of  gebatnbss.  "  The  things  that  men  deem  glorious  were  of  no
account  with  Ohrift.  He  did  not  measure  a  man's  eminence  by  the  lieight  of  the
pedestal  on  which  he  stood,  nor  by  the  stars  that  shone  on  his  breast;  he  had  no
admiration  for  purple  and  gold,  for  the  flash  of  jewels,  for  lofty  titUs,  or  any  of  the
thousand  things  that  dazzle  the  eye  and  impose  on  the  carnal  heart."  "Does  true
greatness  belong  to  the  lion-hearted,  to  the  righteous,  to  the  martyr,  to  the  ascetic,
to  the  saint?  Is  Thomas  on  the  way  to  it,  with  his  strong,  logical  intellect  that  will
take  nothing  on  credit  without  evidence  and  his  sturdy  fidelity  oi'  purpose?"  Greatness
must  associate  either  with  (1)  class ;  (2)  office ;  (3)  wealth ;  (4)  intellect ;  (5)  genius ;
or  (6)  success,  m  order  to  be  appreciated  by  men.


OH.  xvin.  1— 35.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINR  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         237

II.  Christ's  idea  of  gkbatnebs.  Here  our  Lord  is  not  dealing  with  all  greatness  j
only  with  that  greatness  which  is  relative  to  the  ideas  then  in  the  minds  of  disciples.
Their  greatness  meant  "being  served,"  guilefully  watching  for  the  attention  conceived
to  be  their  due ;  self-assertion.  His  greatness  meant  "serving;"  guilelessly  watching
for  the  opportunity  of  doing  something  kind ;  meekness  that  is  the  opposite  of  self-
assertion.  Of  this  a  child  is  the  type.  A  man  ought  not  to  be  in  everything  like
a  child.  Experience  of  life  makes  it  impossible  for  him  to  be  a  child.  What  was
needsd  by  the  disciples,  and  what  is  needed  by  us,  is  that  "  they  should  turn  from
their  self-seeking  ambition,  and  regain,  in  this  respect,  the  relative  blamelessness  of
children."— R.  T.

Ver.  4. — True  dignity  gained  hy  humbling  the  self,  "As  thi»  little  child."  "We
shall  miss  Christ's  meaning  if  we  set  about  thinking  of  children  in  general — of  their
trustfulness,  teachableness,  humility,  unassuming  disposition,  '  sweet  simplicity,*  and
kindred  things.  The  truth  is,  there  is  human  nature  (and  a  good  deal  of  it  too)
in  children  as  well  as  in  men  and  women.  Winsome  as  childhood  is,  and  often  rarely
beautiful,  with  many  a  wile  and  witchery,  even  the  fondest  mother  cannot  help  seeing
in  the  child  she  loves  best  some  tokens  of  waywardness,  self-will,  temper,  caprice,  and
other  things  prophetic  of  ill.  .Jesus  did  not  mean  the  disciples  to  think  of  children
in  general ;  it  was  not  any  child,  taken  indiscriminately  and  at  random,  that  would
have  suited  his  purpose."  It  is  this  child,  one  who  left  his  pla}',  and  came  forward
at  once  when  Jesus  called,  this  child  who  could  'put  self  aside,  who  illustrates  the  true
dignity.

I.  Humbling  the  self  is  not  making  false  estimates  of  oub  oharaoteb.  Good
people  often  think  that  it  is.  Saying,  thinking,  and  writing  bitter  things  against
themselves,  that  are  untrue  and  unfelt,  is  often  confounded  with  humility.  True
"  humility  "  always  goes  hand-in-haud  with  "  truth  ; "  and  demands  expression  which
precisely  represents  feeling.  Two  schools  of  religion  are  in  special  peril  of  falling  into
this  mistake.  1,  Those  who  make  much  of  "experiences."  There  is  always  a
tendency  towards  the  manufacture  of  experiences.  2.  Those  who  make  much  of
"  confessions."  There  is  always  the  peril  of  getting  credit  for  humility  by  exaggerating
the  confession.  What  is  true  of  false  estimates  is  in  measure  true  of  all  imperfect
estimates.

II.  Humbling  the  bblf  is  bbfusing  to  allow  oub  life  to  be  guided  by  sblf-
plbasinq  considerations.  This  is  the  point  in  our  text.  The  disciples  were  scheming
to  advance  their  self-interests.  The  little  chiW  promptly  and  cheerfully  gave  up  his
self-interests  when  Jesus  called  him.  Those  disciples  had  been  called  by  Joxus,  but
they  could  not  put  away  the  self.    In  this  sense,  "humbling  the  self"  will  include

(1)  giving   up  your  personal  opinion  in  order   to  accept   Christ's   revealol-  truth  ;

(2)  putting  aside  your  own  preferences  when  they  conflict  with  Christ's  will;  (3)
giving  up  what  may  mean  your  own  profit  or  advantage,  when  you  are  called  to
engage  in  Christ's  work.     Self-humbling  means  Christ-exalting. — R,  T.

Ver.  8. — The  severity  of  spiritual  discipline.  Cutting  off  a  right  hand  and  plucking
■■ut  a  right  eye  are  extreme  measures,  types  of  the  severest  dealing  with  one's  self.
rhey  bring  into  thought  those  cases  of  disease  in  which  signs  of  mortification  are
shown,  and  the  limb  must  be  promptly  surrendered  or  the  life  will  be  lost.  Our  Lord's
counsel  rests  upon  the  recognized  fact  that  bodily  organs  are  the  agents  of  sin.  The
palate  is  the  agency  of  drunkenness  and  gluttony,  the  eye  of  sensuality,  and  the  hand
of  dishonesty.  We  do  not  really  cure  a  moral  evil  by  merely  removing  the  agency
through  which  It  gains  expression,  but  resolute  dealing  with  the  organ  that  is  the
agent  shows  that  we  are  dealing  with  the  inner  evil,  weakening  it  by  taking  away  its
food  and  exercise.  See  some  of  the  things  which  account  for  spiritual  discipline  taking
such  severe  forms,

I.  Bias  to  special  evils  ik  natural  dispositions.  This  bias  belongs  to  the
mystery  of  liereditary  influences.  Through  a  deteriorated  bodily  organization,  a
man  is  born  with  a  bias  in  favour  of  drink,  cheating,  pride,  sensuality.  The  members
of  ono  royal  family  are  all  born  gluttons.  Possibly,  some  bias  to  evil  is  found  in  every
disposition,  and  the  life-problem  is — What  will  the  man  do  with  just  that  tendency


238  THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  iviii.  1— 35.

influeDcing  all  relations?  Acquirtd  evils  may  be  effectually  dealt  with.  Evils  that
belong  to  our  bodily  constitution  make  the  moral  straggle  of  a  whole  life.

IL  Weakness  of  will  in  natural  dispositions.  This  is  the  real  cause  of  the
necessary  severity  of  spiritual  discipline.  The  man  is  not  strong  enough  to  get  and
to  hold  the  mastery  ovur  his  evil  self,  and  so  he  is  worried  and  worn  by  a  struggle
which  has  to  be  continually  kept  up,  because  he  is  not  strong  enough  to  make  any
victory  decisive.     The  hardest  moral  lives  are  lived  by  the  weak-willed,

IIL  Indulgence  of  the  evil  bias  miTiL  it  obows  masterful.  This  may
be  illustrated  by  the  difference  in  the  tone  of  the  moral  struggle  in  the  case  of  a
man  converted  in  youth,  and  of  k  man  converted  in  advanced  life.  In  the  one  case
the  bias  is  a  mere  tendency,  and  can  be  easily  checked ;  in  the  other  it  has  become  a
fixed  habit,  and  must  be  dug  out.  When  a  man  in  middle  life  has  vigorously  taken  in
hand  his  conduct  and  relations,  and  wisely  reshaped  them,  he  often  has  the  bitter
lesson  to  learn  that  the  evil  in  him  remains  untouched.— B.  T.

Ver.  10. — Despising  the  little  ones.  We  may  well  assume  that  our  Lord  included
in  his  term  "little  ones,"  both  children  and  childlike  disciples.  "Looking  to  the
frequency  with  which  our  Lord's  words  were  addressed  to  the  thoughts  of  his  hearers,
it  seems  likely  that  the  faces  of  some  at  least  of  the  disciples  betrayed,  as  they  looked
on  the  child,  some  touch  of  half-contemptuous  wonder,  that  called  for  this  prompt
lebuke."  Limiting  the  reference  of  the  expression  to  the  children,  we  may  notice
some  of  the  n  ays  in  which  we  may  come  to  despise  them.

I.  We  mat  ukder-estimate  their  varied  influence  fob  qood.  It  is  a  small,
almost  silent,  iufiucnce ;  one  that  cannot  be  put  in  common  earth  scales  and  measured,
or  laid  out  on  a  bank-counter  and  checked.  Man  is  interested  in  big  things  and  noisy
things;  but  the  really  great  forces  are  pervasive  gravitation  and  silent  light.  1.  Tlie
child  exerts  a  high  moral  and  educational  influence  on  its  father  and  mother.  Every
child  is  a  Divine  testing  of  parental  character ;  and  may  be  a  Divine  culture  of  it.

2.  The  child  is  a  moral  power  in  a  home.    Dlustrate  from  times  of  strain  and  sorrow.

3.  The  child  often  proves  to  be  a  minister  of  Christ  in  a  neighbourhood.  Illustrate
from  Norman  McLeod's  "  Wee  Davie ; "  or  the  mora  recent  clever  tale  entitled
"  Bootle's  Baby."

II.  We  mat  fail  to  becoqnize  what  trainino  them  does  fob  us.  No  man  who
is  resolutely  set  upon  soul-culture  will  ever  make  the  mistake  of  "  despising  the  little
ones."  Think  of  the  self-restraints  which  training  children  demands.  Think  of  the
examples  that  must  be  set.  Think  of  the  practical  wisdom  that  must  be  gained.
Think  of  the  perseverance  that  may  be  called  for.  Many  a  man  and  many  a
woman  have  been  ennobled  by  having  family  life  and  claims  grow  up  around  them.

III.  We  mat,  only  too  easilt,  do  injustice  to  the  little  ones.  If  we
"despise  them"  we  shall  fail  to  observe  or  meet  their  peculiarities.  We  shall  repress
their  strange  thoughts  and  questionings.  We  shall  over-estimate  their  failings.  We
sliall  be  out  of  sympathy  with  their  play.  Injustice  to  the  little  ones  means  spoiling
the  chances  of  their  manhood  and  womanhood.  It  is  bad  if  the  despising  takes  the
form  of  "  neglect  j  "  it  is  far  worse  if  it  is  "  moral  hindering."

IV.  We  mat  put  off,  until  the  bt-and-bt  that  never  comes,  the  influence

ON  THE  CHILDREN   WHICH  IB  THE  NEED  OF   THEIR  CHILD-TIME.      That  kind  of  deSplsing

the  little  ones  is  perhaps  one  of  the  grave  sins  uf  the  family  life  of  the  day. — B.  T,

Ver.  13.— The  joy  of  recovering  lost  things.  Dr.  M.  Dods,  writing  on  the  parable
of  Luke  XV.,  has  the  following  suggestive  passage.  Each  of  the  three  parables
"  illustrates  the  fact  that  a  more  active  interest  in  any  possession  is  aroused  by  the
very  circumstance  that  it  is  lost.  The  sheep  that  is  lost  is  not  on  th:it  account
disregarded  by  the  shepherd,  but  receives  for  the  time  greater  attention  than  those
which  remain  in  the  fold.  The  piece  of  money  that  has  gone  a-missing  becomes
on  that  very  account  of  greater  immediate  importance  to  the  woman  than  all  she  has
Biife  in  her  jar  in  the  cupboard.  If  one  of  a  family  turns  out  ill,  it  is  a  small  mitigation
that  all  the  rest  turn  out  well ;  it  is  after  the  lost  the  parent's  heart  persistently  goes.
Bo  is  it  with  God,  The  very  circumstance  that  men  have  strayed  from  him  evokes
in  him  a  more  manifest  and  active  solicitude  in  their  behalf.    The  attitude  of  God


OH.  xvm.  1—35.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  239

and  of  Christ  towards  sinnerg  Is  reduced  to  the  great  principle  that  anything  which
is  lost  and  may  be  regained  exercises  our  thought  more,  and  calls  out  a  more
solicitous  regard  than  a  thing  of  equal  value  which  rests  securely  in  our  possession."

I.  Man  ab  lost.  The  word  as  applied  to  men  is  a  figure.  A  lost  sheep  is  one
heyond  the  shepherd's  control.  A  lost  piece  of  money  is  one  that  has  got  out  of
the  woman's  reach.  This  suggests  that  a  lost  man  is  one  who  has  got  himself  out
of  the  Divine  hands,  and  has  taken  the  ordering  of  life  into  his  own  hands.  As
the  sheep  is  the  shepherd's ;  as  the  coin  is  the  woman's ;  so  man  is  God's.  The
sheep  is  lost  througli  animal  perversity;  the  coin  is  lost  through  accident;  man
is  lost  through  moral  wilfulness.

U.  Mak  ab  recovebable.  There  would  be  no  effort  of  shepherd,  or  woman,  if  they
had  no  reasonable  hope  of  regaining  their  lost  things.  And  we  may  never  conceive
of  men  as  lost  in  any  sense  that  puts  them  beyond  moral  reach.  There  is  a  hardening
through  wilfulness ;  but  we  must  never  think  of  that  save  as  a  process.  In  the  case
of  no  brother-man  may  it  be  thought  of  as  complete.  The  man  beyond  recovery  does
not  exist.

III.  Man  as  becotebed.  That  is  the  work  of  God  in  Christ ;  it  is  accomplished
for  the  race,  and  it  is  an  infinite  joy  to  the  Eeooverer.  That  is  the  work  of  the  Christ-
man  and  of  the  Christian  Church.  They  should  prove  what  joy  is  found  in  saving  the
lost.— R.  T.

Ver.  15. — Christian  way*  with  trespassers.  This  counsel  seems  to  indicate  that  the
dispute  among  the  disciples  as  to  who  should  be  the  greatest  had  gone  a  considerable
length,  had  led  to  hard  words,  and  even  heart-divisions.  Our  Lord  made  this  the
occasion  for  advice  in  relation  to  misunderstandings  among  Christians.  It  should
be  distinctly  seen  that  his  advice  concerns  cases  of  Christians,  each  party  professing
strict  loyalty  to  Christ.

I.  Talk  togbtheb.  Not  just  at  once,  while  there  is  heat  of  feeling ;  but  presently,
when  both  have  had  time  to  grow  calm,  and  give  room  to  those  regretful  feelings  which
ore  sure  to  come  when  the  more  difficult  passages  of  life  are  reviewed.  When  offence
is  given,  the  evil  to  dread  is  the  disposition  of  each  to  stand  aloof  from  the  other.
This  can  soon  widen  into  hopeless  separation.  In  common  life  it  is  the  work  of  friends
to  bring  such  separated  ones  together ;  in  the  Christian  life  we  find  Christ  expects  both
the  offended  and  the  offender  to  be  seeking  each  other.  Talk  in  a  Christian  spirit
will  oites.  correct  misunderstandings,  smooth  difiiculties,  and  put  things  straight.  But
Christ  puts  the  chief  burden  of  seeking  reconciliation  on  the  injur^  one.  The  one
against  whom  the  trespass  is  committed  is  to  act.

II.  Bbing  pbivate  Chbistian  fbienus  in.  There  arise  cases  in  which  the  judgment
of  one  party  may  be  blinded ;  and  the  correction  may  be  beyond  the  power  of  the
other  party  interested.  Then  it  is  wise  to  bring  in  independent  and  unprejudiced
persons,  who  may  help  to  unite  the  disputing  parties.  This  will  lead  on  to  a  con-
sideration of  the  principle  of  "  arbitration,"  and  its  possible  adaptation,  not  only  to
Christian,  but  also  to  social  and  national  disputes.  For  such  arbitration  the  men
of  character  and  weight  are  sought.  They  gain  power,  in  all  phases  of  life,  who  culture
character.

III.  Let  the  Chubch  deal  vtith  the  matter.  The  point  is  this — do  not  make
a  public  thing  of  private  disputes  save  as  a  last  extremity.  There  will  be  different
opinions  as  to  what  is  referred  to  by  the  term  "  Church."  Most  probably  our  Lord  was
thinking  of  the  recognized  officials  of  the  synagogue,  who  formed  an  "  ecclesia,"  or
Church,  and  acted,  on  consultation,  representatively  and  authoritatively.  Christ  says,
"  Do  everything  by  brotherliness ;  bring  in  the  ofiScials  only  as  a  last  resort."-  -E.  T.

Ver.  19. — Power  gamed  by  agreement  in  prayer.  This  verse  is  part  of  a  digression
from  our  Lord's  point.  Perhaps  it  is  suggested  by  the  distmion  occasioned  by  the
disputing  of  the  disciples,  and  our  Lord  takes  the  opportunity  of  pressing  the
Importance  and  value  of  preserving  mutual  agreement.  The  disunited  feeling  spoils
everything  in  Christian  life ;  it  spoils  even  prayer.  Harmony,  unity,  mutual  trust-
fulnosa,  make  up  the  atmosphere  in  which  everything  Chris'tian  can  thrive.  Our  Lord
makes  prayer  a  representative  of  every  phase  of  Christian  life  and  relation,    This  text


240  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  .  [on.  xvm.  1—36.

w,  with  ver.  20,  a  very  familmr  promise,  often  used  in  acts  of  publio  prayer,  but
almost  always  misquoted.  (It  is  remarkable  how'  many  scriptural  texts  have  non-
•oriptural  ideas  attached  to  them,  through  misquotation.)  It  is  always  right,  and  always
best,  to  take  God's  Word  as  it  precisely  is.  Yer.  19  appears  to  be  an  unconditional
promise,  but  it  is  not.  What  we  ask  shall  be  done  for  us,  but  only  if  two  of  you,
my  disciples,  join  to  ask ;  and  only  if  you  two  are  really  agreed  in  the  matter  about
which  you  ask.  It  will  at  once  be  seen  that,  simple  as  these  conditions  sound,  they
really  are  searching  conditions,  and  were  especially  searching  to  those  disputatious
disciples.

I.  Tee  aobgement  of  Chribtian  disoifles.  This  suggests  what  ii  the  primary
foundation-principle  of  Christ's  Church.  We  know  what  it  has  developed  to ;  it  is  well
to  see  what  it  has  sprung  from.  It  is  the  voluntary  union,  for  worship,  fellowship,
and  prayer,  of  two  or  three.  They  must  be  disciples ;  they  must  meet  together;  then
we  may  apply  the  term  "  Church  "  to  them.  They  must  agree  on  some  special  points
of  interest,  if  they  allow  large  liberty  of  opinioa  in  other  matters.  The  real  uniting
bond  must  be  their  common  love  to  Christ,  and  purpose  to  secure  the  honour  of  his
Name.  And  the  Divine  seal  set  upon  their  fellowship  will  be  the  spiritual  presence  of
Jesus,  and  all  that  for  them,  and  by  means  of  them,  which  his  spiritual  presence  involves.

II.  The  frateb-foweb  which  ooues  out  of  such  aqbeements.  It  is  a  meeting
of  necessary  conditions.  It  is  a  persuasion  with  God.  Such  agreement  difiera  from
personal  prayer  in  two  things :  1.  It  represents  interest  in  others.  2.  It  indicates  thought-
ful consideration.  Many  a  private  prayer  cannot  be  answered  because  it  is  only  the
utterance  of  a  passing  impulse,  and  had  better  not  be  answered.  What  we  consult
over  becomes  intelligent.  WeU-conudered  prayer  cannot  fail  to  gain  the  Divine
regard.— E.  T.

Ver.  20. — The  conditions  of  Ghrisfs  sensible  presenea.  "There  am  I  in  the  midst
of  them."  Familiarity  with  this  sentence,  and  a  circle  of  fixed  associations  gathering
round  it,  prevent  our  observing  what  a  striking  and  revealing  sentence  it  is.  He  who
spoke  the  words  was  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  disciples,  in  the  necessary  limitations
of  a  human  body.  And  yet  he  says  to  them  that  wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered
together  in  his  name,  he  is  actually  vidth  them ;  in  the  midst  of  them ;  and  this  seems
to  imply  that  his  presence  might  actually  be  realized  and  felt  by  them.  This  was
a  hopelessly  extravagant  declaration  for  any  mere  limited  man  to  make.  Already  Christ
could  present  himself  as  he  really  was,  and  soon  manifestly  would  be — an  unlimited
spiritual  presence.

I.  The  FiBST  CONDITION  IS  8IN0BBITT.  The  two  or  three  must  meet  in  Christ's
name,  distinctly  as  his  disciples,  to  whom  his  honour  is  the  supreme  interi  st.  The
one  thing  that  our  Lord  most  severely  rebuked  was  "hypocrisy."  The  one  thing  from
which  he  turned  away  was  "  insincerity."  Poverty  of  means  or  mind  was  no  hindrance
to  him ;  but  he  could  only  show  himself  to  the  true-hearted.  It  is  the  ever-working
law  of  Christ.    He  comes  only  to  the  sincere.

II.  The  next  condition  is  oultueb.  Precisely,  the  culture  of  the  spiritual  faculties
and  susceptibilities.  This  is  not  adequately  apprehended.  Our  Lord  put  it  very
stroBgly  to  his  select  disciples,  when  he  said  to  them,  "  The  world  shall  not  see  me,
hut  ye  me  me,"  Their  spiritual  culture  enabled  them  to  see.  The  higher  faculties
of  the  soul  are  quickened  by  personal  relation  to  Christ  "  who  is  our  Life ; "  but  those
quickened  faculties  need  culture,  then  the  soul  breathes  in  a  spiritual  atmosphere,  sees
spiritual  things,  handles  spiritual  realities,  and  recognizes  the  presence  of  the  spiritual
Lord.  It  is  suggested  that  the  gathering  together  of  the  disciples  Involves  their  helping
one  another  to  secure  this  spiritual  culture ;  those  of  the  fuller  and  higher  attainments
inspiring  and  aiding  their  brethren.

III.  The  next  condition  is  unitt.  It  might  seem  as  if  unity  in  request  were
all  that  was  necessary ;  but  the  true  unity  lies  in  the  soul-conditions  of  which  the
request  is  but  an  expression  and  illustration.  And  it  will  be  found  that  the  true  unity
lies  in  the  spiritual  growth  and  culture  of  each  one;  just  as  the  health  of  a  tree  ia
found  by  the  growth  and  enterprise  of  all  the  branches. — E.  T.

Ver.  22^ — The  Cfhiistian  limit  of  forgiveness.    "  Until  seventy  times  seven."    Thli


oa.  xvm.  1— SB.]    lEE  OOSPEL  AOCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         241

U  no  fixed  number.  It  ia  a  figurative  way  of  saying  that  there  ig,  and  there  oiui  be,
no  limit  to  Christian  forgivenegs.  To  understand  the  point  and  force  of  St.  f  eter'i
question,  it  is  necessary  to  know  the  rabbinical  rules  of  forgiveness  with  which  he
would  be  familiar.  It  was  a  settled  rule  of  the  rabbis  that  forgiveness  should  not  be
extended  more  than  three  times.  Edersheim  says,  "  It  was  a  principle  of  rabbinism
that,  even  if  the  wrong-doer  had  made  full  restoration,  he  would  not  obtain  forgiveness
till  he  had  asked  it  of  him  whom  he  had  wronged,  but  that  it  was  cruelty  in  such
circumstances  to  refuse  pardon."  It  says  much  for  St.  Peter's  apprehension  of  his
Master  that  he  was  sore  ha  would  not  limit  forgiveness  to  the  rabbinical  "three
times/*  From  his  point  of  view,  making  the  three  times  into  seven  times  was  a
~splenihd  piece  of  liberality.  But  he  could  not  measure  the  generosity  and  nobility  of
his  Lord,  who  took  the  "  three  times  "  and  made  it  "  seventy  times  seven."  "  It  did
not  occur  to  St.  Peter  that  the  very  act  of  numbering  offences  marked  an  externalism
which  had  never  entered  into,  nor  comprehended,  the  spirit  of  Christ.  He  had  yet  to
learn,  what  we,  alas  1  too  often  forget,  that  as  Christ's  forgiveness,  so  that  of  the
ChristiaD,  mu-st  not  be  computed  by  numbers.  It  is  qualitative,  not  quantitative,
Christ  forgives  sin,  not  sins ;  and  he  who  has  experienced  it  follows  in  his  footsteps."

L  The  ultimatk  limit  is  thb  Divine  example  of  FOBaiVBNESs.  "As  Christ
forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye."  What  do  we  expect  from  God  ?  Can  we  conceive  of  a
limit  to  the  times  when  we  may  hope  for  the  mercy  of  God?  What  would  life  be
worth  if  we  could  ?  The  fear  of  outstretchiug  the  limit  would  811  us  with  misery.
Man  can  never  lose  the  hope  in  God.  If  he  does  he  becomes  fixed  in  sin.  "  Tliere  is
forgiveness  with  thee ; "  a  man  must  be  able  to  say  that  in  full  view  of  the  provoca-
tions of  a  long  life,  when  he  comes  to  his  dying  day.  To  the  Divine  forgiveness  thera
is  no  qualification  of  degrees  or  numbers.

IL  The  fbactioal  limit  is  oub  Chbistlt  lots  fob  oub  bbotheb.  If  we  are
Christly,  we  want  to  do  him  good.  It  does  not  matter  about  ourselves,  and  injury
done  to  us.  It  does  matter  to  a  Christly  man  t^.it  a  brother  has  done  a  wrong.  The
Christly  man  is  set  upon  his  recovery  from  the  wrong ;  and  if  that  means  his  forgive-
ness over  and  over  again,  until  patience  is  tried  unto  the  uttermost,  the  Christly
man  will  forgive  and  bear,  if  only  he  may  win  back  his  erring  brother  at  last. — B.  T.

Ver.  35. — Moral  fitnen  for  receiving  Divine  forgiveness.  Upon  his  earnest  petition,
the  man  gains  a  full  ami  free  forgiveness ;  but  the  question  arises — Did  he  deserve  it  ?
Was  he  in  a  state  of  mind  fit  to  receive  it  ?  Was  the  forgiveness  any  real  moral  good
to  him  ?  This  is  soon  answered.  The  man,  fresh  from  his  great  forgiveness,  finds  a
fellow-servant  who  owes  him  but  a  trifiing  sum,  and  his  severity  with  him  shows
clearly  enough  that  his  heart  was  untouched.  The  unfwgiving  manifest  that  they  are
imfitted  to  receive  OocPa  forgiveness.  The  Christian  limit  of  forgiveness  is — ^Forgive
your  fellow-men  as  freely  and  as  fully  as  God  has  forgiven  you.  The  Christian  law  of
forgiveness  is — Expect  God  to  forgive  you  only  when  you  are  in  such  a  penitent,
humble,  and  sympathetic  frame  of  mind  that  you  can  easily  forgive  your  fellows.

L  See  what  a  mabtel  of  gbaoe  that  Divine  FosaivENESs  is.  Estimate  it
aright,  and  you  will  feel  that  there  must  be.  some  preparedness  for  receiving  such  a
blessing.  1.  Think  of  the  greatness  of  the  sin  to  be  forgiven  us.  Take  Christ's  figure
of  the  immense  debt.  See  sin  as  ingratitude;  and  as  disobedience.  2.  Think  of  the
aggravations  of  sin.  The  wilfulness  of  many  sins.  They  are  sins  against  light  and
knowledge.  They  are  even  committed  after  forgiveness.  3.  Think  what  love  is
shown  in  the  conditions  of  forgiveness.  The  objective  ground  of  remission  is  the  gift
and  sacrifice  of  God's  well-beloved  Son.  4.  Think  of  the  freeness  and  fulness  of  God's
forgiveness.  There  is  no  possibility  of  purchasing  it ;  it  must  come  to  us  as  a  gift  of
infinite  love.  It  is  no  limited  blessing.  God  blots  out  the  record  utterly,  as  a  cloud
is  blotted  from  the  sky,  and  fiings  our  sins  away  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.

II.  See  what  ib  the  state  of  mind  befitting  the  recipients  of  the  Diyins
roBGlVENESS.  We  can  see  plainly  enough  that  the  man  introduced  by  our  Lord  was
wholly  unworthy  of  the  forgiveness  of  that  debt.  It  did  him  no  sort  of  moral  good.
He  was  in  no  sense  ready  for  the  forgiveness.  So  there  are  many  who  cannot  be
forgiven  because  they  are  not  in  such  moral  states  as  would  make  forgiveness  any
blessing  to  them.  A  humbled,  regretful,  gracious  spirit  is  necessary.  Such  a  spirit
MATTHEW — n.  B


249


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDTNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xra.  1—80.


would  be  tested  at  once  by  an  opportunity  of  showing  a  forgiving  mind.  Tender,
melted,  kind.  The  feeling  of  being  undeserving,  unworthy.  Christ's  teaching  on  thi»
point  has  even  a  severe  side — even  his  forgiveness  may  be  revoked,  if  he  finds,  by  our
behaviour  kfter  forgiveness,  that  we  were  morally  unfitted  to  receive  it, — R.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XES.


Vers.  1 — 12. — The  beginning  of  the  hut
journey  to  Jerusalem.  The  question  concern-
ing divorce.    (Mark  x.  I — 12.)

Ver.  1. — ^When  Jesus  had  finished  these
sayings.  This  is  the  beginning  of  a  new
section  of  the  history,  commencing,  as  usual,
with  the  formuliiry.  And  it  came  to  pass.
"These  sayings"  must  refer  to  what  was
recorded  in  ch.  xviii.  But  St.  Matthew's
narrative  omits  man;  events  that  happened
in  the  interval  between  the  account  of  the
Galilffian  ministry  and  the  history  of  these
last  days,  that  is,  frnm  the  autumn  of  one
year  to  the  spring  of  the  next.  The  transac-
tions  of  this  time,  which  are  omitted  also  by
St.  Mark,  are  given  by  St.  Luke  (ix.  51 —
xvii.  11)  and  St.  John  (vii.  2 — ^xi.  54),  com-
prising many  things  that  occurred  at  Jeru-
salem during  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  and
on  other  occMsinns  He  departed  from  Gali-
lee. Not  visiting  it  again  till  be  appeared
there  alter  his  resurrection.  There  was  no
part  of  the  Holy  Land  in  which  he  did  not
at  some  time  sojourn,  and  now,  as  the  final
consummation  drew  nigh,  he  resolutely  set
his  face  towards  Jerusalem.  Came  into  the
coasts  of  Judaea  beyond  Jordan.  Loaiits
should  be  borders.  Judsea  was  bounded  by
the  river,  and  there  was  no  part  of  it  beyond,
that  is,  on  the  east  of  Jordan.  The  words,
"  beyond  Jordan,"  beli  mg  to  the  verb  "came,"
and  the  clause  signifies  that  the  object  of
Christ's  journey  was  the  vicinity  of  Judsaa,
and  that,  instead  of  entering  the  province
by  the  direct  road  through  Samaria,  he  took
the  more  lengthy  but  safer  route  through
Persea.  This  was  the  name  of  the  region
on  the  east  of  the  Jordan  (wipav,  beyond),
extending  at  this  time  from  the  river  Hiero-
max,  or  Jarmouk.on  the  rio]th,to  the  Amon
on  the  south,  i.e.  to  the  middle  of  the  eastern
shore  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  ruler  of  this
district  was  Herod  Antipas,  and  it  was  at
this  era  in  a  most  flourishing  condition,
notably  fertile,  and  containing  many  fine
towns  ornamented  with  magnificent  build-
ings. Here  the  simple,  pastoral  country
people  were  less  influenced  hy  the  narrow
bigotry  of  the  Pharisaic  party,  and  in  the
towns  the  ban  which  excluded  Jesus  from
the  synagogues  of  Galilee  and  Judasa  was
either  not  recognized  or  not  enforced.  A
quiet  opportunity  for  preaching  the  gospel


was  thus  offered.  This  may  possiUr  be  the
sojourn  in  Persea  mentioned  by  St  John  (x.
40—42).

Ver.  2. — Great  mnltitndes  followed  him.
He  was  favourably  received  by  the  unpre-
judiced Perssans.  Healed  them.  Those  of
the  multitude  who  had  need  of  healing  (Luke
ix.  11).  There.  In  the  "beyond  Jordan"
region.  St.. Mark  observes  that  be  taught
them.  Thus,  "at  one  time  teaching,  at
another  working  miracles,  he  varied  his
means  of  salvation,  that  from  the  miracles
faith  might  be  given  him  as  a  Teacher ;  and
by  his  teaching  he  might  urge  to  edification
the  miracles  which  he  wrought "  (St.  Chry-
sostom,  ap.  1.  Williams).

Ver.  3. — We  have  now  to  listen  to  onr
Lord's  teaching  respecting  divorce  and  mar-
riage. Tbe  Pharisees.  The  article  is  better
omitted.  Our  Lord  was  not  long  left  in
peace  by  these  inveterate  enemies,  who,  if
they  could  not  openly  persecute  him,  might
hope  to  extract  something  from  his  words
and  sentiments  which  might  be  used  to  his
disadvantage.  They  were  probably  envoys
sent  from  Jerusalem  to  entrap  and  aunoy
him.  Tempting  liim.  Trying  to  get  him
to  give  an  answer  which  would  in  any  case
afford  a  handle  for  malicious  misrepresenta-
tion. The  question  proposed  concerned
divorce.  To  put  away  his  wile  for  every
cause;  Kori.  iraa-av  airlaV.  qucKumque  ex
causa ;  for  any  cause  whatever.  This  was  a
delicate  question  to  raise  in  the  domains  of
Herod  Antipas  (see  ch.  xiv.  3,  4),  and  one
greatly  debiited  in  the  rabbinical  schools.
Our  Lord  had  already  twice  pronounced
upon  the  subject,  once  in  the  sermon  on  the
mount  (oh.  v.  32),  and  again  when  reason-
ing with  the  Pharisees  on  the  due  observ-
ance of  the  Law  (Luke  xvi.  18).  Two
opposite  opinions  were  held  by  the  followers
of  Hillel  and  Schammai,  the  heads  of  an-
tagonistic schools.  The  school  of  Hillel
contended  that  a  man  might  divorce  his
wife  for  various  causes  quite  unconnected
with  infringement  of  the  marriage  vow,  e.g.
becauae  he  had  ceased  to  love  her,  or  had
seen  some  one  whom  he  liked  better,  or  even
because  she  cooked  his  dinner  badly.  The
school  of  Schammai  was  more  strict,  and
permitted  divorce  only  in  case  of  fornica-
tion, adultery,  or  some  offence  against
chastity.  Between  these  contending  partiei
the  Pharisees  desired  to  make  ourl^rd  give
a  decision,  thinking  that  they  had  fixed  hia


CH.  xa.  ],— 30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDmO  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.


243


in  a  dilemma.  If  he  took  the  popular  lax
view,  they  could  deride  his  claims  aa  a
Teacher  of  superior  morality;  if  he  upheld
the  stricter  side,  he  would  rouse  the  enmity
of  the  majority,  and  possibly,  like  John  the
Baptist,  involve  himself  in  trouble  with  the
licentious  tetraroh.  ,There  was  a  chance
also  that  the  high  tone  which  he  had  already
taken  might  prove  to  be  at  variance  with
Mosaic  enactments.  The  easiness  with
which  divorce  was  obtained  may  bo  seen  in
Josephus,  who  thus  writes :  "  He  who  for
any  reason  wliatsnev6r(andmany8uch  causes
happen  to  men)  wishes  to  be  separated  from  a
wife  who  lives  with  him,  must  give  it  to  her
in  writing  that  he  will  cohiibit  witli  her  no
longer,  and  by  this  means  slie  shall  have
liberty  to  mairy  another  man ;  but  before
this  is  done  it  is  not  permitted  her  to  do  so"
('  Ant.,'  iv.  8.  23).  Josephus  himself  re-
pudiated his  own  wife  because  he  was  not
pleased  with  her  beliaviour  ('  Vita,'  §  76).
And  Ben  Sira  gives  the  curt  injunction,
"  If  she  go  not  aa  thou  wouldest  have  her
(iroTei  x^''P°^  <""')<  ""'  ^^^  °^  f"^"™  *^y  fl^sh,
.  .  .  and  let  her  go  "  (Ecclus.  xxv.  26).

Ver.  i. — He  answered  and  said.  Our  Lord
does  not  directly  reply  in  the  negative,  but
refers  to  the  original  institution  of  marriage.
All  hisauditorsagreed  in  holding  the  legality
of  divorce,  though  they  differed  in  their
estimation  of  the  causes  that  warranted
separation.  It  was  quite  a  new  idea  to  find
the  propriety  of  divorce  questioned,  and  to
have  their  captious  question  met  by  an  ap-
peal to  Scripture  which  they  could  not  gain-
say, and  an  enunciation  of  a  high  ideal  of
matrimony  wliich  tijeir  glosses  and  laxity
had  miserably  perverted  or  obscured.  He
which  made  them.  Manuscripts  vary  between
i  iroi^iraj  and  S  xriiras.  The  latter  is  ap-
proved by  Westcott  and  Hort.  It  is  best
translated,  the  Creator.  The  Vulgate  gives,
qui  fecit  hominem.  At  the  beginning  (dir*
dpxv').  These  words  should  be  joined  to
the  following  verb  made  (iiroirtirev),  and  not
with  the  preceding  participle,  as  it  is  in-
tended to  show  the  primordial  design  in  the
creation  of  man  and  woman.  God  made  the
first  members  of  the  human  family  a  male
and  a  female,  not  a  male  and  females.  The
lower  animals  were  created  separately,  male
and  female  ;  "mankind  was  created  in  one
person  in  Adam,  and  when  tliere  was  found
no  help  meet  fir  Adam,  no  companion  in
body,  soul,  or  spirit,  fit  for  him,  then  God,
instead  of  creating  a  wholly  new  thing,
made  Eve  out  of  Adam  "  (Sadler).  Two
individuals  of  opposite  sexes  were  thus
formed  for  each  other ;  one  .was  the  comple-
ment of  the  other, and  the  union  was  peifrct
and  lasted  as  long  as  life.  There  was  in
this  original  institution  no  room  for  poly-
gamy, no  room  for  divorce.    It  was  a  con-


crete example  of  the  way  in  which   God
onites  man  and  wife.

Ver.  5. — And  said.  The  words  that  follow
are  assigned  to  Adam  in  Gen.  ii.  23,  21,  but
he  spake  by  inspiration  of  God,  as  he  knew
nothing  of  "  father  and  mother  "  by  personal
experience,  and  therefore  they  can  be  rightly
attributed  to  the  Creator.  It  was,  in  fact,  a
prophetic  utterance  of  which  Adam  was  the
moutli piece;  as  St.  Augustine  says,  "Dens
utique  per  hominem  dixit  quod  homo  pro-
phctando  prssdizit."  For  this  oanse.  Be-
cause of  this  Divine  appointment,  and  espe-
cially of  the  peculiar  creation  of  Eve.  She
was  not  formod  separately  of  the  dust  of  the
earth,  but  directly  from  the  substance  of
Adam ;  so  she  was  one  with  her  husband,
nearer  than  all  other  human  relations,
superior  to  the  tenderest  ties  of  nature  and
birth.  Shall  cleave  (vpoaK0\\ti9iiiTerai,  or
Ko\Kri9ii(mai);  literally,  tluill  he  glued  to;
adhxreint.  The  word  expresses  the  closest
possible  union,  stronger  and  higher  than  that
towards  parents.  They  twain  shall  be  one
flesh ;  the  two  ihaU  become  one  flesh  (tirovrai
oi  Sio  (Is  aapxa  ju(av).  The  Septuagint  and
Samaritan  Pentateuch  insert  "  the  two,"
which  is  not  in  the  present  Hebrew  text
Our  Lord  adopts  the  addition  as  conveying
the  correct  sense.  In  marriage  there  is  a
moral  an^l  physical  union,  so  that  two  per-
sons become  virtually  one  beiug.  Originally,
man  contained  woman  in  himself  before  she
was  separated  from  him;  she  was  a  cor-
poreal unity  with  man;  or,  as  others  put  it,
man,  as  a  race,  was  created  male  and  female,
the  latter  being  implicitly  oontiiined  in  the
Ibrmer ;  the  previous  unity  is  thus  asserted.
In  marriage  this  unity  is  acknowledged  and
contiuued,  St.  Paul  quotes  this  text  in
Eph.  V.  31 ;  and  in  1  Cor.  vi.  16  uses  it  aa
an  argument  against  fornication,

Ver.  6. — Wherefore  (So-rt)  ;  to  that.  This
follows  from  the  quotation  just  given.  Our
Lord  explains  and  confirms  the  original
dictum  by  an  assertion  of  his  own  and  a
general  law.  What  God  hath  joined  together.
The  institution  of  marriage  is  God's  appoint-
munt.  Christ  says  i,  what,  neuter  singular,
not "  those  whom,"  plural  and  concrete,  that
he  may  make  it  clear  that  he  is  here  speak-
ing in  the  abbtiact,  not  specially  of  Adam
and  Eve.  Wliat  he  enunciates  is  true  of  all
wedlock,  not  simply  of  the  case  of  our  first
parents.  Let  not  man  put  asunder.  Man
does  thus  infiinge  the  primitive  rule  when
be  divorces  his  wife.  Herein  he  opposes
God  and  acts  against  nature.  He  and  his
wife  are  one;  they  can  no  more  separate
from  one  another  than  they  can  from  them
selves.  If  we  regard  our  Lord's  language
in  this  passage  without  prejudice,  and  not
reading  into  it  modem  notions,  we  must  con-
sider that  he  here  decrees  the  indlaaolubilitj


?41


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xtx.  1-30,


of  the  mamage  tie.  His  bnareTs  plainly  nn-
deistood  him  so  to  speak,  as  we  see  from  the
objection  which  tbey  urged.

Yer.  7. — ^Why  did  Hoses  then  command  1
If,  as  yon  assert,  God  ordained  that  marriage
should  be  indissoluble,  how  comes  it  that
Moses  commanded  (^iycretXaTo)  us  to  prac-
tise divorce,  and  proscribed  rules  as  to  its
conduct  7  They  are  referring  to  Deut.  xxiv.
1,  2.  Jesus  liad  esonped  the  trap  which  was
laid  for  him,  and  foiled  them  by  the  very
words  of  Scripture  and  the  plain  intention
of  the  first  inbtitution.  But  they  see  their
way  to  opposing  the  authority  of  the  great
lawgiver  to  the  dictum  and  interpretation
of  this  new  Teacher.  It  cannot  be  supposed,
they  argue,  that  Hoses  would  enjoin  a  prac-
tice condemned  by  the  Word  of  God ;  there-
fore, if  yon  abide  by  your  exposition,  you
con^adict  Moses.  A  writing  of  divorcement.
The  man  who  desired  to  divorce  his  wife
could  not  effect  this  separation  by  mere
word  of  moiith  or  by  violent  ejectment ;  he
must  have  a  written  document  formally  pre-
pared and  witnessed,  necessitating  certain
delay  and  publicity.  In  regulating  the
method  of  divorce  and  giving  rules  which
prevented  it  from  being  undertaken  rashly
and  lightly,  Moses  could  not  justly  be  said
to  have  commanded  it.  There  were  also  two
cases  in  which  he  absolutely  forbade  divorce
(see  Deut.  xxii.  13—19 ;  xzii.  28,  29).

Yer.  8. — Uoies  because  of  (vphs,  viith  a
view  to,  to  meet)  the  hardness  of  your
hearts  j  your  obstinacy,  perverseness.  You
were  not  honest  and  pure  enough  to  obey
the  primitive  law.  There  was  danger  that
you  would  ill  treat  your  wives  in  order  to  <>;et
rid  of  them,  or  even  murder  them.  The
lesser  evil  was  regular  divorce.  But  the
enactment  is  really  a  shame  and  reproach
to  you,  and  was  occasioned  by  grave  defects
in  your  character  and  conduct.  And  it  is
not  true  to  say  that  Moaes  commanded ;  he
only  suffered  you  to  put  away  your  wives.
This  was  a  temporary  permission  to  meet
your  then  circumstances.  Divorce  had  been
practised  commonly  and  long;  it  was  tra-
ditional; it  was  seen  among  all  other
Oriental  peoples.  Moses  could  not  hope  at
once  to  eradicate  the  inveterate  evil ;  lie
could  only  modify,  mitigate,  and  regulate
its  practice.  The  rules  wliich  he  introduced
were  intended,  not  to  facilitate  divorce,  but
to  lead  men  better  to  realize  the  proper  idea
of  marriage.  And  Christ  was  introducing
a  better  law,  a  higher  morality,  for  whioli
Mo.'ialc  legislation  pavid  the  way  (comp.  Rom.
V.  20 ;  viii.  3  ;  Heb.  ix.  10).  From  the  begin-
ning. The  original  institution  of  marriage
containt  d  no  idea  of  divorce ;  it  was  no
mere  civil  contract,  made  by  man  and  dis-
soluble by  man,  but  a  union  of  God's  own
formation,  with    which   no  human   pnwr


could  interfere.  However  novel  this  view
might  seem,  it  was  God's  own  design  from
the  first.  The  first  instance  of  polygamy
occurs  in  Gen.  iv.  19,  and  is  connected  with
murder  and  revenge.

Yer.  9. — And  I  say  unto  you.  Our  Lord
here  enunciates  the  law  which  was  to  obtain
in  his  kingdom,  which,  indeed,  was  simply
the  reintroduction  and  enforcement  of  the
primitive  and  natural  ordinance.  Ezoept
it  be  for  fornication ;  «  /x^  M  vopveta :  ntV
ob  fomicatioTiem  (Ynlgate).  This  is  tlie
received  reading.  Tregelles,  Tischendorf,
Westcott  and  Hort  omit  el.  The  parallel
passage  in  St.  Mark  (where  Oliiist  is  stated
to  have  made  the  remark  to  Ids  disciples
"in  the  house")  omits  the  clause  altogether.
Lachmann,  following  some  few  manuscripts,
has  introduced  rapeKrhs  \6you  vopvelas,
"saving  for  the  cause  of  fornication,"  from
ch.  V.  82.  The  interpretation  of  this  verse
has  given  occasion  to  acute  controversy.
There  are  some  questions  that  have  to  be
considered  in  expounding  this  matter.  (1)
What  is  here  meant  by  n-oprc/a?  Does  it
bear  its  usual  meaning,  or  is  it  equivalent
to  fioixela,  "  adultery  "  ?  Those  who  affirm
that  the  sin  of  married  persons  is  never  ex-
pressed by  the  word  porneia,  hold  that  it
here  signifies  ante-nuptial  uuohastity,  which
would  make  the  marriage  void  ab  initio;
po4-nuptial  transgression  would  be  punished
by  death,  not  by  divorce.  In  this  view,  our
Lord  would  say  that  no  divorce  is  allowable
except  where  the  wife  is  proved  to  have
been  unchaste  before  marriage.  In  such  a
case,  the  union  being  void  from  the  first,
the  man  is  free  to  marry  again.  But  there
are  difficulties  in  this  interpretation.  Why,
at  the  end  of  the  verse,  is  it  called  adultery
to  marry  the  divorced  woman,  if  she  was
never  really  and  lawfully  married  ?  Again,
it  is  not  correct  to  say  that  porneia  denotes
solely  the  sin  of  unmarried  people.  All
illicit  connection  is  described  by  this  term,
and  It  cannot  be  limited  to  one  particular
kind  of  transgression.  In  Ecclus.  xxiii.  23
it  is  used  exprefsly  of  the  sin  of  an  adul-
teress. Wo  may  also  remark  that  meta-
phorically idolatry  is  often  called  by  this
name,  whereas,  since  Israel  is  supposed  ti
be  married  to  the  Lord,  the  breaking  of  this
bond  by  the  worship  of  false  gods  might
more  strictly  be  named  adultery.  And  yet
again,  there  is  no  proof  that  the  discovery
of  previous  immorality  in  a  wife  did  ipso
/ado  vitiate  the  marriage  (see  Hos.  i.  2,  etc  ).
The  passages  that  are  thought  to  bear  un
this  matter  are  Deut.  xxii.  13 — 21  and
xxiv.  1 — 4.  In  the  former  there  is  no
qnestion  of  divorce, — the  offender  is  to  be
stoned;  in  the  second  passage  the  ground
of  divorce  is  "  some  unoleanness,"  or  some
unseemly   thing,    whether   iuimorality    oi


ca.  xix.  1-30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


iib


pergonal  defect  is  mennt  cannot  be  de-
cided, the  lival  schools  taking  different
sides.  But  it  is  qnite  certain  that  adultery
ii  not  intended,  and  ante-nuptial  nn-
chastity  is  not  even  hinted.  The  inter-
pretation, therefore,  given  above  cannot  be
maintained.  (2)  Omitting  for  the  momeut
the  limiting  clause,  may  we  say  that  the
general  teaching  of  Christ  makes  for  the
indissolubility  of  the  marriage  bond  ?  The
majority  of  the  Fathers  from  Hennas  and
Justin  Martyr  downwards  affirm  this.  Those
who  admit  that  divorce  is  permissible  in
the  case  of  the  wife's  adultery  are  unanimous
in  asserting  that,  by  Christ's  ordinance,  re-
marriage is  prohibited  to  the  husband  during
the  culprifs  life;  so  that,  practically,  if
divorce  a  mensd  et  toro  is  allowed,  divorce
a  vinculo  is  refused.  All  Christ's  utterances
ou  the  subject,  saving  the  apparently  re-
strictive clause  (ch.  v.  32)  and  here,  abso-
lutely and  plainly  forbid  divorce,  on  the
ground  of  law  and  nature.  The. words  in
Mark  x.  11  and  Luke  xvi.  18  are  given
without  any  limitation  whatever.  St.  Paul
draws  fmm  such  his  conclusion  of  the  indis-
solubility of  the  marriage  tie,  as  may  bo
seen  in  1  Cor.  vii.  10, 11, 39  ;  Bom.  vii.  2,  8.
There  could  never  have  been  a  doubt  about
this  subject  had  it  not  been  for  the  difficulty
in  interpreting  the  parenthetical  clause.  (3)
Are  we,  then,  to  su  ppoge  that  Christ,  by  those
words,  modifies  his  general  statement,  and
allows  absolute  divorce  in  the  cbjk  of  a  wife's
misconduct?  Such  is  the  view  taken  by
many  theologians,  and  practically  endorsed
by  the  civil  ^w  of  many  countries.  Neither
the  Eoman  nor  the  Anglican  Churches  sup-
port this  laxity.  Ecclesiastical  and  civil
laws  are  here  antagonistic.  It  is  said  that
Christ  allows  tlie  wronged  party  to  marry
again.  If  so,  if  the  oneness  of  the  parties
is  wholly  destroyed  by  the  sin  of  the  woman,
why  is  it  not  permitted  to  a  man  to  marry
a  divorced  woman?  This  cannot  be  called
adultery  unless  she  is  still  one  flesh  with
her  husband,  although  separated.  We  must
argue  from  this  that  divorce  in  such  a  case
does  not  destroy  the  vinculwm  matrimonii,
the  marriage  bond,  and  if  not  under  this
circumstance,  surely  under  no  other ;  ^  for
any  other  ground  must  be  always  less  serious
than  adultery.  If  the  clause  in  question
enunciated  an  exception  to  the  absolute
rule  elsewhere  given,  Christ  would  seem  to
■tultify  himself,  to  give  two  opposite  deci-
sions, and  to  introduce  uncertainty  in  a
most  important  verdict.  The  principle  on
wUob  he  based  his  dictum  would  be  over-
thrown, and  his  hearers  might  have  accused
him  of  inconsistency.  The  solution  offered
for  this  difficulty  is  this — that  Olirist  is  con-
templating merely  what  we  call  judicial
(eparation;    he  considers  that   no   trivial


cause  justifies  this,  in  fact,  notljing  but
fornication,  and  that  this  modified  divorce
does  not  free  the  man  so  that  he  may  marry
again ;  he  is  bound  by  the  Law  as  long  as
his  wife  lives.  Our  Lord  seems  to  have
introduced  the  exceptional  clause  in  order
to  answer  what  were  virtually  two  questions
of  the  Pharisees,  viz.  whether  it  was  lawful
to  "  put  away  a  wife  for  every  cause,"  and
whether,  when  a  man  had  legally  divorced
his  wife,  he  might  marry  again.  To  the
former  Christ  replies  that  separation  was
allowable  only  in  the  case  of  fornication;
in  response  to  the  second,  he  rules  that
even  in  that  case  remarriage  was  wholly
barred.  And  whosoever  marrieth  her  which
is  put  away  (diroKeKviJ.fvr)v,  without  the
article) ;  her,  when  she  is  put  away  (Revised
Version);  or,o  divorced  woman.  The  clause
is  wholly  omitted  by  N  and  some  other
manuscripts,  and  some  modern  editors,  as
Westcott  and  Hort.  But  it  has  very  high
authority  in  its  favour.  Alford  renders,
"  her,  when  divorced,"  and  restricts  the  ap-
plication to  a  woman  unlawfully  divorced,
not  extending  it  to  one  separated  forporneia.
But  the  language  is  too  indefinite  to  admit
of  this  interpretation  as  certain  (see  Luke
xvi.  18,  and  the  note  on  ch.  v.  32,  where
the  popular  view  is  expressed).  The  clause,
pondered  without  regard  to  foregone  con-
clusions, surely  contains  an  argument  for  the
indissolubility  of  the  marriage  tie,  as  we
have  said  above.  Marriage  with  a  divorced
wife  can  be  rightly  termed  adultery  only  in
consideration  of  the  continuance  of  the  vin-
culum. Doth  commit  adultery.  The  bind-
ing nature  of  marriage  does  not  depend  on
the  will  or  the  acts  of  the  persons,  but  on
its  primal  character  and  institution.  By
the  repeal  of  the  Mosaic  relaxatidu  and  the
restoration  of  marriage  to  its  original  prin-
ciple, Christ  not  only  enforces  the  high
dignity  of  this  ordinance,  but  obviates  many
opportunities  of  wickedness,  such,  for
instance,  as  collusion  between  husband  and
wife  with  a  view  to  obtain  freedom  for  mar-
riage with  others.

Yer.  10. — His  disciples  say  unto  Mm.
Our  Lord  appears  to  have  repeated  privately
to  the  disciples  what  he  had  said  publicly
to  the  Pharisees.  If  the  case  {n  airla)  of
the  man  be  so  with  his  wife.  Some  com-
mentators take  airla  to  signify  guilt:  "if
such  guilt  appertains  to  the  married  state."
But  the  meaning  is  plain  enough  anyway,
and  the  word,  as  here  used,  corresponds  to
the  Latin  eausa,  and  the  Hebrew  dibrah,
which  may  denote  "case,"  "condition,"  etc
"The  disciples  reflect  the  feeling  of  their  day.
Marriage  without  any  possibility  of  essential
release  (for  they  see  that  this  is  Christ's
law)  f  eoms  to  them  a  severe  and  unbearable
connection.    It  were  better  never  to  marry


246


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING-  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1— 30.


at  all  than  to  fetter  one's  self  with  such  an
inexorable  obligation.  Such  a  doctrine  was
entirely  novel  in  that  age,  and  most  un-
palatable ;  and  even  the  apostles  receive  it
with  wonder  and  hesitation.  They  have
not  yet  learned  that  in  Messiah's  kingdom
grace  conquers  natural  inclination,  and
strengthens  the  weak  will  so  that  it  rises
Buperior  to  onstom,  prejudice,  and  the
promptings  of  the  flesh.

Ver.  11. — Our  Lord  makes  a  gentle  reply
to  this  observation  of  the  disciples  concern-
ing the  inexpediency  of  marriage  under
■ome  circumstances.  Tou  say  true,  he
seems  to  mean,  but  all  men  cannot  receive
this  saying ;  i.e.  their  words,  "  It  is  not  good
to  marry."  But  he  endorses  these  words  in
a  different  signification  from  theirs.  Tiieir
objection  to  marry  arose  from  the  impos-
gibility  of  putting  away  a  wile  for  any  cause.
Christ  passes  over  these  ignoble  scruples,
and  enunciates  the  only  principle  which
should  lead  a  man  to  abstain  from  marriage.
They  to  whom  it  is  given.  They  to  whom
are  given  the  call  and  the  grace  to  abstain
from  marriage.  These  persons'  practice
forms  an  exception  to  the  general  view  of
the  propriety  and  blessedness  of  the  mar-
riage state.

Ver.  12. — Our  Lord  proceeds  to  note  three
classes  of  men  to  whom  it  is  given  to  abstain
from  marriage.  There  are  some  eunuchs,
which  were  so  born.  The  first  class  consists
of  those  who  are  physically  unable  to  con-
tract matrimony,  or,  having  the  power,  lack
the  inclinntion.  They  are  compulsorily  con-
tinent, and  are  not  voluntary  abstainers.
Neither  is  the  second  class :  those  which
were  made  eunuchs  of  men.  Such  were
common  enongh  in  the  harems  and  cnurts
of  Orientals.  The  cruel  and  infamous  treat-
ment which  such  persons  underwent  was
practised  against  their  will,  and  conse-
quently their  continence  had  no  sort  of
merit.  The  third  is  the  only  class  which
of  choice  and  for  high  reasons  lived  a  celi-
bate life:  which  have  made  themselves
eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake.
This  is  not  to  be  understood  of  excision;
for  this  would  be  a  contravention  of  the
order  of  nature  and  the  good  work  of
creation.  Origen,  who  took  the  passage
literally,  and  with  his  own  hands  mutilated
himself,  was  justly  condemned  by  the  verdict
of  the  Church.  The  verb  is  to  be  under-
stood in  a  metaphorical  sense  of  the  morti-
fication of  the  natural  desires  and  impulses
at  the  cost  of  much  pain  and  trouble,  the
spirit  conquering  the  flesh  by  the  special
grace  of  God.  The  motive  of  such  self-
denial  is  high  and  pure.  It  is  practised
"  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake,"  that
is,  to  bo  free  from  distraction  and  the  cares
and  dangers  involved  in  a  married  life.  St.


Paul  carries  forward  the  Lord's  teaching
when  he  writes  (1  Cor,  vii.  32,  33),  "  He
that  is  unmarried  is  careful  for  the  tilings
of  the  Lord,  how  he  may  please  the  Lord ;
but  he  that  is  married  is  careful  for  the
things  of  the  world,  how  he  may  please  his
wife  "  (oomp.  Isa.  Ivi.  3, 4).  The  celibate  life,
deliberately  embraced  for  religion's  sake,  is
here  approved  by  Christ,  not  to  the  dis-
paragement of  matrimony,  but  as  a  counsel
which  some  are  enabled  to  follow  to  their
soul's  great  benefit.  It  may  be  added  that
the  counsel  applies  also  to  married  persons
who  sacrifice  conjugal  endearments  for  spiri-
tual reasons — ^"have  wives  as  though  they
had  none  "  (1  Cor. vii.  29).  Let  him  receive  it.
This  is  not  an  injunction,  but  apermissiont
it  is  no  universal  rule,  prescribed  to  all  or
to  the  many ;  it  is  a  special  grace  allowed
to  the  few,  and  by  few  attained.  "Each
man,"  says  St.  Paul,  "hath  his  own  gilt
from  God,  one  after  this  manner,  and
another  after  that "  (1  Cor.  vii.  7, 26).  Some
think  the  Essenes  are  here  referred  to;
but  it  is  not  likely  that  our  Lord  would
endorse  the  practices  of  a  sect  which  in
some  of  its  tenets  was  by  no  means  com-
mendable. Kather  he  is  laying  down  a
limitation  that,  while  self-saorilioe  and
self-dedication  to  God  are  acceptable  and
fraught  with  peculiar  blessings,  none  should
attempt  to  win  heaven  in  this  way,  unless
they  are  specially  prepared  for  such  a  life
by  the  grace  of  God  mastering  the  human
will  and  controlling  every  earthly  desire.
The  pre-eminent  value  set  on  celibacy  by
the  early  Church  was  learned  from  this
and  similar  passages ;  but  Christ  institutes
no  comparison  between  the  single  and
married  states;  and  it  would  have  been
wiser  to  imitate  his  reserve  in  estimating
the  spiritual  merits  of  the  two  conditions.

Vers.  13 — 15. — Benediction  of  little  chil-
dren.  (Mark  x.  13—16;  Luke  xviii.  15  -17.)

Ver.  13. — Christ,  having  laid  his  blessing
on  marriage,  now  blesses  its  fruit.  Then.
This  happened  directly  after  the  preceding
conversation.  Mothers  were  won  to  his  side
by  his  elevation  of  woman  to  her  true  posi-
tion, and  his  marked  tendmness  to  children.  ,
Little  children  (vmSla).  St.  Luke  calls  them
rck  i8pc'^7|, "  their  infauts."  These  were  babes
whom  the  mothers  carried  in  their  arms,
and  who  were  too  young  to  understand  the
meaning  and  importance  of  the  act  of  Ciirist
in  blessing  them.  It  was  a  custom  to  take
infants  to  the  synagogues,  that  they  might
receive  the  prayers  and  blessings  of  the
rabbis,  or  holy  men.  For  this  reason  they
were  brought  to  Christ  as  a  holy  and  revered
Teacher.  That  he  should  put  his  hands  on
them,  and  pray.  The  laying  on  of  hands
was  symbolical  of  blessing  (see  Gin.  xlviii.


OH.  XTK.  1— 30J    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  247


14 ;  Numb,  xxvii  23).  From  the  Jewish  it
passed  into  the  Christiaa  Church  (Acts  vi.
5),  and  oontinues  unto  this  day  to  be  used
on  Tarioua  solemn  occasions.  The  disoiples
rebuked  them.  More  definitely  in  St.  Mark,
"  rebuked  tliose  that  brought  them."  Why
they  did  so  is  not  quite  obTious.  Either
they  thought  that  it  was  beneath  Christ's
dignity,  and  a  waste  of  his  precious  time  to
attend  to  these  babes;  or,  being  still  of
imperfect  faith,  they  did  not  realize  that
any  spiritual  good  could  proceed  from  the
imposition  of  Christ's  hands  upon  uncou-
scious  and  irresponsive  infants.  They  had
seen  him  cure  bodily  diseases  with  a  touch,
and  they  would  have  welcomed  these  little
ones  if  they  had  been  brought  to  be  healed
of  some  obvious  maladies ;  what  they  could
not  understand  was  that  these  irrational
creatures,  not  possessed  of  faith,  could  be
the  recipients  of  Divine  blessing.  Christ,  by
word  and  action,  teaches  another  lesson.  St.
Mark  adds  that  Jesus  was  "mucti  dis-
pleased" at  the  disciples'  faithless  inter-
ference. St.  Luke  tells  us  that  he  "  called
them  [the  babes]  unto  him,"  making  his
followers  desist  from  tbeir  officious  remon-
strance, and  said  the  memorable  words
which  are  given  almost  without  variation
by  the  three  syuoptists.

Ver.  14.— Suffer  like]  little  children,  and
forbid  them  not,  to  come  nnto  me.  He
speaks  as  though  the  infants  were  ready  and
eager  to  come  to  him,  if  they  were  not
prevented.  He  thus  intimates  the  truth
that,  though  incompetent  to  understand  God's
blessing,  children  were  not  incompetent  to
receive  it.  There  was  no  natural  impedi-
ment to  bar  the  way.  Unconscious  infants,
under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  were  ad-
mitted to  the  privileges  of  the  Jewish  Church
by  the  rite  of  circumcision;  in  Christ's
kingdom  analogous  mercies  were  to  be  ex-
tended to  them.  From  tliis  passage  has
been  derived  a  cogent  argument  for  infant
baptism,  because  Christ  herein  showed,  not
only  that  tender  age  and  immaturity  of
reasin  put  no  obstacle  in  the  way  of  his
blessing,  but  that  children  were  the  standard
by  which  fitness  for  his  kingdom  was  to  be
tested.  For  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.
They  who  would  enter  Christ's  kingdom
must  be  pure,  simple,  obedient,  as  little
children  (comp.  oh.  xviii.  3).  That  is  why
he  says,  "  of  such,"  not  "  of  these,"  inti-
mating that  it  is  not  to  the  age,  but  to  the
disposition  and  character,  that  he  refers.
Some,  not  so  suitably,  confine  the  saying  to
such  as  are  dedicated  to  God  in  baptism.  It
is  well  said  that  what  children  now  are  is
God's  work ;  what  they  shall  be  hereafter  is
their  own.

Ver.  15. — He  laid  his  hands  on  them.  He
was  not  influenced  by  the  captious  objec-


tions of  the  disciples.  St.  Mark  tells  us
that  "he  took  them  up  in  liis  arms,  put
his  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them."
Thus  far  he  complied  with  the  wishes  of
the  parents  who  brought  the  babes  to  him.
But  we  do  not  read  that  he  prayei),  as  they
had  asked.  Doubtless  there  was  meaning
in  this  omission.  In  conferring  blessing  hu
was  acting  in  his  Divine  nature,  and  had  no
need  of  prayer.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  prayed
for  the  sake  of  bystanders  (see  John  xi.  42  ;
xii.  30);  here  he  prays  not,  that  he  may
teach  a  lesson  of  his  Divinity.  Departed
thence.  Set  out  from  Persaa,  journeying
towards  Jerusalem.

Vers.  16—22. — An$wer  to  (he  inquiry  of
the  rich  young  ruler  concerning  eternal  life.
(Mark  x.  17—22 ;  Luke  xviii.  18—23.)

Ver.  16. — And,  behold.  The  exclamation,
as  usual,  denotes  the  suddenneus  and  unex-
pected nature  of  the  occurrence.  It  took
place  probably  on  the  next  day  after  the
blessing  of  the  children.  One  came  (cTs
irpoiTf\9<iy).  This  is  more  emphatic  than
the  enclitic  rts,  and  we  learn  from  St.  Luke
that  he  was  "a  ruler,"  «.».  of  the  synagogue,
and  he  must  have  been  of  noted  piety  and
worth  to  have  arrived  at  this  dignity  while
still  a  youth  (ver.  22).  St.  Mark  gives
moredetails  — he  "came  running,  and  kneeled
to  him."  He  was  eager  for  an  answer  to
bis  question,  and  recognized  in  Jesus  o
Babbi  worthy  of  all  honour  and  veneration,
though  he  saw  in  him  nothing  mure.  He
comes  with  no  sinister  intention,  as  the
Pharisees  did,  but  in  all  good  faith,  hoping
to  have  a  religious  difficulty  solved.  Qood
Uaster.  Thus  the  received  text  in  the  three
syuoptists.  The  epithet  "  good  "  is  omitted
by  muny  excellent  manuscripts,  and  has
been  expunged  by  most  modern  editors.  It
is  required  if  the  received  text  of  the  next
verse  is  retained.  It  occurs  in  Mark  and
Luke  without  variation.  The  young  man
may  have  used  the  expression  with  the  view
of  winning  Christ's  favour,  or,  at  any  raje,
with  the  idea  of  showing  the  light  in  whicli
he  regarded  him.  What  good  thing  shall  I
do,  that  I  may  have  eternal  life  ?  His  notion
was  that  eternal  happiness  was  obtained  by
the  performance  of  certain  acts,  and  he  is
not  sure  that  he  has  done  enough  for  the
reward,  and  wishes  to  know  particularly
what  lurther  good  work  will  secure  it.  The
other  syuoptists  have  merely,  "  What  shall
I  do?"  but  of  course,  "good  work"  is
implied,  if  not  expressed.  This  was  a  ques-
tion much  mooted  in  the  rabbinical  schools,
and  one  to  which  the  answers  were  as  various
as  they  were  puerile.  Some  taught  that  the
commandments  were  not  equally  important,
and  that  what  they  deemed  the  lesfier  might


248


Tfifi  GOSPEL  ACCORMNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1^0.


bo  violated  with  impunity,  if  the  othen  were
observed.  Some  made  the  gift  of  perfection
to  depend  on  the  daily  recitation  of  certain
prayers  or  psalms,  others  on  giving  due
honour  to  the  aged.  Amid  such  perplexing
rules,  the  youth  desires  an  authoritative
decision,  which  he  may  put  in  practice,  and
thus  be  sure  of  a  happy  place  in  Messiah's
kingdom — be,  as  the  Jews  termed  it,  "•  son
of  the  age  to  come."

Ver.  17. — Why  eallest  thou  me  goodi
Such  is  the  reading  of  the  received  text
here,  and  without  any  variation  in  the
parallel  passages  of  Mark  and  Luke.  Our
Lord  takes  the  ruler  to  task  for  applying
this  epithet  to  him,  unless  the  youth  believed
in  his  Divinity.  You  think  of  me  only  as  a
learned  Teacher:  how,  then,  can  you  speak  of
me  in  a  term  which  can  really  be  predicated
of  no  child  of  man?  Christ  answers  the
ruler's  address  before  he  touches  the  subject
of  his  interrogation,  reproving  him  for  using
a  form  of  words  without  realizing  its  full
import.  This  is  all  plain  enough ;  but  many
good  manuscripts,  including  K,  B,  D,  etc.,
Vulgate,  and  other  versious,  read.  Why  askest
thou  me  concerning  the  good  f  Most  modern
editors  and  the  Eevised  Version  have  adopted
this  reading,  which  they  hold  to  be  genuine,
and  to  have  been  altered  subsequently  in
order  to  conform  it  to  the  other  synoptists.
If  this  is  so,  it  is  difficult  to  see  whence
Mark  and  Luke  obtained  their  woriling,
unless — which  is  improbable— our  Lord  used
both  interrogations  on  the  same  occasion.
The  revised  reading  expresses  Christ's
astonishment  at  having  this  question  asked ;
and  it  may  be  taken,  as  Bengel  suggests,
"  He  wlio  is  good  ought  to  be  interrogated
about  the  good ; "  or,  "  What  is  right  to  do,
you  ouglit  to  know ;  it  can  only  be  obedience
to  the  Author  of  all  goodness."  There  is
none  good  but  one,  that  is,  Ood.  Here
again  the  reading  varies.  The  other  synop-
tists agree  with  the  received  text  of  M  atthew,
except  that  Luke  has  ets  @shs  instead  of  eU
6  ®i6s.  Late  editors,  following  K,  B,  D,
etc.,  have  printed,  eft  iarXv  <S  iLyad6s:  one
there  it  who  ie  good,  or  me  it  the  good.  God
alone  is  the  absolutely  good ;  he  alone  can
instruct  you  and  put  you  certainly  in  the
right  way.  Persons  have  been  found  to
argue  from  this  sentence  that  Christ  re-
oounces  all  claim  to  be  God  Almighty.
But  it  is  not  so.  He  replies  to  what  was
in  the  young  man's  mind.  The  ruler  re-
garded Jesus  as  man  only ;  Jesus  intimates
tiiat,  in  comparison  wilii  God,  no  man  is
good.  He  does  not  deny  the  upplicability
of  the  epithet  to  himself,  but  turns  the
questioner's  thoughts  to  the  Source  of  all
good.  He  will  not  have  himself  regarded
simply  as  a  pre-eminently  good  man,  but  as
Son  of  God,  one  with  the  Father.    If  thou


wilt  (fiixtis,  wiliest  to)  enter  into  life ;  i.e.
enjoy  eternal  life.  Christ  uses  a  term  equi-
valent to  that  of  the  ruler  in  ver.  16.  So
Christ  said  on  another  occasion  to  a  lawyer
who  tempted  him.  "This  do,  and  thou
Bhalt  live  "  (Luke  x.  28).  There  is  no  real
life  without  obedience.  Keep  the  command-
ments of  him  who  is  good.  The  Law  was
given  to  prepare  men  to  receive  Christianity,
and  in  prpportion  as  they  carefully  observed
it,  BO  were  they  mode  ready  to  inherit  the
life  which  Christ  gives.  No  mere  external
compliance  without  faith  is  here  approved,
but  it  is  laid  down  that,  in  order  to  win
eternal  life,  there  must  be  strict  observance
of  God's  laws — ^not  some  one  extraordinary
performance,  but  constant  attention  to
known  duties  from  the  highest  motive,
Faith,  indeed,  is  belief  in  action,  end  is
dead  and  profitless  if  inoperative;  so  that
true  obedience  is  the  outcome  of  true  faith.

Ver.  18. — Which  (ffofas)  ?  Christ's  answer
was  disappointiug  to  the  inquirer;  it  was
too  vague  and  general  to  saiisfy  liis  thought.
He  expected  to  hear  (as  the  rabbis  taught)
of  some  special  precept  or  precepts,  difficult
of  accomplishment,  and  not  usually  re-
garded, by  observance  of  which  he  could
obtain  his  great  reward.  So  he  asks  with
laudable  persistence, "  Of  what  sort  are  these
commandments  which  I  have  to  obey?"  He
is  far  from  tliinking  of  the  common  duties
of  the  Decalogue,  though  doubtless  he  had
been  taught  that  these  varied  greatly  in
meritoriousness.  Christ,  in  reply,  notifies,  as
examples,  the  chief  enactments  of  what:  we
call  the  second  table  of  the  Decalogue,  quot-
ing the  sixth,  seventh,eighth, ninth, andfifth.
He  enunciates  nothing  uncommon,  nothing
new ;  and,  by  prefixing  the  definite  article
rb  to  the  enumeration,  he  makes  the  whole
a  substantial  unity,  comprising  the  moiA
law  of  duty  to  one's  neighbour.  Perhaps
Christ  confines  his  list  to  the  second  table
in  order  to  make  the  man  feel  his  imperfec-
tion in  these  ordinary  matters,  or  to  bring
out  his  self-righteous  spirit.  There  could
be  no  doubt  that  infringement  of  the  first
table  involved  the  loss  of  eternal  life.  Ver.
17  virtually  includes  the  spirit  of  this  table.
It  was  round  these  last  six  conmiandments
chiefly  that  rabbinical  traditions  and  inter-
pretations had  gathered,  so  that  their  plain
meaning  was  obscured  or  depraved.  Who-
ever observed  the  second  table  in  spirit  uud
truth,  kept  also  the  first  (Bom.  xiii.  9,  10) ;
and  it  is  easier  to  love  one's  neighbour  than
to  love  God,  as  the  apostle  witnesses  (see
1  John  Iv.  20) ;  and  without  love  of  our
neighbour  there  cannot  be  true  love  of  God.

Ver.  19. — Honour,  eto.  Lange  oonsiders
that  in  this  verse  we  have  a  summary  of
the  two  tables,  "  Honour  thy  father  and
mother,"  summing  up  the  commandments


OH.  XIX.  1-- 30.]    THE   GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO   ST.   MATTHEW.


249


of  the  flret;  and  "Thou  slialt  love  thy
neighbonr  aa  thyself,"  those  of  the  Becoad
(Lev.  xix.  18).  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neigh-
bonr as  thyself,  St.  Mark  and  St.  Lake
omit  this  olanse;  the  latter  adds,  "De-
fraud not."  According  to  oar  text,  Christ
gives  four  negative  and  two  positive  com-
mands; the  last  being  a  summary  taken  from
Lev.  xix.  18  (oomp.  Bom.  xiti.  9,  10 ;  Gal.
T.  14).  It  has  been  questionied  why  our
Lord  omits  the  tenth  commandment  (aa  we
call  it)  from  the  oatalogne.  Yirtually  he
introduces  it  in  ver.  21;  but  he  may  have
refrained  from  formally  mentioning  it  be-
cause oovetoDaneas  was  the  ruler'a  besotting
sin,  and  the  marked  omission  of  this  precept
might  force  the  man  to  reflect  upon  this
failing,  vhich  would  wreck  his  spiritnal
life.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  that
Christ  is  not  intending  to  give  an  epitome
of  man's  duty ;  but  affording  merely  an  out-
line of  the  same,  he  naturally  passes  over
some  portion  without  special  mention.

Yer.  20. — ^All  these  things  have  I  kept
[from  my  youth  up].  The  bracketed  words
are  omitted  in  some  good  manuscripts,  and
by  most  modern  editors;  but  they  have
high  authority,  and  are  found  in  most
versions,  and  in  the  parallel  pasaiiges  of  Mark
and  Luke.  They  accurately  express  the
ruler's  view  of  his  conduct  ile  could  say
without  hesitation  or  mental  reservation
that  he  had  scrupulously  observed  the
duties  of  the  D.  ualogae  ftom  the  time  that
he  knew  right  from  wrong.  Of  course,  we
accuse  one  who  could  mstke  such  a  state-
ment of  self-righteousneas,  of  ignorance  of
the  spirit  of  the  Law  wliich  he  claimed  to
have  obeyed ;  and  if  one  of  ua  spoke  thus
presumptuously,  we  should  rightly  condemn
him;  we  should  say  that  outward  service
and  legal  notions  of  duty  were  of  little
worth,  and  could  not  secure  eternal  life.
But  our  Lord  treated  the  young  man
differently.  He  did  not  blame  him  as
boastful  and  self-deceiving ;  he  had  no
reproof  for  his  seemingly  presumptuous
assertion ;  he  recognized  his  simplicity,
honesty,  and  sincerity,  and  Bt.  Mark  tells
us  that  "  Jesus  beholding  [looking  upon,  or
into]  him,  loved  bim."  He  read  the  youth's
heart,  saw  how  pure  and  guileless  it  was,
recognized  in  him  the  possibility  of  great
things,  and  that  he  was  worthy  of  the
saintly  life.  The  ruler  felt  that  there  was
more  to  come ;  hence  he  asks,  What  lack  I
yetl  T/  ^Ti  irrepai  In  what  respect  am
I  still  deficient  ?  How  do  I  come  short  of
eternal  life  7  He  had  still  a  sense  of  want
All  that  he  had  done  had  not  given  him
peace  of  mind.  Hence  his  inquiry.  From
a  Christian  the  question  would  savour  of
ignorance  and  unspirituality ;  but  this  man
asked  it  in  all  sincerity,  desiring  earnestly


to  know  what  more  was  required  of  him,
and  being  ready,  as  he  thought,  to  undergo
any  pain,  make  any,  even  the  most  painful
effort,  if  by  so  doingJie  might  win  the  prize
on  which  his  soul  was  set

Yer.  21.— If  thou  wilt  (94\ets)  be  perfect
I  believe  what  you  tell  me.  You  have  led
a  religious  life  in  the  ordinary  way;  now
you  aspire  to  higher  things;  you  have  a
noble  ambition  to  serve  Grod  more  com-
pletely ;  you  have  the  power,  if  you  have
the  will,  to  do  so;  I  will  tell  you  how.  To
be  "perfect"  is  to  be  lacking  in  nothing
that  is  required  for  life  eternal.  It  is
spoken  of  Noah  and  Job ;  it  is  required  of
Christ's  disciples  (ch.  v.  48).  Christ  is
liere'  giving  a  counsel  of  perfection,  as  it  is
called,  not  of  obligation  on  all  men,  but
suited  to  the  idiosyncrasy  of  this  particular
inquirer,  and  of  others  who  are  capable  of
such  absolute  self-surrender  and  trustful-
ness. Qo  and  sell  that  thou  hast.  Go
back  to  thy  home,  and  sell  all  thy  sub-
stance, all  thy  possessions.  This  was  tl:e
counsel  which  Jesus  gnve,  denoting  the
stumbling-block  which  lay  in  the  way  of
the  ruler's  endeavours  alter  perfection.  He
was  voluntarily  to  deprive  himself  of  the
earthly  thing  to  which  he  fondly  clung,  his
wealth,  and  to  embrace  a  life  of  poverty
and  hardship.  Give  to  the  poor.  The
money  obtained  by  the  sale  of  his  possessions
he  was  to  distribute,  not  to  relations  and
friends,  who  might  make  some  return,  but  to
the  poor,  from  whom  he  could  expect  no  re-
compense. And  then  shalt  have  treasure  in
heaven  (ch.  v.  12 ;  vi.  20).  Thou  shalt  obtain
that  which  thou  desirost,  eternal  life.  Kot
that  stripping  one's  self  of  goods  and  giving
to  the  poor  does  necessarily  ensure  the  great
reward,  but,  in  this  youth's  case,  such  a
sacrifice,  such  a  victory  over  the  besetting
sin,  would  be  the  turning-point  in  his
character,  and  enable  him  to  conquer  all
lesser  temptations,  and  win  the  prize  of  his
high  calling.  Here  was  to  be  proved  love
of  man.  But  there  was  one  more  element
in  the  required  perfection,  viz.  love  of  God.
Come  and  follow  me.  St  Mark  adds,  "  take
up  the  cross."  If  he  would  have  apostolic
perfection,  he  must  embrace  the  apostolic
life.  He  must  give  up  wealth,  position,
earthly  ties,  earthly  occupations,  must  cast
in  his  lot  with  the  despised  Jesus,  suffer
with  him,  and,  if  necessary,  die  with  him.
The  twelve  apostles  had  accepted  Christ's
call  on  these  terms ;  from  him  was  demanded
the  same  sacrifice,  the  same  test  of  sincerity.
He  had  wished  to  be  exceptionally  good ;
exceptional  conduct  was  required  from  him
in  order  to  reach  this  high  standard.  The
condition  imposed,  severe  as  it  undoubtedly
was,  exactly  suited  the  case,  showed  the
weak  spot  in  the  ruler's  character,  and,  if


250  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30.


accepted  fully  and  heartily,  would  hiive
led  him  to  perfection.  Beading  these  words
of  our  Lord,  St.  Anthony  was  so  stricken  in
heart  and  conscience  that  he  oheyed  them
literally,  stripped  himself  of  everything  that
lie  had,  disthhuted  to  the  needy,  and  went
forth  poor  and  nalced,  trusting  to  God  to
provide  for  him.  Many  in  all  ages,  inspired
by  ardent  love  of  life  eternal,  have  done  the
same.  We  shall  do  well  to  recognize  that
there  arc  two  ways  of  serving  God  accept-
ably— there  is  the  good  life  required  from
all  religious  Christians,  and  there  is  the
life  of  [lerfcotion  to  which  some,  by  God's
-peoial  grace,  are  called,  and  which  they
embrace  and  fulfil.  It  was  the  latter  life
that  Obrist  put  before  this  young  manl

Ver.  22. — When  the  young  man  heard
that  saying,  Such  an  injunction  was
wholly  unexpected ;  it  completely  staggered
him ;  it  appealed  to  the  one  point  in  his
character  which  was  weak  and  imperfect.
He  would  have  endured  any  amount  of
legal  requirements  or  of  vexatious  and
paiuful  observances  ;  he  would  gladly  have
become  a  disciple  of  Christ;  but  the  previous
sacrifice  was  too  great ;  he  could  not  make
it;  not  that  he  was  specially  covetous  or
avaricious,  but  his  heart  was  set  on  his
riches ;  he  had  a  wealthy  man's  tastes  and
position  and  self-confidence,  and  he  cuuld
not  bring  himself  to  cast  away  these  even
at  Christ's  word.  Such  supreme  self-denial,
such  absolute  dcTotion,  he  would  not  em-
brace. So  he  went  away  sorrowful.  He
saw  the  right  road,  but  he  turned  away
from  it.  Without  any  further  word,  casting
aside  all  hope  of  the  saintly  life,  yet  grieved
and  dejected  at  the  thought  of  what  he
was  losing,  he  returned  to  his  home.  It
was  hard  to  disobey  the  wise  and  loving
Teacher  who  had  endeavoured  to  lead  him
to  the  noblest  aims  and  the  highest  ambi-
tion ;  but  it  was  harder  to  follow  his  severe
counsels.  The  evangelist  gives  the  reason
of  this  unhappy  decision.  For  he  had  great
possessions ;  ^y  yap  ex""'  KTiiixaTa  noKKi :
erat  etiim  habens  muUas  possessiones ;  he  teas
one  that  had  many  posaeisione,  or  had  and
continued  to  have,  implying  possession  and
retention  (comp.  Luke  v.  16,  "he  continued
in  retirement ").  This  fact  was  the  snare
that  trapped  him,  the  stumbling-block  over
which  he  fell.  The  possession  of  riches
proved  fatal  to  saintliness.  It  is  this  truth
that  our  Lord  emphasizes  in  the  following
discourse.  They  who  are  unconscious  of
having  been  tried  as  this  young  man  was
tried  may  condemn  him  as  worldly,  covetous,
and  insincere.  A  true  Christian,  who
knows  his  own  heart,  may  well  feel  that
lie  can  throw  no  stone  at  this  defaulter;  that
he,  any  more  than  the  Jew,  could  not  give
up  all  that  he  held  dear  for  Christ's  sake ;


that,  had  the  alternative  been  set  before
him  in  this  blunt,  palpable  fashion,  he  too
would  have  gone  away  sorrowful.

Vers.  23 — 30. — The  dangers  of  riehe$  and
theblessingsof  aelf-denial.  (Mark  z.  23 — 31;
Luke  iviii.  24—30.)

Ver.  23. — ^Then  said  Jesus.  He  derivee
an  important  lesson  from  the  sad  result  of
the  above  incident.  St  Luke  connects  it
with  what  had  just  preceded :  "  When
Jesus  saw  that  he  [the  ruler]  was  very
sorrowful,  he  said."  It  was  a  strange  and
most  emphatic  assertion,  quite  alien  from
general  opinion  and  sentiment.  A  rich  man
shall  hardly  ^Sv<rK6?ues,  with  difficulty)  enter
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Bemembering
that  Christ  had  just  invited  the  young  ruler
to  range  himself  on  his  side  and  become
his  disciple,  we  see  that  the  primary  mean-
ing of  the  term,  "  kingdom  of  heaven,"  hero
is  the  Christian  Cliurch,  the  society  which
Jesus  came  to  establish.  It  was  indeed
difScult  for  a  man  wealthy,  honoured,  digni-
fied, to  strip  himself  of  his  riches  and  rank,
and  openly  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  despised
JuBus  and  his  followers,  voluntarily  sur-
rendering all  that  hitherto  had  made  life
beautiful  and  worth  living.  It  is  difScnlt
for  a  rich  man  in  any  case  to  serve  God
acceptably,  as  Christ  shows  with  reiterated
emphasis.

Ver.  24. — Again  I  say  onto  yon.  The
disciples,  St.  Mark  notes,  "  were  astonished
at  his  words,"  so  he  proceeds  to  state  the
startling  proposition  more  unreservedly  and
energetically.  It  is  easier  for  a  camel,  etc.
This  is  a  proverbial  expression  for  an  impos-
sibility. A  similar  proverb  is  found  in  many
countries,  only  substituting  another  great
animal  instead  of  the  camel,  e.g.  the  elephant.
From  taking  a  too  literal  view  of  the  passage,
some  commentators  have  invented  a  gate  at
Jerusalem,  low  and  narrow,  designed  only
for  tbot-passengers,  which  was  called  "  the
needle's  eye."  Others  have  remedied  the
supposed  absurdity  by  reading  xiiiiKos  (if,
indeed,  there  is  such  a  word)  "rope,"  for
KaiiTfiKo^f  as  if  we  were  to  say  cable  instead
of  eamel.  But  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the
expression.  Such  hyperboles  and  paradoxes
are  common  in  all  languages  (comp.  ch.
xxiii.  24).  The  impossibility,  indeed  (as
ver.  26  shows),  is  relative,  but  the  warning
is  none  the  less  real  and  terrible.  The  Lord
says  that  the  possession  of  riches  prevents
the  owner  from  following  him,  and  endangers
his  eternal  salvation ;  for  that'  is  what  it
comes  to.  In  St.  Mark  (whether  the  words
are  genuine  or  not  is  uncertain)  we  find  a
limitation  introduced :  "  How  hard  it  is  for
them  that  trust  in  richesl"  Now,  this  is  ths
effect  of  riches ;  men  learn  to  trust  in  them,
to  deem  that  their  earthly  state  is  secure,


CH.  XIX.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


261


that  change  and  chance  will  not  affect  them,
that  tliey  are,  bo  to  speak,  independent  of
Providence;  tliey  love  the  world  which  is
80  good  to  them  and  so  pleasant  in  their
eyes,  and  they  bare  no  earnest  longing  for
a  better  home.  Such  is  the  natural  conse-
quence of  the  possessiou  of  wealth,  and  that
which  makes  the  impossibility  of  entrance
into  the  kingdom.

Yer.  25. — Exceedingly  amazed.  The  stem
teaching  of  vers.  23  and  24  thoroughly  dis-
mayed and  perhaps  offended  them.  Tem-
poral prosperity  had  in  their  Law  been  held
forth  as  the  reward  of  righteousness  and
obedience,  a  foretaste  of  future  happiness.
They  must  unlearn  this  principle.  Here,
as  they  understood  it,  was  a  doctrine  novel,
unheard  of,  unnatural  t  Fancy  the  astonish-
ment that  would  be  displayed  nowadays  if
such  a  sentiment  were  solemuly  propounded
in  the  Stock  Exchange,  the  bank,  the
market  1  The  apostles  could  not  minimize
its  impoi't,  or  say  that  it  might  suit  other
days  and*  other  states  of  society,  but  was
inapplicable  to  their  age  and  nation.  We
can  do  this  in  the  case  of  many  seemingly
stringent  requirements  of  tlie  gospel ;  but
they  accepted  tlie  announcement  in  its  full
and  simple  meaning,  and  asked  in  sorrowful
wonder,  Who  then  can  be  saved  1  If  the
way  to  heaven  is  barred  to  the  rich  man,
how  shall  the  poor  pass  therein?  The
difBculty  seemed  to  apply  to  everybody.
All  who  are  not  rich  are  hoping  and
struggling  to  become  rich,  and  therefore
fall  under  the  same  category.  If  the
apostlea  thought  not  of  themselves  in  this
question,  they  were  grieved  at  the  reflection
that,  under  the  circumstances,  the  njajoiity
of  mankind  were  recklessly  endangering
their  eternal  salvation.  With  .their  views
of  a  temporal  kingdom,  the  apostles  probably
were  thinking  of  their  own  prospects.

Yer.  26. — But  Jesus  beheld  them  {lfi.fiKeif/as,
looking  upon  them).  He  turned  on  his  dis-
ciples a  look  full  of  earnestness,  sympathy,
and  love,  soothing  their  fears  and  claiming
their  full  attention  for  a  spiritual  truth.
With  men  {irapa.  avepdnrou)  this  is  impossible.
Men  in  their  own  strength,  relying  on  their
own  natural  powers,  cann«t  save  their  souls
or  rise  superior  to  the  snare  of  riches.  From
the  entanglements  occasioned  by  wealth,
and  the  lowering  effects  of  its  pursuit  and
enjoyment,  the  natural  man  is  wholly  unable
to  extricate  himself.  With  &od  all  things
are  possible.  Here  is  the  only  solution  of
tlie  difficulty.  With  the  grace  of  God,  and
embracing  the  calls  of  his  providence,  the
rich  man  may  be  delivered  from  his  dangers,
may  keep  a  heart  unspotted,  may  use  his
wealth  to  God's  glory  and  his  own  eternal
good.  So  the  impossibility  is  a  conditional
one,  to  be  uveroome  by  due  recourse  to  the


help  of  God  and  the  strong  hope  of  the
future  life.  How  a  rich  man  may  be  dis-
ciplined and  elevated  we  see  in  the  case  of
ZacchsBUB  (Luke  xix.  8).  Many  such
instances  have  occurred  in  our  own  days,  as
in  all  Cliristian  times.

Yer.  27. — Then  answered  Peter.  This
was  not  so  much  a  reply  to  any  direct  word
of  Jesus,  as  to  the  general  purport  of  his
late  utterances.  He  had  intimated  that
self-renunciation  was  the  passport  to  eternal
life;  that  a  just  reward  awaited  those  who
gave  up  all  for  Jesus'  sake.  This,  Peter
says,  is  exactly  what  the  apostles  had  done.
We  have  forsaken  all,  and  followed  thee.  It
was  not  much  that  they  had  I  eft,  but  it  was
all  they  had,  their  whole  means  of  subsist-
ence, old  habits,  old  associations,  to  which
the  poor  cling  as  tenaciously  as  the  wealthy.
All  this,  at  a  simple  word  of  Christ,  they  bad
relinquished  unreservedly,  without  regret
or  complaint.  They  had  reduced  them-
selves to  the  condition  which  Christ  had
enjoined.  What  shall  we  have  therefore)
The  question  showed  the  usual  ignorance
of  the  nature  of  the  kingdom  of  Messiah.
Peter  is  thinking  chiefly  of  temporal  advance-
ment and  promotion,  of  success  and  dignity
in  an  earthly  realm.  Even  after  their
Master's  crucifixion  and  resurrection  they
had  asked,  "  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time
restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel?"
(Acts  i.  6).  It  was  not  till  after  the  effusion
of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost  that  their
imperfect  view  was  corrected,  and  they
understood  what  Christ  meant  when  he
said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."
But  what  a  revulsion  of  feeling  must  have
taken  place  in  those  who  a  few  minutes
before  liiid  despairingly  thought  that  salva-
tion was  unattainable,  and  now  asked  what
their  reward  would  be  for  the  sacrifices
which  they  had  made  t  The  older  commenta-
tors have  regarded  Peter's  inquiry  as  re-
ferring tu  eternal  life  after  death,  to  which
their  acts  had  given  them  a  claim.  But  it
must  be  remembered  that  the  Jews  had
very  vague  idens  about  the  beatified  state
in  the  otlier  woild,  which,  as  many  thought,
was  to  be  inaugurated  at  the  close  of  the
Messianic  era,  aud  whiuh  others  put  off
indelinitely  to  the  unknown  day  of  ju<lg-
ment.  It  was  never  generally  and  popularly
anything  more  than  an  uncertain  hope,  nnd
was  not  regarded  as  a  stimulant  to  life  and
action  on  earth.  While,  on  the  other  hand,
the  terrestrial  proceedings  of  the  Messiah
were  a  subject  of  the  keenest  expectation,
and  the  ground  of  national  aspirations.  It
is  not  probable  that  the  apostles'  notions
had  at  this  time  risen  superior  to  the  popular
view.  Peter's  question,  therefore,  was
doubtless  prompted  by  the  national  oon-
ception  of  Messiah's  reign.


252


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30.


Ver.  28. — Verily  1  say  unto  yon.  Christ
does  not  reprove  the  apostle  for  his  seem-
ingly bold  self-assertion,  but,  replying  to
I'eter's  question,  he  gives  a  prand  promise
t>>  him  and  his  fellow-disciples.  Ye  wMoh
have  followed  me,  ezclnding  all  the  half-
hearted, the  self-seeking,  the  Judaizers.  In
the  regeneration  (rp  iraKtyyenevitf).  The
word  means  "  new  birth,"  or  "  renovation,  re-
newal." It  occurs  in  Titus  iii.  15  in  reference
to  baptism, "  through  the  washing  [laver]  of
regeneration."  It  has  b(  en  variously  inter-
preted in  the  present  passage.  Some  have
connected  it  witli  the  participle  preceding,
"  ye  who  have  followed  me  in  the  regenera-
tion," and  explained  it  to  mean  the  reforma-
tion and  spiritual  renovation  commencing
with  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  and
rarried  on  by  the  ministry  of  Christ.  But
more  generally  and  correctly  it  is  taken  with
what  follows.  Ye  shall  sit,  etc.  The  mean-
ing, however,  is  still  disputed.  Some  say
tliut  the  Christian  dispensation  is  intended,
and  an  intimation  is  given  of  the  work  of  the
apostles  in  the  unseen  world  in  directing
•nnd  guariling  the  Church.  But  this  seems
hardly  to  satisfy  the  language  of  the  promise.
Others  regard  the  term  as  signifying  the
resurrection,  when  the  mortal  shall  put  on
immortality,  and  we  shall  be  changed,  re-
made, reconstituted.  This  is  true;  but  it
seems  more  suitable  to  refer  the  term  to  the
new  creation,  the  new  lieaven  and  the  new
earth  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  (Ixv.  17)  and  by
St.  John  (Bev.  xxi.  1,  2;  of.  2  Pet.  iii.  10,
13).  Tills  is  the  reparation  of  the  wliole
creation  described  by  St. ,  Paul  (Rom.  viii.
19,  etc.),  which  is  to  take  place  at  the  great
consummation,  and  which,  remedying  all
the  evils  which  sin  has  impressed  on  the
material  and  spiritual  world,  on  man  and
his  habitation,  may  well  he  called  new
birth.  'J'his  is  the  mysterious  period  when
Christ's  promise  shall  be  accomplished.
Shall  sit.  It  is  not  "  when  he  shall  come,"
but  when  he  shall  have  taken  his  seat  (^ir!,
with  genitive)  as  Judge  upon  his  glorious
throne.  Yealso(i5/i6<s  .  .  .  kbI  v/tcTs).  The
pronoun  is  repeated  to  give  greater  emphasis
to  the  amazing  assertion.  Shall  sit  upon
(Ka9((r6fffle  ^irl,  with  accusative);  shall  be  pro-
moted to,  taken  and  placed  upon.  Twelve
thrones.  Judas  forfeited  his  position ;
Matthias  and  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  after-
wards added  to  the  apostolic  band ;  so  that
the  number  twelve  must  not  be  pressed  us
delining  and  limiting.  Bather  it  expresses
the  completencBB  of  the  judicial  body,  re-
garding not  BO  much  the  persons  as  the
position  of  its  members.  With  reference  to
papal  claims,  it  may  be  observed  that  Peter
has  no  pre-eminence  here,  no  throne  to  him-
self; he  merely  shares  with  his  colleagues
in  the  sewion,     The  apostles  and  those  who


have  been  proved  to  be  of  like  mind  with
them  (for  the  number  is  not  limited)  shall
be  assessors  with  Christ,  as  in  an  earthly
court,  where  the  judge  or  the  prince  sits  in
the  centre,  and  on  either  side  of  him  are
posted  his  councillors  and  ministers.
Judging,  So  in  Daniel  we  bear  of  thrones
being  placed,  and  judgment  given  to  the
saints  (Dan.  vii.  9, 22) ; "  Know  ye  not,"  says
St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  vi.  2,  3),  "  that  the  saints
shall  judge  the  world  .  .  .  that  we  shall
judge  angels?"  (comp.  Bev.  xx.  4).  Of
course,  the  great  Judge  is  Clirist  himself.
What  part  bis  assessors  shall  take  is  not
revenled.  The  verb  "judge"  sometimes
signilies  "govern  or  direct,"  and  perhaps  may
be  here  used  to  denote  that  the  saints  shall,
in  the  new  Messianic  kingdom,  be  Christ's
vicegerents  and  exercise  his  authority.  The
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  There  is  con-
siderable difficulty  in  interpreting  this
portion  of  the  promise.  If  it  meaiis  that
the  beatified  apostles  shall  judge  the  actual
descendants  of  Abraham,  then  we  must
believe  that  the  distinction  between  Jew
and  Qentile  will  be  maintained  in  this  re-
generation— an  opinion  which  seems  to  be
opposed  to  other  texts  of  Scripture  (see
1  Cor.  xii.  13 ;  Gal.  iii.  28,  etc.).  The  judg-
ing in  this  case  would  be  condemnation  of
them  for  not  receiving  the  gospel.  One
does  not  see  how  this  can  be  held  forth  as  a
great  and  happy  reward,  however  high  a
position  it  may  imply.  More  probably
Israel  means  the  spiritual  Xsr.al,  or  i  he  whole
body  of  the  Church ;  and  the  number  twelve
(as  above)  imports  the  complete  number  of
those  who  are  to  be  judged.  They  who
have  followed  Ohristdevoledly  and  sincerely,
as  his  disciples,  shall  be  placed  next  to  him
in  his  glory,  shall  have  pre-eminence  over
all  others,  and  be  associated  with  him  in
assigning  their  due  portion  to  nil  believers,
or  in  governing  the  Church.  Nothing  is
here  said  about  the  tinul  judgment  of  un-
believers and  heathen.

Ver.  29. — Every  one  that  hath  forsaken.
The  Lord  extends  the  promise.  Even  those
who  have  not  risen  to  the  utter  self-sacrifice
of  apostles,  who  have  not  surrendered  so
much  as  they,  shall  have  their  reward,
though  nothing  to  be  compared  to  the
unspeakable  recompense  of  the  twelve.
Houses  .  .  ,  lands.  Some  manuscripts,  fol-
lowed by  some  modern  editors,  omit  or  wife,
the  omission  being  probably  first  made  by
some  critical  scribe,  who  deemed  that  a  wife
should  never  be  left.  The  Lord  enumerates
the  persons  and  objects  upon  which  men's
hearts  are  most  commonly  and  firmly  fixed.
He  begins  and  ends  the  list  with  material
possessions— houses  and  lands,  and  between
them  introduces  in  gradation  the  most
cherished  members  of  the   family  circle.


CH.  XIX.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


268


"FoTsaking  wife  and  children"  may  be
understood  as  abstaining  from  marriage  in
order  the  better  to  serve  God.  For  my
Name's  sake.  In  consequence  of  belief  in
Christ,  rather  than  do  despite  to  his  grace,
or  in  order  to  confess  and  foUovr  him  more
completely.  In  times  of  persecntion,  under
many  different  cases  of  pressure,  or  where
his  friends  were  heathens  or  infidels,  a  Chris-
tian might  feel  himself  constrained  to  re-
linquish the  dearest  ties,  to  cast  off  all  old
associations,  to  put  himself  wholly  in  God's
hands,  Irced  from  all  worldly  things ;  such
a  one  sliould  receive  ample  reward  in  the
presen  t  life.  An  hundredfold.  Some  read
"  mani  foL  I,"  as  in  Luke  xviii.  30.  The  spiri-
tual relationship  into  which  religion  would
introduce  him  largely  compensates  for  the
loss  of  earthly  connections.  He  shall  have
brothers  and  sisters  in  the  faith — hundreds
who  will  show  him  the  affection  of  fafher  and
mother,  hundreds  who  wilUovehimas  well  as
wife  and  chih  I  ren.  And  if  he  suffer  temporal
loss,  this  shall  bo  made  up  by  the  charity  of
the  Christiau  society,  all  whose  resources
are  at  his  command;  and  he  shall  enjoy
that  peace  and  comfort  of  heart  which  no
worldly  possessions  can  give,  and  which  are


superior  to  all  changes  of  fortune.  And  it
may  well  be  that  the  relief  bom  the  cares
and  distractions  caused  by  wealth  brings  a
hundredfold  more  real  happiness  than  its
possession  ever  supplied.  "Godliness  is
profitable  for  all  things,  having  tlie  promise
of  the  life  which  now  is,  and  of  that  which
is  to  come  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  Everlasting  Ufa.
The  hope  of  future  happiness  is  in  itself
sufficient  to  lighten  and  dissipate  all  earthly
troubles,  and  to  stimulate  severest  sacrifices.
Ver.  30. — Uany  that  iire  first!  This  pro-
verbial saying,  which  Clirist  ubbs  mure  than
once  (see  ch.  xx.  16;  Luke  xiii.  30),  is  illus-
trated by  the  parable  in  the  next  chapter,  and
would  be  better  placed  at  its  commencement.
Here  it  conveys  a  warning  that  mau's  esti-
mation is  liable  to  error,  and  it  must  not  be
thought  that  those  who  are  first  in  privilege
are  therefore  highest  in  God's  favour.  The
Lord  may  have  had  in  view  tbe  case  of
Juilas,  who  was  an  early  apostle,  and  had
the  care  of  the  bag,  and  fell  by  reason  nf
covetousness  ;  and  that  of  one  like  St.  Paul,
who  was  called  late,  and  yet  laboured  more
abundantly  than  all  that  were  before  him.
The  application  may  be  made  with  perfect
truth  to  many  professors  of  religion.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 12. — JTie  tanctity  of  marriage.    I.  Contebsation  with  thb  Phabisebb.

1.  Work  in  Perma.  The  Lord  had  now  finally  left  Galilee;  the  restless  hostility  of
the  Pharisees  had  driven  him  from  the  province  in  which  at  first  he  had  met  with
such  great  success,  and  which  was  regarded  as  his  own  country.  Judaaa,  too,  was  now
unsafe  for  him.  His  hour  was  almost  come;  he  would  work  while  it  was  day ;  but  he
would  not  expose  himself  to  unnecessary  danger  before  the  time  appointed.  Perasa
was  for  a  short  season  open  to  him ;  it  was  less  overspread  by  Pharisaic  influence  than
Galilee  or  Judsea.  He  would  work  there  while  he  might.  Multitudes  followed  him,
and  be  healed  them  there.  The  Lord  is  an  example  of  patience  and  perseverance ;  he
would  not  throw  up  his  work  in  weariness  and  disgust,  as  men  too  often  do  when  they
meet  with  failure  and  opposition.  He  neglected  no  opening  for  work,  no  opportunity
of  preaching  the  blessed  gospel.   Oh  that  we  might  imitate  him  in  this  as  in  all  things !

2.  The  question  of  the  Pharisees.  They  found  him, even  in  Peiasa ;  they  followed  him
everywhere  during  the  latter  part  of  his  ministry  with  their  ensnaring  questions  and
malicious  persecutions.  And  now  they  asked,  "Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put  away  his
wife  for  every  cause?"  It  was  common  to  consult  great  teachers  on  points  of  con-
troversy; but  this  question  was  not  asked  honestly;  they  were  tempting  him,  seeking
to  entangle  him  in  his  talk,  to  bring  him  into  collision  with  one  or  other  of  the  two
great  schools,  or  with  Herod  Antipas  himself,  the  ruler  of  the  country  in  which  they
were.  The  famous  Hillel  had  taught  that  divorce  was  allowable  for  any  cause;
Shammai,  that  it  was  lawful  only  in  the  case  of  adnltery.  Herod  was  guilty  of
shameful  violations  of  the  law  of  marriage,  and  had  murdered  the  holy  Baptist,  who
rebuked  him  for  his  sin.  The  Lord  had  taught  the  strict  view  of  marriage  in  his
sermon  on  the  mount;  would  he  dare  to  maintain  the  same  doctrine  in  the  dominions
of  Herod?  The  Pharisees  seemed  to  ask  for  information;  they  had  malice  and  envy
in  their  hearts.  Controversy  is  full  of  danger  to  the  sou!  ;  those  who  are  called  to
engage  in  it  ought  to  look  most  carefully  into  their  own  consciences  to  see  that  their
motives  are  pure  and  good.  3.  The  Lord's  answer.  He  refers  them  to  the  Scriptures.
"Have  ye  not  read?"  he  says,  as  he  h^d  said  before.    He  points  to  the  study  of  tbo


254  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix,  1—30.

Scriptures  as  the  source  of  religious  knowledge.  "  Have  ye  not  read  ?  "  We  ought  to
he  always  reading,  always  learning  lessons  of  Divine  truth  from  the  holy  Word  of  God.
He  goes  back  to  the  original  principle  of  marriage.  "  He  which  made  them  at  the
beginning  made  them  male  and  female."  They  were  created  for  one  another.  "  They
twain  shall  be  one  flesh.  .  .  .  What  therefore  God  hath  joined  together,  let  not  man
put  asunder."  The  wedded  pair  are  one ;  the  Lord  does  not  say  "  those  which,"  but
"  that  which  God  hath  joined."  They  are  no  longer  two,  but  one  flesh,  one  unity.
Mail  may  not  daie  to  part  that  which  God  by  matrimony  hath  made  one.  So  true  is
the  old  saying  that  marriages  are  made  in  heaven.  Marriage  is  an  honourable  estate,
instituted  by  God  in  the  time  of  man's  innocency ;  declared  by  God  himself,  speaking
through  Adam  of  thing.s  which  Adam  could  know  only  through  Divine  inspiration,  to
be  more  sacred  and  binding  even  than  the  love  of  parent  and  child,  the  holiest  surely
and  deepest  of  all  other  forms  of  human  love;  ennobled  in  the  New  Testament  by  a
\et  holier  consecration,  so  that  it  becomes  the  symbol,  the  representation,  of  the
mystical  union  that  is  between  Christ  and  his  Church.  Marriage  is  a  very  holy  thing,
not  to  be  taken  in  hand  lightly  and  wantonly;  not  to  be  dissolved  for  any  cause,
according  to  the  views  of  these  Pharisees  of  Hillel's  school,  but  to  be  undertaken
reverently  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  as  a  bond  which  is  to  unite  husband  and  wife  in  holy
love  unto  their  lives'  end.  4.  The  Mosaic  rule.  The  Pharisees  were  not  convinced ;
they  quoted  Deuteronomy  against  our  Lord.  Why  did  Moses,  they  said,  command  to
give  a  bill  of  divorcement  ?  The  Lord  first  corrected  their  quotation.  Moses  did  not
command ;  he  permitted.  So  eager  controversialists  misquote  Scripture  and  bend  it  to
their  own  purpose.  Let  us  be  careful  to  deal  always  truthfully  and  sincerely  with  the
Word  of  God.  It  was  true  that  Moses  permitted  divorce ;  but  it  had  not  been  bo  from
the  beginning;  it  was  permitted  by  the  Law  of  Moses  for  temporary  reasons,  because  of
the  hardness  of  the  people's  hearts.  The  Law  of  Moses  was  not  final ;  it  was  adapted  in
large  measure  to  the  circumstances  of  the  times — to  the  manners,  capacity,  spiritual
condition  of  the  Israelites.  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions ;  it  was  a  school-
master to  bring  us  to  Christ.  The  high  spiritual  requirements  of  the  gospel  would
not  have  been  suited  to  the  rude,  uncultured  natures  of  the  ancient  Israelites.  There
was  need  of  a  long  preparation,  a  preliminary  training.  Such  a  training  was  furnished
by  the  Law.  The  Law  was  very  high  above  contemporary  moral  teaching;  it  was
imperfect  in  comparison  with  the  gospel  which  was  to  come,  but  very  far  in  advance
of  the  moral  standard  prevalent  in  Gentile  countries.  The  permission  of  divorce  was
one  of  the  points  in  which  allowance  had  been  made  for  the  customs  of  the  time,  for
the  character  of  the  Israelites.  It  had  not  been  so  from  the  beginning;  it  was  not
intended  to  remain  so.  The  Lord  distinctly  forbids  divorce,  "except  it  be  for
fornication."    He  does  not  sanction  remarriage  even  in  that  case.

II.  The  disoiples.  1.  Their  itiference.  If  it  be  so,  if  divorce  is  allowable  only  on
that  one  ground,  then,  the  disciples  thought,  it  is  not  good  to  marry — the  risk  would
be  too  great,  the  prospect  of  happiness  too  uncertain ;  better  to  remain  unmarried  than
to  enter  upon  a  union  which  could  not  be  dissolved.  They  spoke  from  th"e  Jewish  point
of  view,  in  accordance  with  their  old  associations  and  habits  of  thought.  Their
objection  seems  to  us  very  strange.  The  fact  of  their  making  it  shows  the  immense
change  which  Christianity  has  produced  in  the  estimate  of  marriage.  2.  The  Lord's
answer.  "  Not  all  can  receive  this  saying."  Some  can  serve  God  best  in  the  married
state ;  some  in  a  single  life.  Some,  like  the  holy  apostle  St.  Paul,  have  chosen  to  live
unmarried  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven's  sake,  that  they  may  have  fewer  hindrances,
more  time,  more  opportunities  for  the  blessed  work  of  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ.
But  the  Lord  leaves  it  open  for  the  Christian  conscience  to  determine  in  each  man's
case  whether  the  married  or  the  single  life  will  serve  better  to  godliness.

Lessons.  1.  Marriage  is  indissoluble ;  enter  upon  it  discreetly,  with  serious  thought
and  earnest  prayer.  2.  Marriage  is  a  holy  thing ;  let  the  husband  love  his  wife  as
Christ  loved  his  spouse,  the  Church.  3.  The  Lord  raised  woman  to  her  proper  place ;
Christians  must  aim  at  a  high  standard  of  purity.  4.  The  Lord  laid  the  foundation
of  the  sanctity  of  Christian  homes  and  Christian  family  relations ;  let  us  cherish  his
high  and  holy  teaching.

Vers,  13 — 16. — The  litllt  children,    L  Thbt  wbbk  bbouqht  to  Chbist.    1.  Tht


on.  MX.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  255

reason.  It  seems  to  have  been  customary  to  bring  young  children  into  the  synagogues
to  be  blessed  by  the  elders.  The  Lord  was  regarded  with  reverence  as  a  great  Rabbi
now  in  Persea,  as  he  once  had  been  in  Galilee.  Wives  and  mothers  were  naturally
drawn  to  him  by  the  high  view  of  marriage  which  he  taught.  The  frequency  of
divorce  destroyed  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage  bond,  degraded  woman,  interfered
grievously  with  the  true  ideal  of  home  and  family  life.  It  was  Christianity,  or  rather
it  was  the  Lord  himself,  who  raised  woman  to  her  proper  dignity,  who  surrounded
wedded  life  with  an  atmosphere  of  purity  and  mutual  trustfulness,  who  gave  unto
men  all  the  blessed  charities,  all  the  pure  and  holy  joys,  all  that  happy  discipline  of
self-denial  for  the  sake  of  wife,  or  husband,  or  children,  which  consecrate  ChristiaL
family  life,  and  make  the  family  on  earth  a  place  of  training  and  preparation"  for  the
family  in  heaven  (Eph.  iii.  15).  The  Lord's  teaching  touched  the  liearts  of  these
Hebrew  matrons ;  they  brought  their  little  ones  to  him ;  they  wished  him  to  lay  his
hands  upon  them,  in  token  that  his  blessing  should  rest  upon  their  lives ;  they  wished
him  to  pray  for  them ;  they  were  sure  that  his  prayer  was  holy  and  effectual.  These
children  were  infants,  at  least  some  of  them  (fipi(p-n,  Luke  xviii.  15).  The  mothers
doubted  not,  but  earnestly  believed  that  the  prayer,  the  blessing  of  Chiist,  would  be
profitable  to  those  unconscious  infants.  So  we  should  bring  our  little  ones  to  Christ
in  holy  baptism,  in  Christian  education.  Christian  mothers  can  do  much — much
that  no  one  else  can  do  so  well,  for  the  spiritual  good  of  their  children.  The  simple
teaching  of  a  believing  mother,  the  simple  prayers  learned  from  a  mother's  lips,  often
exert  a  hallowing  influence  over  a  whole  life ;  even  if  forgotten  for  a  time  among  the
toils  and  temptation*  of  the  world,  they  often  return  to  the  memory  in  later  years.
Those  holy  memories  are  by  God's  grace  a  powerful  help  in  restoring  that  childlike
spirit  which  is  so  precious  in  the  sight  of  Christ.  2.  The  rebuke  of  the  disciples.  The
conduct  of  the  disciples  seems  strange.  They  had  soon  forgotten  the  incidents  of  their
last  visit  to  Capernaum  (ch.  xviii.  1 — 14).  Then  the  Lord  had  himself  taken  a  little
child,  and,  bringing  him  into  the  midst,  had  made  him  the  subject  of  his  discourse,
and  had  proposed  the  childlike  character  as  the  model  for  their  imitation.  One  who
so  loved  the  little  ones,  who  regarded  them  with  such  affectionate  interest,  who  saw  in
childhood  so  many  beauties,  so  much  that  was  precious,  would  not  be  likely  to  repel
the  children  now.  But  the  disciples  thought,  perhaps,  that  they  were  mere  infants,
unconscious,  incapable  of  learning  anything  from  Christ.  They  did  not  suppose  that
his  touch,  his  prayer,  could  benefit  babes  who  could  not  pray  for  themselves.  They
thought  that  his  time  should  be  given  to  older  people,  who  might  gain  more  from  his
instructions.  Their  Master  was  very  great  and  holy;  his  lessons  were  very  sacred  and
precious.  It  was  not  right,  they  thought,  to  waste  the  time  that  was  so  valuable  by
claiming  his  attentions  for  these  helpless  infants.  Such  things  seemed  beneath  his
dignity,  unworthy  of  his  regard.  And  they  rebuked  those  who  had  brought  the
children.

II.  The  Lord's  ebobption  of  the  little  ones.  1,  Eis  reproof  of  the  diteiples.
"  He  was  much  displeased,"  St.  Mark  tells  us  ;  he  blamed  those  who  would  have  kept  the
little  ones  from  him.  The  apostles  were  displeased  with  the  mothers  who  brought  the
little  ones  to  Christ;  the  Lord  was  displeased  with  the  apostles  themselves.  It  was  a
true  spiritual  instinct  that  prompted  these  Hebrew  mothers;  they  were  right,  the
apostles  were  wrong.  The  apostles  had  yet  to  learn  those  deep  lessons  of  true  Christian
lowliness  and  true  Christian  sympathy  with  the  young  and  simple  and  ignorant  which
only  Christ  can  teach.  Sometimes  the  ignorant  feel  instinctively  what  is  right  when
the  more  instructed  are  led  astray  by  prejudices  or  pride.  Sometimes,  it  may  be,  the
Lord  is  much  displeased  with  us  when  we  think  that  we  are  acting  for  his  honour.
Let  us  watch  carefully  over  our  motives,  remembering  always  that  his  eye  is  ever  on
us,  and  that  no  secrets  of  the  heart  are  hidden  from  him.  2.  His  words.  "  Suffer  little
children."  The  Lord  had  used  the  same  words  when  he  came  unto  John  to  be  baptized
of  him,  "  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now."  As  John  then  obeyed  the  voice  of  Christ,  and
"  suffered  him ; "  so  Christ  bids  his  disciples  to  "  suffer  little  children,  and  forbid  them
not,  to  come  unto  me."  Christians  must  not  keep  them  back,  they  must  not  rebuke
those  who  bring  them ;  for  the  little  ones  are  very  dear  to  Christ ;  he  cares  for  them  all ;
the  Father  cares  for  them :  "  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  that
one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish."    We  must  brin^  them  to  Christ  in  theii


256  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30.

infancy,  dedicating  them  to  him  in  holy  baptism,  asking  him  to  embrace  them  vrith
the  arms  of  hii  mercy,  to  put  his  hands  upon  them  and  bless  them.  We  must  bring
them  to  him  in  prayer,  praying  for  them  ourselves,  as  the  poor  father  prayed  for  the
lunatic  boy,  teaching  them  to  lift  up  their  own  childlike  hearts  to  God  as  soon  as  their
lips  can  utter  the  words  of  prayer.  We  must  bring  them  to  Christ  by  the  training  of
a  Christian  home,  by  holy  example ;  carefully  avoiding  the  danger  of  laying  a  stumbling-
block  in  the  way  of  the  little  ones  by  any  word  or  deed  of  ours.  The  responsibilities
under  which  we  lie  towards  the  children  of  our  families  should  be  a  strong  additional
motive  for  the  cultivation  of  holiness.  We  must  bring  them  to  Christ  by  a  Ohristiau
education,  giving  them  that  inestimable  privilege  which  Timothy  had  received  from
his  grandmother  Loii  and  his  mother  Eunice — the  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Scriptures
from  childhood — ^from  infancy  (4iri  fipi^ovs,  2  Tim.  iii.  16).  The  Lord  is  pleased  with
those  who  thus  bring  the  little  ones  to  him ;  he  is  displeased  with  those  who  would
keep  them  from  him;  for,  he  saith,  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  kingdom
of  heaven  belongs  to  them,  as  it  belongs  to  the  poor  in  spirit,  and  to  those  who  arc<
persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs ;  they  are  by  the
gift  of  God  entitled  to  its  privileges.  Surely,  then,  they  will  be  received  into  the
kingdom  of  glory  if  they  are  taken  hence  in  the  comparative  innocence  of  childhood.
We  cannot  doubt  but  that  he  who  said,  "  Suffer  the  little  children,  and  forbid  them
not,  to  corns  unto  me,"  will  gather  the  lambs  into  his  bosom  in  the  kingdom  of  his
Father.  The  kingdom  is  theirs,  but  not  theirs  only.  "Of  tuch  is  the  kingdom  of
heaven."  The  childlike  in  heart  are  true  children  of  the  kingdom ;  they  receive  the
kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child ;  they  believe  with  the  simple  earnestness  of  children ;
they  are  poor  in  spirit,  like  the  little  ones;  they  are  truthful,  unaffected,  real.  Let  uh
seek  for  that  childlike  simplicity  and  transparency  of  heart ;  let  us  pray,  let  us  strive
after  it.  It  is  the  character  of  Christ's  chosen,  his  beloved.  "  He  laid  his  hands  on
them,  apd  departed  thence."  He  gave  the  desired  blessing :  "  He  took  them  up  in  his
arms,  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  and  blessed  them."  Happy  children  I  Happy  those
who  by  the  grace  of  Christ  and  the  cleansing,  quickening  power  of  his  Spirit,  retain,  or
recover,  th"  freshness,  the  simplicity,  the  comparative  purity,  of  childhood!

Lessons.  1.  Imitate  the  Persean  parents;  bring  the  little  ones  to  Christ.  2.  Let
none  dare  to  despise  children ;  the  Lord  cares  for  them  and  loves  them.  3.  Teach
them  at  home,  in  Sunday  schools;  the  Lord  is  pleased  with  those  who  help  to  train
them  for  him.

Vers.  16 — 8G. — The  yowig  ruler.  L  HiB  intbbvibw  with  Chbibt.  1.  EU  question,
Christ  was  "gone  forth  into  the  way"  (Mark  i.  17);  he  was  leaving  Pereea;  his
ministry  there  was  ended.  But  there  was  a  young  man,  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue,
a  man  of  large  possessions  and  of  blameless  life,  who  came  running  and  kneeled  to  him.
Perhaps  he  had  already  felt  the  supreme  goodness  of  Christ,  the  holiness  of  his  teaching ;
but  his  position,  his  Jewish'  prejudices,  had  hitherto  prevented  him  from  becoming
a  disciple  of  the  Lord.  Now  the  Lord  was  departing ;  if  he  hesitated  longer,  he  would
be  too  late.  He  had  lived  an  upright,  honourable  life,  but  he  felt  that  there  was
something  lacking  yet;  there  was  s  void  in  his  heart,  a  yearning  which  he  could  not
satisfy.  Perhaps  this  great  Teacher  might  help  him.  There  was  no  time  to  lose ;  he
hastily  made  up  his  mind,  and  ran  after  Christ.  Thus  far  he  is  an  example  to  us.
Earthly  rank,  earthly  riches,  will  not  fill  the  heart ;  we  need  something  more — we  need
Christ.  We  may  be  late  in  seeking  him  ;  we  have  wasted  much  time  and  lost  many
opportunities.  The  Lord  is  long-suffering ;  he  is  still  near  at  hand  ;  but  it  may  soon
be  too  late.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found ;  call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is
near,"  Come  running,  kneeling  to  him  in  lowly  supplication ;  he  will  tarry  on  his
way ;  he  will  listen  to  the  suppliant's  prayer.  So  the  young  ruler  came  now.  "  Good
Master,"  he  said,  "  what  good  thing  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  have  eternal  life  ?  "  It
sounds  like  the  question  of  the  jailor  at  Philippi,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "
But  it  was  not  so  genuine,  so  natural,  so  heart-felt.  There  was  an  element  of  truth,
some  real  desire ;  but  there  was  something  of  ostentation,  of  self-confidence ;  little  of
that  childlike  spirit  which  the  Lord  had  so  highly  commended.  He  thought  too
much  of  his  past  uprightness.  He  thought,  apparently,  that  eternal  life  might  be
earned  by  some  great  and  noble  deed.    8.  The  Lor(fs  answer.    "  Why  askest  thou  me


CH.  m.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  257

conceming  that  which  is  good  ?  One  there  is  who  is  good  I"  God  only  is  good,  Lov«
him ;  do  his  holy  will ;  take  him  for  thy  Portion.  Eternal  life  is  his  gift ;  it  is  given
to  them  who  walk  with  God,  who  lire  in  and  for  God,  who  keep  his  commandments.
St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  have  the  words  which  some  ancient  authorities  read  in
St.  Matthew  also,  "Why  callest  thou  me  good?  there  is  none  good  but  One,  that  is,
God."  The  Lord  had  forbidden  the  apostles  to  tell  men  that  he  was  the  Christ,
because  the  Jews  looked  for  a  human  Messiah,  an  earthly  king.  In  the  same  spirit  he
would  not  accept  the  title  "Good"  from  this  ruler,  who  regarded  him  simply  as  a  wise
Teacher,  a  great  RabbL  He  bade  him  keep  the  commandments.  The  young  ruler
had  been  expecting  to  hear  something  lofty  and  extraordinary  from  so  great  a  Prophet ;
he  was  surprised  at  a  direction  so  simple  and  commonplace,  ai  be  doubtless  thought
it.  He  was  disappointed  again  when.in  answer  to  his  inquiry,the  Lord  simply  recited
five  commandments  of  the  Decalogue,  adding  that  general  principle  in  which  the  whole
second  table  is  briefly  comprehended,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."
The  Lord  had  indicated  the  first  and  great  commandment  of  the  Law  in  his  first
answer.  He  now  mentions  those  duties  towards  our  neighbour  which  flow  out  of  our
duty  towards  our  God.  He  would  lead  the  young  man  to  examine  himself,  to  discover
his  deficiencies,  to  see  for  himself  that  he  had  not  yet  entered  on  the  way  that  leadeth
to  eternal  life.  3.  The  young  ruler's  rejoinder.  He  had  done  all  this,  he  said ;  he
knew  it  all;  he  wanted  something  more  than  elementary  teaching.  "All  these  things
have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up :  what  lack  I  yet?"  He  spoke  the  truth  according  to
his  light.  He  had  been  brought  up  in  the  narrow  school  of  the  rabbis,  and,  according
to  the  mechanical  interpretations  of  the  scribes,  was,  like  Saul  the  Pharisee,  "  touching
the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  Law,  blameless."  He  had  lived  all  his  days  a  life  of
external  obediencej^  and  he  did  not  understand  the  spiritual  meaning  of  these  command-
ments as  taught  by  our  Lord  in  his  great  sermon  on  the  mount.  He  did  not  realize
the  wide  range,  the  deep  reach  of  that  second  commandment,  which  became,  when
illustrated  by  our  Lord's  example,  the  new  commandment,  the  mark  and  test  of
Christ's  disciples.  Be  had  kept  the  commandments  as  far  as  he  understood  them,  as
far  as  he  had  been  taught ;  but  he  was  conscious  of  a  deficiency.  He  felt  that  some-
thing, he  knew  not  what,  but  certainly  something  higher  than  this  external  obedience,
was  necessary  for  the  attainment  of  that  eternal  life  which  he  sought.  "  What  lack
I  yet?"  he  said.  It  was  a  fine  character  as  far  as  it  went ;  tmspotted  moral  rectitude
ioined  with  aspirations  for  something  better  and  nobler.  The  Lord  saw  the  promise  of
much  good.  "He  beheld  him,"  St.  Mark  says.  It  was  a  deep  searching  look  that  read
his  heart;  and  he  loved  him — ^he  regarded  him  with  something  of  that  esteem  which  any
degree  of  real  goodness  produces  in  the  good.  "  Goodness,"  Bishop  Butler  says,  "implies
the  love  of  itself,  an  affection  for  goodness.  The  really  good  recognize  any  spark  of
goodness  in  others,  and  cannot  fail  to  love  it."  This  special  drawing  forth  of  the  Lord's
love  was  a  great  honour  to  the  young  ruler  ;  it  showed  the  natural  excellence  of  his
character.  4.  The  Lord's  commandment  "  Go,  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the
poor."  It  is  not  a  counsel  of  perfection,  not  advice,  but  a  commandment.  This  self-
sacrifice  was  necessary  for  the  young  man — necessary  for  the  attainment  of  that  eternal
life  which  he  sought.  "  One  thing  thon  lackest,"  the  Lord  t^aid,  according  to  the
report  of  the  conversation  given  by  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke.  It  must  mean  that  when
the  Lord  read  the  young  man's  soul,  he  saw  much  that  was  lovable ;  but  he  also  saw
that  the  love  of  money,  which  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  was  poisoning  what  should  have
been  a  very  fine  and  noble  character.  It  was  necessary  for  him  to  make  this  great
venture  of  faith.  He  perilled  his  salvation  by  not  doing  so  at  the  time ;  be  may  have
done  it  afterwards.  The  Lord  had  a  high  reward  for  him — ^treasure  in  heaven  here-
after, and  in  this  life  a  place  near  to  himself:  "Come,  follow  me,"  he  said.  It  may
be  that  the  Lord  saw  in  that  young  ruler  the  making  of  an  apostle.  He  might  have
stood  high  in  the  roll  of  saints ;  perhaps  afterwards  he  did.  Can  he  have  been  lost
whom  the  Lord  Jesus  distinguished  with  his  love?  But  now  he  went  away.  He
could  not  make  the  sacrifice  required  of  him.  He  had  thought  that  he  might  do  some
great  thing,  some  noble  deed,  to  gain  eternal  life,  and  the  Lord  had  taken  him  at  his
word ;  but  this  was  too  great,  too  difficult ;  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  it.  He  went
away  sorrowful,  not  angry ;  he  felt  that  the  Lord  was  right.  There  was  something
good  and  noble  in  his  character  which  responded  to  the  Lord's  invitation.  He  felt  the
1U.TTHBW — ^n,  •


2Sd  TSi;  GOSt-Eti  ACCOfeDlNa  to  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1— SO.

supreme  holiness  of  Christ,  the  powerful  attraction  of  his  gracious  love.  He  owned  in
his  heart  that  to  be  near  to  Christ  the  Lord,  to  follow  him,  to  live  in  close  communion
with  him,  was  a  privilege  exceeding  precious,  a  privilege  not  too  dearly  bought  at  the
cost  of  all  earthly  riches,  all  earthly  comforts.  He  knew  that  the  Lord  had  not  asked
too  much;  his  heart  told  him  so;  but  he  had  aot  the  strength,  the  courage.  He  could  not
part  with  his  large  possessions  ;  he  could  not  take  up  the  cross  (Mark  x.  21).  He  was
sad  at  that  saying,  "Take  up  the  cross."  It  was  a  strange  and  dreadful  word;  even  the
apostles  could  not  reconcile  themselves  to  it.  And  he  went  away  sorrowful,  vexed  with
himself ;  he  had  made  the  great  refusal,  and  he  felt  that  he  done  a  weak  and  cowardly
thing.  He  had  judged  himself  unworthy  of  that  eternal  life  which  he  had  sought,
and  he  despised  himself.  He  knew  that  those  riches  for  which  he  had  turned  away
from  Christ  could  not  compensate  him  for  the  tremendous  loss.  He  was  not  blinded.
He  felt  the  value  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  the  unutterable  preciousness  of  eternal  life.
He  knew  that  these  great  possessions  of  his  were  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  that
priceless  treasure  which  Christ  had  offered  him.  He  sinned  against  light,  and  he  was
miserable.  Perhaps  his  misery  brought  him  afterwards  to  a  better  mind.  We  hope  it
was  so.  We  cannot  but  feel  a  very  deep  and  real  interest  in«  character  so  touching,
so  engaging,  in  one  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  loved.  We  are  not  all  called  to  make
the  sacrifice  which  was  required  of  the  young  ruler.  The  Lord  did  not  say  the  like  to
Nicodemus  or  to  Joseph  of  Arimathsea.  But  all  true  Christian  men  must  be  willing
to  do  so  if  need  be.  "Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done "  was  the  Lord's  own  prayer  in
his  agony.  "Thy  will  be  done"  is  the  Christian's  daily,  it  should  be  his  hourly,
prayer.  And  that  prayer  pledges  us  to  the  spirit  of  rea^  self-sacrifice  for  Christ's
sake.  We  must  be  ready  to  give  freely,  liberally,  in  proportion  to  our  means,  for  all
holy  works.  We  must  be  ready  to  take  up  our  cross ;  for  the  Lord  says  that  without
the  cross  we  cannot  be  his  disciples.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  the  word  often  in  our
mouths,  to  have  the  picture  of  the  cross  upon  our  walls,  or  to  wear  the  cross  for  an
ornament.  The  mark  of  the  Christian  is  the  real  cross,  the  inner  spiritual  cross ;  and
that  means  self-denial  for  Christ's  sake,  self-denial  which  is  real,  which  is  painful,
which  is  hard  to  bear ;  even  as  the  cross  which  the  Lord  bore  for  us  was  hard  and
heavy  and  painful  exceedingly.  But  the  cross  leadeth  to  the  crown.  The  conditions
of  eternal  life  are  unvarying ;  they  are  the  same  now,  in  their  real  spiritual  meaning,
as  they  were  when  they  were  presented  by  the  Lord  himself  to  the  young  ruler
in  Per«a.

II.  The  Lord's  conversation  with  thb  apostles.  1.  Z%«  warning.  "A  rich
man  shall  hardly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  It  is  a  hard  thing,  and  his
temptations  are  so  great ;  there  is  so  much  to  draw  him  to  the  world.  Indeed,  he
cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  a  rich  man;  he  must  become  poor,  that  ho
may  be  rich  indeed.  He  must  become  poor  In  spirit,  poor  in  the  willingness  to  conse-
crate all  his  wealth  to  the  service  of  Christ ;  he  must  give  largely,  denying  himself  in
many  things  that  he  may  give  the  more ;  learning  to  do  God's  will,  not  his  own ;  and
regarding  himself  simply  as  the  steward  of  what  really  belongs  to  God.  For  other-
wise his  danger  is  exceeding  great.  The  gate  of  eternal  life  is  always  strait ;  it
becomes  like  the  eye  of  a  needle  to  the  rich  man  who  stands  before  it,  burdened  with
his  riches,  like  a  heavily  loaded  camel.  "  They  that  trust  in  riches  "  (see  Mark  x.  24,
thougn  the  reading  is  somewhat  doubtful)  "  cannot  enter  in ;  "  and  it  is  very  hard  for  a
rich  man  to  cast  off  his  trust  in  his  riches.  Yet  the  strait  gate  shall  be  thrown  open
wide  to  them  that  overcome— to  the  poor  who  are  rich  in  faith,  and  to  the  rich  who  are
poor  in  spirit,  true  disciples  of  him  who,  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  became
poor.  2.  The  amazement  of  the  apostles.  They  were  startled,  almost  terror-stricken ;
it  seemed  so  hard  a  saying;  it  seemed  to  make  salvation  so  very  difiScult  to  attain.
Perhaps  St.  Peter  was  thinking  of  it  when  long  afterwards  he  wrote,  "If  the  righteous
scarcely  be  saved  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  18).  "  Who  then  can  be  saved  ?  "  they  said  in  their
astonishment.  All  men,  they  knew,  share  the  like  peril;  it  is  not  only  the  rich  who
are  in  danger  of  trusting  in  riches.  The  poor  often  care  for  money  quite  as  much  as
the  rich.  The  fault  lies,  not  in  the  fact  of  having  great  possessions,  but  in  the  trust
reposed  in  them ;  and  there  are  poor  men  who  trust  in  their  little  store  quite  as  much
as  some  rich  men  trust  in  their  great  wealth.  "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all
evil,"  and  that  love  is  a  common  temptation  to  all,  rich  and  poor  alike.    "  Who  then


CB.  TEC  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.  259

can  be  saved?  "  The  Lord  b»w  the  perplexity  of  his  apostles ;  be  felt  for  them  In  his
sacred  heart.  He  looked  at  them;  those  holy  eyes  were  fixed  upon  them  with  an
earnest,  loving,  sympathizing  look — a  look  full  of  human  tenderness  and  Divine  com-
passion, "With  men  this  is  impossible,"  he  said;  "but  with  God  all  things  are
possible."  The  disciples  were  right ;  they  might  well  say,  "  Who  then  can  be
saved?"  Man  cannot  save  himself;  he  is  too  weak,  too  sinful.  "With  men  this  is
impossible  " — with  all  men  alike,  whether  they  are  rich  or  poor,  whatever  may  be  their
advantages  or  their  temptations ;  they  cannot  save  themselves ;  the  thing  is  impossible.
But  (we  may  well  thank  God  as  we  read  the  words,  and  fall  down  before  him  in
adoring  gratitude)  it  is  not  impossible  with  God.  And  Christ  is  God ;  "  he  is  able  to
save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him."  His  incarnation,  his
blessed  death  upon  the  cross,  has  made  that  possible  which  was  impossible.  "  With
God  all  things  are  possible;"  he  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean ;  he  can
cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness — from  the  degrading  love  of  money,  from  the
defiling  lusts  of  the  flesh,  from  the  subtle  temptations  of  pride  and  self-righteousness.
Only  we  must  trust  in  him,  not  in  riches,  or  what  seem  to  be  riches,  not  in  our  own
fancied  merits,  not  in  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  only  in  the
cross.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."

III.  The  eewaed  of  the  teue  disciple.  1.  St.  Feter'i  question.  The  apostles
had  done  what  the  young  ruler  shrank  from  doing — they  had  forsaken  all.  Indeed,
they  had  not  so  much  to  give  up  as  he  had ;  but  such  as  it  was,  it  was  their  all ;  they
had  left  all,  and  had  followed  Christ.  The  Lord  had  promised  treasure  in  heaven  to
hit  followers.  "  What  shall  we  have  therefore  ?  "  Peter  said.  He  was  still  too  eager ;
there  was  too  much  self-assertion  ;  he  laid  too  much  stress  on  the  reward  that  was  to
'x>me.    The  higheat  desire  of  the  soul  is  to  serve  Christ  for  himself

**  Not  for  the  sake  of  gaining  aught^
Not  hoping  a  reward  ;
But  as  thyself  hast  loved  me,
O  evei-loving  Lord."

Peter  knew  afterwards  that  the  love  of  Christ  is  its  own  reward  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  Yet  he
was  not  wholly  wrong ;  the  Lord  had  promised  treasure  in  heaven ;  and  that  blessed
hope  is  an  exceeding  great  help  to  fainting  Christians ;  it  is  an  anchor  of  the  soul  both
sure  and  steadfast.  Moses  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward.  St.  Paul
looked  forward  to  the  crown  of  righteousness  laid  up  in  heaven  for  all  who  love  the
appearing  of  the  Lord.  Christ  himself,  our  great  Example,  when  he  looked  back  on
his  perfect  life,  said, "  Now,  0  Father,  glorify  thou  me."  Peter,  perhaps,  regarded  that
heavenly  blessedness  too  much  in  the  light  of  a  reward  due  to  self-denial  here ;  our
Lord  seems  to  imply  this  in  the  parable  of  ch.  xx.,  though  he  now  repeats  his  promise
and  acknowledges  the  self-sacrifice  of  his  followers.  2.  TJie  Lord's  answer.  (1)
The  promise  to  the  apostles.  He  bade  them  look  forward  to  the  great  regeneration,
the  time  of  restitution  of  all  things  (Acts  iii.  21).  The  regeneration  of  individual
Christians  (of  which  the  Lord  speaks  in  John  iii.  3,  5 ;  and  St.  Paul  in  Titus  iii.  5)  is
the  gradual  beginning,  the  preparation  for  the  regeneration  of  the  world,  when  God
will  make  all  things  new,  when  there  shall  be  "  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein
dwelleth  righteousness."  Then  shall  the  Son  of  man,  whose  throne  on  earth  was  the
cross,  sit  in  that  new  creation  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory.  And  they  who  followed
him  nearest  upon  earth,  who  first  bore  the  cross  for  his  Name's  sake,  the  twelve  chosen
apostles,  they  should  sit,  he  said,  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of
Israel.  It  may  be  that  we  shall  not  certainly  understand  the  meaning  of  this  promise
(and  other  similar  passages,  such  as  Luke  xxii.  30 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  2,  3)  till  it  is  fulfilled
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  perhaps  it  is  safest  to  adopt  the  ideal  interpretation.
Twelve  is  the  ideal  number  of  the  apostolic  college.  Judas  went  to  his  own  place.
By  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  we  are  probably  to  understand  the  Israel  of  God,  the
great  Christian  Church  in  all  its  branches.  As  the  judges  ruled  Israel  in  the  days  of
the  theocracy,  so  shall  the  twelve  apostles  rule  the  Israel  of  God  in  the  regeneration.
They  shall  be  nearest  to  the  King,  on  his  right  hand  and  his  left,  in  the  highest  places
of  honour.    (2)  The  promise  to  all  believers.    The  circle  of  promise  is  widenid.    Th»


ica  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    ton.  xix.l— §0

ipostles  had  forsaken  all  for  Christ's  sake  j  but  there  were  multitudes  who  would
afterwards  make  the  like  sacrifice ;  multitudes  more  w  ho  would  be  willing  to  make
it  If  it  were  required  of  them.  To  all  such  the  Lord  promises  a  hundredfold  reward —
"a  hundredfold,"  "  manifold  more,"  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  say — in  this  present  time,
and  in  the  world  to  come,  eternal  life.  "  Gtodliness  hath  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now
is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  That  holy  joy,  that  peace  of  Ood,  which  is  granted
unto  those  who  have  yielded  up  their  wills  to  God's  holy  will,  passeth  all  understand-
ing, and  altogether  outweighs  the  temporal  losses  which  they  may  endure  for  Christ's
sake.  Such  meu,  like  St.  Paul,  count  all  things  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know-
ledge of  Christ  Jesus  their  Lord.  To  such  to.  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain.  A
life  of  holiness  and  self-denial  for  Christ's  sake  is  very  blessed,  for  it  hath  the  presence
of  Christ.  A  holy  death  is  by  much  far  better ;  for  such  a  death  is  the  gate  of  ever-
lasting life.  They  who  would  live  that  life  and  die  that  death  must  watch  and  pray,
seeking  earnestly  the  grace  of  perseverance ;  for  many  that  are  first  shall  he  last,  and
the  last  shall  he  first.  Judas  was  near  to  Christ  when  these  words  were  said,  "  Let  him
that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed,  lest  he  falL"

Lessons.  1.  We  still  ask  the  same  question,  "  What  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  have
eternal  life  ? "  And  still  the  answer  is  the  same,  "  Keep  the  commandments."  2.
fjet  us  not  say,  "  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up."  Let  us  imitate  the
publican  rather  than  the  young  ruler:  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  3.  "The
love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil ; "  "  Love  not  the  world ; "  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord
th  \  God."  4.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  It  is  a  difficult
work,  beyond  the  strength  of  man ;  but  we  can  do  all  things  through  him  that
Btrengtheneth  us.  6.  Let  us  have  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward;  he  who
by  faith  Oi;>cerns  the  crown  may  well  endure  the  cross.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  3 — ^9. — Divorce.  The  readiness  with  which  the  marriage  tie  is  dissolved  in
some  countries,  and  the  daring  questions  on  the  subject  that  have  been  raised  in  Eng-
land, make  it  important  for  us  to  see  clearly  how  divorce  should  be  regarded  in  the
light  of  the  teachings  of  Christ.  Plainly  he  sets  his  face  against  any  divorce  except  in
the  most  extreme  case.  Let  us  consider  some  of  the  pleas  for  a  laxer  rule,  and  then  look
at  the  duty  of  resisting  them.

I.  Pleas  for  a  greater  freedom  or  divorce.  1.  The  happiness  of  the  home.  It
is  urged  that  some  husbands  and  wives  are  hopelessly  at  variance.  Though  married
outwardly,  in  soul  they  are  not  wedded  at  all.  They  live  together  as  enemies  compelled
to  occupy  the  same  prison,  which  a  miserable  conventionality  falsely  names  home.
Undoubtedly,  this  may  be  so.  But  then  happiness  is  not  the  chief  end  of  life.  More-
over, the  immediate  relief  of  freedom  would  have  to  be  purchased  at  the  cost  of  an
invasion  of  the  settled  social  order.  2.  The  rights  of  liberty.  A  more  daring  position
is  taken  up  by  those  who  claim  liberty  to  dissolve  the  marriage  bond.  These  people
deny  that  we  have  any  right  to  enter  into  a  lifelong  contract  of  marriage;  or  rather,
they  plead  that  such  a  contract  should  be  subject  to  revision. '

II.  The  obligations  of  irrevocaulb  marriage  ties.  Jesus  Christ  saw  the  terrible
(.vils  that  resulted  from  great  iVeedom  of  divorce  in  his  day,  and  he  distinctly  opposed
this  dangerous  liceiice.  Let  us  consider  some  of  the  grave  objections  to  it.  1.  It  is
contrary  to  nature.  On  the  surface  of  it,  marriage  may  seem  to  be  an  artificial  arrange-
ment, and  absolute  freedom  the  state  of  nature.  But  our  Lord  pointed  out  that
marriage  was  instituted  at  the  Creation,  and  that  it  was  associated  with  the  very  con-
stitution of  human  life.  There  is  a  higher  nature  than  that  of  the  animal  world.
There  is  a  certain  best  arrangement  which  only  those  who  have  intelligence  to  perceive
it  and  conscience  to  follow  it  can  enter  into.  This  corresponds  to  Nature,  not  in  her
lowest  instincts,  hut  in  her  highest  aspirations.  2.  It  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  God.
The  arrangement  of  nature  was  supplemented  by  the  word  of  revelation.  In  marriage
n'.en  and  women  carry  out  a  law  that  God  has  revealed.  In  free  divorce  they  break
that  law.  This  is  of  no  consequence,  perhaps,  to  people  who  are  "  emancipated ;  "  but
it  should  be  all-authoritative  for  Christians.    3.  It  leads  to  numl>erless  evils.    (1)  It


oa.  XIX.  1— S6.]    TSE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDtNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  261

ruins  the  home.  Discordant  lentiments  may  also  ruin  it;  but  they  indicate  failure  to
re.ich  an  ideal.  Freedom  of  divorce  destroys  the  very  ideal.  The  home  which  may  be
broken  up  at  any  moment  is  no  home.  (2)  It  is  unjust.  It  cannot  always  happen
that  both  husband  and  wife  desire  to  be  separated  when  one  is  tired  of  the  union ;  and
if  the  wish  is  on  one  side  only,  injustice  is  done  by  divorce,  and  a  wrong  inflicted.  Even
if  the  divorce  cannot  be  carried  out  without  mutual  consent,  the  one  person  who  does
not  wish  for  it  is  placed  in  a  cruelly  distressful  position.  (3)  It  lowers  the  idea  of
marriage.  Instead  of  studying  to  make  the  best  of  the  mairiage  union,  people  who
have  freedom  of  divorce  are  tempted  to  be  looking  abroad  for  new  attractions.  This  is
immoral ;  it  tends  directly  to  degrade  the  thoughts,  and  to  throw  open  the  flood-gates
of  unrestrained  desires. — W.  P.  A.

Vers.  13 — 15. — Christ  blessing  little  children.  This  incident,  familiar  to  us  from  our
childhood,  not  only  throws  light  on  the  character  of  our  Lord  and  his  interest  in  child-
life.    It  reveals  something  in  all  who  took  part  in  it.

L  The  mothbbb.  The  word  "  then,"  with  which  the  paragraph  opens,  is  deeply
significant,  because  it  closely  connects  this  paragraph  with  that  which  precedes.
Jesus  had  been  vindicating  the  sanctity  of  marriage.  The  degenerate  Jews  had  come
to  regard  the  subject  too  much,  if  not  exclusively,  in  regard  to  the  relations  of  man
and  wife.  Here  we  see  its  bearings  on  the  great  and  wonderful  fact  of  motherhood.
Marriage  should  be  protected  for  the  sake  of  the  children.  True  parents  do  not  live
chiefly  for  their  own  happiness.  They  live  for  their  children.  The  unselfish  love  of
motherhood  is  one  of  the  most  striking  facts  in  nature.  It  softens  the  tigress  when
she  is  playing  with  her  cubs ;  it  gives  ferocity  to  the  hen  when  she  is  protecting  her
chickens.  Now  mothers,  naturally  yearning  for  the  good  of  their  children,  can  do
nothing  better  for  the  little  ones  than  to  bring  them  to  Christ,  and  train  them  for  him.
Yet  some  parents,  who  study  the  bodily  health  of  their  children  with  deepest  solicitude,
scarcely  give  a  thought  to  their  souls'  welfare.

n.  The  ohildeen.  They  showed  certain  traits  of  character.  1.  Oledience.  _  The
children  came  at  their  mothers'  bidding.  Obedience  to  parents  is  the  root  of  obedience
to  God.  2.  A  perception  of  the  attractiveness  of  Christ.  Obedience  would  bring  the
children  with  their  mothers.  But  more  was  wanted  to  induce  them  to  go  up  to  Christ
and  permit  him  to  take  them  in  his  arms.  There  are  some  people  who  only  terrify
children,  although  they  try  to  coax  them  into  favour.  Jesus,  however,-  was  evidently
one  who  won  children  by  his  own  gentleness,  kindness,  and  childlikeness.  Pharisees
were  uncomfortable  in  his  presence,  but  chUdren  were  quite  at  home.

III.  The  disciples.  They  rebuked  the  mothers.  Why?  1.  For  Christ's  sake.
They  would  not  have  him  troubled.  They  wished  to  serve  Clirist,  but  they  did
not  understand  his  mind ;  therefore  they  blundered.  We  must  know  his  will  and  do
it,  if  we  would  serve  him  acceptably.  2.  For  their  own  sokes.  They  would  keep
Christ  to  themselves.  The  advent  of  these  mothers  and  children  interrupted  a  discus-
sion which  was  very  interesting  to  them.  But  Christ  preferred  to  turn  from  a  subject
which  was  distressing  to  him  to  the  innocent  simplicity  of  the  little  children.  Further
observe :  (1)  Children  will  come  to  Christ  if  we  will  suffer  them.  It  is  our  part  to
remove  every  hindrance  from  their  approach  to  him.  (2)  All  children  need  Christ's
blessing.     (3)  Very  young  children  are  old  enough  to  receive  it.

IV.  Christ  He  appears  as  the  children's  Friend  and  the  Champion  of  their  mothers.
This  well-known  incident  reveals  him  to  us  in  his  most  winning  grace.  1.  Love  of
children.  We  should  give  the  children  a  good  place  in  our  arrangements  for  Christian
work,  if  we  would  please  our  Lord,  who  is  their  Friend.  2.  Childlikeness.  Jesus  is
drawn  to  the  children  by  a  natural  afBnity.  3.  Gracious  kindness.  He  blesses  the
children.  This  he  does  with  personal  touch,  putting  his  liandg  upon  them.  Christ
will  take  trouble  to  help  and  save  children. — W.  F.  A.

Vera.  16—22. — 2%e  great  refusal.  The  young  man  who  won  the  love  of  Christ  by
his  wdour  and  enthusiasm,  and  who  grieved  our  Lord  by  his  refusal  to  make  an  unex-
pected sacrifice,  stands  before  us  in  vivid  portraiture — ^an  example,  and  yet  a  warning.
Let  us  consider  the  successive  traits  of  his  character  revealed  by  his  conduct.

I,  HiB  WUM  qoKSTioN.    It  ia  much  tor  a  man  to  have  a  definite  object  beforei


262  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oa.  xix,  1— SO.

him;  it  is  more  for  him  to  choose  a  worthy  pursuit.  Of  all  personal  things  the
young  ruler  chose  the  very  best.  He  had  wealth,  but  that  did  not  satisfy  him.  H.:
had  the  means  of  acquiring  pleasure ;  but  he  rose  above  the  idea  of  making  worldly
amusement  the  end  and  aim  of  existence.  He  craved  the  life  of  God,  which  is  eternal.
Surely-  we  may  imitate  him  in  this.  Moreover,  he  did  well  in  inquiring  of  Christ.
Jesus  is  the  Way  to  life,  and  we  can  find  its  source  in  him,  as  he  told  the  woman  of
Samaria  (John  iv.  14).    It  is  right  to  come  to  Christ  for  this  boon.

IL  HiB  MISTAKEN  ADDBESS.  He  Called  our  Lord  "  Good  Master."  Jesus  takes  up
the  phrase  at  once,  and  asks  what  it  means.  This  was  no  act  of  captious  criticism.
The  young  man  did  not  really  know  the  deep  signification  of  the  word  "  good."  He
used  language  conventionally.  There  is  a  great  danger  for  those  who  are  brought  up
among  religious  associations  that  they  will  employ  the  greatest  words  without  entering
into  their  true  meaning.

III.  His  moral  conduct.  Christ  began  with  the  first  elements  of  morality.  We
cannot  go  on  to  perfection  until  we  have  mastered  these  elements.  It  is  impossible  to
be  a  thief  in  the  world  and  a  saint  in  the  Church.  Yet  there  is  a  subtle  temptation
that  dogs  the  footsteps  of  those  who  aspire  after  superior  spiritual  attainments — a
temptation  to  fall  away  from  common  morality.  The  young  man  had  avoided  this
temptation.  He  was  no  hollow  sentimentalist.  His  virtue  was  solid.  Yet  it  was  not
enough.

IV.  His  new  duty.  He  is  told  to  renounce  his  wealth— ra  hard,  a  startling  require-
ment. Jesus  does  not  give  this  commandment  to  all  rich  men,  though  he  never
encourages  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  But  he  saw  that  the  young  ruler's  snare  was
his  riches.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  that  the  riches  should  be  given  up.  Now,
although  it  was  not  his  duty  before  this  thus  to  renounce  all  he  possessed,  the  word  of
Christ — if  he  would  become  a  disciple — made  it  his  duty.  Whenever  Christ  tells  any
man  to  sell  all  he  has  and  give  the  proceeds  to  the  poor,  that  man  is  under  an  obliga-
tion to  obey  if  he  would  own  the  Lordship  of  Christ.  The  essential  duty  is  not  poverty,
but  obedience.  The  duty  may  take  the  same  form  with  any  of  us  if  we  are  convinced
on  good  grounds  that  Christ  desires  us  to  make  the  same  sacrifice.  But  whether
absolute  poverty  be  required  or  not,  whatever  we  own  is  only  ours  subject  to  the
bidding  of  Christ  to  use  it  as  he  directs — and  he  is  not  altogether  au  easy  Master  to
serve.

V.  His  SAD  FAILURE.  The  young  ruler  could  not  rise  up  to  I4ie  sacrifice.  His
wealth  was  his  undoing.  It  was  not  a  golden  key  opening  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
but  a  golden  bar  holding  the  gate  shut.  The  young  ruler  might  have  become  a  great
Christian  leader,  saint,  or  martyr.  His  refusal  dropped  him  into  obscurity.  We  can-
not but  pity  him,  for  bis  was  a  hard  test.  Could  we  stand  it?  Have  we  shrunk  back
from  even  a  milder  test  ? — W.  P.  A.

Vers.  23,  24. — The  rich  man's  difficulty.  Jesus  draws  a  lesson  of  sad  warning  from
the  failure  of  the  young  ruler  who  could  not  brins;  himself  to  make  the  great  sacrifice
required  as  a  condition  of  his  obtaining  eternal  life.  He  points  out  the  exceeding
difficulty  of  a  rich  man's  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

I.  The  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  DIFFICULTY.  It  is  whoUy  on  the  side  of  the  man
who  is  hindered  and  hampered  by  his  wealth.  God  has  opened  the  gate  and  invited  all
who  will  to  enter.  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  He  does  not  favour  the  rich  to  the
neglect  of  the  poor ;  and  he  does  not  favour  the  poor  and  deal  harshly  with  the  rich.
He  is  just  and  lair  with  all.  But  the  rich  man  has  hindrances  in  himself.  1.  The
absorbing  interest  of  riches.  The  danger  is  that  the  wealthy  man  should  be  satisfied
with  his  possessions ;  or,  as  that  is  impossible  unless  he  is  partially  stupefied  by  them,
that  they  should  so  fill  his  life  that  he  should  not  have  time  or  thought  for  better
things.  He  may  be  buried  under  the  load  of  his  own  goods,  lost  in  the  mazes  of  his
forest  of  pussessions.  2.  The  deceitful  promise  of  riches.  Jesus  spoke  of  the  deceitful-
ness  of  riches  as  one  of  the  weeds  that  spring  up  and  choke  the  Word  (ch.  liii.  22).  If
wealth  does  not  yet  satisfy,  still  it  promises  future  satisfaction.  The  rich  man  comes
to  think  he  can  buy  all  he  wants,  if  only  he  can  find  the  right  market.  3.  The  foolish
pride  of  riches.  If  ever  a  man  has  a  right  to  be  proud,  it  is  on  account  of  what  he  is,
Mt  because  of  what  be  has.    The  owner  of  miUioiu  may  be  a  miserable  coward|  •


ea.  xtx.  1-36.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDtNfl  TO  St.  MATTHEW.  263

sensual  sot.  a  senseless  fool.  Yet  the  disgraceful  sycoplianoy  of  the  world  teaches  him
to  regard  himself  as  a  superior  person.  Now,  pride  is  the  most  effectual  barrier  to
the  entrance  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Only  the  lowly  and  humble  and  childlike
can  creep  through  its  humble  doorway.  4.  The  hardening  sdfishnest  of  riches.  Wealth,
though  it  gives  the  means  of  helping  others,  tends  to  seal  up  the  fountains  of  generosity
and  destroy  the  springs  of  sympathy.  The  self-indulgent  man  cannot  enter  that
kingdom,  the  citizens  of  which  have  to  deny  themselves  and  carry  the  cross.

II.  The  LESSONS  OF  THE  DiFFiouLTT.  1.  The  follt/ (^  covetousness.  Why  should  W8
make  baste  to  be  rich,  if  riches  may  become  a  curse  to  us  ?  If  in  any  case  they  are
likely  to  bring  fresh  difficulties,  should  we  be  so  anxious  to  acquire  them?  How  is  it
that  so  many  Christian  people  are  to  be  found  eagerly  pursuing  the  race  for  wealth  ?
2.  The  duty  of  contentment.  We  may  never  get  riches.  What  of  that  if  we  have  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is  far  better  ?  Perhaps  we  are  spared  a  dangerous  tempta-
tion. 3.  The  need  of  sympathy  with  the  difficulties  of  rich  men.  Jesus  did  not
denounce  the  young  man  who  made  the  great  refusal.  He  loved  him  and  pitied  him.
If  rich  men  fail,  we  should  remember  that  they  were  beset  with  temptations  that  do
not  fall  to  the  lot  of  most  of  us.  4.  Faith  in  the  power  of  God.  The  rich  man  is
gravely  warned.  He  is  in  serious  danger.  He  may  fail  miserably,  crushed  by  the
load  of  his  own  wealth.  His  salvation  would  be  a  miracle.  But  God  can  work
miracles.  Though  it  be  as  hard  for  a  rich  man  to  save  himself  as  for  a  camel  to  pass
like  a  thread  through  a  needle's  eye,  God  can  save  him.  Therefore  (1)  the  rich  should
have  the  gospel  preached  to  them ;  (2)  we  should  pray  for  the  rich ;  (3)  we  should
rejoice  greatly  that  there  are  rich  men  in  the  kingdom  of  God. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  26. — The  impossible  made  possible.  This  is  the  solution  of  the  rich  man'*
difficulty;  and  it  is  the  solution  of  many  another  difficulty.  When  we  look  away
from  man  to  God,  the  impossible  becomes  possible.

I.  Men  0A2IN0T  savb  themselves.  The  disciples  are  made  to  see  this  truth  in  the
case  of  the  rich,  whose  difficulties  are  peculiarly  great.  But  that  is  only  the
extreme  instance  of  what  really  applies  to  people  in  all  conditions  of  life.  1.  In
experience  we  see  thai  men  do  not  save  themselves.  We  may  preach  the  dignity  and
capacity  of  humanity.  We  may  argue  on  the  faculty  and  scope  of  free-will.  But
when  we  leave  the  pulpit  and  the  lecture-room,  what  we  see  is  a  world  of  continuous
bafflement  and  failure.  The  young  man  starts  well,  but  if  he  is  left  to  himself  and
trusts  to  himself,  he  soon  discovers  his  weakness.  Good  resolutions  seem  only  to  be
made  in  order  to  be  broken.  2.  The  indwelling  sin  of  men  prevents  them  from  saving
themselves.  The  evil  is  within.  The  prisoner  might  cut  his  way  out  of  a  stone
dungeon,  and  the  exile  might  escape  from  the  ocean  island;  but  the  man  whose  own
nature  is  his  dungeon  and  his  place  of  exile  cannot  escape  from  himself.  In  himself
man  has  no  lever  by  which  he  can  lift  himself  above  himselC  3.  The  depth  of  ruin
prevents  men  from  saving  themselves.  The  Fall  is  so  awful,  the  offended  Law  is  so
majestic,  that  self-salvation  is  hopeless.  4.  The  circumstances  of  life  prevent  men  from,
saving  themselves.  Riches  keep  back  the  wealthy.  Poverty,  with  its  cares  and
anxieties,  oppresses  the  destitute.  Yarioua  calls  and  distractions,  fascinations  and
delusions,  hinder  other  men.

II.  QoD  OAN  SAVE  WHERE  MAN  FAILS.  1.  He  doBS  save.  This  is  his  work.  _  Ha
creates,  and  he  renews.  He  gives  life,  and  he  regenerates.  The  Creator  is  the  Saviour.
We  have  not  got  a  gliaimer  of  the  meaning  of  "  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  Gud  "
until  we  have  begun  to  perceive  this  great  truth.  All  the  doctrines  and  ethics  of
Christianity  are  of  little  use  while  we  are  blind  to  its  fundamental  principle.  This
principle  is  not  to  be  lost  in  any  figure  of  speech.  We  have  to  see  that  God  puts  forth
real  power  to  change  and  renew  his  children.  Helpless  and  ruined  in  themselves,  wheu
they  turn  to  his  grace  his  strong  arm  saves  tbem.  This  is  as  actual  a  fact  as  the  fact
that  the  summer  sun  makes  the  vegetation  of  the  earth  to  grow  and  ripen.  Every
true  Christian  can  testify  to  it  from  personal  experience.  2.  There  is  no  limit  to  his
savaig  power.  There  can  be  no  limit  if  he  is  God,  for  God  is  Almighty.  We  see
difficulties,  but  they  all  vanish  as  smoke  when  he  puts  forth  his  power.  The  Divine
method  of  salvation  is  not  as  simple  and  easy  as  we  might  have  expected.  It  involves
the  expenditure  of  God's  only  begotten  Son.    Christ  must  come  to  earth,  and  Chriiit


264  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOSMNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xix.  1— 30,

muRt  die,  if  man  is  to  be  saved.  But  Ohrist  has  come  and  died ;  Ood  ha8  done  all  that
is  necessary.  The  salvation  is  perfect.  Now  it  only  rests  with  us  to  open  our  hearts
to  receive  its  renewing  grace.  There  is  one  thing  that  God  never  does — he  never  over-
rides a  rebellious  will.  If  we  refuse,  he  cannot  save  us.  It  is  for  the  willing  that  there
is  no  limit  to  his  saving  power. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  27 — 30. — The  great  reiimrd.  St.  Peter's  question  strikes  us  as  a  little  low  in
tone.  It  often  happens  that  this  disciple,  who  has  been  exalted  as  the  prince  of  the
apostles,  betrays  some  human  weakness.  And  yet  it  is  nowhere  suggested  to  ns  in
Scripture  that  all  consideration  of  future  rewards  are  to  be  suppressed,  though  certainly
Paley's  feeble  conception  of  Christianity  as  morality  with  the  added  sanctions  of  future
rewards  and  punishments  revealed  in  the  teaching  and  confirmed  by  the  miracles  of
Christ,  is  far  below  the  New  Testament  standard.  Christ  claims  our  service,  and  unless
enthusiasm  for  Christ  draws  us  on,  mere  hopes  of  payment  or  fears  of  penalties  will  not
succeed.  But  for  those  who  are  won  to  Christ  by  the  purest  influences,  all  innocent
motives  are  needed  to  assist  in  the  difficult  task  of  maintaining  their  fidelity.  Our
Lord,  therefore,  condescends  to  encourage  us  by  mentioning  some  of  the  rich  rewards
of  self-denying  service.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  rewards  are  gracious
favours,  like  school  prizes,  not  wages  due  and  paid  on  demands  of  justice.  The  rewards
are  both  heavenly  and  earthly.

L  The  heavehlt  eewaed.  This  is  presented  to  us  in  two  forms.  1.  A  glorious
throne.  The  mi»ds  of  the  disciples  are  full  of  vague  but  splendid  Messianic  dreams,
and  Jesus  approaches  them  along  the  lines  of  their  own  imaginations.  The  splendour
of  the  throne  will  not  be  enjoyed  on  earth.  Here  there  is  to  be  sacrifice,  toil,  poverty,
martyrdom.  But  there  will  be  a  throne  in  the  future  world.  Not  only  will  Ohrist
reign.  His  apostles  will  reign  with  him.  Similarly,  all  Christians  are  to  have  a  kingly
status — to  be  both  "  kings  and  priests."  This  means  more  than  future  joy,  a  mere
elysium  of  delights ;  it  involves  power,  honour,  responsibility — like  the  man  who  had
gained  ten  pounds  being  appointed  to  rule  over  ten  cities  (Luke  xii.  17).  2.  Eternal
life.  The  first  reward  was  external ;  it  pointed  to  status,  function,  honour.  The
second  is  wholly  internal  and  personal.  It  is  more  than  bare  existence  in  the  future.
It  is  a  new  order  of  life — exalted  being,  enlarged  capacity.  To  live  in  the  vast  ages  of
eternity,  to  live  really  and  truly,  not  to  dream  for  ever  in  an  indolent  paradise, — this  is
the  exhilarating  prospect  of  the  faithful  servant  of  Christ.  We  do  not  know  what
life  is  as  yet.    When  we  die  we  shall  begin  to  live.

II.  The  earthly  bewabd.  Their  reward  is  to  be  a  great  reward  on  earth.  In  St.
Mark  the  words,  "  now  in  this  time,"  are  added  (Mark  x.  30).  He  who  gives  to  a
generous  king  will  certainly  receive  back  far  more  than  he  sacrifices.  The  difficulty
is  to  see  how  this  can  be  on  earth.  Now,  we  cannot  take  the  words  of  Christ  literally,
for  no  one  would  wish  to  have  hundreds  of  fathers  and  mothers.  But  as  Ohrist
owned  kinship  with  all  who  do  God's  will  (ch.  xii.  50),  so  may  Christians.  The  Church
should  be  the  new  family  for  those  who  have  been  cast  out  of  their  old  home  on
account  of  their  Christian  confession.  The  pearl  of  great  price,  the  inward  life  and
joy  of  pardon  and  renewal  and  communion  with  God, — this  is  a  great  possession,  and
it  may  be  a  present  possession.'  It  is  better  to  have  the  peace  of  God  in  a  life  of
sacrifice,  than  houses  and  acres  with  a  heart  in  selfish  unrest. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  20. — The  rich  young  man.  "What  lack  I  yet?"  Plainly  th«  young  man
who  put  this  question  was  in  earnest.  He  was  not  one  of  those  who  approached
Jesus  merely  from  curiosity,  or  for  the  sake  of  measuring  themselves  with  this
renowned  Dialectician  and  Teacher.  With  him  the  search  for  life  eternal  was  an
important  personal  matter.  He  went  away  sorrowful,  with  no  heart  to  prolong  the
conversation,  as  soon  as  his  own  case  was  pronounced  upon.  Probably  he  had  an  idea
that  our  Lord  would  recommend  him  to  build  a  synagogue,  or  ransom  some  of  his
countrymen  who  were  slaves,  or  do  some  striking  religious  act.  For  when  our  Lord
replies,  "Keep  the  commandments,"  he  asks,  "  What  commandments?" — fancying  he
might  refer  to  some  rules  for  the  attainment  of  extraordinary  saintliness  not  divulged
to  the  common  people.  And  so,  when  Jesus  merely  repeated  the  time-worn  Decalogue,
the  young  man  was  disappointed,  and  impatiently  exclaimed,  "  All  these  have  I  kept


nn.  XII.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  265

from  my  youth  up,"  n  )t  so  much  yauntiag  his  blamelessness  of  life  as  indicating  that
he  had  had  these  commandments  in  view  all  his  life,  and  that  to  refer  him  to  them
was  to  give  him  no  Batisfaction.  All  the  help  they  could  give  he  had  already  got.
"  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "  Ho  belonged  to  the  "  Tell-me-something-more-to-do-and-I-will-
do-it "  c]aB8  of  Fharisees.  He  thought  he  was  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice,  or  do  any
great  thing  which  would  advance  his  spiritual  interests.    Bemark —

I.  How    ENTIBELT    EVEN    AN    INTELLIGENT     MAN     MAY     MI8APPBBHEND    HIB    OWN

SFIBITUAL  ATTAINMENT.  It  was  natural  this  young  man  should  over-estimate  himself.
He  was  not  only  well-disposed,  very  much  the  model  of  what  a  rich  young  man  should
be,  but  was  interested  in  religion,  as  too  few  wealthy  young  men  are.  He  was  generally
esteemed,  and  had  already  become  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue.  He  came  to  Jesus,  not  to
'  be  taught  the  rudiments,  but  to  receive  the  finishing  touches  of  a  religious  charactei —
and  he  is  told  he  is  wrong  to  the  foundation.  He  is  in  the  position  of  a  person  who
goes  to  his  medical  adviser  complaining  of  a  slight  uneasiness  which  he  supposes
I  tonic  will  remove,  and  is  told  that  he  has  heart-disease  or  cancer.  Or  he  is  in  the
position  of  a  sanguine  inventor,  who  has  spent  years  on  the  elaboration  of  a  machine,
and  at  last  puts  it  into  the  hands  of  the  practical  man,  merely  to  get  steam  applied  and
the  fittings  adjusted,  and  is  told  by  the  practical  man  that  the  whole  thing  ia  wrong  in
conception,  and  can  by  no  possibility  ever  be  made  to  work.  He  sees  himself  as  he
never  saw  himself  before.  He  never  knew  how  much  he  loved  his  money  till  he  found
he  would  risk  his  soul  rather  than  part  with  his  money.  He  never  knew  how  little  he
cared  for  the  poor  till  he  found  he  was  not  prepared  to  help  them  by  becoming  one  of
them.  He  never  dreamt  he  was  ungodly  till  he  found  he  preferred  his  few  acres  of
land  to  that  Person  whom  he  had  confessed  to  be  Incarnate  Goodness.

II.  A   MAN   MAY   NOT   ONLY   MIBAPPEBHEND   HIS   ATTAINMENT,  BUT  HIB  WILLINGNESS

TO  ATTAIN.  This  young  man  fancied  he  would  welcome  any  light  upon  duty.  He
thought  himself  willing  to  do  anything  that  would  advance  his  spiritual  couditiou.
He  finds  he  is  by  no  means  willing.  Thousands  are  in  this  state.  "  Give  us,"  they
would  eay,  "  something  tangible  to  do,  and  we  will  do  it ;  but  religion  seems  always
so  much  in  the  clouds,  we  do  not  know  where  to  begin."  Put  present  duty  to  such
persons  in  an  attainable  form,  and  it  is  not  always  so  welcome  as  they  expected.  Tell
them  that  to  be  holy  is,  in  their  case,  to  say  ten  words  of  apology  to  some  one  they
have  injured,  to  set  apart  some  fixed  time  daily  for  thought  and  prayer,  to  abandon
some  indulgence,  or  spend  money  for  a  relative ;  and  they  turn  sullenly  away,  like  this
young  man.
IIL  Between  oub   pbesent  attainment  and  perfection  these   may  be  a

8A0EIFIOE   EQUIVALENT   TO   CUTTING  OFF   A   RIGHT   HAND    OK    PLUCKING    OUT   A   BIGHT

EYE.  This  young  man  was  plainly  told  that,  in  order  to  attain  life  eternal,  he  must
abandon  his  pleasant  home,  his  position  in  society,  all  his  comforts  and  prospects,  and
become  a  poor  wanderer.  It  seems  a  hard  demand  to  make  of  a  well-intentioned
youth.  But  it  was  no  doubt  justified  by  his  state.  Riches  are  not  the  only  hindrance
to  attainment,  and  we  may  ourselves  be  in  need  of  treatment  as  sharp.  To  begin  the
world  with  a  penny  would  be  no  great  trial  to  some  of  us ;  it  would,  indeed,  be  precisely
what  some  of  uS  are  already  doing ;  and  there  are  probably  few  who  would  not
gladly  sell  all  they  have  if  the  price  would  buy  perfection  of  character  and  life  ever-
lasting. But  it  is  no  such  bargain  our  Lord  means.  He  merely  means  that  to  us,  as
to  this  young  man,  salvation  is  impossible  if  it  be  not  theirs*  thing.  This  young
man's  possessions  happened  to  be  that  which  prevented  him  from  following  Christ ;
but  some  pursuit  of  ours,  or  some  cherished  inteution,  or  some  evil  habit,  or  mere
indifference,  may  be  as  effectually  preventing  us  from  holding  true  fellowship  with  him
and  becoming  like  him.  And  discipline  as  penetrating  and  sore  may  in  our  case
be  required.

IT.  Foe  the  one  thing  bsbential,  if  we  abe  to  attain  pbbfeotion,  is  the  fol-
lowing OF  Chbibt.  This  young  man  respected  Christ,  and  was  no  doubt  willing  to  do
much  to  please  him.  He  would  probably  have  given  up  half  his  possessions,  but  he
could  not  give  up  all  for  Christ.  He  did  not  scoff  or  argue:  he  "  went  away  sorrowfiil,"
feeling  that  the  demand  of  Christ  was  reasonable,  and  that  by  not  responding  to  it  he
was  condemned.  But  he  had  not  love  enough  to  obey.  It  is  not  our  judgment,  but
our  affections,  our  real  tastes  and  likings,  which  make  us  what  we  are,  and  determine


2C6  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30.

where  we  shall  ultimately  be.  Love  to  Christ,  which  will  compel  us  to  cleave  to  him
in  preference  to  all  else, — that  alone  is  security  that  we  shall  reach  perfection.  This  is
the  answer  to  the  question  which  we  all  ask,  "What  lack  I  yet?  What  is  it  that  pre-
vents me  from  becoming  a  purer,  stronger,  holier,  more  useful  man  than  I  am?
I  desire  growth,  and  I  pray  for  it;  but  still  it  is  chiefly  my  natural  propensities  that
api)ear  in  my  life.  I  do  not  seem  to  get  the  help  promised ;  I  do  not  make  the  growth
required.  Why  is  this  ?  What  is  it  always  keeps  me  at  the  same  point  ?  What  is  it
that  always  thwarts  and  bafQes  me  ?  "  Bad'cally,  it  is  the  lack  of  deep  and  genuine
devotedness  to  Christ.

V.  Other  things  may  also  be  lacking,  as,  foe  example,  dbtbbmination  to
BE  HOLT.  It  is  in  religion,  in  growth  of  character,  as  in  other  things,  we  succeed
when  we  are  determined  to  succeed ;  we  fail  when  this  determinatiou  is  awanting.  In
certain  physical  and  mental  attainments,  indeed,  determination  carries  no  efficacy.
No  amount  of  determination  will  make  you  as  tall  as  some  other  man,  or  as  long-
sighted, or  as  imaginative,  or  as  witty.  But  to  determine  to  be  holy  is  already  to  he
holy  in  will,  that  is,  in  the  spring  of  all  amendment  of  character  and  conduct.  Deter-
mination is  everything,  on  the  human  side,  in  the  matter  of  sanctification.  It  is
needless,  therefore,  seeking  for  mysterious  causes  of  failure,  if  this  first  and  last
requisite  he  awanting.  Are  you  determined  to  be  holy  ?  Are  you  bent  upon  this  ?
Because  if  you  are  not  determined,  common  sense  should  forbid  you  to  wonder  why
you  do  not  grow  in  character.  If  you  are  not  determined  to  be  holy,  the  very  root
of  the  matter  is  still  lacking  in  you.

YI.  Remark,  in  conclusion,  that  the  lace  of  one  thing  mat  make  all  other
attainments  useless.  One  mistake  vitiates  a  whole  calculation.  One  disease  is
enough  to  kill  a  man ;  his  brain  may  be  sound,  his  lungs  untouched,  all  his  organs
but  one  may  be  healthy ;  but  if  one  vital  organ  be  attacked,  all  the  other  healthy
organs  will  not  save  him.  So  it  is  in  character.  One  vice  destroys  the  whole.  If
a  man  is  malicious,  it  does  not  avail  that  he  is  temperate.  If  his  heart  is  set  on  the
world,  attention  to  religion  or  domestic  virtue  will  not  save  him.  Many  do  cultivate
all  points  but  one.  How  often  do  we  say,  "What  a  pity  so  good  a  man  should  give  way
in  this  or  that  one  respect  I "  So  may  it  be  said  by  others  of  ourselves.  To  some  this
question,  "  What  lack  I  yet  ?  "  may  come  with  a  tone  of  irony.  "  What  lack  I  ?  "  we
are  tempted  to  say,  "  What  have  I,  rather,  that  is  not  stained  with  sin,  spotted  by  the
world,  unsafe,  unproductive  ?  When  shall  the  time  come  when  I  shall  be  able  in
sincerity  to  say,  '  What  lack  I  yet  ? '  when  so  much  good  shall  have  been  achieved
by  me  that  I  shall  be  at  a  loss  to  see  whether  further  attainment  is  possible  ?  My
youth  was  very  different  from  this  young  man's.  Instead  of  the  ingenuousness,  the
unbroken  hope  and  ardent  aspiration  of  youth,  there  was  its  passion,  its  untamed
desires,  its  selfish  love  of  pleasure,  its  impatience,  its  folly."  There  is,  at  least,  the  same
choice  now  laid  before  you  that  was  laid  before  him.  To  you  Jesus  says, "  Follow  me."
He  wiU  infallibly  lead  you  to  perfection ;  he  sees  to  it  that  every  one  who  forsakes
aught  for  his  sake  receives  in  this  life  a  hundredfold,  and  in  the  world  to  come  life
everlasting. — D.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  ethici  of  marriage.  Note  here  a  contrast :  multitades  following
Christ  for  healing,  Pharisees  pursuing  him  for  mischief.  Satan  will  be  among  the  sons
of  God.  Jesus  turns  the  contradiction  of  sinners  into  instructions  for  his  disciples.
Let  us  consider —

I.  The  Pharisee's  question  eelatino  to  oapbioious  divorce.  1.  The  occasion.
(1)  It  was  commonly  practised.  Josephus  recites  Deut.  xxiv.  1,  and  relates  that  he
divorced  his  own  wife  because  he  was  not  pleased  with  her  manners  and  behaviour
('  Ant.,'  hk,  iv.  c.  8).  (2)  The  practice  had  the  sanction  of  scribes.  While  the  school
of  Schammah  were  strict  in  their  interpretation  of  the  Law,  the  school  of  Hillel  were
lax.  (3)  The  temptation  was  to  embroil  Jesus  with  one  or  other  of  these  schools.
The  plot  was  similar  to  that  in  the  question  of  the  tribute  (see  oh.  ixii.  15),  "  In
evil  things  Satan  separates  the  end  from  the  means ;  in  good  things  the  means  from
the  end"  (Philip  Henry).  2.  The  reply.  (1)  Note:  It  takes  no  notice  of  the  scribes.
Human  authority  is  nowhere  when  put  into  competition  with  the  Word  of  God.  (2)
It  appeals  immediately  to  the  Word:  "Have  ye  not  read?"    Matrimonial  cases  are


OH,  nx.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  267

made  intricate  by  leaving  the  Law  of  God  and  following  the  leading  of  human  psBsion
and  folly.  (3)  "  He  tlat  made  them  from  the  beginning  made  them  male  and
female."  It  is  profitable  to  reflect  upon  our  genesis.  Man  was  created  in  the  image
of  Qod,  woman  after  the  likeness  of  man.  The  true  marriage  is  the  union  of  wisdom
and  love.  One  man  and  one  woman,  leaving  no  room  for  divorce  and  remarriage,  so
intimating  the  perpetual  obligation  of  the  marriage  tie.  Note :  This  argument  is
equally  conclusive  against  polygamy.  (4)  "  And  said  "—God  said — "  For  this  cause
shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife."  But  these
words  of  God  were  spoken  by  the  lips  of  Adam  (see  Gen.  ii.  23,  24).  Adam,  then,
who  had  no  "father  and  mother,"  spake  prophetically  under  Divine  inspiration.
Marriage,  then,  is  a  sacred,  not  a  mere  civil,  institution ;  and  no  legislature  has  power
to  alter  its  law.  The  relation  between  husband  and  wife  is  nearer  than  that  between
parent  and  child.  If,  then,  a  parent  may  not  abandon  his  child,  or  a  cliild  his  parent,
by  so  much  less  may  a  husband  put  away  his  wife.  (5)  "  And  the  twain  shall  become
one  flesh  " — as  if  one  person.  What  can  be  less  dissoluble  ?  His  children  are  of  him,
his  wife  is  as  himselt  One  flesh  with  his  wife,  "  one'  spirit  with  the  Lord."  "  One
flesh,"  viz.  whUe  in  the  flesh.  "  No  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh."  "  They  twain
shall  be  one ; "  so  there  must  be  but  one  wife  (of.  Mai.  ii.  15).  (6)  "  "What  therefore
God  hath  joined  together,  let  not  man  put  asunder."  But  this  the  scribes  had  pre-
sumed to  do.  God  is  the  Author  of  union ;  man,  of  division.  Man  would  sunder  soul
and  body,  sin  and  punishment,  holiness  and  happiness,  precept  and  promise.

II.  Their  citation  oif  the  Mosaic  concession  of  divorcement.  1.  The  am-
cession.  (1)  "Why  then  did  Moses  command  to  give  a  bill  of  divorcement?"  It  is
usual  for  siimers  to  justify  their  conduct  by  the  perversion  of  Scripture.  The  "  com-
mand "  of  Moses  applied  solely  to  the  manner  of  the  divorce ;  the  thing  was  permissive
simply.  A  toleration  is  strangely  converted  into  a  command.  (2)  The  reason  of  the
toleration  was  the  reverse  of  creditable  to  the  Jews.  "  Moses  for  your  hardness  of
heart  sufiered  you  to  put  away  your  wives."  The  permission  was  to  prevent  the
oiTielty  of  vicious  husbands  to  their  wives,  which  was  murderous.  The  bill  of  divorce-
ment had  to  be  drawn  and  witnesses  procured,  and  aflbrded  time  to  obviate  the  eflects
of  sudden  impulses  of  passion.  God's  permission  of  lesser  evil  is  evermore  to  prevent
greater.  2.  Its  repeal.  (1)  This  is  prefaced  by  an  appeal.  "  But  from  the  beginning
it  hath  not  been  so."  The  appeal  here  is  from  Deuteronomy  to  Genesis;  so  from
Moses  still  to  Moses  (cf.  Luke  zviii.  17, 18).  God  who  gave  the  law  had  a  right  to
relax  it.  (2)  But  the  relaxation  applied  only  to  the  Jews,  and  was  conceded  to  them
in  judgment  for  the.  hardness  of  their  hearts ;  for  the  original  was  the  more  excellent
way.  (3)  This  relaxation  is,  however,  now  removed.  "  I  say  unto  you."  Here  is
an  authority  superior  to  Moses,  equal  to  God.  By  Divine  authority  the  law  of
marriage  is  now  explicitly  stated  (see  ver.  9).  Note :  The  grace  of  the  gospel  is
superior  to  that  of  the  Law.  The  Law  considered  the  hardness  of  the  heart;  the
gospel  cures  it  (cf.  Gal.  iiL  19).

III.  The  question  of  the  disciples  on  celibacy.  1.  They  viewed  it  in  the  light
of  selfishness.  "  If  the  case  of  a  man  is  so,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  Qod  said,  "  It  is  not  good
for  man  to  be  alone,"  «'.«.  unmarried ;  the  disciples,  blinded  by  the  prejudices  of  their
race,  said,  "It  is  not  good  to  marry."  2.  Jesus  put  it  in  its  true  light.  (1)  The
principle  of  expediency  is  admissible.  "  All  men  cannot  receive  this  saying ;  "  for  there
are  some  who  are  disqualifled  for  marriage,  so  that  the  question  for  them  is  settled
without  their  option.  (2)  Others  have  not  the  gift  of  continence.  For  such  celibacy
is  not  expedient.  "  It  is  better  to  marry  than  to  burn."  (3)  For  those  who  have
this  gift  celibacy  may  be  expedient  in  times  of  persecution  and  suffering  (cf.  1  Cor.
vii.  26).  (4)  It  is  commendable  in  those  who  are  celibates  "  for  the  kingdom  of
heaven's  sake,"  viz.  that  they  might  walk  more  closely  with  God,  and  be  more
serviceable  to  the  salvation  of  men  (cf.  1  Cor.  viL  32 ;  ix.  6, 12). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  13—15. — The  children  of  the  kingdom.  Here  we  have  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
its  children,  and  its  King.

I.  The  KiNaDOM  of  heaven.  1.  This  is  a  name  for  the  invisible  Ghtirch  of  Ood.
(1)  It  is  the  Catholic  Church.  It  exists  throughout  the  universe,  comprising  the
"  whole  family  "  of  God  at  once  in  heaven  and  on  earth  (see  Eph.  iiL  15).    The  head-


268  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30.

quarters  and  enrolment  are  in  heaven  (see  Heb.  xii.  23).  (2)  It  is  the  one  Church  of  all
the  ages.  It  comprises  the  aristocracy  of  virtue  under  every  dispensatiun.  Christians
from  all  climes  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God  with  all  the  prophets  of  the  Mosaic
dispensation,  and  with  the  patriarchs  of  still  more  ancient  times  ^cf.  ch.  viii.  11 ;
Luke  liii  28,  29).  2.  This  is  also  a  name/or  the  collective  Christian  Church.  (1)  In
this  restricted  sense  it  does  not  include  the  kingdom  of  Israel  or  the  Mosaic  Church.
The  Baptist  ipoke  of  it  as  future  to  him ;  so  also  did  the  seventy  disciples  speak  of  it
as  future  to  them  (see  ch.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  17 ;  x.  7).  (2)  The  gospel  dispensation  is  the
kingdom  of  heaven  as  bringing  heaven  near  to  us.  Christ  is  "  the  Lord  from  heaven."
The  spirit  of  the  gospel  is  tiie  very  spirit  of  heaven.  It  brings  us  also  near  to  heaven.
We  are  spiritually  risen  vrith  Christ,  and  sit  veith  him  in  heavenly  places.

II.  The  ohildbbn  of  the  kingdom.    1.  These  are  the  disciples  who  are  childliJce.

(1)  Those  who  are  without  this  resemblance  have  no  place  in  this  kingdom  (see  ch.
xviii.  1 — 4).  (2)  In  the  innocence  and  simplicity  of  childhood  we  see  in  outline  what
a  man  will  become  when  born  again  and  created  anew.  2.  These  are  also  little  children
•proper.  (1)  Such  were  the  •"  little  children "  brought  to  Christ.  They  were
"brought,"  viz.  by  their  parents.  They  were  so  "  little"  that  Jesus  "  took  tliem  into
his  arms  "  (see  Mark  x.  16).    They  are  described  as  "  babes "  (see  Luke  xviii.  15).

(2)  These  be  received  as  belonging  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  There  would  be  no  good
reason  in  rebuking  the  disciples  for  forbidding  such  little  children  to  come  to  him,
because  childlike  grown  persons  had  a  right  to  admission  into  the  kingdom.  (3)  This
bltssedly  disposes  of  the  dreadful  doctrine  of  non-elect  inlaiits'  damnation.  The
parents  in  this  case  were  in  some  sense  believers  in  Jesus,  else  they  would  not  have
brought  their  children  to  receive  his  blessing.  Yet  his  grace  comes  to  all  infantn
through  his  relation  to  them  as  the  second  Adam  (see  Eom.  v.  14, 15 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  22)
Christ  loves  little  children,  because  he  loves  simplicity  and  innocence.  (4)  The  pro-
minent place  infants  have  in  the  gospel  is  in  keeping  with  the  incarnation  of  innocence
itself  in  the  infant  Saviour.

III.  The  King  or  SAINTS.  1.  Jesus  i»  present  to  welcome  the  little  ona.  (1)  Infants
belonged  to  the  Church  of  the  covenant  under  its  more  exclusive  dispensations  of  the
past.  By  circumcision  they  were  anciently  admitted.  (2)  Are  they  now  to  be  exoludeii
from  the  same  Church  of  the  covenant  under  the  more  liberal  Christian  dispensation  ?
Baptism  is  the  circumcision  of  Christianity  (see  Col.  ii.  11, 12).  (3)  If  little  children
belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the  invisible  sense  of  which  the  visible  Ohurch
is  the  type,  why  should  they  not  also  be  welcomed  into  the  typical  kingdom  ?  Why
should  water  be  forbidden  to  those  who  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost  (cf.  Isa.  xliv.
3 ;  Acts  X.  47)  ?  2.  Present  to  rebuke  those  who  would  keep  them  from  him.  (1)  He
who  had  recently  defended  the  rights  of  marriage  (vers.  3—12)  now  defends  those  of
children.  In  rebuking  his  disciples  he  commended  the  parents.  (2)  There  are  still
those  who  would  keep  the  little  ones  from  Christ,  not  only  through  their  irreligion  and
neglect,  but  also  under  false  zeal  for  the  dignity  of  the  Lord.  (3)  Notably  those
disciples  who  refuse  them  baptism  because  they  cannot  voluntarily  believe.  May  not
those  baptized  in  infancy  believe  when  they  grow  up?  "  The  strongest  believer  loves
nDt  so  much  by  apprehending  Christ,  as  by  being  apprehended  of  him  "  (cf.  Gal.  iv.  9 ;
Phil.  iii.  12).  3.  Se  is  there  to  hless  them.  (1)  The  little  ones  were  brought  to  Jesus
expressly  for  this  purpose.  The  Jews  to  this  day  bring  their  young  children  to  their
rabbis  for  their  blessing.  The  custom  seems  to  have  been  very  ancient  (cf.  Gen.  xlviii.
14,  20).  (2)  Jesus  is  not  said  to  have  prayed,  as  he  was  asked  to  do  (ver.  13)  ;  pro-
bably because  those  who  asked  him  had  no  knowledge  of  his  Oneness  with  the  Father.

(3)  But  it  is  recorded  that  he  "  blessed  them  "  (see  Mark  xi.  16).  Little  children,
then,  are  capable  of  receiving  blessing  from  Christ.  (4)  Let  us  humble  ourselves  to
the  simplicity  of  the  child,  that  we  also  may  receive  the  blessing  of  the  Lord. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  16 — 22. — I%e  perfection  of  goodness.  To  attain  to  this  should  be  the  aim  of
every  rational  being.  In  quest  of  it  we  should  be  willing  to  do  anything  and  to
sacrifice  anything.     "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  "

I.  Chbibt  is  the  impersonation  of  peefeot  goodness.  1.  The  rider,  in  a  sense,
discerned  this.  (1)  He  addressed  him  as  "good  Master"  (cf.  Maik  x.  17;  Luke
xviii.  18).    He  also  evinced  his  veneration  by  "  kue«Ling,"  as  stated  in  Mark.    (2)  He


OH.  XIX.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  26'J

sought  to  Jesus  for  instruction  as  to  liow  he  might  attain  to  "  eternal  life,"  viz.  hy
finding  that  perfect  goodness  of  which  eternal  life  is  the  reward.  His  question  wau,  in
effect,  "  How  may  I  become  like  thee  ?  "  Note :  What  the  young  man  calls  "  eternal
life,"  Christ  calls  "  life,"  for  eternal  life  is  the  only  true  life.  Without  this,  "  in  the
midst  of  life  we  are  in  death."  2.  But  he  discerned  it  falsely,  (1)  He  did  not  recog-
nize the  Divinity  of  Christ.  Hence  the  question,  "  Why  askest  thou  me  concerning
that  which  is  good  ?  "  Suppose  an  emphasis  on  the  word  thou.  So  he  proceeds,  "  One
there  is  who  is  good ; "  equivalent  to  "  None  is  good  save  One,  even  God  "  (Mark
X.  18;  Luke  xviii.  19).  (2)  The  rebuke  here  is  for  ascribing  goodness  to  Christ  with-
out discerning  his  Divinity  as  its  source.  The  title  is  not  inappliaMe,  lor  our  Lord
calls  himself  the  "good  Shepherd"  (John  x.  11).  The  fault  was  that  it  was  improperly
applied.  (3)  The  teaching,  then,  is  that  it  is  vain  to  seek  goodness  apart  from  God.
He  alone  is  good  essentially,  originally,  everlastingly.  "  God  "  is  "  good."  Therefore
we  should  transfer  to  God  all  praise  which  is  given  to  us.  All  crowns  must  lie  before
his  throne  (see  Jas.  i.  17).

IL  The  law  of  God  is  the  bule  op  goodness.  1.  This  is  expressed  in  the
instruction  of  Christ,  (1)  "If  thou  wouldest  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments."
This  is  not  irony,  but  sober  truth.  To  keep  the  commandments  from  a  principle
of  loving  faith  is  undoubtedly  the  way  to  eternal  life.  Those  who  are  justified  by
faith  must  keep  the  commandments  before  they  can  enter  into  life  and  be  finally
saved.  (2)  Keeping  the  commaudments  must,  however,  include  faith  in  Jesua
Christ  (see  1  John  ill.  23).  Moses  gave  it  amongst  his  commandments  that  we  should
hear  the  great  Prophet  to  be  raised  up  like  unto  him.  2.  2%e  ruler  observed  the  com-
mandments in  the  letter.  (1)  The  inquiry  "Which?"  was  probably  occasioned  b^
the  confusion  introduced  by  the  scribes,  who  mixed  up  the  traditions  of  the  elders  with
the  precepts  of  Moses ;  and  who  magnified  the  ritual  observances  so  as  to  neglect  the
moral  rules — ^the  "weightier  matters  of  the  Law,"  justice,  mercy,  and  charity.  (2)  The
answer  put  the  moral  law  in  the  foremost  place.  The  particular  commandments  which
our  Lord  selects  are  but  adduced  as  instances  of  moral,  in  opposition  to  ritual,  obedi-
ence. Nor  does  he  cite  the  commandments  in  their  order,  probably  to  show,  as  the
Jews  themselves  express  it,  "that  there  is  neither  first  nor  last  in  the  Law" — that
every  precept  is  so  perfect  that  it  matters  not  whether  it  be  taken  first  or  last.  He
mentions  only  the  duties  of  the  second  table,  summing  them  up,  however,  with  the
precept  from  Lev.  six.  18,  for  the  love  of  God  can  only  be  made  manifest  by  love  to
our  neighbour  (cf.  1  John  iv.  20,  21).  "  Our  light  hwrns  in  love  to  God,  but  it  shines
in  love  to  our  neighboiu: "  (Henry).  (3)  "  All  these  things  have  I  observed  "  (cf.  Phil,
iii.  6).  3.  He  failed  to  keep  them  in  the  spirit.  (1)  "What  lack  I  yet?"  He  was
convinced  that  he  yet  needed  something.  He  had  too  much  of  that  boasting  which  is
excluded  by  the  law  of  faith,  and  which  excludes  from  justification  (Luke  xviii.  11, 14 ;
Kom.  iii.  27).  (2)  The  Lord  soon  discovered  to  him  the  covetousness  and  earthliness
of  his  heart.  He  found  how  he  over-estimated  his  obedience  when  he  was  unwilling  to
part  with  his  possessions  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor,  and  preferred  earthly  to  heavenly
treasure.  Note:  Worldly  men  prefer  heaven  to  hell ;  Christians  prefer  heaven  to  earth.
(3)  We  cannot  become  peri'ect  without  becoming  spiritual.  So  a  man  may  be  free
from  gross  sin,  yet  come  short  of  the  life  of  grace  and  glory.

III.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  way  of  goodness.  1.  It  promises  eternallife
in  Christ.  "Thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven:  and  come,  follow  me."  (1)  In  the
school  of  Christ  we  learn  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  in  his  sufScient  atone-
ment. (2)  The  connection  with  that  atonement  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  thia,
heart.  (3)  His  teaching,  moreover,  shows  us  the  connection  between  faith  and  obedi-
ence unto  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law.  2.  But  it  exacts  an  absolute  submission.  (1)  "  SlU
all."  This  was  literally  required  in  the  case  of  the  ruler.  Christ  did  not  lighten  hia
cross,  because  "  he  loved  him."  Note :  This  reason  should  sustain  us  under  our  crosses.
(2)  Virtually  we  have  to  sell-all.  We  must  be  willing  to  part  with  everything  that
may  hinder  our  salvation.  3.  I%ose  who  refuse  submission  accept  sorrow.  (1)  "  He
went  away  sorrowful."  What  an  opportunity  he  missed  I  The  offer  to  him  was  tn
become  one  of  Christ's  more  intimate  disciples;  to  be  specially  trained  by  him  in  the
knowledge  of  spiritual  things,  and  to  preach  his  gospel  (of.  oh.  iv.  19  ;  viii,  22  ;  ix.  9 ;
Mark  ii.  14  j  x.  21).    (2)  Many  are  ruined  by  the  sin  they  commit  with  reluctance


270  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30

What  would  be  the  ruler's  sorrow  in  the  sequel  to  find  his  wealth  gone  and  eternal  life
along  with  it  1  Mariners  act  prudently  when,  to  save  their  lives,  they  throw  overboard
rich  bales  of  silk  and  precious  things. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  23 — 30. — Possessions  and  life.  "  Behold,  on«  came  "  to  Jesus  (see  ver.  16).
Multitudes  of  poor  persons  bad  followed  him  from  the  beginning ;  at  length  "  one  "
rich  man  came,  and,  sad  to  say,  this  one  retired  sorrowful  and  unsaved.  So,  turning  to
his  disciples,  the  Lord  said,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,"  etc.     Learn —

I.  That  the  salvation  of  a  rich  man  is  a  special  uibaole  op  mbrot.  1,
That  it  is  outside  the  rwnge  of  ordinary  probability  is  evinced  in  the  'case  of  the  ruler
(1)  His  circumstances  were  exceptionably  favourable.  Observe :  (a)  The  seriousness
of  his  inquiry  after  eternal  life.  (6)  The  respectfulness  of  his  approach  to  Christ,
(c)  The  excellence  of  his  moral  character.  (<?)  The  affection  with  which  our  Lord
regarded  him.  (e)  The  sorrowful  struggle  of  spirit  with  which  he  departed.  (2)  Yet
for  all  this  he  was  overcome  by  the  influence  of  his  "great  possessions."  (3)  The
silence  respecting  him  afterwards  renders  it  probable  that,  in  gaining  the  world,  he  lost
his  soul.     2.  Ihat  it  is  outside  the  range  of  ordinary  probability  is  declared  by  Christ.

(1)  "It  is  hard,"  etc.  (ver.  23).  And  this  is  emphasized  by  a  "verily."  (2)  The
assertion  is  strengthened  by  what  follows  (ver.  24).  "  I  incline  to  the  opinion  that  at
the  time  the  Redeemer  spake  this  parable,  he  was  with  his  disciples  in  one  of  the
]Mblic  khans,  there  being  no  other  resting-place  for  them ;  and  there,  seeing  the  people
mending  their  camel-saddles,  for  which  purpose  they  use  a  long  needle  like  a  straight
packing-needle,  he  pointed  to  them  and  said  as  it  were, '  These  camels  can  as  soon
pass  through  the  eye  of  those  needles  as  a  rich  man  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
God '"  (Gadsby).  Note :  The  way  to  heaven  is  fitly  compared  to  a  needle's  eye,  which
it  is  hard  to  hit ;  and  a  rich  man  to  a  camel — a  beast  of  burden.  For  he  has  his
riches  from  others,  spends  them  for  others,  leaves  them  to  others,  and  is  himself  the
carrier.  (3)  What  our  Lord  adds  does  not  soften  his  earlier  words  (see  ver.  26);  for  it
makes  the  salvation  of  the  rich  an  utmost  effort  of  omnipotence.  3.  The  salvation  of
the  rich  is  imperilled  by  the  deceitfulness  of  riches.  (1)  It  is  not  riches  themselves,  but
the  sordid  iove  of  them,  that  our  Lord  condemns  (cf.  Mark  x.  24).  So,  in  the  bad
sense,  a  man  is  rich  in  proportion  to  his  attachment  to  worldly  possessions.  A  rich
man,  according  to  this  definition,  cannot  be  saved.  (2)  But  those  who  have  riches
naturally  love  them  and  trust  them  (cf.  ch.  vi.  21 ;  Col.  iii.  5).  They  tend  to  increase
pride,  covetousness,  and  self-indulgence.  They  purchase  flattery  and  exclude  faithful
reprovers.  They  prejudice  the  mind  against  the  humbling  truths  and  self-denying  pre-
cepts of  Christ.  They  increase  the  number  and  force  of  the  obstacles  which  must  be
broken  through  (cf.  Ps.  xlix.  6,  7 ;  Iii.  7 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  (3)  Yet  how  few  see  that
to  be  rich  is  a  misfortune  I  Even  when  Christ  intimated  this,  his  own  disciples  were
"astonished  exceedingly"  (ver.  25);  and  he  had  to  "look  upon  them," penetrating
their  feeling  of  astonishment  and  perplexity,  to  convince  them  that  such  feelings  as
theirs  were  the  peril  of  the  rich ;  for  they  were  deceived  into  the  notion  that  riches
gave  singular  advantages  towards  salvation.  4.  Still  with  Ood  the  salvation  of  the  rich
is  possible.  (1)  It  needs  more  than  human  power  to  wean  the  heart  of  man  from
worldly  things.  No  perfection  of  science  can  enable  him  to  discern  spiritual  things ;
these  are  above  the  natural  man.    God  alone  can  destroy  the  love  of  the  world  in  us.

(2)  Omnipotence  is  displayed  in  grace  as  well  as  in  nature.  God  can  effectually  plead
the  cause  of  the  rich  in  the  presence  of  the  poor,  by  pleading  the  cause  of  the  poor  in

•the  presence  of  the  rich  (see  ver.  21).  (3)  The  possibility  is  evinced  in  the  examples
of  Nicodemus,  Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod's  steward,  and
many  more.  Man  fails  when  he  begins  with  himself;  succeeds,  when  he  begins
with  God,

II.  That  fob  whatever  we  saobifioe  ih  the  servioe  of  Christ  we  shall  be
WONDBBFULLY  REWARDED.  1.  In  this  present  life,  (1)  Peter  said,  "  Lo,  we  have  left
all,  and  followed  thee."  The  disciples  had  but  little ;  yet  it  was  their  all  (cf.  Mark  xii.
43,  44).  (2)  Peter  speaks  of  their  giving  up  all  (ver.  27) ;  Jesus  speaks  of  their
following  him  (ver.  38).    "  To  obey  is  better  than  to  sacrifice."    Obedience  indudei

sacrifice.  "The  philosopher  forsakes  all  without  following  Christ;  most  Ghristiane
follow  Christ  without  forsaking  all;   to  do  both  is  apostolic  perfection"  (Beugel).


CH.  XIX.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  271


(3)  Christ  did  not  estimate  the  attachment  of  his  disciples  to  him  by  the  quantity  of
thmgs  they  relinquished,  but  from  the  mind  and  intention  with  which  they  relin-
quished them.  "  And  every  one  that  hath  left  houses,"  etc.,  viz.  either  by  giving
them  up  when  they  could  not  retain  them  with  a  clear  conscience,  or  by  refraining
from  acquiring  them,  "ffur  my  Name's  sake"  (ver,  29;  see  2  Cor.  viii.  12).  (4)  The
compensation  then  is  "  a  hundredfold,"  viz.  not  in  kind,  but  in  spiritual  blessings.
Here  is  cent,  per  cent,  multiplied  a  hundred  times.  Such,  even  in  this  life  (see  Mark
X.  30),  is  the  advantage  of  the  spiritual  value  gained  in  this  blessed  exchange  I
2.  In  the  life  to  come.  (1)  "  The  regeneration  "  commences  in  the  millennium.  That
will  be  the  great  day  of  judgment,  or  reigning.  It  will  be  a  theocracy,  as  in  the
times  of  the  ancient  judges  (cf.  Isa.  i.  26).  Irenteus  says  that  the  reward  of  the
hundredfold  is  to  happen  in  the  millennium  (cf.  Isa.  xxxii.  1 ;  Dan.  vii.  18,  27 ;
ch.  xxvi.  29  ;  Acts  iii.  20,  21 ;  Bev.,  xx.).  (2)  The  Lord's  glorification  is  the  pattern
of  human  regeneration  here ;  for  those  who  follow  him  are  morally  risen  with  him  and
resemble  him.  Hereafter  also,  for  we  shall  in  our  regeneration  from  the  power  of  the
grave  be  in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection.  So  the  "  redemption  of  the  body  "  will  be
the  "  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  "  (cf.  Luke  xx.  36 ;  Eom.  viii.  23 ;  1  John  iii.  2).
(3)  The  "  regeneration "  which  commences  in  the  millennium  will  culminate  in  the
"  new  heaven  and  earth  "  in  which  the  "  new  creation,"  under  the  headship  of  the  second
Adam,  will  be  finished.  The  reward  of  that  glorious  state  is  "  life  everlasting." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  6,  7. — Natwral  laws  and  human  infirmities.  The  law  of  marriage  must  be
thought  of  as  fixed  for  human  beings  before  the  FalL  Natural  laws  are  not  fixed  in
view  of  man's  wilfulness  and  sin.  They  remain  natural  laws  after  man  has  sinned ;
but  their  application  and  practical  working  are  modified  by  the  new  conditions  and
relations  which  sin  has  introduced.  God  made  man  male  and  female.  God  designed
single  pairs.  God  proposed  lifelong  faithfulness  of  the  wedded  pairs.  There  is  no
natural  provision  made  for  divorce,  because  such  a  thing  hag  no  place  in  the  natural
order.  In  the  Divine  idea  human  society  is  based  on  the  mutually  helpful  relation
in  which  one  man  and  one  woman  may  stand.  Instability  of  human  society  comes
when  the  family  bond  can  be  easily  broken.  The  human  infirmities  which  have
necessitated  modifications  of  the  natural  marriage  laws  are —

I.  CbuelWbs.  It  became  necessary  for  womau  to  have  some  defence  against  man's
violence.  Natural  law  makes  man  and  woman  equals.  They  are  different ;  but  their
faculties  and  sympathies  are  relative,  and  each  is  head  in  a  way.  But  sin  took  first
shape  as  masterfulness ;  and  man,  the  stronger,  took  advantage  of  woman,  the  weaker,
and  made  her  his  slave.  There  had  to  be  adjustment  of  law  to  meet  this  condition
and  give  due  protection  to  the  weaker  one.  "  But  for  the  possibility  of  divorce,  the
wife  would  have  been  the  victim  of  the  husband's  tyranny ;  and  law — social  law —
which  has  to  deal  with  facts — not  with  what  ought  to  be,  but  with  what  is — was
compelled  to  choose  between  two  evils."  Woman's  lot,  even  in  civilized  times,  would
often  be  intolerable  but  for  the  possibility  and  the  fear  of  divorce.

II.  Infidelities.  This  subject  needs  to  be  touched  very  wisely  in  a  general
audience;  and  yet  there  is  no  subject  on  which  wise  words  are  more  pressingly
demanded.  It  is  one  of  the  most  serious  of  the  mischiefs  wrought  by  sin,  that  it  has
loosened  men's  control  of  bodily  passion.  And  the  mischief  is  wrought,  not  in  man
only,  but  also  in  .woman.  Infidelities  make  the  continuance  of  natural  relations
impossible,  though  the  modification  of  law,  which  permits  divorce,  makes  no  attempt  to
deliver  man  or  woman  from  the  power  of  their  infirmity. — B.  T.

Ver.  11. — Varieties  in  receptiveness,  "All  men  cannot  receive  this  saying."  It  is
not  quite  clear  to  what  the  term  "  this  saying  "  refers.  It  may  be  the  rule  laid  down
by  our  Lord  in  ver.  9.  It  may  be  the  exclamation  of  the  disciples  in  ver.  10.  It  may
be  that  our  Lord  refers  generally  to  marriage,  and  intends  to  say  that  the  question  of
entering  into  the  marriage  state  is  one  which  each  man  must  settle  for  himself,
according  to  natural  capacity,  material  circumstances,  and  cultured  disposition.  It  is
one  thing  to  give  good  and  wise  counsels ;  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  receive  them
and  act  upon  them.  It  is  easy  to  say,  "  It  is  good  to  marry  ;  "  but  it  is  not  everybody
who  can  receive  the  saying.


272  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1— 80.

I,  BEOEFTivEirags  DEPENDS  ON  NATURAL  DISPOSITION.  There  is,  in  this,  a  marked
diBtinctiou  between  men  and  women.  As  a  rule,  by  nature,  women  are  receptive,  and
not  critical;  men  are  critical,  and  not  receptive.  Sometimes  we  find  the  womanly
receptiveness  in  man;  but  it  is  a  sign  of  a  weak  disposition.  Strong  men  only  receive
on  compulsion.  Receptiveness  may  hinder  rather  than  help  education ;  and  it  prevents
activity.  He  who  is  satisfied  to  receive  makes  little  effort  to  attain.  True  education
deals  with  natural  receptivity,  and  is  anxious  about  its  effective  limitation.  It  makes
teaching  easy,  but  too  easy.  He  who  can  only  receive  becomes  only  a  crammed
storehouse.

II.  Receptiveness  depends  on  mobal  discipline.  While  the  receptiveness  which
we  have  as  an  element  of  our  natnral  disposition  may  prove  a  perilous  weakness,  the
receptiveness  which  we  gain  by  self-discipline  becomes  an  effective  power  in  oui
life.  It  is  a  qualifying  receptiveness.  It  is  related  to  the  will.  It  is  held  in  control
The  man  who  is  not  subject  to  influence,  who  cannot  be  persuaded,  who  is  as  a
hard  field-path  into  which  no  seed  can  sink,  is  a  manifestly  undisciplined  man,  self-
centred,  self-satisfied — a  man  who  can  learn  nothing,  and  grow  no  better. — R.  T.

Ver.  13. — The  folk  who  are  interested  in  the  children.  It  is  difficult  for  us  to
conceive  of  the  good  man  who  dues  not  love  flowers,  song,  spring-time,  and  children.
We  might  be  quite  sure  that  the  "  best  of  men  who  e'er  wore  earth  about  him  "  loved
the  children.  But  in  the  East  all  children  are  kept  in  the  background ;  female  children
are  despised  by  their  fathers,  and  even  male  children  are  in  the  women's  hands  tintil
quite  big.  So  our  Lord's  interest  in  children  seemed  new  and  strange  to  his  disciples.
At  this  time,  his  mind  was  filled  with  the  thought  of  coming  sorrows,  and  it  was  relief
and  comfort  to  be  made  to  think  of  simple,  guileless  childhood.  If  Jesus  honoured
the  children,  it  is  also  true  that  the  children  comforted  Jesus.  Beware  of  exaggera-
tion in  representing  Christ's  dealings  with  children.  Very  few  instances  are  recorded.
On  one  occasion  he  "  set  a  child  in  the  midst "  of  the  disciples ;  then  there  is  the
mcident  of  the  text;  and  also  the  "hosannah"  of  the  children  at  the  triumphal  entry.
Fixing  attention  on  the  persons  prominent  in  the  incident  of  the  text,  see —

I.  What  the  mothers  want  foe  theib  children.  1.  Their  physical  health.
Subtle  connectiuu  between  health  and  character.  Relation  of  health  to  success  in  life.
Importance  of  laying  foundations  of  health  in  early  years.  2.  Their  mental  culture.
Age  of  education;  danger  of  overstrain;  and  of  thinking  learning  more  important
than  character.  3.  Their  social  position.  So  they  try  to  secure  for  them  right
companions,  good  society,  advautageous  connections.  4.  Their  moral  character.  This
ought  to  come  first.  Beginnings  of  character  and  piety  are  reverence,  truthfulness,
obedience,  trustfulness.

II.  What  disciples  may  want  fob  the  ohildebn.  These  disciples,  in  their
conduct  on  this  occasion,  may  represent  all  who  have  narrow  and  limited  views  of  the
sphere  of  God  and  religion.  They  wanted  these  children  to  run  away  and  play,  and
not  trouble  or  hinder  the  Master.  Deal  with  the  once-prevailing  idea  that  religion  is
only  the  concern  of  grown-up  folk.  There  has  been  over-pressure  of  the  idea  of
"  conversion."     There  is  an  unfolding  into  the  service  of  Christ.

III.  What  the  Lord  Jbsos  wants  for  the  children.  1.  To  come  to  him  for
their  own  sakes.  And  "  coming  to  Christ "  is  simply  this — setting  otir  love  upon  him.
2.  To  come  to  him  for  their  mothers'  sakes ;  because,  through  tliem,  he  can  get  a
gracious  iuflueuce  on  the  mothers.  3.  To  come  to  him  for  the  sake  of  what  he  can
teach  with  their  help.  Bring  out  the  reproofs  and  lessons,  for  the  disciples,  involved
in  our  Lord's  act. — B.  T.

Ver.  16. — The  ruler's  mistakes.  The  assumption  that  this  ruler  was  a  youth  has  no
foundation.  The  man  could  not  have  been  a  ruler  if  he  had  been  a  youth.  He  must
have  been  in  what  we  should  call  the  prime  of  life ;  but  he  evidently  retained  some-
thing of  the  impetuousness  of  youth.  His  mistakes  suggest  the  impulsive  temperament,
that  readily  yields  to  emotion,  and  is  wont  to  act  before  it  thinks.  Our  Lord  skilfully
dealt  with  individuals.  "  He  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man;  for  he  knew
what  was  in  man."  Ho  was  "  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."
In  the  ruler's  abrupt  and  impulsive  question  we  may  trace  three  forms  of  mistake.


OH.  XIX,  1—80.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  2YS

I.  A  uiSTAKB  ABOUT  Ohbist.  He  applied  the  word  "  good  "  to  hinij  and  jet  he  had
no  adequate  ideas  concerning  goodness.  If  he  had  really  meant  anything  worth
meauiDg,  he  would  have  recognized  in  Christ  the  infinitely  Oood  One,  the  Son  of  Gkid ;
for  none  ia  good  save  God.  This  mistake  Jesus  corrected  in  two  ways.  1.  By  reference
to  God.  *  Koue  is  good  save  one,  that  is,  God."  Yon  do  not  call  God  good  heoause  be
doe$  good,  but  because  he  it  good.  2.  By  a  severe  and  searching  test,  which  reveals  to
the  man  the  imperfeotneas  of  his  own  goodness.  He  would  never  b«  able  to  get  right
ideas  of  God  or  Christ  from  himsel£

IL  A  MISTAKE  coKCEBNiNa  HUiBEur.  This  took  a  twofold  form.  He  thought  he
wM  good ;  and  he  thought  he  could  do  good,  if  only  he  was  told  what  to  do.  Jesus
showed  him  a  good  tiling  that  he  could  not  do ;  and  so  set  his  conscience  suggesting,
that  perhaps  he  toot  not  as  good  as  he  had  thought.  We  may  think  ourselves  good
while  we  arrange  the  forms  that  our  goodness  shall  take;  but  we  may  learn  our
mistake  when  God  arranges  the  forms  for  us.  The  question  betrays  the  man's  self-
righteous  spirit.  He  is  indirectly  paying  a  compliment  to  himeelf — to  his  own  goodness ;
or,  at  any  rate,  to  human  goodness,  that  idol  which  he  worshipped  with  his  whole  soul.

III.  A  uiBTAKB  coKCBBNiKQ  THE  FUTUBs.  Feeling  himeelf  well  provided  for  in  all
that  concerned  this  life,  he  wanted  to  be  as  safely  and  as  well  off  in  the  next  life.  He
would  inherit  eternal  life ;  he  would  have  it  as  something  coming  to  him ;  he  wanted
as  much  right  to  it  as  he  had  to  his  worldly  possessions.  How  much  he  had  to  learn  1
A  man's  life  here  "consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  he  possesses."  A
man's  wealth  is  his  character  i  that  is  true  of  this  life,  but  much  more  true  of  the  life
to  come.— B.  T.

Ver.  19. — Bight  attitude  toward*  parents.  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother.''
It  is  significant  that  the  old  Law  did  not  say,  "  Obey  thy  father  and  mother,"  or  even
"  Love  thy  father  and  mother."  Perhaps  we  are  intended  to  see  that  obeying  and
loving  have  no  will  necessarily  in  them.  We  obey  in  simple  yielding  to  the  force  that
commands ;  we  love  our  parents  in  the  animal  sort  of  way  that  characterizes  all  young
creatures.  "  Honour  thy  father  "  suggests  active  intelligence,  careful  estimates,  opera-
tive will,  personal  decision.  Reverence,  and  show  reverence  for,  thy  father,  Doth
t>ecause  he  is  thy  father,  and  because  of  what  he  is  in  his  fatherliness.

I.    BlOBT   ATTITUDE   TOWABDS    FABENTS    IS    THB    BEGINNINO  OP   MOBAU   AND  BELl-

GioN.  Our  father  and  mother  represent  the  power  above  us  that  we  first  know.  We
know  parents  before  we  know  God.  And  we  know  God  through  our  parents.  He
begins  life  with  an  almost  overwhelming  disability  who  has  parents  whom  he  cannot
"  honour."  Honouring  includes :  1.  Cherishing  high  thoughts  concerning.  To  a  child,
father  and  mother  ought  to  be  embodiments  of  all  excellence.  2.  Loving  dependence
on.  The  confidence  that  the  goodness  will  be  adequate  to  all  emergencies.  3.  Perfect
response  to.  Involving  the  putting  of  the  parents'  will  before  the  child's  own.  4.
Tender  care  of.  Expressed  in  all  thoughtful  and  self-denying  attentions.  It  may  be
shown  how  this  attitude  prepares  the  child  to  gain  right  thoughts  of  God,  who  should
be  to  us  our  glorified,  idealized  father  and  mother ;  not  father  only,  not  mother  only,
but  a  Being  realizing  in  himself  the  perfections  of  both.

n.  Right  attitude  towabds  fabbhts  ensubes  obedibnob  inspibed  bt  rEELnia.
Obedience  is  not  just  one  thing.  It  is  various,  according  to  the  motive  inspiring  it.
We  should  obey  our  Master  from  a  sense  of  duty,  whether  he  be  gentle  or  froward,
and  whether  we  like  to  obey  or  not.  But  obedience  to  parents  belongs  to  a  higher  type
of  obedience.  It  is  prompted  by  feeling ;  it  is  inspired  by  love.  And  it  is  through
the  obedience  of  our  parents  that  we  learn  true  obedience  to  God. — B.  T.

Ver.  23. — Th»  hindering  power  of  worldly  possessione.  "  He  went  away  sorrowful :
for  he  had  great  possessions."  "  A  rich  man  shall  hardly  [or,  •  with  difficulty ']  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven."  The  figure  of  the  "  camel  and  needle's  eye "  is  a  prover-
bial one,  and  no  precise  facts  answering  to  it  need  be  sought  for.  There  are  other
proverbs  very  similar.  It  strikingly  expresses  that  which  is  almost  impossible,  but  not
quite  impossible.  This  sentence  is  taken  from  the  Koran  :  "  The  impious  shall  find
the  gates  of  heaven  shut ;  nor  shall  he  enter  there  till  a  camel  shall  pass  through  the
•ye  of  a  needle."    Our  Lord  teaches  that  the  rich  man  may  enter  the  kingdom,  but  he

HATTHEW — U.  ■


374  THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINCJ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xix.  1—30.

will  surely  find  that  bis  riches  will  stand  in  his  way,  and  make  it  very  hard  work  for
him,  as  they  made  it  hard  work  for  this  rich  ruler.  What  is  it  in  worldly  possessions
that  makes  them  such  hindering  things  ?

I.  Riches  have  a  sbpabatino  influbnob  on  men.  They  tend  to  put  men  in
classes  j  those  having  the  riches  claiming  to  be  a  superior  class,  and  demanding  special
consideration  and  treatment.  This  tends  to  induce  the  idea  that  the  way  of  salvation
for  rich  people  ought  to  be  a  special  provision.  The  rich  man  does  not  care  to  be  saved
just  as  the  poor  man  is.  He  finds  the  gospel  too  levelling.  If  he  cannot  have  a  way
of  his  own,  he  will  have  no  way.  It  is  difficult  for-  him  to  realize  that  God  takes  no
count  of  riches ;  and  whoever  would  come  to  him  must  come  in  at  the  one  strait  gate,
which  is  big  enough  to  take  the  man,  but  not  big  enough  to  take  anything  that  he
would  carry  in  with  him.

II.  ElOHBS  HAVE  A  SATiSFTiNa  INFLUBNOB  ON  MEN.  They  bring  with  them  a
sense  of  security.  The  rich  man  can  have  all  he  wants,  and  there  will  be  no  future,
he  thinks,  in  which  he  will  have  any  needs  that  cannot  be  met.  The  poor  have  a  basis
for  religiob  in  their  daily  need  and  daily  dependence.  The  rich  have  no  basis  for
religion.  It  is  their  misery,  that  bodj',  mind,  and  soul  never  have  any  wants.  They
have  got  the  riches:  what  more  can  they  want?  This  kind  of  feeling  provides  the
gravest  of  hindrances  to  entrance  into  the  kingdom.

III.  BlOHES   HAVE   A   HABDENINO    INFLUBNCB    ON    MEN.       This    IS    mOSt   true,   mOSt

strange,  and  most  sad.  It  can  be  illustrated  in  cases  we  all  know,  of  self-sacrificing
generosity  while  persons  were  poor,  which  changed  at  once  into  selfish  meanness  when
wealth  came  to  them.  It  is  that  hardening  which  makes  it  so  difiicult  for  a  rich  man
to  enter  the  kingdom. — B.  T.

Ver.  26. — Salvation  possible  because  it  is  OocPs  work.  As  the  disciples  understood
their  Lord,  he  seemed  to  them  to  make  it  impossible  for  a  rich  man  to  become  a  Chris-
tian ;  and  if  a  rich  man  could  not  be  a  Christian,  who  could  be  ?  They  mistook  their
Master,  who,  as  an  effective  Teacher,- sometimes  stated  things  very  strongly,  and  with-
held the  qualifications  in  order  to  excite  thought.  The  "immensely  difficult"  is  not
the  "  impossible."  The  impossible,  if  you  can  only  reckon  upon  htiman  forces,  is  not
impossible,  if  you  can  bring  in  Divine  forces.  And,  in  relation  to  moral  salvations,
you  have  to  take  account  of  what  God  can  do.  "  With  men  this  is  impossible ;  but
with  God  all  things  are  possible."  This  very  large  and  unqualified  statement  concern-
ing the  absolute  ability  of  God  has  often  been  misrepresented  and  misused,  because
it  has  been  applied  to  things  of  which  our  Lord  was  not  thinking  It  is  said — God
cannot  make  two  things  fill  one  space,  or  make  two  and  two  count  five.  But  these  are
not  "  impossibilities ; "  they  are  "  absurdities,"  proved  such  by  the  conditions  of  human
language.  God  cannot  do  what  is  manifestly  absurd  in  the  very  statement.  Our  Lord
was  speaking  strictly  of  moral  possibilities  and  impossibilities.

I.  God  can  save  bioh  men,  because  hb  can  take  aw  at  tbbib  riches.  And  so
remove  their  hindrance.  Man  cannot  do  this ;  but  all  wealth  is  absolutely  in  the
Divine  control.  This  is  forcibly  illustrated  in  the  story  of  Job ;  all  whose  worldly  pos-
sessions take  wings  and  fly  away  in  a  single  overwhelming  day.  The  rich  ruler  would
not  put  his  possessions  away  in  order  to  enter  the  kingdom ;  but,  if  it  had  pleased
Christ  so  to  do,  he  could  have  taken  them  away,  and  so  have  given  him  his  opportunity.
Many  a  man  has  been  brought  to  God  by  losing  the  riches  in  which  he  had  trusted.

II.  God  can  save  bich  men  bt  taking  them  away  from  theib  biches.  Draw-
ing them  away  from  their  confidences.  God  has  power  over  the  minds  and  souls  of
men.  By  his  Spirit  he  can  awaken  such  soul-anxieties  that  a  man  may  become  indif-
ferent to  death,  put  his  fingers  in  his  ears,  and  cry,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  "
God,  by  his  Spirit,  can  "  convince  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment ; "  and
under  that  convincement  a  man  will  surely  be  liberated  from  the  enslaving  of  worldly
possessions. — B.  T.

Ver.  28. — "  Tht  regeneration,''  This  may  be  but  another  name  for  the  setting  up  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  As  the  apostles  were  to  be  directly  connected  with  it,  the
final  "restitution  of  all  things"  can  hardly  be  meant.  It  is  usual  to  refer  such
expressions  to  the  "second  coming  of  Christ;"  but  he  appears  to  have  had  in  mind


OH.  XIX.  1—30.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINa  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.  27C

the  starting  of  the  Messianic  kingdom  at  Pentecost.  Understanding  Christ  to  he
using  Eastern  figures  of  speech,  we  may  see  his  meaniiig  to  be  simply  this — Those
who  truly  and  self-sacrificingly  follow  him  shall  occupy  the  chief  places  of  influence
in  the  new  kingdom  which  he  proposed  soon  to  establish.

I.  ThB     BBOENEKATION     treated     as     the      establishment     of     the     KINaDOM.

Christ  sat  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory  when  he  ascended  into  "  heaven,  and  sat  on
the  right  hand  of  God."  Then  was  "  all  power  given  to  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth ;  "
and  then  the  glorious  work  of  regenerating  the  world  was  initiated.  The  new  creation,
to  be  completed  finally  in  "  the  restitution  of  all  things,"  was  commenced.  The  out-
pouring of  the  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  the  miracles  performed  by  his  apostles,
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  of  "  those  his  enemies  who  would  not  that  he  should
reign  over  them,"  and  the  abolition  of  the  Mosaic  economy,  were  the  palpable  proofs
of  bis  exaltation.

II.  The  beqeneeation  treated  as  indioatino  the  mission  of  the  kingdom.
The  "kingdom"  was  to  be  the  supreme  renovating,  renewing,  regenerating  force  in  the
world.  The  "regeneration"  may  be  taken  as  the  time  following  on  our  Lord's  resur-
rection. "  1.  It  was  primarily  centred  in  our  Lord's  own  renovated  Person ;  for  he  then
put  off  the  servant  form,  and  put  on  his  immortality.  2.  That  renovation  oveispread
and  included  his  followers,  especially  his  twelve  apostles.  By  the  Pentecostal  Spirit
they  were  endowed  with  power  from  on  high;  they  entered  on  possession  of, the
kingdom  appointed.  3.  The  Church  was  renewed  and  regenerated  from  the  old  to  the
new  dispensation.  The  types  and  shadows  had  departed,  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  ol
God  with  power  was  begun."  There  is  to  be  a  new  birth  for  mankind.  Christ  exalted
and  living,  Christ  working  through  his  Church  and  in  the  might  of  his  Spirit,  is  now
established  as  the  regenerating  force  of  humanity;  and  these  are  the  times  of  the
"  regeneration." — R.  T.

Ver.  29. — 2%e  Christian  possession  and  Christian  heritage.  "  Shall  receive  an
hundredfold,  and  shall  inherit  everlasting  life."  St.  Peter  (1  Epist.  i.  4,  9)  speaks  of
"  receiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls ; "  and  of  our  lively
hope  of  the  "inheritance  incorruptible  and  undeflled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  We
may  unduly  fix  our  thoughts  on  that  which  we  gain  now  by  becoming  Christians.
But  many  fail  of  due  appreciation  of  present  blessings,  because  they  are  absorbed  in
anticipation  of  the  good  things  that  are  to  come.  Our  Lord  had  to  deal  with  disciples
who  were  very  easily  led  to  think  about  what  they  should  get  by  being  disciples.  In
this  passage  he  seeks  to  deliver  them  from  material  notions  of  getting,  and  to  help
them  in  forming  worthy  estimates  of  the  spiritual  blessings  of  disciplcship.

I.  The  sfibitual  things  a  disoifle  now  has.  Things  answering  to  "houses
and  lands,"  and  to  "  wife  and  children."  Man  here  on  earth  has  two  supreme  satis-
factions— they  are  found  in  "things  possessed,"  and  in  "objects  of  affection."  Dis-
cipleship  to  Christ  provides  no  sort  of  guarantee  for  a  hundredfold  more  in  number  of
possessions  or  objects  of  affection.  It  does  guarantee  a  hundredfold  better  in  quality.
There  are  answering  soM?-possessions ;  there  are  answering  «OMZ-affections.  How  firinly
St.  Paul  declares  of  the  Christian,  "  AH  things  are  yours,  whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or
Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come ;  all  are
yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's"!  Riches  and  objects  of  affection
depend  on  the  faculties  wakened  in  us.  Discipleship  wakens  new  and  nobler  faculties ;
and  these  Christ  provides  for.

II.  Tee  SPiBiTnAL  thinqs  a  disoifle  ezfeots.  Lest  there  should  be  any  mistake,
our  Lord  distinctly  speaks  of  the  future  as  higher,  nobler,  sublimer  life — "  everlasting
life."  We  are  in  danger  of  materializing  the  heavenly,  because  we  can  only  get  appre-
hensions of  it  with  the  aid  of  sensible  figures — "many  mansions,"  "crowns,"  "harps,"
"  palms."  But  the  apostles  help  to  liberate  and  raise  our  thoughts,  for  they  speak  of
a  "  crown  of  righteousness,"  a  "  crown  of  life,"  a  "  crown  of  glory."  "  Godliness  has
the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  The  Christian
makes  "  the  best  of  both  worlds." — R.  T.

Ver.  30. — Beversion  of  present  estimates.  "  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last."  There
is  a  story  of  a  poor  man  who,  in  distant  ages,  had  stood  aloof  from  the  sacrifices  to


276


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xx.  1—34.


Varuna,  the  goddess  of  the  waters,  but  had  been  eventually  signalized  by  her  as  her
most  devoted  worshipper — ^his  omission  to  join  in  a  certain  rite  having  only  arisen  from
the  intensity  of  his  heartfelt  adoration.  So  the  last  proved  to  be  first.  There  may  be
a  designed  allusion  to  the  rich  ruler  who,  in  his  own  estimate  stood  first,  but  soon  was
put  last,  when  he  came  under  the  searchings  of  the  Divine  Teacher.  And  there  is  a
more  immediate  reference  to  those  disciples  who  bragged  about  how  much  they  bad
given  up,  and  assumed  their  claims  to  first  places  in  the  kingdom.  Maybe  that,  at
kst,  "  publicans  and  harlots  would  enter  the  kingdom  in  front  of  them."

I.  Pbesekt  estimates  abb  spoiled  bt  self-oentrednebb.  Men  make  themselves
their  standards ;  and  then  easily  make  thumselves  better  than  their  neighbours ;  and
put  their  neighbours  low  down.  Certain  phases  of  religious  doctrine  encourage  self-
centredness,  and  make  a  man  think  that  A«  is  a  special  favourite  of  Heaven ;  and  of  all
disagreeable  people,  favourites — court  favourites  and  others — are  the  worst.  A  man
never  estimates  either  himself  or  others  aright  until  he  makes  God  his  standard.

II.  Present  estimates  are  ipoileu  by  jealousies.  Who  of  us  is  fully  and
honourably  free  from  jealousy  in  forming  our  estimate  of  our  fellows  ?  How  many
are,  we  think,  where  we  ought  to  be,  if  only  we  had  our  rights  ?  All  jealousy-tinged
estimates  will  have  to  be  reversed.    Our  last  may  be  put  first.

III.  Present  estiuates  are  dependent  on  affeabangeb.  Men  are  always  taken
with  showy  gifts.  The  fluent  man  is  always  overpraised.  A  cynical  writer  says,  but
with  some  truth  in  his  saying,  "  So,  in  current  literature,  we  find  ourselves  in  an
inverted  world,  where  the  halt,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  blind  are  the  magnates  of
our  kingdom ;  where  heroes  are  made  of  the  sick,  and  pets  of  the  stupid,  and  merit
of  the  weak  man's  nothingness,"  A  wise  man  avoids  fixing  men  in  order  and  place,
as  first  or  last ;  refuses  to  have  a  place  for  himself,  and  is  content  to  wait  for  the
Divine  appraising. — K.  T.


jfiXPOsrrioN.


OHAP'lJfia  XX.


Vers.  1 — 16.— Parable  of  the  labourert  in
the  vineyard.    (Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.)

Ver.  1. — For.  The  following  parable  is
intended  to  illustrate  the  apophthegm  at
the  end  of  the  last  chapter,  which  is  re-
peated almost  in  the  same  words  at  the
close,  "  Many  that  are  first,"  etc.,  and
"Tiie  last  shall  be  first,"  etc.  It  taught
the  apostles  a  lesson  in  answer  to  Peter's
question  (oh,  xii.  27),  "What  shall  we
have  therefore?"  and  the  primary  lesson
was  that  the  reward  of  the  liingdom  is  not
of  debt,  but  of  grace.  There  are  many
difficulties  in  the  parable,  which  may  be
better  noticed  after  we  have  expounded  its
literal  beaiing  and  details.  The  kingdom
of  heaven  is  like.  That  is,  what  happens
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  parallel  to  the
case  of  a  householder,  etc.  The  kingdom
of  heaven  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  whether
militant  on  earth  (when  the  labourers  are
hired)  or  triumphant  in  heaven  (when  the
reward  is  bestowed).  We  may  refer  to  eh.
xiii.  24,  45,  where  an  analogous  comparison
is  found.  Early  in  the  morning  (ajiia  vpat) ;
i.e.  at  the  end  of  the  last  night  watch  (see
on  ver.  3),  wishing  to  secure  labourers,  who
at    vintage-time  were  probably   in  great


request.  Vineyard.  The  Ohuroh  Is  else-
where so  called  by  our  Lord  (ch.  xxi.  28, 33,
etc.),  and  in  the  Old  Teatument  (see  Pa.
Ixxx.  8  ;  Isa.  v.  1 ;  Jer.  xii.  10).

Ver.  2. — When  he  had  agreed  with  the
labourers.  With  those  first  hired  he  makes
a  special  agreement  for  the  pay  of  the  day's
work;  with  the  others  he  acts  differently.
For  a  penny  a  day  (^i«  Snvapioti  tV  iinipav).
The  denarius  (always  translated  "  a  penny  "
in  our  version)  was  a  silver  coin  about  equal
in  value  to  the  French  franc,  hut  of  course
in  its  buying  capacities  worth  in  those  days
a  great  deal  more.  We  learn  from  Tacitus
('  Annal.,'  1.  17)  that  it  was  the  usual  pay
of  a  Roman  soldier.  It  was  equivalent  to
the  Greek  drachma,  which  Tobit  (v.  14)
offered  to  Azarias  as  daily  wages.  Our
rendering  of  "a  penny"  conveys  a  very
erroneous  impression  to  unlearned  bearers,
both  in  this  passage  and  in  other  places
where  it  occurs.

Ver.  3. — The  third  hour.  It  seems  that
at  this  time  the  Jews  divided  the  day,
reckoned  between  sunrise  and  sunset,  into
twelve  equal  parts,  the  length  of  these
divisions  varying  according  to  the  season.
The  day  in  Palestine  at  longest  consisted
of  fourteen  European  hours  twelve  minutes,
and  at  shortest  of  nine  hours  forty-eight
minutes,  so  that  the  difference  between  the


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


277


longest  and  Bhortest  diTision  of  the  so-called
Jewish  "hour"  was  twenty-two  minutea.
It  is  usaal  to  consider  the  Hebrew  day  as
lasting  from  6  a.m.  to  6  p.m.,  the  sixth
hour  corresponding  to  our  noon,  the  first
hour  being  7  o'clock  and  the  third  9  a.m.
This  estimate,  though  not  absolutely  correct,
is  near  enough  to  the  fact  to  serve  all  ez-
poaitory  purposes.  The  four  periods  men-
tioned in  the  parable  are  quarters  of  the
working  day,  in  which  a  proportional  part
of  the  day's  wuges  might  be  earned.  Stand-
ing idle  in  the  market-place.  The  Greek
agora,  the  Boman  forum,  and  the  Eastern
market-place,  was  the  usual  place  where
idlers  ami  expectant  labourers  gathered
together.  Such  a  scene  may  often  nowa-
days be  witnessed  in  Oriental  cities,  and
indeed  at  our  own  docks,  and  in  many
of  our  small  country  towns.  It  must  be
supposed  that  the  labourers  now  hired
either  were  not  present  when  the  house-
holder first  wont  forth,  or  that  they  had
then  rejected  hie  offer,  but  now  thought
better  of  it.  And  so,  in  the  case  of  the
others  later  on.

Ver.  4. — Ye  also;  implying  that  he  had
already  set  some  to  work  at  fixed  wages.
Whatsoever  is  right  (SIkiuov)  ;  just  and  fair.
He  offers  these  no  defiaite  sum  as  remune-
ration, assuring  them  only  that  he  will  deal
equitably  with  them ;  i.e.  doubtless,  accord-
ing to  their  view,  that  he  will  give  them
three  quarters  of  a  day's  wages,  paying
them  pro  rata.  But  at  the  end  he  treats
theiTi  much  more  generously.  Lightfuot
notes  that  the  Talmudista  had  tracts  on  the
payment  and  regulation  of  labourers,  and
in  their  canons  distinguished  between  being
hired  for  a  day  and  for  some  hours.  They
went  their  way,  quite  satisfied  to  leave
their  remuneration  to  the  householder,  with
whom  probably  they  were  acquainted.

Ver.  5.— Sixth  and  ninth  hour.  At  midday
and  3  p.m.,  which  would  give  respectively
about  half  a  day's  and  a  quarter  of  a  day's
work.

Ver.  6. — The  eleventh  hour;  the  hour
before  sunset,  say  about  5  p.m.,  leaving
only  one  hour  for  work,  when  it  would  be
most  unusual  to  engage  labourers.  Idle.
The  word  is  omitted  in  some  manuscripts.
There  is  some  reproach  in  the  master's
question.  Where  were  they  earlier  in  the
day,  when  he  was  hiring  labourers  for  his
vineyard?  Why  were  they  not  in  the
market-place,  like  their  comrades,  looking
out  for  employment?  Such  questions,  like
many  others  in  the  parable,  are  left  un-
answered. We  gee  from  the  universal  use
of  the  term, "  the  eleventh  hour,"  to  express
the  close  of  the  day  of  grace,  how  widely
has  prevailed  the  interpretation  of  the
parable   which  applies  it  to  the  various


stages  of  the  life  of  the  individual.  (See
on  this  below.)

Ver.  7. — No  man  hath  hired  ns.  A  poor
excuse,  because,  had  they  been  at  their  post
earlier,  work  would  have  been  ofiered  them.
Oo  ye  also  into  the  vineyard.  The  house-
holder accepts  the  excuse,  and,  now  that
they  are  desiring  to  labour,  engages  them
as  the  others,  promising  to  give  them  what
is  fair.  Their  present  willingness  seems
to  compensate  for  their  previous  tardiness.
The  clause,  "  whatsoever  is  right,"  etc.,  is
omitted  by  some  good  manuscripts,  the  Vul-
gate, and  other  versions.  Thus  no  mention
of  reward  is  made  to  these — they  were  satis-
fied by  being  employed  at  all.

Ver.  8. — When  even  was  come.  Accord-
ing to  Mosaic  Law  (Dent.  xxiv.  15),  a  hired
labourer  was  to  be  paid  his  wages  at  sunset,
i.e.  at  the  twelfth  hour.  Steward.  The
lord  himself  is  said  to  have  hired  the
labourers,  but  he  commits  the  payment  of
them  to  his  steward,  as  his  representative,
to  whom  such  matters  of  detail  were  en-
trusted. From  the  last.  Those  last  hired
were  first  to  receive  their  hire  (rhv  lutrdiv),
that  which  it  had  been  agreed  to  pay  them,
in  one  case  "a  penny,"  in  the  others  "that
whicli  was  just."  Why  the  last  are  re-
warded first  is  one  of  the  difficulties  of  the
parable.  To  say  that  this  is  done  because
in  their  one  hour's  work  they  did  more
than  all  the  rest,  is  a  solution  which  ia
supported  by  nothing  in  the  story  itself.
It  should,  in  the  primary  interpretation,
rather  be  conceived  as  depending  on  the
lord's  good  pleasure.

Ver.  9. — They  received  every  man  a  penny.
The  steward,  of  course,  was  acting  accord-
ing to  his  master's  instructions  (though
nothing  is  said  of  any  previous  orders  on
the  subject)  when  he  thus  bounteously
remunerated  those  that  had  been  hired  at
the  eleventh  hour.  Some  commentators
have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  "penny"
allotted  to  each  set  differed  greatly  in  value;
but  this  is  an  unwarrantable  conjecture,
and  it  is  indispensable  to  the  purport  of  the
parable  that  the  wages  should  be  alike
to  all.

Ver.  10. — ^They  supposed  that  they  should
have  received  more.  The  text  varies  be-
tween Tr\i7ov  (^plus,  Vulgate)  and  irXe/oco,
the  former  implying  "a  greater  sum"  than
the  stated  hire,  the  latter  hinting  indefi-
nitely at  "  more"  things,  more  in  number.
Seeing  the  liberal  payment  given  to  the
others,  they  expected  some  increase  in  the
wages  offered  to  themselves,  or  an  ad-
ditional remuneration  of  some  kind.

Ver.  11. — They  murmured.  They  com-
plained aloud  of  the  injustice  to  which,  as
they  thought,  they  were  subjected.  This
is  oae  of  those  traits  in  the  parable  which.


278


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.


whatever  its  spiritual  meaaing  may  be,  ia
moat  natural  and  life-like.

Ver.  12. — These  last  have  wrought  but
one  hour;  ^iav  &pav  IvoiTiffav:  una  hora
fecerunt  (Vulgate) ;  have  spent  but  one  hour
(Bevised  Version).  The  verb  roiea/  is  used
with  nouns  of  time  in  the  sense  of  "  spend,"
"  pass,"  as  in  Kuth  ii.  19  (Septuagint) ;  Acts
XV.  33,  etc.  They  speak  of  the  late  workers
contemptuously  (o5toi  oj  laxaroi),  "  these
fellows  who  are  last."  They  do  not  allow
that  they  laboured — they  "  made  "  one  hour
nominally.  Equal  unto  ns.  Bengel  notes,
"Bnvy  does  not  demand  more  for  itself,
but  wishes  that  others  should  have  less."
Their  complaint  is  that  others  who  have
worked  less  are  not  docked  of  their  wages
in  due  proportion.  Burden  and  heat  of  the
day ;  t6  fiipos  rijs  rin4pas  koI  rbv  Kavcwva :
the  burden  of  the  day  and  the  scorching  heat
(Revised  Version).  The  latter  word  is  used
for  the  hot  dry  wind  wLich,  blowing  from
the  east,  was  fatal  to  vegetation  and  pre-
judicial to  human  comfort,  if  not  to  life.
The  remonstrance  of  tliese  men  may  be
compared  with  that  of  the  elder  brother
in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  (Luke
XV.  29,  30).  They  ehow  somewhat  of  the
spirit  of  the  apostles  when  they  asked,
"What  shall  we  have  therefore?"  (oh.
xix.  27).

Ver.  13.— He  answered  one  of  them.  The
Lord  condescended  to  show,  not  to  all  the
lai)Ourere,but  to  one  of  them — the  ringleader
probably — the  futility  of  the  ground  of  hii
murmur.  Christ  often  explains  himself  to  his
friends,  while  he  refuses  further  el  ucidation  to
enemies  and  the  hardened.  Friend  (Iraipe).
Not  a  term  of  affection,  or  special  good  will,
but  one  of  indifference,  addressed  to  an  in-
feiior.  It  was  the  word  used  to  Judas  (eh.
xxvi.  50)  when  he  came  to  betray  his  Lord,
"Friend,  wherefore  art  thou  come?"  I  do
thee  no  wrong.  The  labourer  had  really
nothing  to  complain  of  in  strict  justice ;  he
had  received  the  full  amount  of  the  stipu-
lated wages.  But  he  very  naturally  felt
that  he  had  not  been  fairly  dealt  with.  He
would  say  to  himself,  "  If  one  hour's  work,
and  that  in  the  cool  of  the  evening,  is
deemed  worth  a  penny,  surely  a  whole  day's
labour,  in  the  fuU  heat  of  the  sun,  ought  to
deserve  a  higher  remuneration."  Thediifi-
culty  here  must  be  felt  by  every  one.  Nor
is  the  master's  solution  perfect;  it  would
scarcely  commend  itself  to  the  dissatisfied
murmurer.  And  doubtless  it  is  not  in-
tended to  be  complete.

Ver.  14. — Take  that  thine  is ;  thine  own.
Take  your  agreed  wages,  and  go ;  there  is
nothing  more  to  be  said.  I  will  {84\a  Sc)
give;  but  it  in  my  vrill  to  give.  The  lord
defends  his  conduct  on  the  ground  that  such
is  his  will  and  pleasure.     By  it  he  injureB


nobody,  he  benefits  many;  who  should  pre-
sume to  censure  him  1

Ver.  15. — With  mine  own ;  iv  rois  4fiais :
in  the  case  of  whaJ,  is  mine  own.  These  words
are  omitted  by  the  Vulgate,  which  has,  Aut
($)  non  licet  mihi  quod  volofacere  f  Is  thine
eye  evil  1  The  evil  eye  is  here  expressive  of
envy,  as  Frov.  xxviii.  22.  The  Latin  word
invidia,  Cicero  informs  us  ('  Tusc.  Disp.,'
iii.  9),  "  ductum  est  a  nimis  intuendo  fortu-
nam  altcrius."  For  nimis  Bentley  conjee-
tnres  limis,  "  with  sidelong  glances."  The
idea  is  the  same,  envy  being  indicated  by
the  look  of  the  eye.  Good ;  generous.  Why
should  you  view  with  disfavour  my  libe-
rality ?  The  master  says  no  more  ;  he  gives
no  further  account  of  Lis  determination.

Ver.  16. — So  the  last,  etc.  The  parable
concludes  with  the  saying  with  wliich  it
began  (ch.  xix.  30),  but  with  some  inversion
in  the  order  of  the  words.  There  it  was,
"  Many  first  shall  be  last ;  and  last  first ;  "
here  it  is,  The  last  shall  be  first,  and  the
first  last.  The  circumstances  of  the  parable
necessitate  this  change.  The  last  called
were  first  paid,  and  were  equal  to  the  first
in  recompense;  the  first  were  behind  the
others  in  time  of  payment,  and  in  tlie  spirit
with  which  they  received  tlieir  wages ;  they
were  also  treated  with  less  generosity  than
the  others.  For  many  be  called  .  .  .  chosen
(ch.  xxii.  14)/  This  clause  is  omitted  by
K,  B,  and  other  manuscripts ;  but  it  has
good  authority,  and  is  most  probably  genuine
It  is  added  in  explanation  or  justification  of
the  preceding  statement.  From  not  seeing
its  applicability,  and  regarding  it  as  oppos-
ing the  intention  of  the  parable,  some  tran-
scribers and  some  editors  have  expunged  it
from  the  text.  But  it  would  seem  that
Christ  takes  occasion  from  the  particular
case  in  the  parable  to  make  a  general  state-
ment, that  not  all  who  are  called  would
receive  reward,  because  many  would  nut
answer  the  call,  or  would  nullify  it  by  their
cunduct;  not,  as  Theophylact  says,  that
salvation  is  limited,  but  men's  efforts  to
obtain  it  are  feeble  or  negative.  In  other
words,  many  outwardly  members  of  the
kingdom  of  God  are  unworthy  of,  and  shall
not  share  in,  its  spiritual  blessings.  Chosen.
Many,  that  is  virtually  all,  are  oliosen  ;  but
there  is  an  election  witiiin  the  election,
and  they  only  who  are  of  this  inner  circle
shall  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of
the  just.

The  interpretation  of  tne  parable. — As  in
all  parables,  so  here,  wo  are  to  regard  the
general  scope,  and  not  lay  too  much  stress
on  details,  which  often,  while  adding  to  the
vividness  of  the  picture,  contribute  nothing
to  its  spiritual  side.  "The  explanation  of
this  difficult  parable  has  greatly  exercised


OH.  XX.  1—3*.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


279


the  minds  of  commentators  in  all  ages  of
the  Church,  and  various  have  been  the  views
with  which  its  bearing  has  been  regarded.
We  may,  however,  select  two  expositions
which  seem  to  embody  most  of  the  sugges-
tions advanced,  and  are  in  themselves  most
reasonable.  The  first  considers  it  as  of  in-
dividual application — ^the  call  of  God  coming
to  the  soul  at  different  ages  of  life.  Thus
the  householder  is  God,  the  market-place  the
world,  the  vineyard  the  visible  Church,  the
labourers  are  men  who  have  to  do  their  work
tliereiQ,  the  steward  is  Christ,  who  super-
intends and  rewards  the  faithful  workers.
The  hours  of  the  day  represent  the  various
periods  of  men's  life  at  which  they  hear  and
answer  God's  call  to  a  closer  walk  with  him,
when,  as  modern  theology  terms  it,  they  are
converted.  Some,  at  the  first  hour,  from
their  very  infancy,  live  a  pure  and  holy
life ;  some  at  the  third  hour,  in  early  youth,
begin  to  serve  God  effectually;  otLeis  at
midday,  in  full  maturity ;  others  at  the
ninth  Jiour,  when  old  age  is  creeping  on
them ;  and  lastly  others  obey  the  call  only
at  the  eleventh  hour,  at  the  very  approach
of  death.  And  all  who  have  laboured  at  alljT
without  regard  to  the  length  of  service,
receive  the  "penny,"  i.e.  not  some  indefinite
temporal  benefit,  but  eternal  life,  which  in
a  general  sense  (without  consideriug  the
difiereuce  of  degrees  which  shall  exist)  is
the  same  for  all.  The  apparent  unfairness
of  this  recompense,  if  we  take  a  merely
human  view  ot  the  transaction,  is  obvious.
They  who  have  lived  a  life  of  holiness,  and
they  who  have  given  to  God  only  the  dregs
of  their  ill-spent  days,  receive  the  same
salvation.  The  difficulty  is  removed  in  two
ways.  We  may  say  that  the  capacity  for
receiving  and  enjoying  the  reward  depends
on  the  recipient,  and  that  what  to  one  would
be  infinite  bliss  and  satisfaction,  to  another
would  offer  far  inferior  enjoyment.  Or  we
may  take  refuge  in  the  mysteriousness  of
God's  arrangements,  and  hold  that  the  con-
siderations in  accordance  with  which  God
apportions  his  rewards  are  known  only  to
him,  and  are  truly,  and  are  Intended  to  be,
beyond  human  understanding.  Further,  if
the  hours  represent  the  stages  of  human
life  at  which  Christians  are  called,  surely,
to  make  the  parable  concinnous,  they  .ought
to  be  the  tame  persons  who  are  invited  on
each  occasion,  not  difierent  ones.  We  should
be  told,  not  that  the  householder  found
others  wanting  work,  and  sent  all  thus  found
into  tbe  vineyard ;  but  that  some  of  those
called  at  the  various  hours  refused  the  work
and  scoffed  at  bis  offer,  while  others  after  a
lime  accepted  it,  and  at  the  approach  of  the
night  all  the  idle  remnant  consented  to
labour,  thankful  at  last  to  win  wages  for
little  trouble.  But  the  parable  says  nothing


of  all  this,  and  would  need  much  alteration
to  make  it  speak  so.  There  is  another
difficulty  which  has  to  be  met,  if  the  above
interpretation  is  adopted.  How  are  we  to
explain  the  murmuring  of  the  discontented
labourers  1  There  can  be  no  envy  and  dis-
pleasure in  heaven.  It  is  not  conceivable
that  any  who  have  obtained  the  gift  of
eternal  life  should  be  dissatisfied  with  their
reward  or  jealous  of  others.  This  ia  not  a
mere  accessory  which  is  outside  the  spirit
of  the  story,  and  adds  no  item  to  its  mystical
signification ;  it  is  really  the  leading  feature,
and  the  householder's  own  interference  and
reproof  are  based  entirely  on  tliis  behaviour
of  the  first  called.  If  the  "  penny  "  signifies
eternal  life,  and  the  labourers  are  all  the
called,  there  is  no  satisfactory  explanation
of  this  part  of  the  parable.  The  murmur
is  heard  after  the  reception  of  the  reward,
aud  is  censured  accordingly;  these  things
could  not  be  found  in  the  Church  trium-
phant ;  none  can  murmur  there ;  if  they  did
feel  envy  and  discontent,  they  would  not  be
worthy  of  a  place  in  the  kingdom.  There-
fore another  interpretation  must  be  advanced
which  will  allow  the  proper  importance  to
this  detail  of  the  parable.  The  only  one
that  does  this  is  that  which  gives  a  national,
not  simply  an  individual,  bearing  to  the
story.  According  to  this  exposition,  it
applies  to  the  calling  of  the  Jews  and  the
Gentiles,  though  there  are  stiU  particulars
which  do  not  entirely  or  without  some  vio-
lence suit  the  application.  The  "  penny  "
which  all  receive  Is  the  favour  of  God,  the
privileges  that  crown  and  reward  the
members  of  his  kingdom.  God's  ancient
people  were  first  called  to  work  in  his  vine-
yard. The  various  hours  of  the  day  cannot
be  accurately  explained.  Many  interpreters
follow  St.  Gregory  in  defining  the  first  hour
as  extending  from  Adam  to  Noah,  the  third
from  Noah  to  Abraham,  the  sixth  from
Abraham  to  Moses,  the  ninth  from  Moses  to
the  coming  of  Christ,  the  eleventh  from  the
coming  of  Christ  to  the  end  of  the  world.
During  all  the  day,  up  to  the  eleventh  hour,
the  call  was  confined  to  the  Jews  and  their
progenitors ;  in  the  eleventh  hour  the  Gen-
tiles are  called,  and,  accepting  the  call,
receive  the  same  privileges  as  the  Jews.  It
is  better  to  forego  any  attempt  to  interpret
the  various  hours  and  the  various  sets  of
labourers  definitely,  except  to  observe  tliat
the  first  called,  with  whom  a  covenant  was
made,  plainly  represent  the  Jews,  the  people
called  under  the  covenant  of  works,  who
were  to  be  rewarded  according  to  their
service;  tbe  other  workers  are  not  paid
stipulated  wages;  they  receive  ("I  will
give  ")  reward  of  free  grace  in  accordance
with  God's  inscrutable  appointment.  That
the  Jewa  murmured  at  the  admission  of  the


280


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.


Gentiles  to  the  kingdom  of  God  and  tlie
Father's  favuur,  we  are  taught  in  many
places.  The  diseontent  of  the  elder  brother
in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  is  a  case
in  point.  So  in  Acts  xiii.  45,  46,  the  Jews
are  filled  with  envy  that  the  Word  should  be
spoken  to  and  accepted  by  heathens,  and  St.  .
Paul  (1  -Thess.  ii.  16)  complains  that  the
Jews  forbade  him  and  his  fellow-apostles
"  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles,  that  tliey  might
be  saved."  Our  Lord  looks  forward  to  and
prepares  his  disciples  for  this  envious  and
ungenerous  behaviour,  as  he  continually
teaches  that  the  gospel  is  for  all  men  every-
where, confined  to  no  people  or  country,  but
free  as  the  air  of  heaven  or  the  light  of  the
all-fostering  sun.  These  Gentiles  are  the
last  in  time,  but  by  their  willing  service  and
obedience  in  the  faith  are  made  first ;  while
God's  ancient  people,  onoe  the  fii'st,  become
by  their  jealousy  and  hatred  of  others  the
last.  "  There  (enei)  shall  be  weeping  and
gnashing  of  teeth,  when  ye  shall  see  Abra-
ham, and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all  the
prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  you
yourselves  thrust  out.  And  they  shall  come
from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from
the  north,  and  from  the  south,  and  shall  sit
down  ill  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Luke  xiii.  28,
29).  This  momentous  change  in  the  relation
of  the  peculiar  people  to  the  rest  of  the  world
was  thus  foretold  aud  prepared  for.  And  the
lesson  ends  with  the  mournful  fact,  read  by
the  eye  of  the  Omniscient,  that  though  vir-
tually all  the  Jews  were  called,  yet  but  a
small  remnant  will  accept  the  gospel— the
elect  of  grace,  a  little  flock.  By  this  parable,
regarded  in  its  primary  application  as  a
reply  to  Peter's  question  (ch.  six.  27),
"What  shall  we  have  therefore?"  the
apostles  are  warned  that  they  are  not  to
expect  as  their  due  something  supereminent
over  those  called  later  than  themselves;
that  the  reward  is  not  of  merit,  but  of  free
grace.  This  last  thought  pervades  the
whole  similitude,  and  must  be  borne  care-
fully in  mind,  whether  we  take  the  indi-
vidual, or  the  national,  or  any  other  mixed
interpretation.

Vers.  17 — 19. — Third  and  fuller  prediction
of  Jetui'  tufferingt  and  death.  (Mark  x.  32 —
34;  Luke  xviii.  31— 34.)

Vor.  17. — Going  up.  This  is  the  usual
expression  for  travelling  to  the  capital,
and  was  partieularly  appropriate  to  a
journey  to  Jerusalem,  which  was  set  among
hills.  Tills  last  journey  of  the  ELdeemer
was  indeed  a  steep  ascoiit,  the  end  of
which  was  Calvary.  Took  (jtapeKafie,  took
to  himself)  .  .  .  apart  (/tar'  lUav).  He  was
accompanied  by  many  followers,  but  what
he  had  now  to  impart  was  not  intended


to  be  divulged  to  all,  but  was  reserved
for  the  cliosen  twelve.  Tiie  mass  could
not  have  heard  it  without  offence.  In  the
way.  The  Vulgate  omits  these  words.
The  Bevised  Version,  on  good  authority,
alters  the  received  order,  reading,  and  in
the  way  he  said  unto  them.  Thus  Christ
prepared  the  apostles  for  the  coming  time
of  trial,  after  they  had  shown  fuller  faith
in  his  Godhead.

Ver.  18.  —  Behold.  This  exclamation
would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  events  pre-
dicted were  very  near  at  hand,  as  it  were,
already  in  sight.  Shall  be  betrayed ;  irapa-
SoBiffferai:  shallhe  delivered ;  the  same  word
as  in  the  next  verse,  (xod  "  spared  not  his
ow.n  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all  "
(Bom.  viii.  32).  The  special  agent  of  this
betrayal  is  not  here  named.  Of  his  future
crime,  Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  had  probably
no  tl^ought,  the  devil  not  having  yet  put  it
into  his  heart.  The  chief  priests  (see  on
ch.  xvi.  21).  Shall  condemn  him.  This  was
the  act  of  the  Sanhedrin,  who  could  doom,
but  could  not  execute  (John  xviii.  31).
The  announcement  of  his  death  and  resur-
rection had  already  been  made  at  least
twice  before — once  after  Peter's  great  con-
fession (ch.  xvi.  21),  and  again  at  the
Transfiguration  (ch.  xvii.  12,  22 ;  Mark  ix.
9,  12).

Ver.  19.— The  Gentiles.  Pilate  and  the
Bomans  (ch.  xxvii.  2).  This  fact  would
show  the  treatment  he  was  to  expect,  and
the  death  he  was  to  die.  To  mock,  and  to
scourge  (see  ch.  xxvii.  26,  28—30).  To
crucify.  This  is  the  first  time  that  Jesus
distinctly  announced  his  death  by  cruci-
fixion. The  fact  of  his  death  he  had  im-
pressed upon  his  apostles,  but  the  mode  had
not  been  mentioned;  such  an  unexpected,
awful,  and  ignominious  close  was  incredible,
and  needed  special  preparation  ere  it  could
be  received  as  true.  Intimations,  indeed,  of
such  a  death  had  been  given  darkly,  when
his  disciples  were  told  that  they  must  take
up  the  cross  and  follow  him,  or  when  he
spoke  of  being  "  lifted  up  "  like  the  serpent
in  the  wUderness  (John  iii.  14);  but  his
words  were  not  understood ;  they  fell  upon
ears  prejudiced  to  a  certain  erroneous  con-
viction, which  events  alone  could  eradicate.
He  shqll  rise  again  (see  on  ch.  xvi.  21).  It
seems  to  us  almost  incredible  that,  after  all
that  Clirist  said  here  and  elsewliere,  his
resurrection  should  have  come  upon  his
followers  as  a  surprise  which  they  could  not
believe  without  tangible  proof.  But  when
we  read  of  their  duiness  and  unbelief,  we
are  constrained  to  admire  the  candour  and
sincerity  of  narrators,  who  record  such  facts
to  their  discredit  without  evasion  or  apology.
As  St.  Luke  says,  "  They  understood  mme
of  these  things;   and  this  saying  was  hid


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


281


from  them,  neither  knew  they  the  things
which  were  spoken."

Vers.  20 — 28. — Ambitious  requBit  of  the
mother  of  the  torn  of  Zebedee.  (Mark  x.  35 —
45.)

Ver.  20. — Then.  The  incident  seems  to
have  arisen  from  the  promise  of  tlie  twelve
thrones  in  ch.  zix.  28,  and  is  significant  as
6 bowing  how  utterly  misunderstood  was  the
true  nature  of  the  Messianio  kingdom.  The
mother  of  Zebedee's  children.  The  mother
of  James  and  John  was  named  Salome
(ch.  xxvii.  56  compared  with  Mark  xv.  40 ;
xvi.  1);  she  had  left  her  husband  Zebedee
(Mark  1.  20)  in  Galilee  (unless,  as  is  more
probable  from  the  terms  in  which  she  is
introduced,  he  was  now  dead),  and  followed
Jesus  in  the  band  of  holy  women  who  at-
tended on  him  and  ministered  to  him  of  their
substance.  Some  have  thought  that  she
was  the  sister  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  so  inter-
preting John  xix.  25.  St.  Mark  makes
the  two  apostles  present  their  own  request ;
and  doubtless  they  put  their  mother  for-
ward, coming  with  her  to  the  presence
of  Jesus,  anil  using  her  agency  in  this
somewhat  delicate  matter.  Our  evange-
list was  present  on  the  occasion,  and  his
precision  may  be  relied  on  in  this  detail.
Worshipping  him.  Making  the  customary
prostration  before  a  superior.  A  certain
thing  (ti).  She  did  not  at  first  make  any
definite  request,  but  endeavoured  to  get
Jesus  to  promise  to  grant  her  what  she  asked.
According  to  St.  Mark,tbe  sons  say  plainly,
"  We  would  that  thou  shouldest  do  for  us
what(  ver  we  shall  desire."  Thus  Batlislieba
addressed  David,  "I  desire  one  small  peti-
tion of  thee ;  I  pray  thee,  say  me  not  nay  "
(1  Kings  ii.  20).  Salome  is  plainly  intend-
ing to  ask  some  great  thing.

Ver.  21.— What  wilt  thoul  Jesns  will
make  no  unconditional  promise ;  he  compels
her  to  formulate  her  petition.  Grant;  eiVe:
command.  These  my  two  sons.  She  points
to  them,  as  they  stood  or  knelt  behind  her.
Jlay  sit  ...  in  thy  kingdom.  The  right
and  left  hand  would  be  the  places  occupied
by  those  next  to  the  sovereign  in  dignity
and  consideration.  There  is  here  no  thought
of  St.  Peter's  pre-eminence  (oomp.  1  Kings  ii.
19;  2  0hron.xviii.l8;  Ps.xlv.9;  ox.l).  The
petitiou  was  urged  at  this  moment,  because
it  was  felt  that  a  great  crisis  was  at  hand.
This  visit  to  Jerusalem musthave momentous
results ;  here  Jesus  was  about  to  set  up  his
throne;  now  was  the  moment  to  secure  the
highest  places  in  his  court.  He  bad  an-
nounced his  death ;  he  had  also  annonncid
his  glory ;  they  balanced  one  declaration
against  the  other,  and  seized  on  that  which
was  most  consonant  to  their  national  preju-
dices and  tiieir  own  ambitious  views.    Pro-


bably they  interpreted  the  nnintelligible
resurrection  to  mean  the  establishment  of
the  kingdom  of  Messiah  (Luke  xix.  11).  If
this  was  imminent,  no  time  was  to  be  lost
in  making  their  claims  known.  So  thought
the  "sons  of  thunder,"  and  acted  with
energy  and  haste.

Ver.  22. — Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.
Jesns  addresses,  not  the  mother,  but  the  two
brothers  who  had  prompted  and  virtually
made  the  request.  They  indeed  merited  a
rebuke  for  their  preposterous  demand ;  but
the  Saviour  deals  mildly  with  them.  They
had  spoken  ignorantly,  perhaps  fancying
tliat  some  favour  might  be  shown  to  them
on  the  ground  of  their  relationship  to  the
Virgin  Mary,  or  because  of  their  nearness
to  Jesus,  and  certainly  not  in  the  least
realizing  the  nature  of  the  kingdom,  the
qualifications  of  its  inheritors,  or  the  ditfioul-
ties  that  have  to  be  surmounted  by  those
who  would  win  eminent  positions  therein.
Things  that  we  deem  most  desirable  would
often  be  the  very  worst  for  our  spiritual  pro-
gress ;  and  in  praying  for  really  good  things,
we  are  apt  to  forget  to  count  the  cost  wo
must  pay  for  their  attainment.  Jesns  seta
before  the  ambitious  brethren  the  obstacles
that  would  meet  them.  Are  ye  able  to  drink
of  the  cup  ?  Joy  and  sorrow,  blessing  and
afHiotion,  in  Holy  Scripture  are  often  de-
noted under  the  metaphor  of  a  cup  (comp.
Ps.  xi.  6;  xxiii.  5;  Isa.  Ii.  17;  Jer.  xxv.
15).  Here  the  cup  signifies  the  internal,
mental,  and  spiritual  sufferings  which  Christ
endured  (ch.  xxvi.  39,  42).  That  I  shall
drink  of;  h  iyii  fifWa  irlyeiv,  which  I  am
about  to  drink ;  or  am  purposing  to  drink.
Christ  expresses  his  voluntary  intention  of
suffering  bitterly,  and  asks  if  they  are  pre-
pared to  do  the  same.  To  be  baptized,  etc.
The  baptism  is  significant  of  the  external
pains  and  persecutions,  in  the  sea  of  which
he  was  to  be  sunk  (comp.  Ps.  Ixlx.  2,  15).
The  cup  and  the  baptism  adumbrate  the
two  sacraments  by  which  we  are  made  one
with  Christ.  Many  uf  the  best  manuscripts,
the  Vulgate  and  other  versions,  omit  this
last  clause,  and  the  corresponding  one  in
the  following  verse;  and  many  modem
editors,  with  the  Kevised  Version,  expunge
it  also.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  intro-
duced from  the  parallel  passage  in  St.  Mark.
There  it  is  undoubtedly  genuine ;  so  we  have
good  warrant  to  believe  that  ora-  Lord  spoke
the  words,  whether  St.  Matthew  really  re-
ported them  or  not.  We  are  able.  They
came  forward  now  and  answered  in  sim-
plicity, not  understanding  that  to  which
they  pledged  themselves.  Tliey  loved  their
Master,  they  knew  that  trials  awaited  him,
and  they  were  willing  to  share  his  lot.  Ere
long  they  were  put  to  the  proof,  tnd  in  the
end  came  out  victorious.


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.


Ver.  23. — Te  shall  indeed  drink,  etc.  Jesus
accepts  their  ventare  of  faith,  and  prophesies
its  fulfilment.  St.  James  first  shared  in
Christ's  baptism  of  blood,  being  murdered
by  Herod  (Acts  xii.  2).  He  was  a  martyr  in
will  and  deed.  St.  John  did  not,  indeed,  un-
dergo a  violent  death,  but  he  stood  by  the
cross  and  felt  his  Master's  sufferings;  he
lived  a  long  life  of  persecution,  banishment,
and  distress ;  he  saw  all  his  companions  drop
off  one  by  one,  till  in  extreme  old  age  he
was  left  solitary,  with  nothing  to  comfort
him  but  the  memory  of  vanished  years,  and
the  hope  of  au  eternal  future.  Truly  he
was  a  martyr  in  will,  if  not  in  deed.  The
story  that  he  was  cast  into  a  cauldron  of
boiling  oil  by  Nero's  command,  and  that,
coming  forth  unhurt,  he  was  afterwards
banished  to  Patmos,  is  one  which,  except  as
regards  the  banishment,  has  not  been
accepted  by  inoderu  criticism.  The  event  is
meutioned  by  TertuUian  ('  De  Prsescript.,'
xxivi.),  Jerome  ('Adv.  Jovin.,'  i.  26;  and
'Comm.  in  Matt.'  xx.  27),  and  is  com-
memorated in  the  Church  Calendar  on
May  6,  under  the  title  of  "S.  Joh.  ante
Port.  Lat. ;  "  but  it  appears  to  have  been  a
legend  that  first  appeared  iu  Tertullian's
work,  and  was  copied  from  him  by  other
writers  without  examination.  Is  not  mine
to  give,  but  it  sliall  be  given  to  them  for
whom  (i\A'  oTs)  it  is  prepared.  The  Autho-
rized Version  inserts  SoBiia-erai ;  the  Ee-
vised,  "But  it  it  for  them  for  whom  it
hath  been  prepared."  The  Vulgate  has,
Non  est  meum  dare  vohis,  sed  quihus  paratum
est  a  Fatre  meo.  Probably  oAAii  here  is
equivalent  to  €i  /lii,  as  in  ch.  xvii.  8  and
Mark  ix.  8,  and  means  '■  except,"  "  unless."
Tlie  Lord  does  not  mean  that  he  was  not
able  to  give  it,  if  so  ho  thought  fit,  or  that
the  boon  was  solely  at  his  Father's  bestowal,
not  his  (which  he  might  have  said,  speaking
iu  his  human  nature).  What  he  affirms  is
this :  The  prize  is  awarded,  not  by  favour
or  on  any  earthly  considerations,  but  by
absolute  justice,  and  only  to  those  who  prove
themselves  worthy  to  receive  it.  Christ
assigns  to  the  Father  the  revelation  of
mysteries  and  the  election  to  eternal  life
(see  ch.  xi.  26;  xvi.  17).  7*  it  prepared;
it  kalh  been  prepared  (ch.  xxv.  34),  according
to  certain  impartial  laws  ordained  by  God,
who  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  "The
throne,"  says  St.  Bernard, "  is  the  price  of
toils,  not  a  grace  granted  to  ambition;  a
reward  of  righteousness,  not  the  oonoession
of  a  request."

Ver.  24. — Were  moved  with  indignation
against  (vfpi) ;  concerning.  "  Tlie  ambition
of  one  creates  envy  in  others  who  partake
of  the  same  feeling"  (I.  Williams).  The
displeasure  of  the  ten  arose  from  their
charing  in  the  ambitious  deeireif  which  had


Prompted  the  request  of  the  brothers.  Peter
oes  not  appear  prominently  here,  as  guard-
ing the  position  which  Bomanists  assign  to
him.

Ver.  25. — Called  tbem  onto  him.  The  two
had  stood  apart  when  they  made  tlieir
request,  but  the  ten  had  overheard  it,  or
judged  of  its  nature  from  Christ's  answer
and  their  own  feelings.  Jesus  now  gathers
them  all  round  him,  and  gives  them  a  lesson
which  they  all  needed,  first,  oonceming
worldly  greatness  and  pre-eminence,  and
secondly  (ver.  26),  concerning  Christian
greatness  and  pre-eminence.  Te  know.  He
appeals  to  common  experience.  Exercise
dominion  over  them ;  i .«.  over  the  Gentiles.
KaraKupteioviriy,  lord  it  over — significant  of
an  absolute  and  oppressive  domination.
Sxercise  authority  upon  them ;  i.e.  over  the
Gentiles  ((taref ou«'jafoi«ri»') ;  use  authority
harshly  and  severely.  The  heathen,  when
they  are  raised  to  pre-eminence,  employ
their  power  cruelly  and  in  order  to  gain
their  own  ends  and  purposes,  and  aspire  to
superiority  only  with  such  objects  in  view.
Such  ambition  is  essentially  a  heathen  pas-
sion, and  wholly  alien  from  the  spirit  of  C  lirist.

Ver.  26. — It  shall  not  be  so  among  yon.
There  is  good  authority  for  reading  "  is  "
instead  of  "  shall  be."  The  new  order  of
things  was  already  prepared.  In  Messiah's
kingdom  a  contrary  rule  holds  good.  There
the  governors  rule  solely  for  the  good  of
the  fiook,  with  no  self-seeking,  and  serving
no  private  interests.  Whosoever  will  bo
(hs  iiai  64\p  .  .  .  yev4a8ai :  whosoever  loould
/oin  liecome)  great  among  you  .  .  .  minister
(JSiiKovos).  'faking  for  granted  that  theie
will  be  ranks  and  gradations  of  ofSce  in  the
Church,  Christ  lays  down  the  rule  that  men
become  governors  therein  in  order  that  they
may  serve  their  brethren,  be  the  ministers
of  those  who  are  subject  to  them.  So  the
pope,  in  his  official  documents,  with  a  ver-
bally proper  humility,  terms  himself, "  Servus
servorum  Dei."

Ver.  27.— Whosoever  will  be  (9«\p  .  .
cTfai)  chief  {first,  irpuTos)  . . .  servant  (bond-
servant,  SoSKos).  'The  charaotoristio  of  the
Christian  ruler  should  be  humility.  Christ
enforces  the  teaching  of  the  previous  verse
more  emphatically  by  altering  the  terms  in
which  it  was  stated.  "  Great "  now  becomes
"  first ; "  "  minister,"  »  slave."  Of  these  two
last  words  the  former  would  imply  rather
occasional  service,  to  meet  some  temporary
call;  the  latter,  the  regular  business  of  a
slave  bound  to  his  master  at  all  times.  We
do  not  gather  from  this  passage  that  the
Christian  minister,  called  by  God,  is  to  take
his  doctrine  from  his  congregation,  or  to  be
directed  by  them  in  his  labours ;  but  he  is
to  devote  time,  talents,  faculties,  to  the  good
of  his  flock,  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  their


OH.  XX.  1—34]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


283


eerrice,  tolet  nopriyato  interests  or  pursuits
interfere  with  Ms  manifold  duties  to  those
whom  he  oversees.  The  same  sentiment  is
tound  in  eh,  xxiii.  11.

Ver.  28. — Even  as.  Christ  adduoes  his
own  example  as  a  pattern-  of  profound
humility.  To  minister.  By  his  incarnation
Christ  assumed  the  lowliest  life  of  man.
He  took  upon  himsell  the  form  of  a  servant,
und  was  ever  active  in  ministering  to  others'
wants,  going  about  doing  good,  healing
the  sick,  cleansing  lepers,  casting  out
demons;  always  accessible,  sympathetic,
merciful ;  never  weary  of  teaching,  however
fatigued  in  body ;  a  servant  to  the  race  which
he  came  to  save.  A  ransom  for  many;
Xirpov  aiiT\  iioKKav :  inetead  of  many.  The
crowning  example  of  his  humility  is  that
he  gave  his  life  as  a  ransom  for  the  souls  of
men.  This  is  the  atonement,  the  sacrificial
act,  which  (as  the  Mosaic  sacrifices  did  in
a  partial  and  temporary  manner)  reconciled
God  and  man.  Whatever  may  be  the  way
ill  which  this  atonement  acts  on  the  Divine
mind,  the  expression  here  shows  tliat  it  was
vicarious  and  propitiatory,  energizing,  not
by  example,  as  an  effort  of  superhuman  self-
denial,  courage,  and  patience,  but  by  an
iuhcrent  power,  as  mysterious  as  it  is
erticacious.  We  can  only  say  that,  being
tiie  act  of  one  who  is  God,  its  effects  must
necessarily  be  incompreheusible  and  iu-
iinite.  The  difficulties  that  beset  this
doctrine  are  increased  by  the  fact  that  Jesus
himself  says  little  about  the  atoning  nature
of  his  Biifferings  and  death — a  topic  which
would  not  at  this  time  have  been  properly
received  by  friends  or  enemies,  the  former
refusing  to  credit  his  approaching  death,
the  latter  being  totally  unable  to  conceive
how  such  death  could  supersede  Jewish
sacrifices  and  reconcile  the  whole  world  to
God  (Sadler).  Christ  certainly  died  for  all,
as  St.  Paul  says,  "  He  gave  himself  a  ransom
for  all  (ivrUvrpoy  uwip  iraPTuv) "  (1  Tim.  ii.
6),  but  all  do  not  accept  the  offered  salva-
tion ;  hence  arise  the  two  expressions,  "  all "
and  "  many,"  referring  to  the  same  object;
"  not,"  as  an  old  Father  says,  "  that  salva-
tion is  limited,  but  men's  efforts  to  obtain
it  are  limited."  The  same  expression  was
used  by  our  Lord  at  the  Last  Supper,  when
he  said,  "This  is  my  blood  of  the  New
Testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the
remission  of  sins  "  (oh.  xxvi.  28).  A  com-
parison of  the  passages  in  which  the  death
of  ChiTst  is  connected  with  the  salvation  of
men  would  show  a  similar  interchange  of
terms,  depending  on  the  view  which  the
writer  is  taking  of  the  doctrine,  whether  an
objective  one  or  a  subjective.  In  the  former
case  we  may  cite  Bom.  v.  15 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14 ;
1  Tim.  ii.  6;  1  John  ii.  2;  in  the  latter,
Bom.  iiL25,  26;  Eph.  t.  2.


Vers.  29 — ^84. — Beating  of  tmo  blind  men
at  Jerioko.  (Mark  x.  46 — 52 ;  Luke  iviii.  35 —
43.)  The  miracle  narrated  in  this  passage
is  common  to  the  three  synoptists,  but  with
some  remarkable  differences,  not  one  of
them  agreeing  altogether  in  details.  St.
Matthew  speaks  of  two  blind  men,  St.  Lnke
and  St.  Mark  of  one  only,  and  the  latter
mentions  this  one  by  name  as  BHrtimceus.
St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  make  the  miracle
performed  as  Jesns  quitted  Jericho;  St.
Luke  assigns  it  to  the  approach  to  the  city.
Thus  the  number  of  the  cured  and  the
locality  of  the  miracle  are  alike  variously
stated.  It  is  an  easy  solution  to  say,  with
St.  Augustine,  Ligbtfoot,  and  Greswell,  that
two,  or  perhaps  three,  distinct  facts  are  here
related ;  and  it  is  not  absolutely  impossible,
though  altogether  improbable,  that  in  the
same  locality,  under  identical  circumstances,
like  sufferers  made  the  same  request,  and
received  the  same  relief  in  the  same  manner.
But  we  are  not  driven  to  this  extravagant
hypothesis ;  and  the  unity  of  the  narrative
can  be  preserved  without  doing  violence  to
the  language  of  the  writers.  As  to  the
nnmber  of  the  blind  men,  we  have  seen  the
same  discrepancy  in  the  case  of  the  de-
moniacs at  Gadara  solved  by  supposing  that
one  of  the  two  was  the  more  remarkable  and
better  known  than  the  otlier.  Hence,  in
this  incident,  the  tradition  followed  by  some
of  the  synoptists  preserved  the  memory  of  this
one  alone,  who  may  have  become  known  in  the
Christian  community  as  a  devoted  follower
of  Jesus,  the  other  passing  into  obscurity
and  being  heard  of  no  more.  Another  hypo-
thesis is  that  a  single  blind  man  first  ad-
dressed Christ  as  he  entered  Jericho,  but
was  not  cured  at  that  time.  Jesus  passed  tluit
night  in  the  city  at  the  house  of  Zacchseus
(Luke  xlx.  1 — 10) ;  and  on  the  morrow,  when
leaving  Jericho,  was  again  entreated  by  the
blind  man,  who  meantime  had  been  joined
by  a  companion,  and'  healed  them  both.
There  are  other  solutions  offered,  e.g.  that
there  were  two  Jerichos — an  old  and  a  new
town — and  that  one  blind  man  was  healed
as  they  entered  one  city,  and  the  otlier  as
they  left  the  other;  or  that  the  term  rendered
"was  come  nigh"  (Luke  xviii.  35)  might
mean  "  was  nigh,"  and  might  therefore
apply  to  one  who  was  leaving  as  well  as  to
one  entering' the  city.     But  we  weary  our-


284


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34


Belvea  in  vain  in  seeking  to  harmonize  every
little  detail  in  the  Gospel  narratives.  No
two,  much  less  three,  independent  witnesses
would  give  an  identical  account  of  an
incident,  especially  one  which  reached
some  of  them  only  by  hearsay.  Inspiration
extends  not  to  petty  circumstances,  and  tlie
credibility  of  the  gospel  depends  not  on  the
rectification  of  such  minutia.

Ver.  29. — Jericho.  The  Lord  was  on  his
way  to  Jerusalem  to  meet  the  death  which
he  was  willing  to  undergo,  and  to  win  the
victory  which  he  was  by  this  path  to  accom-
plish. His  route  lay  througli  Jeiicho,  as
the  march  of  his  forerunner  Joshua  had  led.
Joshna  had  set  forth  to  conquer  the  promised
land ;  Jesus  sets  furth  to  win  his  promised
inheritance  by  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.
"The  upland  pastures  of  Persea  were  now
behind  tliem,"  -says  Dr.  Geikie,  speaking  of
the  approach  to  Jericho  ('The  Life  of
Christ,'  ii.  384),  "and  the  road  led  down
to  the  sunken  channel  of  the  Jordan,  and
the  'divine  district'  of  Jericho.  This
small  but  rich  plain  was  the  most  luxuriant
spot  in  Palestine.  Sloping  gently  upwards
from  the  level  of  the  Dead  Sea,  1350  feet
under  the  Mediterranean,  to  the  stern  back-
ground of  the  hills  of  Quarantana,  it  had
the  climate  of  Lower  Egypt,  and  displayed
the  vegetation  of  the  tropics.  Its  fig  trees
were  pre-eminently  famous ;  it  was  unique
in  its  growth  of  palms  of  various  kinds;  its
crops  of  dates  were  a  proverb ;  the  balsam
plant,  which  grew  principally  here,  furnished
a  costly  perfume,  and  was  in  great  repute
for  healing  wounds ;  mnize  yielded  a  double
harvest;  wheat  ripened  a  whole  month
earlier  than  in  Galilee,  and  innumerable
bees  found  a  paradise  in  the  many  aromatic
flowers  and  plants,  not  a  few  unknown  else-
where, which  filled  the  air  with  odours  and
the  landscape  with  beauty.  Bising  like  an
amphitheatre  from  amidst  this  luxuriant
scene,  lay  Jericho,  the  chief  place  east  of
Jerusalem,  at  seven  or  eight  miles  distant
from  the  Jordan,  on  swelling  slopes,  seven
hundred  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  river,  from
which  its  gardens  and  groves,  thickly  inter-
spersed with  mansions,  and  covering  seventy
furlongs  from  north  to  south,  and  twenty
from  east  to  west,  were  divided  by  a  strip  of
wilderness.  The  town  had  had  an  event-
ful history.  Once  the  stronghold  of  the
Canaanites,  it  was  still,  in  the  days  of
Christ,  surrounded  by  towers  and  castles.
A  great  stone  aqueduct  of  eleven  arches
brought  a  copious  supply  of  water  to  the
city,  and  the  Roman  military  road  ran
through  it.  The  houses  themselves,  how-
ever, though  showy,  were  not  substantial,
but  were  built  mostly  of  lun-diied  bricks.


like  those  of  Egypt ;  so  that  now,  as  in  the
similar  case  of  Babylon,  Nineveh,  or  Egypt,
after  long  desolation,  hardly  a  trace  of  them
remains."  A  great  multitude.  A  vast  crowd
of  pilgrims,  bound  for  Jerusalem  to  keep
the  Passover,  acconipanied  Jesus  and  his
disciples.  The  number  of  people  that  this
great  festival  attracted  to  the  central  place
of  worship  seems  to  us  incredibly  large.
Josephus  ('Bell.  Jud.,'  vi.  9.  3)  reckons
them  at  three  millions.  Doubtless  our  Lord
was  followed  by  many  of  those  whom  he
had  benefited,  and  others  whom  he  had  won
by  hia  teaching;  and  these,  at  any  rate,
would  witness  the  ensuing  miracle.

Ver.  30.— Xwo  blind  men.  St.  Matthew
is  doubtless  accurate  in  this  statement.
Tradition  might  easily  drop  one  of  the  suf-*
ferers  in  the  coujse  of  time,  but  it  is  not
likely  to  have  multiplied  one  into  two.
These  sufferers  had  heard  of  the  miracles  of
healing  performed  by  Jesus  in  his  various
circuits,  and  especially  of  the  late  cure  at
Jerusalem  of  one  born  blind,  and  they  were
ready  to  believe  in  his  power  and  to  profit
by  his  mercy.  Heard.  The  beggars  piark
X.  46),  debarred  from  sight,  had  their  atten-
tion aroused  by  the  tread  of  numerons  feet,
and  the  voices  of  the  excited  crowd,  and
naturally  asked  the  bystanders  to  tell
them  what  it  all  meant.  When  they  heard
that  Jesus  was  there,  the  hope  of  relief  im-
mediately ruslied  into  their  mind.  Have
mercy  on  us,  0  lord,  thou  Son  of  David!
"  O  Lord  "  is  only  the  usual  respectful  ad-
dress of  an  inferior  to  one  in  higher  station ;
but  to  call  on  Jesus  as  "  Son  of  David  "  was
virtually  to  acknowledge  him  to  be  the
Messiah,  who,  as  old  prophets  foretold,  was
to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  (Isa.  xxii.  18 ;
XXXV.  5).  The  same  ory  had  been  raised
by  the  blind  men  who  were  cured  earlier  in
the  ministry  (ch.  ix.  27),  and,  by  the  Syro-
Phconician  woman  (oh.  xv.  22,  where  see
note).  How  these  men  had  learned  the
truth  we  know  not ;  they  could  not  see  or
read  for  themselves ;  their  faith  must  have
come  by  hearing,  and  the  inward  iUumina-
tion  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Ver.  31.— Eebnked  them,  because  (tva,  in
order  thai)  they  should  hold  their  peace.
The  motive  of  the  crowd,  in  thus  silencing
the  blind  men,  has  been  explained  in  two
ways  —  either  they  grudged  that  Christ
should  be  addressed  by  the  high  title  of
"  Son  of  David ; "  or  they  desired  to  spare
him  unseemly  importunity  and  unreason-
able interruption  in  his  journey.  As  the
multitude  show  no  signs  of  hostility  at  this
time,  the  latter  suggestion  seems  most  pro-
bable. They  cried  the  more,  The  attempted
check  only  made  them  more  earnest  in  their
entreaty.  The  opportunity  now  offered
might   never    present   itself   again.     Th«


CH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


285


offieions  interference  of  nnsympatbizing  by-
standers was  at  oiioe  brushed  aside.  They
conld  attract  Christ's  attention  only  by  their
passionate  cry,  and  this  they  continued  to
utter  with  renewed  energy.  Faith  resists
opposition  and  triumphs  over  all  impedi-
ment!.

Ver.  32. — Jesns  stood  still.  He  acknow-
ledged the  title  of  "  Son  of  David,"  and,  as
the  blind  men  could  not  follow  him,  he
stopped^ his  progress;  their  perseverance
won  his  acceptance  ;  he  was  ready  to  listen
to  theii  appeal  and  to  grant  their  request.
Called  them.  The  gracious  summons  left
them  in  no  doubt  as  to  tho  happy  issue  of
their  prayer.  St.  Mark  speaks  of  the  joyful
alacrity  with  which  the  blind  man  obeyed
the  call ;  how  he  "  oast  away  his  garment,
sprang  up,  and  came  to  Jesus."  What  will
ye  that  I  shall  do  nnto  yoal  The  Lord
knew  the  desire  of  their  hearts,  but  he
wished  to  draw  forth  the  public  confession
of  their  needs,  and  the  distinct  blessing
which  they  craved,  that  all  the  bystanders
might  acknowledge  the  miracle,  and  the
sufferers  themselves  might  be  incited  more
vehemently  to  urge  their  plea,  and  thus
become  more  worthy  of  relief.  So  God  knows
all  our  necessities  before  we  ask,  but  he  will
have  our  prayers,  that  we  may  co-operate
with  him  in  the  work  which  he  purposes  to
accomplish.

Ver.  33.— That  oni  eyes  may  be  opened.
So  another  blind  man  said,  when  asked  the
same  question  (Mark  x.  51).  Tliey  had  at
first  asked  vaguely  for  mercy,  now  they
prayed  definitely  for  sight — an  example  to
all  to  make  their  supplications  for  particular
graces  and  mercies,  and  not  to  be  content


with  general  terms  which  do  not  describe
their  special  wants.

Ver.  34. — Touched  their  eyes.  Only  St.
Matthew  mentions  this  action  of  our  Lord;
but  in  all  other  cases  of  the  cure  of  blind-
ness the  healing  touch  of  the  Man  accom-
panied the  word  of  the  God  (comp.  ch.  ix.  29 ;
Mark  viii.  23 ;  John  ix.  6),  and  Christ  did
not  now  depart  from  his  usual  practice.
Thus,  as  we  have  noticed  before,  he  con-
nected the  cure  with  himself.  He  proved
that  his  flesh  taken  unto  the  Godhead  was
life-giving,  remedial,  eflciicious;  and  he
confirmed  the  faith  of  the  sufferers  and  by-
standers by  showing  that  there  was  no
deceit  or  collusion.  The  other  synoptists
give  Christ's  assurance  to  the  men,  that  the
restoration  of  their  sight  was  the  reward  of
faith — a  faith  exhibited  by  the  invocation
of  Jesns  as  "  Son  of  David,"  by  continued
importunity  amid  surrounding  dilHeulties,
by  confidence  in  his  power  and  willingness
to  heal  brouglit  to  a  point  by  Christ's
question,  "  AVhat  will  ye  that  I  shall  do
unto  you?"  They  followed  him.  A  fact
only  less  remarkable  than  the  miracle  that
led  to  it.  The  impulse  of  a  grateful  heart
drew  them  along  the  road  which  the
Saviour  travelled.  They  may  have  accom-
panied him  to  .Jerusalem,  and  joined  the
applauding  multitude  which  escorted  him
to  the  holy  city,  and  employed  their  new
power  of  sight  in  observing  that  wonderful
spectacle  which  the  next  few  days  afforded.
One,  at  any  rate,  of  tliese  men,  Bartimeeus,
seems  to  have  IJecome  known  in  the  early
Church  as  a  devoted  follower  of  Christ,  and
hence  his  name  is  recorded  for  all  time  in
the  sacred  narrative.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 16. — Parable  of  the  ldbourer$  m»  the  vineyard.  I.  Thb  hibikq.  1.  7%e
connection.  The  parable  is  very  closely  connected  with  the  last  four  verses  of  ch.  xix.
It  is  plainly  intended  to  illustrate  our  Lord's  saying  in  oh.  xix.  30, "  Many  that  are  first
shall  be  last;  and  the  last  shall  be  first."  St.  Peter's  question  in  ver,  27  contained  an
element  of  error.  The  Lord  had  promised  a  great  reward  to  his  faithful  servants,  and
he  would  give  it.  It  was  their  due,  in  a  sense ;  but  not  as  a  debt,  not  as  of  merit  ("  the
gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  "),  but  only  of  promise,  because  God,  in  the  free  bounty  of  his
sovereign  grace,  has  given  unto  us  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."  ,  God  will
remember  his  holy  promise ;  he  is  faithful.  But  his  people  must  understand  that  the
rewards  of  his  kingdom  are  his  to  give — to  give  according  to  his  own  will.  His  will  is
not  arbitrary ;  it  is  holy  and  just  and  good.  He  cannot  deny  himself;  the  datermina-
tions  of  his  will  must  always  be  in  accordance  with  his  own  infinite  goodness,  love,
wisdom,  justice.  His  people  must  learn  to  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done.'  They  must
trust  absolutely  and  wholly  in  his  love  and  bounty.  They  must  not  prescribe  their
own  reward.  They  must  not  venture  to  estimate  it  upon  the  basis  of  so  much  reward
for  so  much  work.  They  must  not  make  jealous  comparisons  of  themselves  with
others.  Each  Christian  man  must  do  his  duty,  not  grudgingly,  nor  of  necessity,  but
out  of  love,  in  simple  trustfulness.  God  is  faithful.  2.  The  first  hiring.  The  house-
bolder  went  out  early  in  the  morning  to  hire  labourers  into  his  vineyard.    The  House-


28«  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.

holder  is  God ;  the  vineyard  is  his  kingdom ;  the  labourers  are  men  called  by  him  to  do
his  work.  The  jiarable  was  addressed  to  the  apostles,  and  was  part  of  the  answer  to
St.  Peter's  question ;  so  it  would  seem  that,  in  the  first  and  strictest  meaning,  the
labourers  first  called  must  be  the  apostles  themselves.  The  householder  went  out
early  in  the  morning;  the  Lord  came  forth  from  heaven;  it  was  to  hire  labourers,  to
send  forth  men  to  carry  on  the  great  work  which  he  himself  began.  He  agreed  with
them  for  a  penny  a  day.  The  penny  must  mean  the  jirize  of  the  high  calling — that
treasure  in  heaven  which  the  Lord  had  offered  to  the  young  ruler,  that  eternal  life
which  he  promised  to  all  who  deny  themselves  for  his  Name's  sake.  The  labourers
hired  later  in  the  day  must,  on  this  theory,  be  the  holy  men  (such  as  St.  Stephen,
St.  Paul,  and  others)  who  were  c.illed  to  the  work  after  the  twelve,  but  still  in  the
apoBtolic  times.  Those  called  at  the  eleventh  hour  will  be  Gentile  Christians  called
later  yet  to  the  work,  such  as  the  fellow-labourers  of  St.  Paul.  The  context  seems  to
suggest  this  explanation  as  the  first  and  most  obvious  meaning  of  the  parable.  But  it
may  be  fairly  understood  also  of  the  Jews,  God's  ancient  people,  who  were  first  called
into  covenant  with  God ;  and  of  the  Gentiles,  called  in  the  last  times  into  a  covenant
of  grace.  And,  again,  the  parable  illustrates  in  a  touching  and  striking  manner  the
dealings  of  God  with  individual  souls ;  some  are  called  in  childhood  like  Samuel,  some
in  middle  life,  some  in  advanced  age.  They  differ  indefinitely  from  one  another  in
early  training,  in  talents,  in  opportunities.  But  all  have  their  appointed  work ;  all  have
the  like  blessed  hope  to  cheer  them  on  in  their  daily  task.  Each  must  do  his  best
according  to  his  powers,  according  to  the  time  allowed  him.  All  must  trust  in  God.
He  is  gracious  and  merciful,  just  and  large  in  his  generous  bounty.  But  he  is  sovereign
in  the  exercise  of  his  goodness.  None  may  presume  to  murmur;  envies  and  jealousies
are  excluded  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  last  shall  be  first.  St.  Paul,  the  last
of  all,  the  least  of  the  apostles  in  his  own  sight,  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they
alL  "  Yet  not  I,"  he  says,  "  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me."  That  is  the
true  Christian  temper,  which  ascribes  all  its  energy  and  all  its  labours  to  the  assisting
grace  of  God,  which  never  murmurs,  which  gladly  recognizes  the  goodness,  the  work  of
others,  which  rejoices  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  in  the  successes  of  others,  in  the
praises,  the  honours,  the  rewards  bestowed  upon  them.  3.  The  intermediate  hirings.
Again  the  householder  went  out  when  nearly  a  quarter  of  the  working  day  was  gone ;
there  were  others  standing  idle  in  the  market-place ;  he  bade  them  go  and  work  in  his
vineyard.  He  made  no  definite  agreement  with  them,  as  he  had  done  with  the  first
hired  labourers ;  they  were  satisfied  with  his  promise  to  give  whatever  was  riglit,  aud
they  went  their  way.  Again  at  noon,  and  again  when  only  a  quarter  of  the  working
hours  remained,  he  did  the  like.  All  went,  none  refused ;  none  tried  to  bargain  with
the  householder ;  none  asked,  "  What  shall  we  have  therefore?"  We  must  not  stand
idle  when  God  calls  ub  to  work  for  him.  We  must  go  at  once  whenever  we  hear  that
gracious  call,  whether  it  be  early  or  late,  whatever  be  our  circumstances  and  employ-
ments; all  other  work  is  but  idleness  in  his  sight,  compared  with  the  great  work,  the
work  which  God  has  given  us  to  do.  We  must  trust  him  implicitly.  We  have  the
blessed  word  of  Holy  Scripture,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be
saved."  It  is  enough  for  us.  4.  The  last  hiring.  The  day  was  now  nearly  ended ;
only  one  hour  remained.  For  the  last  time  the  householder  went  into  the  market-
place. God,  in  his  long-suffering  mercy,  calls  us  again  and  again,  at  different  periods
of  our  lives,  in  different  ways.  He  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all
should  come  to  repentance."  The  market-place  is  the  world ;  it  is  a  bustling,  noisy
scene ;  yet,  alas  1  many  stand  there  all  the  day  idle.  Their  idleness  may  be  laborious
idleness.  There  was  one  who  said  on  his  death-bed,  "  Heu !  vitam  perdidi  laboriose
nihil  agendo."  Their  life  may  be  restless,  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  or  riches,
filled  every  hour  with  this  or  that  engagement,  this  or  that  amusement.  Yet,  if  the
great  end  of  life  be  neglected,  all  is  but  a  laborious  doing  nothing ;  for  nothing  real  la
gained.  "  Man  walketh  in  a  vain  shadow,"  if  he  is  not  working  for  God ;  this  life,  with
all  its  varied  occupations,  is  no  better  than  idle  play,  if  it  has  no  conscious  relation  to
the  life  beyond  the  grave.  Men  think  that  they  are  working  bard  when,  in  the  eye  of
God,  they  are  standing  idle  all  the  day,  for  they  are  not  working  out  their  own  salvation,
the  only  work  that  is  real,  earnest,  abiding.  God  doth  not  leave  such  idlers  to  perish,
Ue  c«U8  them  agaio  and  again,  by  hit  Word,  by  his  juinisters,  by  his  provideiice.    iU


OH.  XX.  1—34]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  287

calls  then  at  the  eleventh  hour,  "  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?  "  "  The  night
Cometh,  wherein  no  man  can  work,"  aud  the  work  to  be  done  before  nightfall  is  ot
momentous  importance.  They  that  then  stood  idle  gave  a  reason  for  their  idleness,
"  Because  no  man  hath  hired  us."  The  excuse  was  true  in  the  mouth  of  those  Gentile
fellow-labourers  who  were  gathered  into  the  Church  late  in  the  apostolic  times.  God
"  in  times  past,"  said  St.  Paul  (Acts  xiv.  16),  "  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their
own  ways"  (comp.  also  Acts  xvii.  30  and  Rom.  xi.).  They  had  not  been  called  into
the  Church,  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  can  be  true  only  in  a  very  partial  sense  of
Christians  now.  Men  do  not  heed  the  call ;  the  loud  noise  and  bustle  of  the  world
drown  the  still  small  voice  of  the  blessed  Spirit.  Their  deafness  is  wilful ;  the  voice
comes  again  and  again ;  they  will  not  listen,  and  it  becomes  fainter  and  less  distinct.
Sometimes  it  is  unheeded  to  the  end;  sometimes  at  last  it  swells  into  a  trumpet-note,
and  rouses  the  thoughtless  to  repentance.  Yet,  alas  I  even  in  Christian  countries  there
are  many,  brought  up  among  evil  surroundings,  in  all  the  misery  of  godless  training
and  wicked  examples,  without  instruction,  witliout  the  means  of  grace ;  of  whom  (it
sometimes  seems  to  ns,  when  we  face  sadly  and  helplessly  these  perplexing  problems
of  life)  those  words  may  still  be  said,  "  No  man  hath  hired  us."  But  God,  we  know,
is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish ;  we  may  not  doubt  but  that  in  some  way  his
voice  makes  itself  heard  even  to  such  as  these,  if  not  earlier,  yet  at  the  eleventh  hour,
as  life  is  drawing  near  to  its  close.  "  Go  ye  also  into  the  vineyard,"  the  householder,
said,  though  so  short  a  time  for  work  was  left.  No  stipulation  was  made ;  perhaps,  in
this  case,  the  reward  was  not  even  mentioned ;  the  promise  of  giving  whatsoever  was
right  is  omitted  here  in  some  of  the  most  ancient  manuscripts,  which  the  Revised
Version  follows.  The  men  trusted  the  householder  implicitly;  they  went  even  at  that
late  hour  into  the  vineyard.  There  was  yet  work  to  be  done ;  and,  if  there  was  work,
there  was  hope.  They  went,  they  worked ;  and,  we  shall  find,  their  trust  was  not
in  vain.

IL  The  result.  1.  The  reward.  When  even  was  come,  the  lord  of  the  vineyard
said  unto  his  steward,  "  Call  the  labourers,  and  give  them  their  hire."  Christ  himself
is  tha  Steward,  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house  (Heb.  iii.  6).  All  power  is  given  unto
him ;  it  is  he  who  will  say  to  the  redeemed,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father ;  inherit
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you."  The  steward  called  the  labourers ;  he  began,  as  his
lord  had  bidden  him^  with  the  last  hired.  They  had  wrought  but  one  hour,  and  that
without  any  definite  agreement.  They  knew  not  what  to  expect ;  they  had  done  their
best,  it  seems;  but  the  time  was  short,  very  short.  What  could  they  look  for?  They
came  in  doubt  and  anxiety.  But  they  received  every  man  a  penny — the  full  day's
wages.  They  were,  we  may  be  sure,  full  of  joy  and  gratitude ;  it  was  far  more  than
they  had  expected.  They  had  not  earned  it,  they  knew ;  it  was  of  grace,  a  free  gift,
a  prool  of  the  generous  bounty  of  the  lord  of  the  vineyard.  The  rewards  of  heaven  are
not  calculated  by  the  methods  of  earth.  Men  called  late  into  Christ's  service  might
rank  with  the  first  chosen  twelve.  Paul  the  persecutor  would  sit  on  one  of  the  twelve
thrones;  Judas  the  apostle  would  forfeit  his  place  in  the  apostolic  hierarchy.  Geotiles
would  be  called  into  the  kingdom  on  an  equal  footing  with  God's  ancient  people.
Throughout  the  history  of  the  Church  it  would  happen  again  and  again  that  men
called  late  in  life,  sometimes  on  the  very  bed  of  death,  would  receive  the  full  reward.
Work  is  not  always  measured  by  time ;  life  itself  is  not  measured  by  time.  A  short
life  has  sometinnes  far  more  of  real  living,  more  of  deep  spiritual  energy,  and  even
sometimes  of  outward  work,  than  a  very  long  life  spent  without  earnest  purpose  ("  He
being  made  peifect  in  a  short  time,  fulfilled  a  long  time,"  Wisd.  iv.  13).  We  may
well  believe  that  in  the  dying  hours  of  the  penitent  thief  there  was  concentrated  a
depth  of  repentance,  an  intensity  of  love,  an  energy  of  victorious  faith,  which  he
marked  and  rewarded  who  measures  life,  not  by  time,  not  by  outward  work,  but  by
faith  and  love.  The  labourers  were  called  in  order  from  the  last  unto  the  first.  All
received  the  like  reward — the  penny,  covenanted  to  the  first  called,  given,  it  seems,
without  covenant  to  those  sent  later  into  the  vineyard.  The  parable  contemplates  a
portion  only  of  God's  dealings  with  mankind;  its  point  of  view  does  not  extend  to  the
disobedient,  mentioned  elsewhere,  who  went  not  to  the  vineyard.  Here  all  the
labourers  had  worked,  and  all  received  their  hire.  But  that  reward,  though  in  itself
the  same,  varies  according  to  the  spiritual  capacity  of  the  receiver.    Eternal  life  is


288  TEE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cii.  xx.  1—31.

promised  to  all  the  llessed ;  God  himself  is  their  Portion.  Yet  we  read  of  ten  cities
»nd  of  five  (Luke  six.  il,  19).  There  will  he  first  and  last,  greatest  and  least,  in  the
kingdom  of  God ;  all  the  iitars  shine  in  the  heaTecs,  but  one  star  differeth  from  another
star  in  glory.  All  the  bleksed  will,  by  the  grace  of  God,  be  admitted  into  the  exceed-
ing great  rapture  of  the  beatific  vision.  That  vision  of  love  and  glory  will  fill  every
heart  with  unutterable  gladnei« ;  the  saints  will  be  changed  into  the  same  image  from
glory  to  glory,  drawn  ever  nearer,  received  into  an  ever-closer  nearness,  an  ever-deepen-
ing blessedness,  increasing  in  prt^rtion  to  the  powers,  the  love,  the  fervour,  thci
devotion  of  each  glorified  spirit.  aU  will  receive  the  blessed  promise,  eternal  life ;
the  realization  of  that  promise  will  depend  in  some  measure  on  the  capacities  of  the
receiver.  All  will  be  blessed.  Holy  Smpture  seems  to  teach  that  there  will  be  degrees
of  blessedness  in  heaven,  as  there  are  degrees  of  holiness  on  eartli.  2.  Hie  mwrmun.
The  first-hired  labourers  had  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day;  they  now  received
the  covenanted  reward.  It  was  their  just  due  according  to  the  original  agreement.
But  they  murmured,  not  because  they  had  received  too  little,  but  because  others,  as
they  thought,  had  received  too  much.  These  last  had  wrought  but  one  hour,  and  yet
the  good  man  of  the  house  had  made  them  equal  to'  those  who  had  worked  from
morning  until  evening.  The  Jews  showed  this  narrow  spirit  of  unworthy  jealousy
towards  the  Gentiles;  we  see  it  throughout  the  New  Testament.  It  was  this  that
caused  the  rejection  of  our  Lord  at  Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  26 — 29).  It  was  this  that
excited  the  fierce  wrath  of  the  Jews  against  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxiL  21,  22).  They  were
God's  chosen  people ;  the  adoption  was  theirs,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and
the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises  (Bom.  ix.  4).  They
could  not  endure  the  thought  that  the  despised  Gentiles  were  to  be  admitted  to  an
equality  of  privileges.  St.  Peter  had  just  showed  something  of  this  spirit  in  his
question,  "Behold,  we  have  left  all,  and  followed  thee;  what  shall  we  have  therefore?"
The  primary  intention  of  the  parable  was,  it  seems,  to  teach  him  and  his  brother
apostles  that  the  rewards  of  God's  kingdom  are  not  of  debt,  but  of  grace ;  and  to
rebuke  that  desire  of  pre-eminence,  those  jealoueies  and  rivalries,  which  we  meet  with
BO  often  in  the  history  of  the  apostles,  and,  alas  I  in  the  whole  history  of  the  Church.
There  must  be  no  jealousies  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Each  Christian  n.ust  learn  of  him
"  who  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart "  the  great  grace  of  humility ;  we  must  all  learn  "  in
lowliness  of  mind  to  esteem  others  better  than  ourselves."  We  must  learn  this  great
lesson  now ;  for  murmurers  have  no  place  in  the  kingdom  of  glory.  Heaven  is  the
home  of  love ;  no  jarring  notes  of  envy  or  discontent  may  disturb  its  Divine  harmonies.
It  is  the  home  of  blessedness ;  there  can  be  no  complaints  in  heaven;  for,  if  there  are
degrees  of  blessedness,  yet  each  redeemed  soul  is  blessed  to  the  full  extent  of  its
capacities,  and  is  disturbed  by  no  unsatisfied  longings.  Then  if  we  apply  the  parable
to  the  circumstances  of  individual  Christians,  and  understand  the  penny  as  meaning
the  unspeakable  gift — Christ  now,  eternal  life  hereafter — we  must  regard  this  portion
as  belonging  to  the  scenery,  so  to  speak,  of  the  parable,  to  its  setting,  as  conveying  a
warning  of  what  might  happen  on  earth,  not  a  prophecy  of  what  will  happen  hereafter.
On  earth  the  murmurers  receive  the  penny ;  they  have  worked  for  it.  There  is  no
intimation  in  the  parable  that  they  worked  less  strenuously  than  those  called  later;  it
would  not  be  just  to  withhold  it,  though  they  marred  their  industry  by  their  envy
•nd  ill  temper.  In  the  world  to  come  such  men  would  lose  their  reward ;  in  this
world  they  knew  not  how  to  value  it.  The  reward  off j  red  was  the  gift  of  Christ,
Christ  himself,  Christ  present  to  his  people's  hearts;  but,  alas)  though  they  seemed  to
begin  well,  they  envied  others  who  afterwards  outstripped  them  in  the  Christian  race ;
and  that  envy  of  the  progress,  of  the  successes,  of  the  rewards  of  others  marred  their
own  religious  service,  destroyed  the  value  of  their  work,  poisoned  and  killed  out  of
their  hearts  the  holy  life  of  faith  and  love.  To  such  heaven  would  be  no  heaven  if
they  were  allowed  to  enter  there,  for  to  the  unloving  there  can  be  no  joy  in  the  love  of
heaven.  "  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God ;  for  God  is  love."  8.  The  reply  of  the
householdtr,  "Friend,"  he  said.  The  Greek  word  is  not  one  which  implies  affection
or  friendship,  but  only  knowledge  and  companionship;  it  is  used  by  the  Idng  in  the

S arable  to  the  man  who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment,  and  by  our  Lord  in  addressing
udas  at  Qethsemane.    The  man  had  received  the  penny ;  the  payment  was  according
to  the  agreement ;  he  had  no  right  to  more.    The  apostles  would  receive  the  promised


ou.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  289

reward ;  but  they  ought  not  to  seek  great  things  for  themselves ;  they  ought  not  to
desire  pre-eminence ;  they  ought  to  trust  the  bounty  and  the  justice  of  God.  They
ought  not  to  boast  of  what  they  had  done ;  they  ought  not  to  say,  "  Behold,  we  have
left  all,  and  followed  thee ; "  but  rather,  as  St.  Paul  said  afterwards,  **  I  know  whom  I
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed
unto  him  against  that  day."  Implicit  faith  in  God's  justice  and  love  is  the  proper
attitude  of  the  Christian  soul.  His  will  is  sovereign ;  he  distributeth  to  every  man
severally  as  he  will ;  but  it  is  not  arbitrary ;  it  is  holy  and  just  and  good.  He  knows,
as  none  else  can  know,  all  the  circumstances,  all  the  surroundings,  all  the  temptations,
all  the  advantages  and  disadvantages,  which  must  be  taken  into  consideration  in  any
accurate  estimate  of  character.  Without  this  knowledge  it  is  impossible  to  weigh
one  man  against  another,  or  to  balance  the  relative  preponderance  of  good  or  evil  in
each.  We  cannot  have  this  knowledge.  God  has  it ;  we  must  trust  his  ruUng.  We
must  not  dare  to  complain  if  others,  whom  we  regarded  as  our  inferiors,  are  put  above
US  or  on  an  equality  with  us.  God  has  his  reasons;  he  doeth  all  things  well.
Perhaps  the  householder  in  the  parable  knew  that  any  addition  to  the  stipulated
reward  was  not  deserved;  perhaps  he  knew  that  it  would  be  misused,  that  it  would  in
some  way  do  harm  rather  than  good.  God,  who  knows  all  things,  certainly  acts
always  for  the  best.  The  Lord  is  loving  unto  every  man.  He  maketh  all  things
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  him.  This  is  enough  for  us  to  know.  We
must  learn  the  blessed  grace  of  humility,  the  holy  lesson  of  contentment.  Murmuring
there  must  not  be ;  it  shows  at  once  the  miworthiness  of  the  murmurers.  Envy  is  an
evil  thing ;  it  comes  from  the  evil  one ;  it  has  no  place  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  for
the  law  of  that  kingdom  is  love.  4.  The  conclusion.  The  Lord  sums  up  the  parable
in  the  words  which  he  had  used  before  (ch.  six.  30).  The  parable  was  intended  to
illustrate  their  meaning.  He  now  repeats  them,  "  So  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the
first  last."  He  does  not  mean  that  it  will  be  so  in  all  cases;  but  that  the  fact  of
being  first  called,  or  first  in  other  senses,  first  in  station,  first  in  the  esteem  of  men,  or
even  first  in  outward  works,  will  not  necessarily  save  a  man  from  being  last  at  the
end.  "  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last."  The  first  hired  in  the  parable  were  last  in
several  respects.  They  received  their  reward  last ;  that  reward  was  least  in  proportion
to  the  time  of  service;  and  they  were  last  in  good  feeling.  All  the  rest  were  con-
tented; they  only  were  dissatisfied  and  ungratefuL  Then  the  first  places  in  the
kingdom  are  for  those  who  are  first  in  humility,  first  in  self-abasement,  who  are  willing
to  be  last  of  all  and  the  servants  of  all;  who  recognize  their  own  sinfulness,  their
unworthiness  of  the  least  of  God's  mercies ;  who,  far  from  putting  forward  a  claim  to
pre-eminence,  are  content  to  take  the  lowest  place.  Such  men  may  seem  last  in  the
eyes  of  men ;  they  may  have  been  called  late  in  life ;  they  may  be  very  inferior  to
others  in  showy  qualities ;  but  they  are  first  now  in  the  sight  of  God ;  they  will  be
first  one  day  in  the  sight  of  men  and  angels.  If  the  last  clause  of  ver.  16  is  genuine
in  this  place,  it  cannot  be  taken  in  the  same  sense  as  in  ch.  xxiL  14.  There  the  guest
who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment  was  called  indeed  to  the  marriage,  but  not  chosen
unto  life  eternal ;  he  was  cast  into  outer  darkness.  Here  all  receive  the  reward ;  but
few  are  chosen  out,  as  pre-eminent  in  holiness,  for  the  highest  places  in  God's  kingdom,
to  sit  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  King,  or  to  occupy  the  twelve  thrones  of  the  rulers  of
the  spiritual  Israel.  God  gives  these  highest  distinctions  to  whom  he  will,  to  the
lowliest  and  the  most  self-denying.  But  there  is  no  room  for  ambition  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven ;  all  the  faithful  must  be  content,  all  will  be  content  with  the  place  assigned
to  them,  for  the  very  lowest  place  there  is  a  prize  unspeakably  glorious,  blessed  above
all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.

Lessons.  1.  God's  rewards  are  of  grace,  not  of  debt.  2.  Christians  must  be  humble
and  thankful,  not  jealous  of  others.  3.  The  very  lowest  place  in  God's  kingdom  is
far  higher  than  the  best  of  us  deserves.  4.  We  must  obey  the  calling  of  God.  He  has
work  for  every  one  of  us ;  let  us  earnestly  try  to  do  it.  5.  Let  us  not  despair  if  we
are  called  at  the  eleventh  hour.     Only  let  us  do  our  best.    The  last  may  be  first.

Vers.  17 — 19. — Predictions  of  the  Passion.  L  Jodbney  to  Jerusalem.  1.  The
Lord.  He  was  going  up  now  for  the  last  time  to  the  holy  city.  His  work  in  Galilee,
m  Peraea,  was  over;  it  seemed  to  have  ended  in  disappointment.     His  popularity  was

MATTHEW— n.  U


290  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1-34.

aot  what  it  liad  been;  his  enemies  had  to  a  large  extent  succeeded  (or  seemed  to  have
succeeded)  in  undermining  his  influence.  He  was  "  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted
with  grief."  A  few  days  of  thankless  labour  awaited  him  at  Jerusalem,  and  then  the
awful  cross.  He  knew  it  all.  We  cannot  discern  the  secrets  of  the  future ;  God  has
mercifully  shrouded  them  in  darkness.  The  shadow  of  the  cross  fell  along  the  whole
life  of  the  Lord.  And  now  he  knew  that  his  hour  was  come,  thtJt  he  should  depart
out  of  this  world  unto  the  Father.  The  thought  gave  an  awful  dignity  to  his  mien,  a
Divine  majesty  to  his  figure,  a  strange  stateliness  to  every  gesture  (Mark  x.  32).  He
was  going  to  meet  his  death.  He  saw  it  plain  before  him  in  all  its  circumstances  of
shame  and  anguish;  but  he  shrank  not.  He  went  forwards  with  a  sweet  and  holy
calmness,  with  a  more  than  heroic  courage,  which  shone  through  his  features  and
illumined  those  clear  holy  eyes  with  a  light  that  spoke  of  heaven.  2.  Hie  disciples.
The  Lord  went  before  them,  leading  them  to  the  fearfiil  conflict.  They  followed  in
silent  awe;  they  watched  the  Lord's  demeanour;  they  had  never  before  seen  such  a
strange  high  glory  of  steadfast  resolve  even  on  that  blessed  face,  and  they  weie
amazed,  terror-stricken.  They  regarded  him  with  the  deepest  reverence — reverence  not
diminished  by  familiar  intercourse,  but  constantly  increasing;  and  now,  it  seems,  they
feared  to  intrude  upon  his  meditations ;  but  they  were  troubled  and  anxious.  They
felt  that  some  momentous  crisis  was  at  hand.  The  Lord  cared  for  them.  Be  was  not
■0  absorbed  in  the  intense  contemplation  of  his  coming  sufferings  as  to  forget  his  fol-
lowers. He  is  our  great  Example.  We  think  that  the  excitement  caused  by  the
expectation  of  great  joy  or  great  sorrow  is  an  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  our  ordinary
duties.  It  was  not  so  with  Christ  our  Lord.  "  Having  loved  his  own  which  were  in  the
world,  he  loved  them  unto  the  end."  He  took  them  apart  in  the  way.  He  would  in
his  loving  tenderness  prepare  them  for  the  dreadful  trial.  Twice  already  he  liad  pre-
dicted his  death,  but  they  seemed  unable  to  take  it  into  their  minds ;  he  would
tell  them  a  third  time,  more  plainly  now,  in  greater  detail.  And  so  he  took  them
apart.  Perhaps  the  roads  were  crowded;  there  were  multitudes  going  up  to  the  Pass-
over. He  would  not  tell  them  the  dreadful  secret  within  the  reach  of  unsympathizing
ears ;  they  would  best  hear  it  alone,  where  none  were  present  save  those  most  deeply
concerned — the  blessed  Master,  and  the  little  company  who  so  dearly  loved  him.  Mark
the  tender  delicacy  of  his  dealings  with  them.

II.  What  was  to  be  expected.  1.  The  hetrayal.  "Behold,  we  go  up  tc  Jeru-
salem," the  Lord  said.  It  was  a  glad  thought  commonly.  "  I  was  glad  when  they
said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Our  feet  shall  stand  witliin  thy
gates,  0  Jerusalem."  And  they  were  now  going  up  to  the  Passover.  It  may  be  that
the  disciples,  like  other  Jews,  were  looking  forward  to  that  great  festival  with  feelings
of  joy ;  and  very  probably  they  were  cherishing  the  hope  that  their  Master  would  then
manifest  himself  openly  as  the  Messiah,  that  he  would  be  welcomed  as  the  great  King,
the  Deliverer  that  was  to  come.  He  was  to  he  manifested,  but  upon  the  cross ;  he  was
to  reign,  but  from  the  tree.  He  told  them  calmly  of  the  double  betrayal  that  was
coming.  He  should  he  betrayed  (he  did  not  say  by  whom ;  they  conld  not  bear  yet
to  hear  that)  unto  the  chief  priests  and  scribes.  They  would  not  acknowledge  him  as
the  Christ  (as  perhaps  the  disciples  were  hoping) ;  they  would  condemn  him  to  death,
and  betray  him  to  the  Gentiles.  His  own  disciple  would  betray  him  to  the  priests  ;
his  own  nation,  nay,  the  priests,  who  knew  where  the  Christ  should  be  horn  (ch.  ii.  4),
one  of  whom  "  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation "  (John  xi.  61),
would  betray  him  to  the  Gentiles.  2.  The  manner  of  his  death.  He  told  them  very
plainly  now.  It  would  be  the  act  of  the  Gentiles,  but  the  guilt  would  rest  mainly
with  the  Jews  (John  xix.  11).  He  predicted  the  harrowing  details  of  his  Passion ;
he  would  be  mocked,  scourged,  crucified.  He  had  mentioned  the  cross  already  (ch.  x.
38 ;  xvi.  24),  but  it  was  in  figurative  language ;  the  spiritual  cross  of  self-denial  was
to  be  the  test  of  his  true  disciples.  Now  he  told  them  plainly  what  it  was  that
was  to  give  a  new  meaning  to  the  hated  word,  and  make  it  another  name  for  the
holiest  and  loftiest  self-sacrifice.  He  himself  was  to  die  upon  the  cross,  not  in  figure,
hut  in  reality.  He,  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  he  whom  the  three  chosen
apostles  had  seen  glorious  with  the  radiance  of  heaven,  he  was  to  die  that  death
which  hitherto  had  been  regarded  as  of  all  things  horrible  the  most  horrible,  ol  all
things  ignominious  the  most  intensely  shameful.     Yet  the  future  was  not  all  dark ;  h«


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  291

WAB  to  rise  again  the  third  day.  He  had  raised  others  already  from  the  dead :  he  himseli
would  rise,  for  he  is  the  Besurrection  and  the  Life  ;  it  was  not  possible  that  he  could  be
holden  of  the  grave.  It  was  now  the  third  warning  j  yet,  St.  Luke  tells  us,  the  apostles
"  understood  none  of  these  things ;  and  this  saying  was  hid  from  them,  neither  knew
they  the  things  which  were  spoken."  It  seems  strange ;  but  is  it  not  much  the
same  now?  In  spite  of  warnings,  men  will  not  understand  that  their  own  death  is  at
hand;  they  think  all  men  mortal  but  themselves;  they  will  not  speak  of  death;  they
carefiilly  avoid  the  subject.  Christ  teaches  us  a  different  lesson.  We  should  often
think  of  death,  we  should  often  speak  of  it,  of  our  own  coming  death,  and  that  calmly,
with  the  Christian's  hope  of  a  blessed  resurrection.

Lessokb.  1.  Mark  the  awe  and  reverence  with  which  the  apostles  regarded  the  Lord,
though  they  loved  him  so  well.  Reverence  becomes  the  true  Christian.  2.  How  often,
when  we  look  for  joy,  there  comes  great  sorrow!  Let  us  be  prepared.  3.  Think  much
of  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  it  cannot  be  too  much  in  the  Christian's  thoughts.

Vers.  20 — 28. — Salome  and  her  sons.  L  Thbib  convebsation  with  Christ.  1.
r/te  request.  Salome  was  one  of  the  Lord's  most  faithful  followers;  she  was  present
at  the  cross ;  perhaps  she  was  his  mother's  sister.  Her  sons  had  been  admitted  into
the  innermost  circle  of  the  apostles ;  they  with  Peter  were  the  three  nearest  to  the
Lord.  But  even  the  chosen  three  could  not  receive  the  Lord's  predictions  of  his  death.
Their  hearts  were  so  preoccupied  with  thoughts  of  the  kingdom,  the  twelve  thrones,
the  coming  glories,  that  they  seemed  quite  unable  to  take  the  thought  of  the  cross  into
their  minds.  They  had  seen  the  grandeur  of  the  Transfiguration;  like  Peter, they
recoiled  in  horror  from  the  prospect  of  the  crccs.  They  could  not  think  that  that
height  of  glory  and  that  depth  of  shame  could  meet  in  one  Person ;  they  could  not
believe  it  at  all ;  and,  as  men  do  still,  or  try  to  do,  they  put  away  such  distressing
thoughts.  And  now  Salome  came,  doing  lowly  reverence  to  Jesus  as  to  the  King  Mes-
siah, and  making  her  request.  She  prayed,  not  for  herself,  but  with  a  mother^s  love
for  her  sons,  that  they  might  sit,  the  one  on  the  Lord's  right  hand,  the  other  on  the
left,  in  his  kingdom.  2.  The  Lord's  reply.  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask."  They
thought  of  an  earthly  kingdom.  He  knew  what  they  would  not  know,  though  he  had
told  them  thrice.  Salome  would  soon  see,  one  at  least  of  her  sons  would  see,  the  Lord
not  sitting  on  a  royal  throne,  but  hanging  on  the  cross.  They  would  see  on  the  right
hand  and  on  the  left  not  two  great  officers,  two  ministers  ot  state,  but  two  crucified
malefactors.  We  often  know  not  what  we  ask  when  we  seek  in  our  folly  great  things
for  ourselves.  We  do  not  know  the  future ;  we  do  not  know  ourselves.  The  best
prayer  is  the  Lord's  own  prayer,  "Not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  done."  "Not  my  will."
We  wish  tor  this  or  that  honour,  this  or  that  post  of  pre-eminence  for  ourselves,  for
our  children,  for  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  us.  We  know  not  what  we  ask ;  we  do
not  rightly  estimate  our  own  powers ;  we  do  not  think  of  the  dangers  and  temptations
which  lie  before  us,  the  envies  and  the  jealousies  which  we  provoke.  Ambition  is  rash
always ;  most  perilous  is  its  rashness  when  it  aspires  to  the  highest  places  in  the
Church.  "  Are  ye  able  to  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of  ?  "  None  can  tread
safely  in  those  places  save  those  who  can  drink  of  the  Saviour's  cup ;  none  can  endure
those  tremendous  responsibilities  save  those  who  have  been  baptized  with  his  baptism.
And  that  cup  is  the  cup  of  self-denial,  and  that  baptism  is  the  baptism  of  blood,  the
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  which  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  which  maketh  those  only  white
and  clean  who  have  come  out  of  great  inoulation,  the  spiritual  tribulation  of  contrition
and  self-abasement,  if  not  the  outward  tribulation  of  suffering  for  the  sake  of  Christ.
"  We  are  able,"  said  the  sons  of  Zebedee.  They  were  true  and  faithful ;  it  was  not  a
mere  vulgar  ambition  which  prompted  them ;  they  were  devoted,  heart  and  soul,  to  the
service  of  their  Lord.  They  were  ready  to  follow  him  through  danger  and  through  suffer-
ing, though  now  they  failed  to  understand  the  meaning  of  that  kingdom  which  was  so
much  in  their  thoughts.  The  Lord  recognized  their  truth  and  loyalty ;  they  had  the
high  courage  which  they  professed;  they  should  be  united  very  closely  with  him  by
the  sacraments  of  suffering  and  martyrdom  in  deed  or  in  will.  But  those  highest
places  in  the  kingdom  of  glory  were  not  to  be  given  by  partial  love,  at  the  request  of
mother  or  of  sons  ;  they  were  to  be  bestowed  according  to  the  eternal  election  of  God
the  Father  upon  those  who  were  nearest  to  the  Lord  in  lowliness  and  entire  self-sacri-


292  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    loh.  xx.  1— 84.

floe.  Let  us  pray  for  the  holy  courage  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  "  We  are  able,"  It  is  a
noble  word  if  it  issues  out  of  a  true  and  real  faith,  if  it  is  uttered  in  hiimility  and
dependence  upon  Christ ;  it  is  a  pure  and  holy  word  when  it  is  spoken  by  Christ's
faithful  followers.  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  Other-
wise it  is  presumptuous  and  profane,     "  Without  me,  ye  can  do  nothing,"

IL  Thb  ten  afcstles.    1.  Their  indignation.    Salome  and  her  sons  had,  it  seems,
approached  the  Lord  privately,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  other  apostles.    When
they  heard  of  the  request  that  had  been  made  they  were  much  displeased.    The  two
had  sought  pre-eminence  over  the  rest,  even  over  Peter.    Peter  does  not,  as  at  other
times,  put  himself  prominently  forward ;  possibly  the  twice-repeated  warning  of  our
Lord,  "  Many  that  are  first  shall  be  last,"  Eept  him  back.    The  displeasure  of  the  ten
was  natural,  but  it  was  wrong.    They  had  forgotten  the  lessons  of  the  eighteenth
chapter ;  they  still  harboured  those  uni9orthy  jealousies  which  ought  to  have  no  place
among  the  disciples  of  Christ,    2.   The  Lord'$  warning.    (1)  The  commandment.
The  Church  must  not  imitate  the  world.    The  rulers  of  the  nations  lord  it  over  them ;
but  (as  St.  Peter  wrote  afterwards,  echoing,  it  seems,  the  Saviour's  word)  Christian
presbyters  must  not  lord  it  over  the  chaige  allotted  to  them.    The  way  to  true  great-
ness is  lowly  service.     He  is  greatest  in  the  Christian  ministry  who  realizes  most  the
meaning  of  the  word  "  minister,"  as  St.  Paul  understood  its  meaning  and  illustrated  it
in  his  life  (comp.  2  Cor,  vi.  3 — 10 ;  xi.  23 — 30).     He  is  greatest  who  stands  waiting
day  and  night  on  Christ,  who  follows  him  most  closely  in  self-denying  ministrations.
He  will  be  first  in  the  great  day  who  is  willing  now  to  be  the  last  of  all,  who  regards
himself  as  the  servant  of  Christ,  and  as  the  servant  of  all  men  for  Christ's  sake ;  as  St.
Paul  made  himself  the  servant  of  all  that  he  might  gain  the  more.     He  will  be  chief
then,  who,  though  his  labours  may  be  abundant,  like  the  labours  of  St,  Paul,  yet,
like  St.  Paul,  owns  himself  to  be  the  least  of  all,  seeking  no  pre-eminence  over  others,
but  simply  and  unafiectedly  attributing  all  that  is  good  in  himself  or  in  his  work  to
the  grace  of  God  :  "  Yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me."    (2)  The
great  Example.    The  Lord  docs  not  only  teach ;  he  illustrates  his  teaching  by  his  life ;
especially  when  he  gives  the  most  difficult  lessons,  he  calls  our  attention  to  his  own
example.    He  bids  us  become  the  servants  of  all;  he  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a
servant.     He  bids  us  minister  to  others ;  he  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to
minister.     He  came  from  heaven,  from  his  true  home,  to  this  lower  earth  of  ours,  and
that  not  to  display  the  glory  of  his  majesty,  not  to  be  ministered  unto  as  Messiah  thu
King.    Angels  did  minister  unto  him,  so  did  holy  women  and  others ;  but  that  was
occasional,  incidental.    The  purpose  of  his  coming  was  to  minister — to  minister  to  the
deep  wants  of  humanity,  to  the  cravings  of  those  who  hungered  after  God,  to  the
mortal  sickness  of  countless  dying  souls.     He  came  to  feed  the  hungry  with  the  Bread
of  life,  which  is  himself;  to  cleanse  the  sin-defiled  with  the  fountain  opened  for  sin
and  for  iniquity,  which  is  his  precious  blood ;  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  tu  give  rest
to  all  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, — for  he  is  the  great  Physician ;  he  is  our  Peace,
the  only  Best  of  the  weary  soul.    He  came  to  minister;  those  who  would  bo  nearest
him  in  his  glory  must  be  nearest  him  in  his  ministry.     His  ministers  must  imitate
him  who  was  "  a  Minister  of  the  circumcision  for  the  truth  of  God."    But  he  came  to
do  more  than  to  minister — he  came  to  do  that  one  great  deed  which  stands  aloue  in
the  world's  history,  which  none  could  do  save  only  the  Son  of  God,  who  became  for  our
sake  the  Son  of  man.     He  came  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many.     He  gave  it;  it
was  his  free  gift,  a  spontaneous  act  of  mysterious  love  and  bounty,  generous  above  the
reach  of  human  thought.    What  he  gave  was  his  life — that  human  life  which  he  had
taken  into  his  Divine  Person.     That  human  life  was  pure  and  holy ;  the  one  only
human  life  that  came  not  under  the  curse  of  the  Law.   "  The  soul  [the  life]  that  sinneth
it  shall  die."    He  needed  not  to  die ;  but  in  his  generous  love  he  gave  that  pure  and
holy  life  as  a  ransom  for  the  many  sinful  lives.    He  gave  "himself  for  us  an  offering
and  a  sacrifice  unto  God "  (Eph.  v.  2).    The  ransom  was  given  to  Gk)d.    The  atone-
ment belongs  to  the  region  of  very  high  and  sacred  mysteries ;  its  reasons,  its  necessity,
its  wide-reaching  and  awful  meaning,  are  high  above  us.    Human  words  are  inadequate
to  express  it;   human  illustrations  at  the  best  are  partial  and  incomplete;   human
thought  cannot  grasp  it  in  its  fulness.     It  becomes  us  to  speak  of  these  high  mysteriet
with  reverence  and  solemn  reticence,    "  God  is  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon  imrSi  ■.  ther»-


OK.  XX.  1-^4.]    TUE  GOSPEL  ACCORDLNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  298

fore  let  thy  words  be  few.*"  But  thus  much  we  know  for  certain,  and  that  from  the
Lord's  own  lips,  his  death  was  a  sacrifice,  and  it  was  vicariouB.  He  gave  his  life  a
ransom  for  many,  in  their  place,  in  their  stead.  Such  is  the  only  possible  meaning  of
the  words ;  he  took  upon  him  our  punishment,  he  suffered  in  our  stead,  blessed  be
his  holy  Name  I  One  died  for  many ;  but  that  One  was  God,  God  and  Man  in  one
Person,  infinite  in  love  and  power,  as  that  sacrifice  was  infinite  in  preciousness.  For
many,  and  yet  for  all,  as  St.  Paul  says,  when  he  repeats  the  precious  words  (1  Tim.
i.  6) ;  for  all  who  will  believe  and  come  to  him  in  faith ;  for  he  is  the  Saviour  of  the
world,  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."

Lessons.  1.  Seek  not  great  things  for  yourselves,  for  your  children ;  pray  for
humility.  2.  Try  more  and  more  to  work  into  your  heart  that  holiest  prayer,  "  Not
my  will,  but  thine,  be  done."  3.  Abase  yourselves.  The  lowliest  here  shall  be  the
highest  there.

Vers.  29 — 34. — The  two  blind  men.  I,  Jerioho.  The  Lord  had  come  to  Jericho,
the  famous  city  of  the  palm  trees,  the  first  city  taken  by  Joshua  in  his  career  of  con-
quest. Now  in  Jericho  a  greater  Joshua  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  and  brought
tbe  good  news  of  peace  and  reconciliation  with  God  to  the  house  of  the  publican ;  and
from  Jerioho  he  went  up  to  the  holy  city  to  meet  a  mightier  foe  than  any  who  ever
fell  before  the  8word»of  Joshua — to  triumph  over  sin  and  Satan  by  the  power  of  the
most  holy  cross.

IL  The  mieaolb.  1.  The  prayer.  Two  blind  men  sat  by  the  wayside.  One  was
3artim»us,  the  son  of  Timaaus.  He  was  well  known  in  Jericho ;  he  had  sat  there
begging  long,  perhaps  for  years.  They  heard  the  multitude  pass  by ;  they  asked  what
was  the  njeaning  of  the  crowd,  the  tramp  of  many  feet.  It  was  Jesus,  they  were  told —
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  They  had  heard  of  him ;  every  one  had  heard  of  him.  He  had
given  sight  to  the  blind ;  nay,  he  had  opened  the  eyes  of  one  who  was  born  blind.
They  begged  for  the  like  mercy  now :  "  Have  mercy  on  us,  0  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David ! "
2.  ITie  rebuke  of  the  multitude.  There  was  a  brief  revival  of  the  Lord's  popularity ;
mou  hoped  that  he  would  at  last  openly  announce  himself  as  the  Messiah,  and  claim
the  throne  of  David.  A  vast  multitude  attended  him  in  his  royal  progress.  The
crowds,  absorbed  in  great  expectations,  cared  not  for  the  blind  beggars.  They  were
disturbed  by  their  cries ;  perhaps  they  thought  that  the  interruption  would  annoy  the
King.  They  rebuked  them,  that  they  should  hold  their  peace ;  but  they  cried  the
more,  saying,  "  Have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David  1 "  Christians  meet
Moiuetimes  with  similar  difficulties  now,  when  they  first  wake  to  the  sense  of  their
spiritual  blindness,  when  they  first  begin  to  follow  Christ  in  earnest  supplication.
Others,  who  are  content  with  a  mere  formal  religion,  find  fault  with  their  earnestness  ;
it  is  felt  by  the  indifferent  and  apathetic  as  a  reproof  to  themselves.  They  must  not
be  discouraged ;  they  must  cry  the  more,  "  Have  mercy  on  us,  0  Lord ! "  The  Lord
will  listen ;  the  Lord  will  save.  3.  The  Lord's  compassion.  He  heard  the  cry  of  the
supplicants  through  the  noise  of  the  multitude ;  it  arrested  his  attention.  He  stood
still  and  called  them.  He  could  think  of  the  wretched  even  now,  surrounded  as  he
was  by  an  ap|)lauding  crowd,  on  his  way  to  his  last  dread  conflict,  tlie  shadow  of  death
gathering  round  him.  He  will  listen  to  us  when  we  pray.  He  seems,  perhaps,  to  be
passing  by ;  but  the  cry  of  earnest  supplication  will  detain  him.  Only  let  us  pray,  as
the  blind  men  prayed,  with  all  intensity  of  entreaty,  not  ceasing  till  he  hears  us,  and
stands  still  and  calls  us.  He  is  passing  by;  a  crowd  of  worshippers  follow,  gazing  on
him  in  adoration.  He  will  listen  to  those  who  feel  the  misery  of  spiritual  blindness,
and  weep  for  their  want  of  faith.  Only  let  them  persevere  in  their  prayer,  "  Lord,
increase  our  faith,"  lest  he  pass  on  out  of  the  reach  of  their  cries.  4.  The  answer,
"What  will  ye,"  he  said,  "that  I  should  do  unto  you?"  "Lord,"  they  said,  "that
our  eyes  may  be  opened."  At  once  the  Lord  had  mercy.  He  touched  their  eyes,  and
immediately  they  received  their  sight,  and  followed  him.  His  touch  hath  still  its
ancient  power ;  still  he  can  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind ;  and  still  they  who  with  eyes
opened  by  his  touch  look  up  upon  the  Lord,  must  follow  him  on  the  way  that  leadeth
to  the  cross.

Lkssons.  1.  The  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind ;  he  will  open  our  eyes  if  we
come  to  him  in  faith.    2.  We  must,  am  heed  the  objections  which  men  make  to


294  THE  GOSPEL  ACUOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  rs.  1—34.

leligioui  earnestness.  We  need  Christ;  we  must  find  him.  3.  The  Lord  is  ever
passing  by,  ever  ready  to  hear  the  prayer  of  strong  desire.  4.  His  touch  can  shed  the
light  of  heaven  upon  our  souls.    Shine  into  our  hearts,  0  Lord  1


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  labourers  in  the  vineyard.  This  parable  is  closely  connected  with
our  Lord's  remarks  in  describing  the  rewards  of  the  kingdom,  and  it  may  have  been
intended  to  convey  a  mild  rebuke,  or  at  least  a  gentle  warning,  to  St.  Peter,  who  had
asked,  "  What  then  shall  we  have  ?  "  The  apostles  are  to  receive  great  rewards.  But
those  who,  like  St.  Peter,  were  called  first,  are  not  to  assume  that  they  will  have  any
more  than  those  who  came  in  later.

I.  Chbist  seeks  LAB0UEBE8  FOB  HIS  VINEYARD.  There  Is  work  to  be  done  in
winning  the  world'  for  Christ,  and  in  training  the  Church  that  its  fruit  may  be  brought
forth  in  abundance.  For  this  work  our  Lord  requires  labourers.  His  servants  are  not
to  be  satisfied  with  receiving  his  grace.  That  grace  is  given  for  the  express  purpose
of  its  being  used  in  his  service.     Christ  calls  us  that  we  may  serve  him.

II.  Christ  offers  a  faib  beward  foe  laboue.  The  so-called  "penny"  was
evidently  the  regular  wages  of  the  ordinary  day  labourer.  Al»hough  Christ  might
exact  service  on  royal  authority,  he  does  not  put  forth  this  authority.  He  accepts
each  labourer  on  the  man's  free  consent,  and  he  offers  him  all  that  he  could  ask  for.
We  talk  of  the  sacrifice  and  toils'of  a  Christian  life.  We  should  be  honest  to  reckon
up  its  gains  on  the  other  side.

III.  Christ  hires  laboubebs  at  the  various  houes.  The  Church  did  not  start
fully  equipped.  By  degrees  the  requisite  forces  have  been  drawn  into  the  service  of
the  kingdom.  Those  late  hired  may  represent  various  classes.  1.  The  later  called
apostles.  St.  Peter  will  not  have  pre-eminence  because  he  was  called  earlier  than  St.
Jude.  When  St.  Paul  came  his  case  would  be  obviously  met  here.  And  yet  the
parallel  is  not  exact,  because  the  later  apostles  did  not  have  a  shorter  season  of  work.
2.  The  Oentiles.  These  were  called  later  than  the  Jews ;  but  they  were  not  assigned
an  inferior  place  in  the  kingdom.  3.  The  heathen.  Even  to-day,  at  the  eleventh  hour,
some  nations  are  being  called  in.  4.  The  aged.  One  who  did  not  receive  the  gospel
in  youth  will  not  necessarily  be  lower  than  one  who  had  the  privilege  of  knowing  it
in  his  early  days.

IV.  Christ  ebwards  in  an  unexpected  manner.  Here  we  have  a  description
of  an  equality  of  payment.  Elsewhere  there  is  an  idea  of  diversity,  e.g.  Luke  xix.
24 — 26.  Each  representation  has  its  own  lesson.  In  the  case  before  us  we  learn  that
the  final  division  may  not  be  at  all  according  to  our  expectation.  The  obscure  may
be  on  a  level  with  the  eminent — the  Gentiles  with  the  Jews,  the  new  mission  Churches
of  India  and  China  with  the  old  Christian  Churches  of  Europe.

V.  Christ  has  a  eight  to  deal  gbnebouslt  afteb  he  has  acted  justlt.
The  payment  looked  unfair.  But  no  one  could  complain,  bucause  every  one  had  what
he  had  agreed  to  take,  and  because  no  one  had  less  than  fair  wages.  Beyond  this  the
householder  was  free  to  be  as  generous  as  he  pleased  in  the  disposal  of  his  own  property.
Still,  one  can  quite  understand  the  dissatisfaction.  People  are  hurt  when  generosity
does  not  seem  to  be  equal  and  fair.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  later  comers
had  excused  themselves  on  the  plea  that  no  man  had  hired  them.  Possibly  they  were
as  willing  to  work  all  day  as  those  who  had  done  so.  Now,  Christ  judges  by  the  heart
and  the  intentions. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  16  —  j1  great  reversal.  This  is  an  often-repeated  saying  of  our  Lord's ;  per-
haps he  uttered  it  more  often  than  anything  else — a  fact  which  shows  its  importance  and
also  the  difficulty  people  have  in  believing  it  and  acting  ou  it.  Wo  are  not  to  suppose
that  there  is  a  Nemesis  that  mocks  at  good  fortune  and  delights  in  reversing  it.  Pros-  '
perity  is  not  punished  as  such,  for  it  is  not  in  itself  an  evil  thing.  God  is  gracious  and
generous.  He  would  not  torment  his  children  with  needless  disappointments.  Let  us,
then,  look  for  the  causes  of  the  great  reversal.

L  God  does  not  judge  men  by  their  wobldly  position.   He  does  not  punish  rank.


OT.XX.1— S*.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  295

He  takea  no  account  of  it,  except  in  so  far  as  it  brings  with  it  obligations,  etc.  We  see
men  in  honour  because  of  their  riches  or  their  success.  Such  things  mean  nothing  to
God.  He  only  looks  at  the  naked  characters  of  the  men  themselves.  These  are  all  that
he  puts  in  his  scales.  If  these  are  found  wanting,  they  are  condemned,  and  no  riches
or  honours  can  be  thrown  in  as  "  make-weights."  On  the  other  hand,  poor,  obscure,
oppressed,  misunderstood,  or  persecuted  people  suffer  nothing  whatever  in  God's  judg-
ment on  account  of  those  circumstances  which  bring  on  them  the  contempt  of  the
world.    If  they  have  real  worth  they  are  understood  and  appreciated  in  heaven.

II.  Worldly  pke-bminencb  boes  not  usually  sfbino  feom  those  graces  or
CHARACTEB  WHICH  GoD  VALUES.  Sometimes,  indeed,  it  is  the  reward  of  real  merit.  But
too  often  it  comes  from  most  inferior  qualities.  The  accident  of  birth  confers  the  highest
honours  and  the  greatest  wealth  by  the  artificial  law  of  primogeniture.  Successful
schenoing  and  good  fortune  bring  a  man  money  and  influence.  A  Kapoleon  forces  his
way  to  the  head  of  Europe  by  the  exercise  of  enormous  mind  and  will  powers  at  the
expense  of  every  moral  consideration.

III.  There  is  a  tendency  in  worldly  pre-bminenoe  to  injure  the  bpitteb
QUALITIES  OP  THE  SOUL.  Christ  spoke  of  the  difficulty  of  rich  men  in  entering  the
kingdom  of  heaven  (ch.  xix.  23).  Other  forms  of  pre-eminence  besides  that  of  wealth
also  have  their  difficulties.  One  great  hindrance  to  spiritual  progress  is  pride,  and  high
rank  fosters  pritie.  Self-will  is  incompatible  with  spiritual  excellence,  and  the  great
and  exalted  are  tempted  to  indulge  self-wiD.  Lowliness  and  obedience,  unselfishness
and  a  spirit  of  serving,  are  the  qualities  which  Christ  honours.  It  is  very  difficult  to
cultivate  thess  graces  in  high  places — difficult,  but  possible  to  those  who  seek  the  help
of  God — as  we  see  in  a  Margaret  of  Navarre  and  a  Cardinal  Contarini.

IV.  Ultimately  God  will  treat  all  according  to  their  true  characters.
The  irony  of  judgment  will  be  terrible,  just  because  it  will  be  just.  At  the  great  reve-
lation the  fictitious  glory  of  worldly  pre-eminence  will  fade  and  all  its  tawdry  tinsel
will  be  shown  in  hideous  distinctness.  Then  tnie  worth  will  shine  as  the  sun  bursting
forth  from  the  clouds.  That  day  is  coming.  Therefore  let  not  the  favoured  boast  of
their  temporary  exaltation ;  and  let  not  the  lowly  and  oppressed  despair.  There  will
be  a  great  reversal. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  20 — 23. — A  mother's  amhition.  In  St.  Mark  we  are  only  told  that  the  two
sons  of  Zebedee  came,  asking  for  the  first  places  in  the  kinjidom.  St.  Matthew's  account
shows  that  the  request  originated  with  their  mother.  It  is  natural  that  a  mother
should  dream  of  a  great  future  for  her  children.  The  mother's  ambition  is  au  inspira-
tion for  her  training  of  them.  In  the  present  instance  it  seemed  to  overstep  the  bounds
of  modesty.  Yet  when  we  consider  all  the  circumstances,  we  shall  see  that  there  was
something  really  grand  about  it.

I.  The  daring  request.  1.  Its  selfishness.  This  is  the  first  thing  that  strikes  any
reader  of  the  narrative.  On  a  mother's  part  it  is  not  so  selfish,  however,  as  if  the  two
brothers  had  come  alone.  Yet  there  is  a  family  selfishness.  Moreover,  the  brothers
shared  in  their  mother's  request.  2.  Its  naturalness.  These  two  disciples  belonged
to  the  most  intimate  group  of  the  friends  of  Jesus.  Possibly  the  request  was  only  that
there  might  be  a  continuance  in  heaven  of  the  privilege  already  accorded  on  earth.
We  know  that  one  of  the  brothers,  St.  John,  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  Jesus  on  earth

ijohn  xiii.  25) ;  it  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  St.  James  sat  on  the  other  side  of  the  Master,
f  so,  the  request  is  for  the  continuance  of  a  present  privilege.  Will  Jesus,  when  in
glory,  abandon  his  old  friends  ?  or  will  he  own  the  fishermen  and  honour  them  in
proportion  to  their  present  privileges  ?  3.  Its  faith.  This  daring  request  was  made
just  after  Christ  had  spoken  of  his  approaching  death.  The  gloomy  prospect  might
have  checked  the  hopes  of  the  most  ardent.  Nevertheless,  Zebedee's  wife  is  sure  that
Christ  will  triumph  and  reign  in  his  glorious  kingdom.  In  full  view  of  the  greatest
approaching  disaster,  she  speaks  of  the  division  of  the  spoil  after  the  ultimate  victory.
Here  is  a  marvel  of  faith !

II.  The  searching  question.  Jesus  answers  the  request  with  a  question.  Only
they  can  receive  the  heavenly  privileges  who  attain  to  them  in  the  right  way.  Are
the  two  brothers  prepared  for  this  ?  1.  Prayer  is  often  offered  in  ignorance  of  what  ii
involves.     These  simple  people  had  little  conception  of  the  road  to  greatness  in  the


296  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.

kingdom  of  heaven.  We  may  seem  to  be  uttering  most  harmless  requests,  yet  we
know  not  what  we  ask.  Therefore  prayer  should  he  submissive.  It  is  well  to  leave
our  prayers  to  God's  discriminating  judgment.  2.  Hiey  who  would  reign  with  Christ
must  suffer  with  him.  It  is  vain  to  think  of  sharing  the  final  victory  if  we  will  not
share  the  previous  conflict.  The  two  brothers  assent  to  the  condition.  In  doing  so
they  atone  for  much  of  the  selfishness  of  their  request.  They  had  tbeir  grand  de.stiny
of  suffering.  St.  James  drank  of  Christ's  cup  in  being  the  first  martyr-apostle ;  St.  John  in
enduring  longest,  and  in  suffering  exile  and  other  hardships  for  his  Lord's  sake.  There
is  no  escaping  this  condition,  although  it  may  assume  various  forms.  3.  The  ultimate
destiny  of  souls  is  with  Ood  alone.  It  is  not  for  Christ  to  settle  on  grounds  of  friend-
ship or  favour.  It  belongs  to  the  awful  and  mysterious  counsels  of  God.  Here  we
see  the  secondary  rank  of  the  Son  compared  with  his  Father,  Yet  the  main  lesson  is
not  one  concerning  tha  nature  of  the  Trinity.  It  is  to  teach  us  to  renounce  even  the
highest  selfish  ambition.     That  cannot  help  us.    The  future  is  with  God. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  25—27. — True  greatness.  The  daring  request  of  the  mother  of  Zebedee's
children  roused  the  jealousy  of  the  other  disciples.  This  was  natural,  and  quite  in
accordance  with  the  customs  of  the  world.  Nevertheless,  Christ  disapproved  of  the
feeling.  It  showed  something  of  the  same  selfish  ambition  that  the  two  brothers  had
displayed.

I.   WOBLDLT  DIFFBEENCES  OF  RANK   ARE   NOT   TO   BE   ALLOWED  IN  THE   ChURCH   OF

Christ.  1.  The  necessity  of  this  rule.  It  springs  from  the  essential  characteristics  of
Christianity.  (1)  Brotherhood.  In  Christ  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low,  are  brothers,
members  of  one  family.  We  are  to  call  no  man  master  in  the  Church,  because  we  are
all  brethren.  No  institution  of  man  is  more  democratic  than  the  Church  of  Christ —
when  it  realizes  his  idea.  (2)  The  supremacy  of  Christ.  One  is  our  Master,  even
Christ  (ch.  xxiii.  8).  For  a  man  to  exercise  lordship  is  to  usurp  the  kingly  office  of
Christ;  Not  only  is  he  supreme ;  he  deals  directly  with  every  soul  in  his  kingdom.
(3)  The  worthlessness  of  external  pre-eminence.  Christ  cares  for  nothing  of  this  sort.
Of  titles  and  offices  he  takes  no  account.  Character  and  conduct  are  the  only  things
that  he  observes  and  judgeg  us  by;  and  character  and  conduct  are  quite  independent
of  official  position  and  nominal  rank.  2.  The  application  of  this  rule.  It  has  been
and  it  is  now  so  grievously  neglected  and  outraged  that  we  ought  to  expose  the  wrong
with  a  reformer's  courage.  (1)  In  hierarchical  pretensions.  The  papal  claims  are
here  out  of  court.  Therefore  the  friends  of  the  papacy  do  not  lavour  the  reading
of  the  New  Testament  by  the  people.  But  all  domineering  priestliness  is  equally
excluded.  (2)  In  worldly  position.  Differences  of  rank  that  have  nothing  to  do
with  ecclesiastical  order  are  also  quite  out  of  place  in  the  Church.  They  may  have
their  use  in  the  world.  But  they  cannot  confer  any  privileges  in  spiritual  and  religious
matters.

II.  Chbibtlan  GREATNESS  IS  GREATNESS  OF  SERVICE.  It  is  not  hierarchical  power
and  dignity.  It  is  not  secular  wealth  and  titles.  It  is  a  purely  moral  greatness — ^the
result  of  conduct.  They  stand  highest  in  the  kingdom  ol  heaven  who  best  serve  their
brethren.  1.  TTie  grounds  of  this  greatness.  (1)  It  is  Christ-like.  They  will  be  most
honotu'ed  by  Christ  who  best  resemble  him;  they  will  come  nearest  to  him  in  rank  who
follow  him  most  closely  in  conduct.  Christ  was  the  servant  of  all.  (2)  It  is  inherently
excellent.  God  honours  Christ  himself  for  this  very  reason.  He  humbled  himself  and
took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant — "Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him"
(Phi),  ii.  9).  To  serve  is  to  manifest  energy  in  unselfishness  and  kindness — the  best  ot
all  things  witnessed  on  earth.  2.  The  pursuit  of  this  greatness.  The  words,  "and
whosoever  would  become  great  among  you  shall  be  your  servant,"  are  not  the  threat
of  a  punishment  for  anjbition.  They  are  an  indication  of  the  way  to  true  greatness.
This  is  not,  like  worldly  greatness,  reserved  for  the  privileged.  It  is  within  the  reach
of  all.  If  any  wish  lo  approach  the  honours  coveted  for  the  brothers  James  and  John,
the  way  is  open.  It  is  to  be  first  in  service,  to  excel  in  self-sacrificing  toil  for  the  good
of  others.— W.  P.  A.

Ver.  28. —  Christ  the  Servant  and  the  Ransom.  The  immediate  application  of  these
words  ifi  to  confirm  the  previous  assertion  of  the  nature  of  true  greatness  in  the  kingdom


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTUEAV.  297

of  heaven.   But  they  are  so  intensely  significant  that  they  claim  our  attention  on  theii
own  account.

L  Chkist  the  Sbbvant.  This  startling  conjunction  of  titles  is  suggested  even  in
the  Old  Testament,  in  the  latter  part  of  Isaiah.  Jesus  realizes  the  singular  prophecy
in  deeper  humility  and  self-denial.  In  the  prophet  the  Messiah  is  the  "  Servant  of  the
Lord."  In  the  life  of  Jesus  we  see  him  as  this,  hut  also  as  the  Servant  of  man.  Con-
sider the  negative  and  positive  aspects  of  this  wonderful  fact.  1.  Its  negative  atpect,
Christ  did  not  come  to  be  ministered  unto.  He  did  not  ask  for  a  prince's  courtly
rights ;  he  did  not  expect  them.  He  came  in  lowly  guise.  Although  a  few  obscure
friends  delighted  to  give  him  the  means  of  support  in  their  gratitude,  the  great  world's
ministry  of  honour  was  never  his.  2.  Its  positive  aspect.  Jesus  came  to  minister.
Service  was  an  object  of  his  life,  not  an  accident  that  came  upon  him  with  surprise.  He
speaks  of  his  coming  into  the  world  as  though  this  had  been  deliberately  fixed  and  the
service  of  man  part  of  its  great  purpose.  Here  we  see  the  humility,  the  unselfishness,
the  love,  and  the  practical  spirit  of  our  Lord.  In  this  ministry  (1)  he  deserves  our
adoring  gratitude;  (2)  he  invites  our  trustful  confidence, — for  it  is  on  our  behalf;  and
(3)  he  is  the  example  for  our  diligent  imitation.

II.  Chbist  the  Banbom.  Here  is  a  great  thought  flashing  out  of  the  darkness  that
broods  over  the  cross.  Previously,  Jesus  had  spoken  of  his  approaching  death ;  now  ho
suddenly  reveals  the  purpose  of  it.  It  was  more  than  a  necessity  resulting  from  faith-
ful living,  more  than  a  martyrdom.  It  was  the  paying  of  a  ransom.  1.  The  price  paid.
Jesus  gave  his  life.  He  came  for  the  express  purpose  of  doing  so.  One  object  of  his
birth  was  that  he  might  be  able  to  die.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  our  attention  is
always  directed  more  to  the  fact  of  Christ's  death  than  to  the  pain  he  suffered — to  his
cross  rather  than  to  his  Passion,  though  doubtless  both  were  of  value  in  the  great
redeeming  work.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  Jesus  tasted  death  for  every  man.  He
gave  all  he  could  give — his  very  life-blood.  2.  The  liberty  effected.  Men  ransom  from
captivity.  "What  was  the  captivity  from  which  Christ  brought  liberty?  Origen  and
other  Fathers  regarded  it  as  bondage  to  Satan,  and  they  thought  the  ransom  was  actually
paid  to  the  devil.  This  is  a  coarse  way  of  regarding  a  great  truth.  The  ransom  could
not  have  been  paid  to  the  devO,  because  Christ  fought  the  prince  of  evil  as  a  deadly
foe ;  he  did  not  bargain  with  the  fiend.  But  he  came  to  deliver  from  the  power  of
Satan,  i,e,  from  sin,  and  tliat  object  involved  his  death.  He  died  to  save  us  from  sin.
We  must  not  press  the  analogy  of  the  ransom  further.  3.  The  people  freed.  The  ran-
som is  for  "  many."  It  is  a  harsh,  ungenerous  criticism  that  would  fix  on  the  apparent
limitation  of  the  word  "  many" — many  rather  than  all.  There  is  no  such  antithesis
here.  The  many  saved  are  contrasted  with  the  one  Saviour.  His  life-blood  is  so
valuable  a  ransom  that  it  purchases,  not  the  liberation  of  one  or  two  captives  of  sin  ^
only,  but  a  large  multitude — the  host  of  the  redeemed. — W.  F.  A,

Vers.  29—34. — The  blind  men  of  Jericho.  Jesus  is  now  at  Jericho  on  his  last
journey  to  Jerusalem.  When  he  visited  the  sacred  city  a  few  months  before,  he  cured
a  blmd  man,  and  the  miracle  led  to  an  important  investigation  and  vindication  of  the
powers  of  Christ  (John  ix.).  It  is  likely  that  the  fame  of  it  reached  to  Jericho,  and  that
this  inspired  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  blind  beggars.  Let  us  follow  them  through  the
course  of  the  incident.

I.  Thbie  helpless  condition.  1.  These  afflicted  men  were  "  iitting."  They  could
but  grope  about  when  they  attempted  to  walk.  The  glad  activities  of  life  were  not  for
them.  They  sat  apart  in  their  misery.  2.  They  were  "  hy  the  wayside."  St.  Mark
tells  us  that  "one  of  them,  at  least,  was  begging  (Mark  x.  46).  While  the  throng  of
country  pilgrims  passed  by  on  their  way  to  the  Passover,  a  harvest  of  charity  might  be
reaped.  Yet  at  best  this  was  a  wretched  way  of  gaining  a  livelihood.  3.  They  were
together.  St.  Mark  only,  tells  us  of  one  man — Bartimjeus  (Mark  x.  46).  Probably  he
was  the  more  energetic  and  the  better  known  of  the  two.  Yet  his  obscure  friend  is
with  him.  Sufferers  can  sympathize  with  their  brothers  in  suffering.  The  more  active
and  confident  should  bring  their  diffident  friends  to  Christ.

II.  Theib  peayeb  or  faith.  1.  They  acknowledged  Christ.  They  named  him
"Son  of  David."  Thus  they  anticipated  the  hosannas  of  Palm  Sunday.  Perhaps
they  helped  to  inspire  those  hosannas.    2.  They  cried  for  mercy.    Mercy  was  all  they


298  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [ch.  xx.  1—34.

could  seek,  for  they  could  not  afford  to  pay  an  oculist's  fees.  When  we  come  to  Christ
the  richest  among  us  must  approach  him  as  beggars.  The  only  plea  of  the  sinner  is  in
the  mercy  of  his  Saviour.

III.  Their  tryino  disooukagembnt.  1.  The  multitude  rebuked  them — as  the
disciples  rebuked  the  Psraean  mothers  (ch.  xix.  13).  Their  eager  cries  were  irritating.
They  were  but  beggars ;  any  one  could  take  it  upon  him  to  reprimand  such  humble
creatures.  They  who  would  come  to  Christ  are  sometimes  discouraged  by  the  servants
of  Christ.  2.  Jesus  did  not  respond  immediately.  (1)  Perhaps  he  did  not  hear.  (2)
Perhaps  he  was  occupied  with  some  important  teaching.  (3)  Perhaps  he  would  try  the
faith  of  the  poor  men.     1"he  answer  to  prayer  is  sometimes  delayed.

IV.  Their  undaunted  persbveranob.  Now  is  their  opportunity.  Soon  Jesus
will  have  passed,  and  it  will  be  too  late  for  them  to  seek  his  aid.  Yet  great  is  their
need.  So  eagerly  do  they  long  for  sight,  that  no  discouragement  of  impertinent  strangers
shall  hinder  them.  It  is  the  persevering  faith  of  such  men  as  these  that  conqueis  in
the  end — like  the  perseverance  of  the  Syro-Phoenician  woman.

V.  Their  clear  decision.  1.  Jesus  ashed  what  he  should  do  for  them.  This  shows
willingness  to  help.  But  he  must  have  a  clear  statement  of  need.  Perhaps  he  spoke
with  a  smile  of  amusement  at  the  intensity  of  their  eager  cry.  As  though  there  were
any  doubt  as  to  what  they  needed !  His  question  will  calm  them.  2.  They  answered
promptly  and  without  hesitation.  They  know  what  they  want.  We  should  know
what  we  want  from  Christ.

VI.  Thbir  perfect  HBALiNa.  1.  It  sprang  from  the  compassion  of  Christ.  The
blind  men  asked  for  mercy.  They  got  more — deep  sympathy.  This  is  the  root  and
source  of  Christ's  saving  grace.  2.  It  was  immediate.  There  was  delay  in  finding
Christ ;  there  was  no  delay  when  he  was  found.  3.  It  was  just  the  thing  required.
They  asked  for  sight,  and  they  received  it.  We  do  not  always  get  exactly  what  we
seek  for,  but  if  we  seek  aright  we  get  its  better  equivalent. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  lahowers  in  the  vineyard.  This  parable  is  one  from  which  we  are
liable  to  draw  some  erroneous  inferences'  unless  we  mentally  hold  it  in  strict  connection
with  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  originally  spoken.  When  the  rich  young  man
turned  away  sorrowful,  our  Lord,  sympathizing  with  the  severity  of  his  temptation,  said,
"  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  That  a  rich  man  shall  hardly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."
Peter,  seeing  that  he  thus  appreciated  the  difBculty  of  giving  up  property  and  detaching
one's  self  from  the  world,  suggests  that  those  who  overcome  that  difficulty  are  peculiarly
meritorious.  "  Behold,"  he  says,  "  we  have  left  all,  and  followed  thee ;  what  shall  we
have  therefore  ?"  But  in  so  speaking,  Peter  revealed  precisely  that  disposition  which
most  thoroughly  vitiates  all  service  for  Christ— the  disposition  to  bargain,  to  work  for
a  clearly  defined  reward,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  the  work  itself,  and  in  generous  faith
in  the  justice  and  liberality  of  the  Master.  Bead  in  this  light,  it  is  obvious  that  the
parable  directs  attention  to  the  fact  that,  in  estimating  the  value  of  work,  we  must  take
into  consideration,  not  only  the  time  we  have  spent  upon  it  or  the  amount  we  have  got
through,  but  the  motive  that  has  entered  into  it.  An  hour  of  trustful,  loving  service
is  of  greater  value  to  God  than  a  lifetime  of  calculating  industry  and  self-deceiving  zeal.
While  men  are  applauding  the  great  workers  who  ostentatiously  wipe  the  sweat  from
their  brows  and  pant  so  that  you  can  hear  them  across  the  whole  field,  God  is  regarding
an  unnoticed  worker,  who  feels  he  is  doing  little,  who  is  ashamed  that  any  one  should
see  his  work,  who  regrets  he  can  do  no  more,  who  could  not  name  a  coin  small  enough
to  reward  him,  but  who  is  perfectly  well  assured  that  the  Master  he  serves  is  well
worth  serving.  It  is  thus  that  the  last  becomes  first,  and  the  first  last. '  That  we  are
meant  to  see  this  difference  of  spirit  in  the  workers  is  obvious  from  the  terms  of  their
engagement.  Those  hired  early  in  the  day  agree  to  work  for  the  penny.  At  four  or
five  in  the  morning  no  man  in  the  market  engages  without,  making  hig  own  terms,
and  striking  hands  with  his  hirer  as  his  equal.  If  he  thinks  one  master's  pay  too  little,
he  waits  for  a  better  offer ;  he  is  not  going  to  work  all  day  to  oblige  a  neighbouring
proprietor,  but  to  make  a  good  wage  for  himself.     But  in  the  evening  the  tables  are

Ijirned the  masters  have  it  all  their  own  way.   Possibly  these  men  were  the  proudest

in  the  morning,  and  missed  their  chance ;  but  now  pride  gives  place  to  hunger  and
anxious  thoughts  of  the  coming  night.    In  no  condition  to  bargain,  they  go,  glad  w


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  299

get  work  on  any  terms,  not  knowing  what  they  are  to  get,  but  trusting  and  grateful ;
the  others  went  proud,  self-confident,  mercenary.  This  prepares  us  for  the  striking
scene  which  ensued  at  the  close  of  the  day.  'i'hose  who  had  barely  got  their  work
begun  were  first  paid,  and  were  paid  a  fuU  day's  wage.  There  must,  of  course,  have
been  a  reason  for  this ;  it  was  not  mere  caprice,  but  was  the  result  and  expression  of
some  just  law.  It  could  not  be  that  these  late-hired  labourers  had  done  as  much  in
their  one  hour  as  the  others  in  twelve ;  for  the  others  are  conscious  of  having  done
their  work  well.  We  are  thrown  back,  therefore,  for  the  explanation  on  the  hint  given
in  the  hiring,  namely,  that  the  men  who  bargained  are  paid  according  to  their  bargain ;
while  the  men  who  trusted  got  far  more  than  they  could  have  dared  to  bargain  for.
The  principle  is  more  easily  understood,  because  we  ourselves  so  commonly  act  upon
it.  It  is  work  done  with  some  human  feeling  in  it  that  you  delight  in ;  that  of  the
man  who  works  not  for  you,  but  for  his  wage,  is  the  work  of  a  hireling,  with  whom
you  are  quits  when  you  pay  him  what  he  contracted  to  receive.  Our  Lord  does  not
affirm,  however,  that  all  the  last  shall  be  first,  and  the  first  last,  but  only  that  many
shall  exemplify  this  reversal.     "  Many  are  called,  but  few  chosen."

I.  It   IB  THE  FACT  THAT    MANY    WHO    AKB    FIB8T    IN   MAN's   ESTEEM   ABK    LAST   IN

God's  eeckonino.  We  see  plainly  enough  that  many  who  are  most  diligent  in  the
Lord's  vineyard  have  a  complacency,  a  consciousness  that  they  are  the  good  workers,
which  does  not  at  all  resemble  the  humble,  trustful,  self-ignoring  spirit  of  these
late-hired  labourers.  Perhaps  they  have  once  in  their  life  made  a  great  sacrifice  as
Peter  had  done,  or  perhaps  they  have  quickly  apprehended  the  duty  peculiar  to  their
own  generation,  whether  it  be  caring  for  the  sick,  aiding  the  poor,  or  carrying  the
gospel  to  the  masses,  or  subscribing  liberally  to  Church  objects.  Or  perhaps  they  do
the  work,  rot  for  the  sake  of  the  vineyard,  but  for  their  own  sake — either  that  they  may
advance  their  own  spiritual  state,  or  win  a  good  reputation,  or  maintain  in  their  own
minds  the  impression  that  they  are  indubitably  good  labourers.  Now,  if  you  deduct
all  who  are  working  in  one  or  other  of  these  ways,  you  will  come  to  the  conclusion
that  *'  many  are  called,  but  few  chosen ; "  many  working  hard,  spending  and  being  spent,
and  yet  withal  few  choice  workers,  few  who  appeal  to  the  Lord's  heart  and  draw  out
his  affectionate  response  by  their  lowly,  unexpectant  service,

II.  Many  fibst,  but  not  all  the  fiest,  shall  be  last.  Some  at  least  of
the  best-known  workersin  the  vineyard,  some  who  entered  it  early,  and  never  left  it
for  an  hour,  some  who  scarcely  once  straightened  their  backs  from  toil  and  dropped
asleep  as  they  came  to  the  end  of  their  task,  knowing  nothing  but  God's  work  their
whole  life  through,  have  also  wrought  in  no  bargaining  spirit,  but  passed  as  humble
a  judgment  on  their  work  as  the  least  of  their  fellow-labourers  on  theirs.

III.  And  there  are  some  last  who  remain  last.  Not  all  who  do  little  do  it
well ;  not  all  who  enter  the  vineyard  late  enter  it  humbled.  Mercenariness  is  not  con-
fined to  those  who  have  some  small  excuse  for  it.  Late  entrauco  into  the  vineyard  is
to  be  on  every  account  deprecated,  and  receives  no  encouragement  from  this  parable
rightly  read.  Do  not  think  of  the  work  of  Christ  as  a  mere  extra,  which  can  at  any
convenient  time  be  added  to  your  other  work.  It  covers  the  whole  of  our  life.  All
outside  his  vineyard  is  idleness.

This  parable  may  be  viewed  as  the  great  Physician's  prescription  for  envy  in  what-
ever sphere  it  is  manifested,  and  may  be  applied  in  two  ways.  1.  Every  man  of  us
has  as  much  at  least  as  he  deserves.  Were  God  to  say,  "  Take  that  thine  is,"  in  the
strictness  of  just  and  exact  retribution,  which  of  us  would  willingly  stand  upon  our
right?  2.  The  second  is  found  in  these  words,  "  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what
I  will  with  mine  own?"  You  are  none  the  less  because  another  is  greater.  You  are
what  God  sees  best  to  make  you,  and  what  the  other  is  he  is  of  God's  goodness.  It
is  at  God's  expense,  not  at  yours,  that  any  man  is  blessed.  But  the  teaching  special
to  this  parable  is  that  our  Lord  measures  our  work,  not  solely  by  the  amount  done,  nor
by  the  skill  we  show  in  doing  it,  but  by  the  spirit  we  are  of  in  the  doing  of  it.  Many
of  us  are  called.  Many  of  us  are  in  the  vineyard,  and  have  long  been  bo.  In  what
spirit  have  we  laboured  ? — ^D.

Vera.  20 — 28. — Sdlmne^s  petition  for  Zehede^i  sons.  This  strange  petition  must  have
operated  in  a  twofold  way  upon  our  Lord.    On  the  one  band,  it  must  have  made  it


300  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDlNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xx.  1—34.

more  clear  than  ever  to  his  mind  that  nothing  but  his  death  and  departure  from  this
earth  could  dissipate  the  hopes  of  an  earthly  kingdom  cherished  by  even  the  best  of  his
followers.  Ou  the  other  hand,  it  gave  him  a  most  melancholy  exhibition  of  the  kind
of  men  whom  he  must  leave  behind  him  to  found  his  Church.  Yet  in  our  Lord's  reply
there  ii  no  trace  of  anger,  of  contempt,  or  even  of  disappointment,  but  only  of  tender-
ness. It  is  the  language  of  a  father  to  his  child,  who  begs  to  be  allowed  to  go  with
him  on  a  jierilous  expedition.  No  man  can  by  any  possibility  make  this  life  easy  to
nimself  and  yet  find  himself  next  to  Christ  in  all  that  constitutes  the  glory  of  bii
character  and  work.  Nothing  daunted,  the  two  brothers  promptly  declare  that  what
Jesus  can  endure  they  also  can  endure.  They  were  prepared  for  any  risks  such  as  they
considered  were  ioevitable  in  ^  popular  rising;  they  had  made  up  their  minds  to  follow
their  Master  to  the  end.  Onr  Lord's  answer  might  seem  to  imply  that  it  is  possible  for
men  to  share  his  experience  here,  and  yet  not  be  with  him  eternally.  Manifestly  this
is  an  impossible  meaning.  What  our  Lord  meant  was  merely  to  direct  the  thoughts  of
his  disciples  to  the  fact  that  he  was  not  an  arbitrary  Prince  who  might  rule  as  he
pleased,  advancing  his  own  favourites  to  high  posts,  and  bestowing  large  rewards  on
those  he  loved,  but  was  rather  the  Administrator  of  an  inflexibly  righteous  and
impartial  government,  in  which  all  things  were  regulated  according  to  fixed  law.  He
has  in  his  gift  all  that  is  worth  working  for;  but  all  he  has  he  must  give  to  those  who
in  the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  (that  is  really)  are  worthy  of  them.  No  doubt  he  was
exceptionally  attached  to  James  and  John;  all  that  friend  can  ask  of  friend  he  was
delighted  to  give ;  but  he  could  not  reverse  moral  law  and  upset  moral  order  in  their
favour.  We  argue  as  these  men  did :  "  Christ  loves  us ;  all  will  be  well.  He  wishes  to
honour  us;  we  shall  be  honoured."  We  refuse  to  consider  that  in  God's  government
high  position  simply  means  high  character,  and  nearness  to  Christ  is  but  another  name
for  likeness  to  Christ.  A  father  may  desire  nothing  more  earnestly  than  that  his  two
sons  take  their  places  in  life  at  his  right  hand  and  at  his  left;  but  he  knows  perfectly
well  that  this  can  only  be  if  his  sons  fall  in  with  certain  conditions.  So  Christ  cannot
promote  you  irrespective  of  what  you  are.  Our  neglect  of  this  law  appears  in  our
prayers.  Character  has  an  organic  integrity  and  a  consecutive  growth  as  a  tree  has.
But  we  ask  God  to  give  us  fruit  without  either  branch,  blossom,  or  time.  We  wish
ability  to  accomplish  certain  objects  before  we  have  the  fundamental  graces  out  of
which  that  ability  can  alone  spring.  When  we  are  suddenly  put  to  shame  through
our  lack  of  Christian  temper,  courage,  or  charity,  we  as  suddenly  ask  Christ  for  the
grace  we  need,  apparently  supposing  that  we  have  just  to  give  the  order  and  put  on  the
ready-made  habit.  In  such  a  case  we  might  hear  our  Lord's  voice  saying  to  us,  "  Te
know  not  what  ye  ask.  These  things  I  can  give  only  to  those  who  are  prepared  for
them,  and  for  whom  they  are  prepaied."  Can  you  endure  all  that  is  required  for  the
formation  of  these  habits  ?  You  ask  for  humility :  do  you  consider  that  in  doing  so
you  pray  for  humiliation,  for  failure,  mortified  vanity,  disappointed  hopes,  the  reproach
of  men,  and  the  feeling  that  you  are  worthy  of  darker  accusations  than  any  that  men
can  bring  against  you?  You  ask  to  be  useful  in  the  world:  but  can  you  drink  of
Christ's  cup  ?  can  you  take  your  stand  by  his  side,  abandoning  your  own  pleasure  and
profit  for  the  sake  of  the  ungrateful  ?  And  yet  he  does  not  daunt  you  with  impractic-
able requirements,  he  would  not  discourage  you  from  high  aims,  but  would  have  you
count  the  cost,  so  that,  understanding  something  of  the  difficulties  before  you,  your
resolve  to  succeed  may  become  more  determined  and  eager,  your  prayer  more  real  and
urgent.  In  our  prayers  we  are  sometimes  too  general.  Through  indifference  or  want
of  thought,  we  pray  in  general  terms  for  blessings  which  are  recognized  by  all  as  the
proper  subjects  of  prayer.  The  fault  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee  lay  in  an  opposite
direction  ;  and  yet  with  all  this  definiteness  of  naming  the  precise  posts  they  aspired  to  in
the  new  kingdom,  they  had  not  been  at  pains  to  fathom  the  real  purport  of  their  request.
Wo  also  have  sometimes  the  appearance  of  definite  knowledge  without  the  reality.
But  our  Lord  takes  occasion  further  to  tell  his  disciples  (vers.  25 — 28)  that  greatness
in  his  kingdom  consists  not  in  getting  service,  but  in  doing  service;  not  in  having
servants,  but  in  being  servants.  In  the  kingdom  of  Christ  the  throne  was  really  the
cross ;  it  was  that  deepest  humiliation  and  most  devoted  service  of  men  which  gave
Christ  his  true  power  over  us  all.  The  greatness  he  won  for  himself,  and  to  which  he
invites  us,  ii  power  to  do  without  the  things  we  naturally  crave ;  to  forego  worldly


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  801

honour  and  the  applause  of  men,  to  hold  comfort  and  ease  very  cheap,  and  to  make
nothing  of  money  and  possessions ;  it  is  power  to  put  ourselves  at  the  disposal  of  a  good
cause,  and  to  be  of  service  to  those  who  need  our  service. — D.

Ver.  22. — Ignorant  prayers.  "Te  know  not  what  ye  ask."  If  some  one  were  to
say  to  us,  as  we  rose  from  our  knees  or  after  public  worship,  "  What  is  it  that  you  now
expect  to  receive  ?  Of  all  the  blessings  men  have  been  known  to  receive  at  the  hand
of  God,  which  have  you  been  asking  for?"  should  we  not  frequently  be  forced  to  own,
"  I  know  not  what  I  asked  "  ?  We  seem  to  expect  little  more  thaa  that  somehow  our
tone  may  be  elevated  and  the  temper  of  our  spirits  improved  by  our  worship.  But
communion  with  God  can  never  supersede  simple  prayer ;  so  long  as  we  are  encom-
passed with  infirmities  we  must  ask  God's  help,  ana  when  we  do  so  we  should  know
what  it  is  we  ask.     There  are  four  ways  in  which  the  text  pointedly  rebukes  us.

I.  When  we  dtteb  the  lanquaob  or  peateb  without  attaohino  ant
MEANlNO  TO  IT.  We  do  Dot  dream  of  waiting  for  an  answer,  because  we  have  no  desire
to  receive  one.  Aim  at  such  definiteness  that  if,  when  you  say,  "  Forgive  me  my  sins,"
God  were  to  say,  "  What  sin  ?  "  you  would  be  able  without  hesitation  to  name  those
transgressions  that  are  written  on  your  conscience.  Be  as  sure  what  you  have  to
coinplain  of  as  when  you  go  to  consult  your  physician.

II.  When  we  peat  fob  iome  definite  blessing  which  we  debibe,  not  bo  much

FBOM   A    PEESONAL   APPBEOI^TION   OF  ITS  WOBTH,   AS    FBOM  THE    KNOWLEDGE   THAT    IT

IB  ONE  OF  THE  THINGS  GoD  IS  MOST  BEADT  TO  GIVE.  Theso  SOUS  of  Zebedee  named
the  precise  boon  on  which  their  hearts  were  set,  and  yet  what  could  they  have  toid
you  of  the  real  purport  of  their  request — of  the  requirements  of  the  position  they  aspired
to  ?  No  one  who  prays  can  acquit  himself  of  this  very  charge.  Take  so  common  a
request  as  that  for  the  Holy  Spirit :  have  you  thought  that  you  were  inviting  a  Person,
and  that  Person  absolutely  holy  and  almighty,  to  dwell  within  you  ?  We  are  to  covet
earnestly  God's  best  gifts,  but  we  are  to  limit  ourselves  by  his  promises,  and  to  learn
the  meaning  of  these  promises  as  far  as  we  can.  By  asking  such  things  as  we  know
our  need  of,  even  though  they  be  less  valuable  than  some  other  gifts,  we  may  be  led
on  to  richer  blessings  than  we  looked  for.

in.  When  we  pbat  fob  what  is  in  itsblf  good,  but  to  ub  would  be  xvil.
If  God,  who  sees  the  effect  these  things  would  have  upon  you,  were  to  translate  your
prayer,  it  might  be,  "  I  beseech  thee  grant  me  complete  delight  in  tliis  world,  and
forgetfulness  of  thee;  I  pray  thee  humble  me  no  more,  but  grant  me  of  thy  mercy
vanity  and  pride  of  life ;  I  pray  thee  increase  to  me  the  cares  of  this  life,  so  that  I  may
not  be  disposed  to  worship  thee  nor  to  remember  my  own  need  of  thee.  Send  me  no
more  chastening  and  discipline,  remove  from  me  all  restraints  and  crosses,  and  gra-
ciously suffer  me  so  to  fall  away  from  thee,  that  I  may  be  in  danger  of  everlasting  woe."
Yet  this  is  not  a  reason  for  restraining  prayer,  but  for  laying  each  of  our  petition!
before  God  with  an  accompanying  resignation  of  our  will  to  his.

IV.  When  wb  pbat  fob  some  good  thing  without  taking  account  of  whai
WE  MUST  DO  AND  suFFBE  IN  OBDEB  TO  OBTAIN  IT.  Many  of  the  gifts  WO  ask  at
God's  hand  are  such  qualities  of  soul  as  can  only  be  produced  by  long  and  painful
processes.  You  ask  for  humility :  do  you  know  that  herein  you  ask  for  failure,  dis-
appointed hopes,  mortified  vanity,  the  reproach  of  men,  and  the  feeling  that  you  are
worthy  of  deeper  accusations  than  any  they  can  bring  against  you  ?  You  ask  to  be
like  Christ:  but  can  you  drink  of  his  cup,  and  be  baptized  with  his  baptism?  These
words  of  your  Lord  are  not  spoken  to  dishearten  you,  to  discourage  you  from  high  aimi;
but  he  would  have  you  pray  with  deliberation,  with  a  mind  made  up,  with  a  devoted
and  solemn  apprehension  of  the  difficulties  before  you.

Two  remedies  may  be  suggested  for  this  evil  of  vagueness  and  ignorance  in  prayer,
the  first  connected  with  the  form,  the  second  with  the  matter,  of  prayer.  1.  It  seems
to  have  been  the  practice  of  the  devout  in  all  ages  to  use  the  voice  in  their  private
devotions.  Where  it  is  possible,  speech  is  a  great  help  to  an  orderly  method  of  think-
ing. Besides,  so  long  as  we  merely  think,  we  fall  into  the  idea  that  it  is  only  a  frame
of  our  own  spirits  we  have  to  do  with ;  and  speech,  the  ordinary  mode  of  realizing
another's  presence,  enables  ub  at  once  to  realize  the  presence  of  God.  2.  The  great
remedy  against  ignorance  in  prajer  is  to  be  foimd  in  meditation.     And  no  man  will


302  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.

ever  make  much  of  meditation  who  does  not  make  much  of  the  Word  of  God.  Realize
that  this  is  Dot  just  a  book  to  read,  but  a  voice  speaking  to  you,  that  it  has  a  Person
behind  it  addressing  you.  This,  without  any  mystic  influence,  but  on  the  most
natural  principles,  works  a  change  in  our  devotions.  This  gives  as  a  real  communion
with  God.— D.

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  astonishment  of  precedence.    The  text  of  this  parabls  is  found

in  the  last  verse  of  the  preceding  chapter.  The  words  are  repeated  as  the  conclusion  of
its  argument  (ver.  16).  Hence  the  critics  say  the  last  verse  of  oh.  xix.  ought  to  have
been  the  first  of  oh.  xx.  Yet  the  last  verse  of  ch.  xix.  is  evidently  connected  with
Christ's  discourse  upon  the  case  of  the  ruler  (of.  Mark  x.  31).     Note —

L  That  preobdence  is  astonished  in  God's  gifts  and  oallinos.  1.  The  Jew*
were  the  •people  of  ancient  privUege.  (1)  Theirs  was  the  "  adoption."  Nationally  they
were  separated  from  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth,  and  adopted  by  God  as  his  peculiar
treasure.  (2)  Theirs  was  the  "  glory."  In  the  pillar  of  cloud.  In  the  cherubim.  (3)
Theirs  were  the  "covenants."  The  first  from  Sinai — the  Law.  The  second  from
Zion — ^the  gospel  (of.  Isa.  ii.  3;  Luke  xxiv.  47).  (4)  Theirs  was  the  "service  of
God."  For  ages  "  Jerusalem  was  the  place  where  men  ought  to  worship."  Levitlcal
rites  wore  instituted  and  sanctioned  against  all  Gentile  abominations.  (5)  Theirs  were
the  "promises,"  viz.  on  which  the  covenants  were  established.  They  were  given  to
the  fathers,  and  renewed  and  amplified  by  the  ministry  of  the  prophets.  By  these
God,  "rising  up  early,"  went  into  the  market-place  to  hire  labourers  for  his  vineyard
(of.  Jer.  vii.  25).  As  the  day  of  their  visitation  wore  on,  the  prophets  invited  the
people  at  the  third,  sixth,  and  ninth  hours.  (6)  Theirs  were  the  "  fathers."  They
were  sprung  from  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob.  They  were  "beloved  for  the  fathers'
sakes."  (7)  Theirs  was  "  Christ,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed
for  ever "  (Bom.  ix.  4,  5).  2.  Their  presumption  vpon  their  precedence  was  rebuked.
(1)  They  believed  themselves  by  it  secured  against  rejection.  They  overlooked  the
conditions  of  their  promises.  They  missed  the  lessons  of  their  history.  They  filled
up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  in  rejecting  Christ,  (o)  In  his  Person.  (6)  In  his
gospel  offer  of  salvation.  Then  Christ  rejected  them.  "Their  place  and  nation  were
taken  away  by  the  Romans ;  and  they  have  ever  since  suffered  in  captivity.  (2)  That
the  Gentiles  should  become  "fellow-heirs"  with  them  so  as  to  leave  no  difference
(of.  Acts  IV.  1,  9;  Bph.  iii.  3 — 6),  was  a  mystery  they  would  not  comprehend.  Their
anger  at  the  mercy  of  God  to  the  Gentiles  is  expressed  in  the  murmuring  and  evil  eye
(see  Dent.  iv.  9 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  6 ;  Mark  vii  22)  of  the  labourers  first  called,  against
the  lord  of  the  vineyard,  for  his  goodness  to  those  called  at  the  eleventh  hour.  Note :
The  labourers  first  called  bargained  (ver.  13)  for  hire  in  the  spirit  of  the  Law ;  and  the
murmur  was  in  keeping  with  the  spirit  of  the  bargain.  Those  afterwards  called  worked
in  faith  and  love,  viz.  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  (cf.  Bom.  iv.  4,  5).  God  is  new
taking  out  of  all  nations  "a  people  for  his  Name."  (3)  The  Christian  Churches  were
first  formed  among  the  believing  Jews,  but  since  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  these
have  become  absorbed  in  the  Gentile  Churches  afterwards  founded.  (4)  Amorgst  the
Gentile  nations  there  is  one  destined  in  the  order  of  providence  to  stand  out  in
contrast  to  the  rejected  Jewish  nation  (see  ch.  xxi.  43).  Can  Britain  be  that  dis-
tinguished nation?

II.  That  peecedbnoe  is  astonished  in  God's  beokgninos.  1.  Consider  the
lessons  of  the  market-place.  (1)  All  sinners  are  "idle,"  or  do  nothing  to  purpose,
before  God  calls  them  to  work  in  his  vineyard.  (2)  Those  who  desire  to  labour  in  his
cause  should  be  found  in  the  market-place  where  the  Master  seeks  his  labourers — ^in
the  appointed  means  of  grace.  God  does  not  commonly  find  his  labourers  in  the  slums
of  the  city.  Another  master  finds  his  willing  slaves  in  the  Walks  of  wickedness  (see
Josh.  xxiv.  15).  (3)  Some  are  called  in  the  morning  of  their  days,  as  the  Baptist  and
Timothy  (see  Luke  i.  15 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15).  Some  in  the  meridian  of  life.  Nicodemus
may  be  born  again  when  he  is  old.  (4)  Let  not  the  sinner  plead  to  his  destruction  the
mercy  of  the  "  eleventh  hour."  Can  the  pleader  say,  with  the  men  in  the  parable,
"  No  man  hath  hired  us  "  ?  The  thief  on  the  cross  was  a  singular  and  extraordinary
example,  and  may  be  in  his  conversion  accounted  with  the  miracle  of  the  rending
rocks  and  opening  graves     2.  Consider  the  lessons  of  the  vineyard.    (1)  There  is  work


OH.  XX.  1—84.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  803

in  the  Church  for  every  qualified  labourer.  All  are  qualified  by  accepting  the  House-
holder's conditions.  (2)  The  work  is  pleasant.  We  are  called  into  the  vineyard  of
the  Church  to  weed  and  dress,  to  plant  and  water,  to  fence  and  train.  The  training
of  living  growths  is  not  dull  work.  The  production  and  maturing  of  immortal  fruits
for  the  service  and  glory  of  a  gracious  Master  is  inspiring  service.  (3)  The  time  for
vineyard  work  is  short.  One  day,  at  most,  to  be  followed  by  the  "  night  in  which  no
man  can  work."  The  eleventh  hour  of  life  may  be  earlier  or  later.  It  was  early  to
Thomas  Spencer,  Henry  Martyn,  Kirk  White,  Eobert  MoOheyne.  (4)  Every  labourer
has  his  hire.  3.  Consider  the  lessons  of,  the  reckoning.  (1)  God  gives  to  every  one  his
right  under  the  agreement  he  has  made  with  him  (see  Bom,  iii.  5,  6).  The  heavenly
reward  will  be  given  to  all  who  seek  it  in  God's  tvay,  without  reference  to  fo'me  or
accidents.  Further  than  this  we  must  not  insist  upon  the  equality  of  wages  (see  Luke
xix.  12;  1  Cor.  iii.  8).  (2)  God  exercises  a  free  and  sovereign  grace  beyond  his
engagements  of  promise.  It  would  be  sad  for  the  best  of  us  were  he  to  limit  us  to  our
merits.  Then  the  highest  creature  must  go  away  into  nothing;  the  wicked  into
misery.  (3)  The  goodness  of  God  will  astonish  some  who  have  come  in  late  to  find
themselves  preferred  before  others  who  have  laboured  long.  Some  who  followed  Christ
when  first  he  preached  afterwards  became  offended  and  walked  no  more  with  him.
Paul  was  as  one  chosen  out  of  due  time,  yet  he  came  not  behind  the  chiefest  of  the
apostles,  and  took  the  throne  forfeited  by  Iscariot.  (4)  Many  who  occupy  the  first
rank  here  for  culture,  standing,  and  influence,  will  there  be  last.  Galilseans,  in  these
respects  inferior  to  the  scribes  and  priests,  were  chosen  to  be  the  inspired  teachers  of
the  gospel.  The  lowest  will  in  many  cases  be  preferred  to  the  self-righteous  Pharisee
(see  ch.  viii,  11,  12;  xxi,  31,  32;  Luke  vii.  29,  30;  xiii,  28—30).  The  disciples
evidently  thought  the  advantages  of  the  rich  in  favour  of  salvation  were  such  that  if
they  should  fail,  there  could  be  little  hope  for  the  poor;  but  were  "astonished
exceedingly"  to  hear  the  teaching  of  Christ  (see  ch.  xix.  23 — ^26).  John  Newton  said,
"  When  I  get  to  heaven  1  shall  see  three  wonders.  The  first  will  be  to  see  many
persons  there  whom  I  did  not  expect  to  see ;  the  second  will  be  to  miss  many  whom  I
did  expect  to  see ;  the  greatest  wonder  of  all  wlU  be  to  find  myself  there." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  17 — 19. — Prophetic  a/ntidpations.  The  roads  are  now  crowded  with  people
journeying  to  Jerusalem  to  celebrate  there  the  great  annual  Feast  of  the  Passover  (see
Deut.  xvi.  1 — 7).  Jesus  separated  his  disciples  from  the  crowd,  probably  by  retiring
into  some  sylvan  shade  to  rest,  that  he  might  discourse  to  them  privately  of  his
approaching  Passion.     His  discourse  evinces —

L  A  DiviNis  FOSEKNOWLEDQB.  1.  It  anticipated  his  betrayal.  (1)  He  was  able  to
read  its  history  in  that  of  Ahithophel  (cf.  2  Sam.  xv.  12 ;  Ps.  xli.  9 ;  Iv.  12,  14,  20 ;
John  xiii.  18).  (2)  As  yet  he  had  not  named  Judas ;  but,  had  Judas  already  meditated
his  infamous  act,  what  must  have  been  his  feelings  when  Jesus  now  said  in  his  hearing,
"  And  the  Son  of  man  shall  be  delivered  unto  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  "  ?  No
disciple  of  Christ  can  apostatize  from  him  unwarned,  2.  It  anticipated  the  malignity
of  the  rulers.  (1)  Delivery  "  unto  the  chief  priests  and  scribes "  is  a  periphrasis  for
the  Sanhedrin,  which  sat  at  "  Jerusalem  "  (see  Luke  xiii.  33).  (2)  The  corporate
conscience  is  proverbially  elastic ;  yet  who  but  God  could  have  foreseen  that  the  San-
hedrin would  agree  to  condemn  Jesus  to  death  ?  (3)  The  Sanhedrin  might  "  condemn"
to  death  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  but  the  Bomans  had  deprived  it  of  the  power  to  carry
out  the  sentence  (see  John  xvii.  31).  In  this  note  a  symptom  of  the  departure  of  the
sceptre  or  magistracy  from  Judah,  which  was  to  be  preceded  by  the  coming  of  Sfailoh
(see  Gen.  xlix.  10).  3.  It  anticipated  the  violence  of  the  Romans.  (1)  This  is  now  the
third  time  that  Jesus  clearly  predicted  his  sufferings  (cf.  ch,  xvi.  21 ;  xvii.  22,  23).
But  here,  for  the  first  time,  the  part  the  Gentiles  were  to  take  in  that  tragedy  ia
indicated.  It  was  meet  that  the  Saviour  of  a  sinful  world  should  suffer  from  the  com-
bined malice  of  Jew  and  Gentile  (see  Eph.  ii,  16).  (2)  "  And  shall  deliver  him  to
the  Gentiles  to  mock."  This  was  done  by  Herod  and  his  Boman  soldiers  (see  Luke
xxiiL  11).  (3)  "  And  to  scourge,"  This  was  done  by  Pilate  (see  John  xix.  1).  And
his  soldiers  followed  up  the  scourging  with  many  dreadful  insults.  (4)  "And  to
crucify."  The  punishment  of  the  cross  was  Boman,  not  Jewish.  It  was,  originally  con-
sidered, more  probable  that  Jesns  should  be  privately  slain  or  stoned  to  death  in  a  tumult,


?.(H  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xi.  t— 84.

aa  was  Stephen.  And  when  he  was  delivered  hack  to  the  Jews  hy  Pilate,  with  permission
to  judge  him  according  to  their  Law,  it  is  wonderful  that  he  wag  not  stoned.  The  fore-
knowledge that  saw  it  otherwise  was  manifestly  Divine.  How  little  did  those  cruel
actors  know  that  they  were  offering  up  the  great  Sacrifice  fur  the  world's  salvation  I
How  does  God  make  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him  1  i.-It  anticipated  his  resurrec-
tion from  the  dead.  (1)  No  fact,  originally  considered,  could  be  more  unlikely  than
this;  yet  it  is  circumstantially  predicted,  and  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  (2)  This  element
in  the  prediction  was  assuring  to  himself^  The  joy  of  its  anticipation  sustained  him  in
his  preparatory  sufferings.  In  it  he  was  "  straightway  glorified  "  (cf.  John  xiii.  31,  32 ;
Heb.  xii.  2).  (3)  It  was  also  assuring  to  the  disciples.  When  they  beard  of  his
approaching  sufferings  they  were  "amazed"  and  "afraid"  (Mark  x.  32),  and  the  more
so  as  they  "  understood  none  of  these  things  "  (Luke  xviii.  34).  Yet  afterwards  they
remembered  them  as  most  memorable  things.

II.  A  Divine  predestination.  1.  Jesus  could  have  avoided  his  sufferings,  (1)  He
was  not  surprised  into  them.  He  foresaw  them  all.  Every  thorn  of  hia  crown  was
lully  in  his  vision.  (2)  He  could  have  avoided  Jerusalem.  His  boldness  in  going  up
there  amazed  his  affrighted  disciples  (Mark  x.  32).  (3^  At  Jerusalem,  were  he  so
uiinded,  he  might  have  had  "  twelve  legions  of  angels,  any  of  which  could  have
frustrated  the  purposes  of  the  Jews  and  the  resources  of  the  Romans.  2.  But  he
'  resolutely  faced  th^  (1)  Because  he  would  fulfil  all  righteousness.  He  must  there-
fore keep  the  Passover ;  and  be  must  go  to  Jerusalem  to  keep  it  (see  Deut.  xii.  6).
The  moral  here  is  that  consequences  must  never  be  considered  in  competition  with  the
will  of  God.  (2)  Because  he  would  fulfil  all  benevolence.  He  went  up  to  that
Passover  that  he  might  himself  become  the  world's  salvation.  (3)  This  the  multitude
could  not  see.  Notia:  The  action  of  Jesus  was  allegorical,  when  he  separated  bis
disciples  fi:om  the  crowd  on  their  way  to  the  legal  Passover,  that  he  might  unfold  to
them  the  mysteries  of  his  Passion.  The  spirit  of  the  Law  is  a  special  revelation.
(4)  What  the  disciples  had  beard  they  were  in  due  time  to  testify.  Not  yet ;  events
were  not  ripe.  Hence  also  their  separation  from  the  crowd  on  the  road  (cf.  ch.  x.  27;
xvii.  9).  (5)  The  Scriptures  must  be  fulfilled  (cf.  Luke  xviii.  31).  The  Divine  power
of  Jesus  in  fulfilling  the  predictions  uttered  by  him  is  as  conspicuous  and  real  as  the
Divine  prescience  which  prompted  their  utterance.

Beuabkb.  1.  It  is  good  to  converse  with  Jesus  in  the  way.  2.  It  is  good  to
anticipate  so  as  to  become  familiar  vrith  our  dying.  3.  It  is  good  to  connect  with  our
meditation  upon  death  the  matter  of  our  resurrection. — J.  A.  M.

Ters.  20 — 28. — Distinction  in  the  kingdom.  In  the  company  of  Jesus  and  his
twelve  apostles,  as  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  the  Passover,  were  probably  other
disciples,  their  relatives  and  friends.  For  here  is  "  the  mother  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee,"
who  came  "  worshipping,  and  asking  a  certain  thing "  of  Jesus.  The  reply  and
discourse  following  show —

I.  That  distinction  in  the  kingdom  or  Christ  is  not  the  distinction  op
LonDBEiP.  1.  J^iis  is  the  distinction  of  earthly  kingdoms,  (1)  "  The  princes  of  the
Gentiles  lord  it  over  them."  They  have  titles,  insignia,  robes,  retinues,  and  cere-
monies, to  invest  them  with  an  air  of  superiority.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  ostenta-
tion— vanity  and  pride.  (2)  "  Their  great  ones  exercise  authority  over  them."  Their
distinction  is  more  than  pageantry.  They  wield  power  civil  and  military.  This  they
often  use  tyrannically.  (3)  "  They  are  called  benefactors  "  (see  Luke  xxii.  25).  Their
patronage  is  courted.  Their  favours  are  applauded.  They  are  worshipped  and  imitated
by  courtiers,  sycophants,  and  slaves.  2.  Christiana  sometimes  mistake  it  for  the
distinction  of  ChrisCs  kingdom.  (1)  These,  however,  are  imperfect  Christians,  as  the
apostles  were  before  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  The  sons  of  Zebedee  were  evidently  of  this
way  of  thinking  when  they  sought  places  of  distinction.  For  degrees  of  dignity  in
Eastern  customs  were  denoted  by  proximity  to  the  throne  (see  1  Kings  ii.  19 ;  Ps.
xliv.  9).  They  still  cling  to  the  notion  of  an  earthly  monarchy.  Note :  To  dobire  to
be  preferred  before  a  brother  is  to  reflect  upon  him.  Their  fellow-disciples  were  no  less
vulgarly  ambitious.  Ambition  was  the  source  of  their  indignation  against  the  sons  ol
Salome.  (2)  Christ  discerns  the  subtle  pride  that  eludes  the  vision  of  its  subject.  On
an  curlier  occasion  Jes/ia  rebuked  James  and  Joliu,  aud  aaid,  "Ye  know  not  wliat


OB.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDINa  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  SOS

manner  of  Bpirit  ye  are  of  (see  Luke  iz.  66).  Here  again,  "  Te  know  not  what  ye
•sk,"  Ye  know  not  the  true  quality  of  my  kingdom  (see  1  Pet.  v.  3).  Neither  know
ye  what  is  pre-required.  "  Are  ye  able,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  22).  We  know  not  what  we  ask
when  we  desire  the  gloiy  of  the  crown  without  the  grace  to  bear  the  cross.  (8)
Ambition  may  too  much  presume  upon  influence.  The  mother  of  the  sous  of  Zebedee
was  probably  a  near  relative  of  ova  Lord;  some  think  she  was  the  daughter  of
Cleopnas  or  Alphseus,  and  sister  or  cousin-german  to  Mary  (cf.  Mark  y.  40;  xtL  1;
John  xix,  26).  They  availed  themselves,  therefore,  of  their  mother's  influence.  They
may  have  encouraged  their  ambition  also  by  the  favours  they  had  already  enjoyed.
Jesus  had  called  them  *'  sons  of  thunder "  (see  Mark  iii.  17) ;  and  with  Peter  they
were  on  three  occasions  specially  favoured  (see  Mark  t.  37 ;  ch.  xvii.  1 ;  xxvL  37),
Yet  were  none  so  reproved  as  these.  Whom  Christ  best  loves  he^aost  reproves  (see
Rev.  iiL  19).  (4)  In  the  reproof  there  is  still  recognition  of  distincRon  proper  to  the
kingdom  of  Christ.  He  refers  to'  his  kingdom  of  glory  what  they  understood  of  a
kingdom  of  the  earth.  He  had  already  promised  to  his  apostles  the  distinction  of  the
twelve  thrones.  There  is  a  "  measure  of  stature  "  both  of  grace  and  glory  (Eph.  iv.
13).  (6)  The  whole  passage  may  be  taken  as  a  prophetic  allusion  to  and  condem-
nation of  that  spirit  of  domination  which  so  early  maniifested  itself  in  the  Apostasy  (sea
2  ThesB.  ii.  4).

IL  That  distinction  in  thb  kingdom  or  Ohbist  is  the  distinction  of  bebviob.
1.  Z%e  service  of  suffering,  (1)  This  is  implied  in  the  question,  "Are  ye  able  to  drink
the  cup  that  I  am  about  to  drink  ? "  Christ  obtained  not  his  crown  by  wars  and
victories,  but  by  shame  and  death.  Very  different  from  the  sons  of  Zebedee  were
those  whom  our  Lord  was  first  to  have  on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left  (see  ch.  xxviL
38).  (2)  "We  are  able.".  This  was  the  language  of  self-confidence;  its  vanity  was
soon  made  manifest  (see  ch.  xsvi.  31,  66).  Christ  did  not  rebuke  that  self-confidence
then;  he  left  the  rebuking  to  events.  History  has  its  admonitions  as  well  as  its
revenges.  (3)  "  My  cup  indeed  ye  shall  drink."  Here  note  the  spirit  of  prophecy.
James  suffered  martyrdom  from  Herod  (see  Acts  xii.  2).  John  was  banished  to  Patmos
(see  Bev.  i.  9).  Both  sympathized  with  Jesus  in  his  Buffering.  Beligion,  if  worth
anything,  is  worth  everything ;  and  if  worth  everything,  then  it  is  worth  suffering  for.
"  Christ  will  have  us  know  the  worst,  that  we  may  make  the  best  of  our  way  to
heaven"  (Henry).  (4)  Yet  did  not  this  drinking  of  the  Bedeemer's  cup  of  necessity
entitle  the  sons  of  Salome  to  the  distinction  corresponding  to  that  which  they  had
sought.  The  other  apostles  shared  with  them  in  the  suffering.  So  did  tlie  noble  army
of  the  martyrs.  The  lowest  place  in^  heaven  is  a  full  recompense  for  the  greatest
Bufferingyon  earth.  (5)  For  the  more  worthy  the  higher  distinctions  are  reserv^  And
who  but  God  can  distinguish  the  most  worthy  7  Obedience  is  perfected  in  suffering.
So  was  the  obedience  of  Christ  perfected  (see  Heb.  ii.  10).     So  is  that  of  his  followers

Ssee  Jas.  L  4).  Who  but  God  can  distinguish  among  the  perfected?  But  Christ  is  God
cf.  John  xviL  2).  2.  ITie  service  of  ministry.  (1)  The  theory  of  this  service  is  here
propounded  (ver.  27).  The  minister  of  Christ  must  not  lord  it  over  God's  heritage
(1  Pet.  V.  8).  Even  Paul  the  apostle  disclaims  dominion  over  the  private  Christian's
faith  (2  Cor.  i.  24).  Christians  should  serve  one.  another  for  mutual  edification  (see
Bom.  xiv.  19 ;  xv.  2 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  19 ;  1  Pet.  v.  6).  In  such  loving  service  lies  the
truest  dignity.  (2)  The  practice  of  this  service  is  encouraged  by  the  most  illustrious
example  (ver.  28).  Jesus  in  his  youth  and  early  manhood  appears  to  have  been
familiar  with  labour  (see  Mark  vi.  3).  The  years  of  his  public  ministry  were  years  of
self-Bacrificing  toil  for  the  good  of  others.  This  also  was  the  end  for  which  he  died.
(3)  Note  here  especially  that  Jesus  speaks  of  himself  as  a  piacular  Victim.  This  is  the
first  instance  in  which  he  is  reported  by  this  evangelist  to  have  done  so ;  though  John
shows  that  he  had  done  so  earlier  both  publicly  and  privately  (see  John  iii.  14, 16 ;  vi.
61).  The  sacrificial  nature  of  the  death  of  Christ  was  shadowed  forth  in  sacrifices  from
the  beginning  (see  Gen.  iv.  4 ;  viii,  20 ;  xxii.  7,  8).  In  after-times  it  was  yet  more
largely  and  significantly  prefigured  in  the  Mosaic  ritual  (see  Lev.  xvii.  11 ;  Heb.  ix.).
Still  later  it  was  foretold  by  the  prophets  (see  Isa.  liii. ;  Dan.  ix.  26).  Then  by  the
Baptist  (see  John  i.  29).  By  Jesus  himself.  Ever  since  it  is  the  fundamental  truth  of
the  gospel  preached.  (4)  Wakefield's  translation,  viz.  "  a  ransom  instead  ot  manj  "
teaches  that  Christ's,  one  sacrifice  once  offered  waa  to  supersede  the  many  sacrifices  oi
uatthew — u.  X


30«  THE  GOSPEL  ACOOEDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34,

typical  anticipation.  (5)  By  his  dying  "for  many"  we  must  not  infer  that  he  did  not
die  for  all,  for  that  would  be  to  contradict  other  Scriptures  (see  Ezek.  xviii.  23 ;  zzxiiL
11 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4 — 6).  The  One  for  "  many"  Mta  forth  the  infinite  uobility  of  the  One.
-J.  A.  M.

Vers,  29 — 34. — Oomtnunttt/  and  unity.  Jonrneying  to  Jerosalem  to  the  PassoTer,
Jesus,  with  his  apostles  and  other  disciples  following,  was  also  followed  by  a  crowd.
This  grew  into  "  a  great  multitude "  as  he  moved  out  from  the  populous  town  of
Jericho.    In  the  scene  here  described  we  may  study —

I.  CoMMDNiTT  xs  VAEI0U8  PHASES.  1.  We  See  it  here  in  excUement.  (1)  "  A  great
multitude,"  In  numbers  there  is  a  strange  sympathy.  This  occasions  the  panics
which  frequently  AfiCur  in  crowds.  They  are  also  subject  to  fits  of  passion — sometimes
generous,  sometimes  violent,  often  insane.  We  should  beware  of  the  spirit  of  the
crowd.  (2)  The  presence  of  Jesus  was  the  occasion  of  this  excitement.  The  multi-
tude "  followed  him."  Christ  is  followed  from  various  motives.  Some  follow  him
from  love :  his  apostles  and  disciples  were  moved  by  this  holy  inspiration.  Some
follow  him  from  curiosity:  the  mixed  multitude  had  heard  of  his  character,  claims,
teaching,  and  miracles.  Many  still  follow  him  for  the  loaves  and  fishes.  2.  We  see  it
here  also  in  suffering.  (1)  "  Two  blind  men  " — Bartimteus  and  a  companion  in  affliction.
Friendships  spring  of  community  in  suflfering.  The  multitude  who  enjoyed  their  vision
had  little  sympathy  with  those  who  were  deprived  of  it.  (2)  They  are  sitting  by  the
wayside,  viz.  in  company,  and  for  the  same  purpose,  viz.  to  beg  (see  Mark  x,  46)'
The  privation  of  sight  reduced  them  to  this  dependence.  Sufferings  bring  with  them
entailments  of  suffering.  Partnerships  come  with  the  entailments.  (3)  But  privations
have  their  compensations.  These  blind  companions  had  the  use  of  their  ears.  Blind
persons  generally  enjoy  acute  hearing  and  sensitive  touch.  We  do  well,  when  we
meditate  upon  our  afflictions,  to  meditate  also  upon  our  mercies.  3.  And  we  see  it  in
contention.  (1)  The  blind  men  cried  to  Jesus  for  mercy.  Affliction  has  a  voice  to
Christ.  (2)  But  "  the  multitude  rebuked  them,  that  they  should  hold  their  peace."
Probably  they  thought  the  cry  for  mercy  was  an  appeal  for  alms,  and  that  the  blind
men  might  be  troublesome  to  Jesus.  Men  too  readily  judge  of  Christ  by  themselves.
The  multitude  will  ever  rebuke  those  who  cry  after  the  Son  of  David.  (3)  But  the
blind  men  "  cried  out  the  more."  So  must  all  who  would  not  come  short  of  a  moral
cure.  We  must  never  heed  the  counsel  that  would  keep  us  from  Christ.  When  a
true  sense  of  misery  urges,  neither  men  nor  devils  can  stop  the  cry  for  mercy.  (4)  In
the  prayer  of  these  men  we  note :  (o)  Importunity.  The  stream  of  fervency,  it  stopped,
will  rise  and  swell  the  higher,  (6)  Humility,  They  sought  not  gold,  but  "  mercy,"
The  cry  for  mercy  disclaims  all  merit  (see  Ps.  cxxx,  7 ;  Heb.  iv.  16).  (c)  Faith.
They  called  Jesus  "  Lord  "  (see  1  Cor.  xii.  3).  They  identified  the  Messiah  (cf.  ch.  xii.
23 ;  zxi.  9 ;  xxii.  44).  (d)  Persistency  (see  Luke  xviii.  1).  Now  or  never :  Jesus  ia
passing ;  will  soon  have  passed.  Christ  did  not  return  to  Jericho.  "  Now  is  the
accepted  time."  (e)  Here  was  that  concurrence  in  prayer  which  is  especially  pleasing
to  Christ  (see  ch.  xviii.  19).

IL  Unity  in  vabious  contbasts.  1.  One  leading  many.  (1)  "  A  great  multitude
followed  him."  Note  here  the  ascendency  of  a  great  character.  (2)  Note  here  also  the
subordination  of  the  physical  to  the  spiritual.  The  multitude,  as  compared  with  Christ,
were  as  an  aggregation  of  physical  units.  2.  One  compassionating  suffering,  (1)
"  Jesus  stood  still."  His  standing  rebuked  and  silenced  the  thoughtless  clatter  of  the
unsympathizing  throng.     Wherever  there  is  suffering  there  the  Blessed  One  stands.

(2)  He  "  called "  to  the  blind.  What  a  contrast  to  the  multitude  who  would  have
silenced  their  cry  to  him  for  mercy  I    Jesus  invites  those  whom  the  world  repulses.

(3)  The  one  condition  of  mercy,  viz.  to  those  who  are  prepared  for  it,  is — Ask.  "  What
will  ye  that  I  should  do  for  you  ? "  Like  as  the  waterman  in  a  boat  who  hooks  the
shore  does  not  so  much  draw  the  shore  to  him  as  himself  to  the  shore,  so  do  we  in  prayer
draw  ourselves  to  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  3.  One  wonder-worker.  (1)  The  blind  men
raised  their  voices,  not  to  inquire  who  was  with  Jesus,  but  to  cry  to  him  for  mercy.
(2)  What  a  sequel  (see  vers.  33, 34)  1  (3)  Spiritual  blindness  is  ignorance  of  the  truth.
Many  who  say,  "  We  see  *  are  spiritually  blind  (see  John  ix,  41).  Blindness  of  heart
is  a  disease  of  which  the  patient  too  seldom  complains.    This  too  can  be  cured  only  by


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  807

the  one  great  Light  of  the  world.  (4)  Christ  is  the  one  Eluminator  of  eternity.
"Earthly  blindness  may  be  borne;  it  is  but  for  a  day;  but  who  could  bear  to  be
blind  through  eternity?"  (Beecher).  (5)  Attendance  upon  Christ  evinces  the  con-
dition of  spiritual  illumination.  Bartimaeus  and  his  companion  now  "  followed,"  now
only  requiring  the  one  great  spiritual  Guide.  No  longer  are  they  dependent  upon  alms.
Eeligion  has  the  proniiso  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  that  which  is  to  come.  It
fulfils  that  promise  by  opening  the  eyes  of  its  subjects. — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  2. — Fair  laihour-agreemenU,  Van  Letinep  describes  the  Eastern  customs  to
which  our  Lord  alludes  in  this  parable.  "During  the  whole  season  when  vineyards
may  be  dug,  the  common  wrokmen  go  very  early  in  the  morning  to  the  sook,  or  market-
place of  the  village  or  city,  where  comestibles  are  sold.  While  '  waiting  to  be  hired,'
they  take  their  morning  cup  of  coffee,  and  eat  a  morsel  of  bread.  The  owners  of  vine-
yards come  to  the  place  and  engage  the  number  of  labourers  they  need.  These  imme-
diately go  to  the  vineyard,  and  work  there  until  a  little  while  before  the  sun  sets,
which,  according  to  Oriental  time,  is  twelve  o'clock,  so  that  the  'eleventh  hour'
means  one  hour  before  sunset.  We  have  often  seen  men  standing  in  the  market-place
through  the  entire  day  without  finding  employment,  and  have  repeatedly  engaged  them
ourselves  at  noon  for  half  a  day's  job,  and  later  for  one  or  two  hours'  work  in  our
garden.  In  such  a  case  the  price  has  to  be  particularly  bargained  for,  but  it  is
more  often  left  to  the  generosity  of  the  employer  to  give  what  bakshish  he  feels  dis-
posed." There  is  now  a  very  grave  danger,  of  which  we  need  to  be  on  our  guard.
Men  are  talking  at  if  our  Lord  made  himself  an  authority  on  social  questions.  The
truth  is,  that  he  distinctly  refused  to  bear  any  relation  to  social,  political,  and  legal
disputes.  He  revealed  unknown  or  hidden  truths  to  men ;  he  resettled  the  great
principles  of  morals;  he  quickened  men  with  a  new  and  Divine  life;  but  he  refused  to
guide  in  detail  the  applications  of  the  principles  he  taught.  In  this  parable,  which
seems  to  deal  with  the  questions  of  capital  and  labour,  the  thing  our.  Lord  teaches  is
that  every  man  is  a  free  man,  but  if,  Toluntarily,  he  enters  into  engagements,  he  must
loyally  keep  his  engagements.

I.  The  man  who  has  work  to  offer  must  keep  his  bngagementb.  Religion  doei
not  need  to  come  in  and  say  that  he  who  wants  work  done  must  offer  fair  terms  for
the  doing  of  it.  Common  humanity  and  honesty  demand  that.  No  man  has  any
right  to  "go  beyond,"  "take  advantage  of,"  or  "defraud "his  neighbour  in  anything.

II.  The  man  who  has  skill  to  do  the  work  must  keep  his  bkoagements.  If  he
agrees  for  a  penny  a  day,  nothing  can  happen  to  make  that  unfair.  He  may  make  a
new  bargain  to-morrow,  but  he  must  carry  through  his  bargain  to-day.  Strike*  are
very  often  sinful  repudiations  of  agreements. — B.  T.

Ver.  6. — The  eleventh  hour  a  type  of  old  age.  This  treatment  illustrates  the  sugges-
tiveness  of  Scripture  figures.  They  start  thought  on  lines  that  lead  away  from  theii
immediate  connections.

I.  At  the  eleventh  hour  there  ib  btill  work  to  bb  done.  Fronde  says,
"  Beautiful  is  old  age — beautiful  as  the  slow-dropping  mellow  autumn  of  a  rich  and
glorious  summer.  In  the  old  man  Nature  has  fulfilled  her  work ;  she  loads  him  with
her  blessings ;  she  fills  him  with  the  fruits  of  a  well-spent  life ;  and,  surrounded  by  his
children  and  his  children's  children,  she  rocks  him  away  to  a  grave,  to  which  he  is
followed  with  blessings.  God  forbid  we  should  not  call  it  beautiful  I "  If  old  age  were
only  beautiful,  it  would  be  a  power  we  could  ill  afford  to  lose.  For  all  beauty  is  akin
to  truth,  and  all  truth  is  akin  to  God ;  and  so  all  beauty  is  a  shadow  of  him,  a  message
from  him,  a  help  towards  him.  This  sin-filled  world  wants  all  the  truth,  aU,  the  love,
all  the  beauty  it  can  get,  in  order  to  dispel  the  darkness,  the  hate,  and  the  ugliness  of
itB  eviL  We  become  as  the  things  on  which  we  look,  and  God  keeps  old  men  and
women  among  us  in  order  that  we  may  see,  and  feel,  and  be  lifted  higher  by  their
grace.  The  aged  are  kept  among  us  because  of  the  work  they  can  do.  One  thing —
they  can  check  our  hurry.  Young  folk  want  everything  at  once.  The  aged  seem  to
say,  "  Quietly.  One  thing  at  a  time.  Good  things  are  worth  waiting  for."  And  they
are  kept  in  order  to  link  together  the  generations.  What  a  world  it  would  be  if  the
people  came  and  went  in  complete  generations,  and  there  was  no  blending  of  one  with


308  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOSDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx  1—34.

the  other,  80  that  experience  might  tone  ardonri  And  the  aged  among  us  witness  for
God.  They  tell  us  of  the  Ch)d  who  "fed  them  all  their  life  long;  the  God  who
redeemed  them  from  evil."

II.  At  the  eleventh  houb  God  does  call  hek  to  his  bbbtiob.  H«  proves
the  riches  of  his  grace  in  the  conversion  of  old  men  and  old  women.  A  marvel  of
grace,  indeed,  when  all  the  long  ten  hours  of  the  day  of  life  have  been  spent  in  the  ser-
vice of  self,    A  saved  old  man  is  the  witness  that  God  can  "  save  unto  the  uttermost."

III.  At  the  eleventh  hoitb  is  an  aluobt  hopeless  time  fob  beoinnino  a
Lirs-woBE.  It  is  unsuitahle  for  any  beginnings.  The  eun  is  in  the  wrong  quarter
of  the  heavens.  "  The  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work."  And  the  ability  Is
low.    The  "  eleventh  hour  "  is  time  to  be  weary,  and  go  to  the  long  rest. — B.  T.

Ver.  0. — TJM  lodal  difficulty  of  the  worJclett.  Oivilization  works  cruelly  for  some
classes  of  society.  It  improves  the  condition  of  the  few ;  it  multiplies  the  miseries  of
the  many.  One  thing  it  does — gathers  great  masses  of  people  into  the  cities,  where  the
demand  for  workers  must  be  limited,  and  the  thousands  must  be  "  workless."  Scatter
the  people  over  the  land,  and  every  man  can  find  work  which  will  provide  him  with  a
simple  living.  Mass  the  people  in  a  few  centres,  and,  as  they  cannot  earn  by  work,  all
they  can  do  is  prey  on  one  another,  either  in  the  bad  sense  of  criminality,  or  in  the
very  doubtful  sense  of  scheming  to  take  all  advantage  of  philanthropy  and  charity.

I.  The  wobklebs  who  cannot  wobk.  1.  These  include  persona  born  into  dis-
ability— blind,  deaf  and  dumb,  lame,  weak  in  intellect,  etc.  Of  such  it  is  only  neces-
sary to  say  that  they  are  society's  charge ;  and  society  is  bound  to  provide  for  all  who
are  physically  incapable  of  work.  This  is  simple  citizen  duty,  society  duty ;  it  is  the
claim  of  the  human  brotherhood.  2.  These  include  persons  who  are  able  to  work,  but
cannot  find  work  to  do.  They  divide  into ;  (1)  Skilled  workmen,  whose  trade  has  gone
out  of  &shion  or  has  left  tiie  country.  (2)  Unskilled  workmen,  labourers,  only  a
limited  number  of  whom  can  ever  be  required  in  one  district.  (3)  Workmen  whose
trade  is  hopelessly  overstocked,  such  as  clerks,  who  can  do  nothing  but  write  and  sum.
These  workless  classes  make  the  great  social  problem  of  the  day.  Some  would  say
that  the  Church  of  Christ  must  solve  the  problem.  But  it  is  not  her  mission ;  nor
has  she,  in  any  sense,  capacity  for  so  doing.  It  belongs  to  national  government.  It
is  a  society  evil,  with  which  society  must  deal.  And  in  some  way  the  nation  must
find  out  how  to  turn  the  stream  of  population  that  has  long  set  strongly  toward  the
great  cities,  and  make  it  flow  back  upon  the  land.  Village  industrial  centres  provide
the  only  hope  for  the  million  workless  ones  among  us.

n.  The  wobklbss  who  will  not  wobk.  "  If  a  man  will  not  work,  neither  shall
he  eat."  We  might  reasonably  desire  that  legislation  should  deal  rigorously  with  all
such.  Every  man  who  can  work  and  will  not  should  lose  his  right  of  personal  liberty,
should  be  treated  as  a  lunatic,  cared  for  by  the  state,  and  kept  from  all  chance  of  pro-
pagating his  miserable  species. — B.  T.

Ver.  15. — Generosity  may  go  leyond  agreement.  Business  men  are  often  misunder-
stood, because,  while  they  are  sometimes  nobly  generous,  they  are  also  strict  and  pre-
cise in  carrying  out,  and  in  requiring  to  be  carried  out,  all  business  engagements.  A
man  does  no  wrong  to  his  fellow-man  who  has  made  precise  terms  with  him,  if  he
deals  fairly  with  the  man  who  has  made  no  terms  with  him.  In  this  case  the  sum
agreed  was  one  penny  for  a  day's  labour,  and  because  the  half-day  man  received  a
penny,  the  whole-day  man  set  up  a  claim  to  more  than  a  penny.

I.  Evebt  man  has  a  EI8HT  TO  MAKE  TERMS.  Society  is  based  on  the  principle
that  every  man  is  absolutely  free  to  buy  or  to  sell.  There  is  the  open  market  for
goods,  and  there  is  the  open  market  for  physical  power,  and  the  open  market  for  cul-
tured skill.  There  should  be  no  sort  of  restrictions  on  free  purchase  and  sale.  Com-
binations to  raise  prices  are  perilous,  whether  they  belong  to  capitalist  or  workman,
to  buyer  or  seller.  They  are,  at  the  best,  necessities  of  over-civilization,  which  has
disturbed  all  natural  relations.  The  man  who  has  money  to  put  to  use  hag  precisely
as  great  a  right  to  make  the  best  terms  he  can  as  the  workman  who  has  a  cunning
right  hand  to  sell.  If  social  relations  were  more  simple  and  natural,  it  would  be
possible  for  the  man  with  money,  the  man  with  brains,  and  the  man  with  hands,  to


OH.  XX.  1—34.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  809

meet  and  negotiate  their,  conditions  of  mutual  serrice,  making  fair  and  honourable
terms  for  each.  All  combinationa  are  unhealthy  interferences  with  the  markets  that
should  be  absolutely  open  and  free  to  everybody.

II.  EvEBT  HAN  HAS  A  BioHT  TO  BE  OENEBons.  If  »  man  pleases,  he  may  accept
less  work  for  his  money  from  some.  If  a  man  pleases,  he  may  pay  for  his  work  more
than  he  agreed.  If  a  man  pleases,  he  may  pay  for  doing  nothing.  But  no  man  has
any  claim  upon  his  brother's  generosity.  It  ceases  to  be  generosity  if  he  has  claim
upon  it.  This  needs  to  be  vigorously  asserted  in  our  day,  because  a  confused  notion
is  grovring  up  that  the  poor  have  davms  on  a  distribution  of  the  money  of  the  rich.
A  man  has  a  right  to  be  generous,  and  an  equal  right  to  be  ungenerous.  He  la  only
uoble  and  Christly  as  he  uses  well  his  right  to  be  generous. — B.  T.

Ver.  18.— AntieipaUons  of  betrayal.  It  is  not  often  set  out  prominently  that  the
chief  ingredient  in  our  Lord's  sorrowful  anticipations  was  his  betrayal  by  one  of  his
disciples.  There  is  no  greater  distress  comes  to  us  in  life  than  the  unfaithfulness  of
trusted  friends.  The  psalmist  wails  in  this  way  (Ps.  Iv.  12 — 14) :  "  For  it  was  not
an  enemy  that  reproached  me ;  then  I  could  have  borne  it . .  .  but  it  was  thou,  a  man
mine  equal,  my  guide,  and  mine  acquaintance."  The  dealings  of  our  Lord  with  Judas
need  careful  study.  Our  Lord  had  to  act  so  as  not  to  interfere  with  Providence.  The
fact  that  he  kTteio  what  would  happen  must  not  be  used  to  prevent  it  from  happening ;
and  yet  that  knowledge  filled  him  with  anxiety  concerning  Judas,  and  constrained
him  to  make  attempts  to  influence  the  man  who,  on  the  road  of  his  covetousness,  was
fast  hastening  to  his  crime.

I.  Anticipations  of  bbtrataIi  tested  the  Lobd  Jbstts.  Even  that  was  in
the  Father's  will  for  him.  There  could  hardly  be  anything  in  his  cup  of  woe  more
bitter.  Probably  Judas  had  been  chosen  an  apostle  because  of  his  business  capacity.
Our  Lord  had  trusted  him.  His  face  was  familiar  to  him.  He  had  grown  interested
in  Judas,  and  it  was  hard  indeed  to  think  ho  would,  one  day  soon,  turn  traitor.  Our
Lord  would  not  have  been  fairly  tested  by  all  forms  of  human  anxiety  if  he  had  not
known  failing,  forsaking  friends.  Could  he  take  up,  and  bear,  this  yoke  of  the  Father  ?
Knowing  it  was  coming,  could  he  go  on,  quietly,  steadily,  in  the  path  of  duty  ?  Could
he  bear  to  have  Judas  close  beside  him  day  by  day  ?  This  gives  us  a  deep  sense  of  the
reality  and  severity  of  our  Lord's  struggle  to  preserve  a  perfect,  Son-like  obedience  and
submission.    Even  here  he  won  and  held  his  triumph.

II.  Anticipations  of  betbatal  tested  the  diboifles.  It  must  have  led  to
heart-searching  inquiries.  Some,  no  doubt,  felt  our  Lord's  words  more  than  the  others.
Some  would  think  it  only  a  melancholy  mood  that  the  Master  was  in.  Some  would
feel  quite  certain  that  the  words  would  never  apply  to  them.  What  did  Judas  think
about  the  possible  betrayal?  We  know  well.  The  man  who  is  deteriorating,  as
Judas  was,  becomes  insensible  (-«  nuch  suggestions.  None  could  have  been  more  posi-
tive than  Judas  in  denying  tl.at  the  term  "traitor"  could  ever  apply  to  him.  But
Judas  was  the  betrayer. — R.  T.

Ver.  20. — Motherly  ambition  ■.  It  is  certainly  surprising  to  find  James  and  John
presenting  such  a  request  as  this.  We  cannot  but  think  that  they  ought  to  have
known  their  Lord  better.  If  any  of  the  apostoUc  company  had  insight  of  their
Master's  spiritual  mission,  it  surely  was  the  first  group,  which  included  James  and  John.
Perhaps  Matthew  lets  the  light  in  when  he  explains  that  they  were  prom^jted  by
their  mother,  "  Then  came  to  him  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  with  her  sons
worshipping  him,  and  desiring  a  certain  thing  of  him."  If  it  was  her  idea,  we  can
understand  it.  Woman-like,  she  was  practical ;  she  understood  only  the  material
aspect  of  Messiah's  mission ;  and  she  had  not  come  into  such  association  with  Christ
as  served  to  correct  and  spiritualize  her  ideas ;  and  she  knew  the  value  of  forethought,
of  "  taking  time  by  the  forelock,"  and  so  she  schemed  to  secure  an  early  promise
of  the  best  places  in  the  new  kingdom  for  her  sons.    A  motherly  mother  indeed !

I.  Worthy  motherly  ambitions.  Illustrate  how  directly  the  great  men,  in  all
the(<. various  spheres  of  life,  have  been  dependent  on  their  mothers.  Explain  the
ambition  in  the  heart  of  every  Jewish  mother  to  become  the  mother  of  Messiah,
A  possible  poet,  artist,  thought-leader,  statesman,  age-reformer,  hero,  is  in  every  chili  I


310  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx.  1—34.

that  lies  on  woman's  bosom ;  and  she  is  a  poor  mother  who  does  not  look  into  her
child's  face,  and  dream  for  him  high  position  and  ennobling  influence  in  the  days
of  unfolded  manhood.  But  ambitions  are  not  worthy  that  rest  with  worldly  success.
True  motherhood  is  more  anxious  that  the  child  shall  be  wwthy  of  success,  than  that
he  should  win  success.  Character  alone  is  the  worthy  ambition.  Mothers  aim  at
nobility  and  piety.

II.  Mistaken  kotheblt  ambitions.  These  are  illustrated  in  the  passage  before
as.  This  mother  wanted  office,  rank,  and  wealth.  In  these  days  motherhood  often
aims  at  imperfect  and  unworthy  things.  Illustrate  by  the  modern  despising  of  trade,
and  pressing  of  the  sons  into  overstocked  professions ;  despising  of  retail  trade,  and
pressing  into  overstocked  wholesale  commerce ;  or  by  anxiety  to  secure  advantageous
marriage  settlements.  A  child's  material  well-being  is  a  proper  subject  of  motherly
concern ;  but  moral  and  spiritual  character  and  health  ought  always  to  be  held  as  the
supreme  things. — B.  T.

Ver.  22. — InconBiderate  petition.  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask."  That  is,  yon
have  not  thought  seriously  about  it ;  have  not  looked  it  well  round,  so  as  to  be  quite
sure  what  your  petition  means  and  involves.  One  is  a  little  surprised  to  find  James
and  John  acting  so  impulsively.  It  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  better  suits  Peter.
"  Boanerges  "  is  a  strange  name  for  John ;  perhaps  it  was  specially  adapted  to  James,
the  elder  brother.  This  James  seems  to  have  been  somewhat  of  a  zealot,  and  he  paid
the  penalty  by  becoming  the  first  apostolic  martyr.

L  An  inconsiderate  fbaygb.  Evidently  these  men  had  no  higher  idea  of  Christ's
mission  than  that  he  had  come  to  found  a  temporal  kingdom.  They  aslsed  an
impossible  thing,  simply  because  they  did  not  know  how  impossible  it  was.  If  they
had  spiritually  entered  into  the  teachings  of  Jesus,  they  never  could  have  asked  it.
Their  prayer  lacked  "humility"  because  it  lacked  "thought."  Prayer  is  a  serious
thing.  It  is  the  approach  of  the  erring  creature  to  the  All-holy,  if  All-merciful,  One ;
it  can  never  be  undertaken  lightly.  '  "  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet ;  the  place
whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground."  We  should  "  take  with  us  words,"  carefully
chosen,  when  we  "  turn  unto  the  Lord."  Prayer  may  lose  tone  by  its  fi:equency,
and  become  unduly  familiar.  So  often  we  go  to  God  with  nothing  special  to  say.
We  go  because  it  is  time  to  go ;  the  hour  of  prayer  has  struck.  Distinguish  between
(1)  acts  of  adoration;  (2)  acts  of  communion;  (3)  acts  of  petition;  (4)  acts  of
intercession.  Our  daily  spiritual  converse  with  God  is  only  in  a  conventional  sense
called  "  prayer ; "  for  there  need  not  be  any  element  of  petition  in  it.  How  many
of  our  prayers  would  have  been  offered,  if  we  had  seriously  thought  about  them  before-
hand? Thought  takes  in  what  may  be  right  for  us  to  ask,  and  what  we  may  suppose
God  can  give.

II.  DrviNB  TBEATMENT  OF  INOONBIDEBATB  PBATEB.  Jcsus  auswcred  Kndly,  but
firmly.  James  and  John  were  wrong,  and  must  be  shown  that  they  were  wrong.  Our
Lord  endeavoured  to  quicken  thought,  and  so  help  James  and  John  to  correct  their
own  mistake.  And  their  great  mistake  was  that  they  had  misapprehended  his  royalty.
He  was  to  be  King  of  the  obedient,  who  would  be  willing  to  suffer  for  their  obedience.
If  they  bad  known  what  they  asked,  they,  would  hare  seen  that  they  asked  a  special
share  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings. — B.  T.

Ver.  22. — Imperfect  Belf-estimatee.  "  They  say  unto  him,  We  are  able."  The  words
of  our  Lord  "  come  to  us  as  spoken  in  a  tone  of  infinite  tenderness  and  sadness.  That
nearness  to  him  in  his  glory  could  be  obtained  only  by  an  equal  nearness  in  suffering.
Had  they  counted  the  cost  of  that  nearness?  There  was  enough  to  lead  them  to  see
in  their  Master's  words  an  intimation  of  some  great  suffering  about  to  fall  on  him,  and
this  is,  indeed,  implied  in  the  very  form  of  their  answer,  '  We  are  able,'  say  they,
in  the  tone  of  those  who  have  been  challenged  and  accept  the  challenge.  That  their
insight  into  the  great  mystery  of  the  Passion  went  but  a  little  way  as  compared  with
their  Master's,  lies,  of  course,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case "  (Dean  Plumptre).
Over  a  Greek  temple  was  placed  the  inscription,  "  Know  thyself ; "  but  every  man
finds  that  to  be  the  very  hardest  work  ever  given  him  to  do,

L  ▲   UAJS   U  SYE&  INCLINED   TO    BXAaOEBATB    HIS    OWN    KXOELUCNOKg.       VlgOrOUS'


OH.  XX.  1—34,7    THE  GOSPEL  AOOOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  811

as  he  may  be  in  criticizing  the  virtues  of  others,  ■  man  is  weak  at  self-criticism.  There
is  a  fondness  for  his  own  things  which  prevents  bis  appraising  them  aright.  He  judges
others  by  a  standard,  but,  unfortunately,  the  standard  is  his  own  attainment.  It
is  only  when  he  is  willing  to  take  Christ  as  the  standard  of  moral  excellence  that
he  discovers  the  imperfection  of  his  self-estimates.  "  Let  another  praise  thee,  and  not
thine  own  self."

II.  A  MAN  IS  EVER  INOLINKD  TO  BXAGGBEATB  HIS  OWN  DBFI0IBNCIE8.      They  loom

large  to  the  sincere  man,  because  they  are  his ;  he  knows  them  so  well,  and  he  feels
so  keenly  the  diflBculties  and  troubles  into  which  they  bring  him.  "  Wlio  can  under-
stand his  errors  ? "  There  are  some  types  of  religious  thought  which  exaggerate
the  sense  of  deficiency,  frailty,  and  sin ;  and  make  forced  and  manufactured  confession
a  sign  of  piety.  There  is  as  much  real  pride  in  exaggerating  deficiencies  as  in
exaggerating  excellences.  He  must  be  taught  of  God  who  would  know  his  own
sinMness  aright.

III.  A  MAN  IS  EVEB  INCLIKBD  TO  EXAOSEBATE  HIB  OWN  ABILITIES.      BecaUSe,  while

he  can  form  a  good  idea  of  the  ability,  he  cannot  estimate  the  demand  that  is  made
on  the  ability.  It  may  seem  a  big  ability,  but  it  may  be  very  small  as  seen  in  its
relation  to  the  claims  coming  on  it ;  as  in  this  case  of  James  and  John. — B.  T.

Ver.  27. — Hie  moral  greatneta  of  service.  There  was  nothing  more  characteristic
of  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  perhaps  we  may  even  say,  nothing  more  novel  in  his  teaching,
than  his  reversion  of  the  common  notions  of  service.  All  the  world  over,  and  all  the
ages  through,  the  ordinary  man  has  seen  dignity  in  "being  served,"  and  hai  seen
a  kind  of  indignity  in  "  serving."  This  has  come  about  in  two  ways.  1.  Through
the  exaggerated  importance  given  to  self.  A  man  has  come  to  be  of  more  interest
to  himself  than  his  brother  can  ever  be  to  him.  Yet  God  made  man  male  and  female
in  order  to  prevent  this  egoism,  and  start  man  upon  working  the  altruistic  principle,  each
finding  his  or  her  own  best  blessing  in  caring  for  the  other.  Christianity  is  the  recovery
of  the  primary  altruistic  principle,  and  the  mastery  of  that  egoism  which  has  proved
the  prolific  parent  of  all  the  vices.  2.  Through  the  absorbing  interest  of  appearances ;
of  material  things — state,  wealth,  luxury,  show  of  greatness.  True  greatness  lies
in  character ;  let  us  once  see  this  clearly  and  receive  it  fully,  and  then  the  kindliness
and  thoughtfulnesB  which  sweetly  blend  with  humility,  and  ever  make  us  ready  to  serve,
will  seem  to  be  surpassingly  valuable.  The  moral  greatness  of  service  may  he  seen  if
we  consider —

I.  It    IB    THE    HIGHEST    AND    NOBLEST    VIEW    WE    CAN    GET   OF    QOD.      Thoughts    of

majesty,  dignity,  authority,  are  properly  encouraged ;  but  we  must  have  felt,  as  the
psalm-writers  felt,  that  only  when  we  conceive  of  God  as  the  all-ministering  One
do  we  bow  in  fullest  reverence  of  love  before  him.  "  The  eyes  of  all  wait  on  thee.  Thou
givest  them  their  meat  in  due  season."

II.  It  is  THE  INFINITE  ATTBAOTioN  OF  THB  LoBD  Jesus.  The  charm  of  Christ
would  be  gone  for  ever  if  any  one  could  show  us  that  he  ever  got  anything  for  himself.
"  He  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  He  was  among  us  as  "  One
that  serveth."  His  character  is  the  ideal  character;  his  life  was  the  ideal  life;  but
its  glory  lies  in  its  self-denying  service — its  all-rulihg  "altruism."

III.  It  is  the  universally  admirable  thing  in  good  men.  The  man  who  lives
to  get  is  despised.  'J'he  man  who  lives  to  give  and  serve  is  commended.  Christ
has  afi'ected  the  standard  of  moral  greatness.  We  are  no  longer  dazzled  by  appearances.
Service  to  our  human  brother  is  now  the  only  true  nobility. —  R.  T.

Ver.  31. — Importunity  revealing  character.  Eastern  beggars  are  very  clamorous
and  persistent.  But  there  seems  to  have  been  something  unusual  in  the  energy  and
determination  of  these  blind  men.  They  had  their  opportunity,  and  they  made  the
best  possible  use  of  it.  There  are  many  cases  which  indicate  that  our  Lord  was
a  keen  and  skilful  observer  of  character.  The  actions,  movements,  expressions,  and
words  of  men  and  women  revealed  to  him  the  measure  of  their  receptivity  for  that
double  blessing — temporal  and  spiritual — which  he  was  prepared  to  bestow.  One
of  the  most  striking  instances  is  the  response  he  made  to  those  four  friends  who
carried  the  paralyzed  man,  and  broke  up  the  house-roof  in  order  to  get  him  into  the


312


THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1—46.


presence  of  Jesus.  Beading  character  in  their  act,  "  seeing  their  faith,"  Jesus  gave
the  sufferer  a  higher  blessing  than  they  sought,  but  included  with  it  what  they  asked.

L  Impobtunitt  bbteals  will.  Many  of  the  gravest  troubles  of  life  haie  their
real  cause  in  "  weakness  of  wilL"  Men  cannot  decide.  If  they  decide,  they  cannot
do  anything  with  their  decisions.  No  doubt  many  sufferers  lost  Christ's  healing
because  they  were  too  weak  of  will  to  seek  him  or  cry  to  him.  The  man  who  can
keep  on  is  the  man  who  has  made  a  firm  resolve ;  who  means  something ;  who  has
an  end  before  him.  This  "  weakness  of  will-power "  may  be  a  natural  infirmity ;
but  it  is  largely  remediable  by  skilful  educational  influences ;  and  yet  to  this  precise
work,  "  strengthening  the  will-power,"  how  few  parents,  and  how  few  teachers,  bend
careful  attention  1  The  world  yields  its  treasures  to  those  who  show  they  have  wills,
by  keeping  on,  fixing  firm  hold ;  and  refusing  to  let  go.  Illustrate  Jacob,  "  I  will  not
let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me."

IL  luFOBTUNiTT  BETEALB  FAITH.  This  Icads  in  the  more  familiar  way  of  treating
such  incidents  as  this  of  the  text.  What  Jesus  noticed  in  such  cases  was  "  faith."
If  these  mea  had  not  believed  that  he  could  heal  them,  and  if  'their  faith  had  not
blended  with  hope  that  he  would  heal  them,  they  would  have  been  repressed  by  the
rebukers,  and  would  have  ceased  t«  ory.  The  man  in  eantest  Is  the  man  of  faith,
who  ii  open  to  receive. — E.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXL


Ven.  1 — 11. — Tritmiphal  entry  into  Jeru-
lalem.  (Markii.  1—11;  Luke  xix.  29— 44 ;
John  xii.  12—19.)

Ver.  1.— We  have  come  to  the  last  week
of  our  Lord's  earthly  life,  when  he  made  his
appearance  in  Jerusalem  as  Messiah,  and
Butfered  the  penalty  of  death.  If,  as  is  be-
lieved, his  crucifixion  took  place  on  the  four-
teenth day  of  the  month  Nlsan,  the  trium-
phal entry  must  be  assigned  to  the  ninth,
which  day  was  reckoned  to  commence  at
one  sunset  and  to  continue  till  the  follow-
ing evening.  This  is  regarded  as  the  first
day  of  the  Holy  Week,  and  is  called  by
Christians  from  very  early  times  Palm  Sun-
day  (see  on  ver.  10).  He  had  probably  gone
straight  from  Jericho  to  Bethany,  and  spent
the  sabbath  there  with  his  friends  (ch.  xxvi.
6 ;  John  xii.  1).  Bethphage.  The  name
means  Houie  offlgt,  and  was  appropriate  to
s  locality  where  such  trees  grew  luxuriantly.
The  village  has  not  been  identified  with
certainty,  though  it  is  considered  with  great
probabiUty  to  be  represented  by  Kefr-et-Tur,
on  a  summit  of  Olivet,  within  the  bounds
of  Jerusalem,  i.e.  two  thousand  cubits'  dis-
tance from  the  city  walls.  Bethany  is  below
the  summit,  in  a  nook  on  the  western  slope
and  somewhat  further  from  the  city.  The
Mount  of  Olives  is  separated  from  Jerusalem
by  the  valley  of  the  Kedron,  and  has  three
summits,  the  centre  one  being  the  highest;
but  though  it  is  of  no  great  elevation  in  it-
self, it  stands  nearly  four  thousand  feet  above
the  Dead  Sea,  from  wbicb^it  is  distant  some
thirteen  miles.    Then  sent  Jesus  two  dis-


eiples.  Their  names  are  not  given,  and  it  Is
useless  to  conjecture  who  they  were,  though
probably  Peter  was  one  of  them.  Alford
suggests  that  the  triiunphal  entry  in  Hark
xi.  is  related  a  day  too  soon,  and  that  our
Lord  made  two  entries  into  Jerusalem — the
first  a  private  one  (Mark  xi.  11),  and  the
second,  public,  on  the  morrow.  But  there  is
no  sufficient  reason  to  discredit  the  common
tradition,  and  St.  Mark's  language  can  be
otherwise  explained.  The  deliberate  pre-
paration for  the  procession,  and  the  inten-
tional publicity,  so  contrary  to  Christ's  usual
habits,  are  very  remarkable,  and  can  be  ex-
plained only  by  the  fact  that  he  was  now
assuming  the  character  and  claims  of  Mes-
siah, and  putting  himself  forward  in  his  true
dignity  and  office  as  "  King  of  the  Jews."
By  this  display  he  made  manifest  that  in
him  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  and  that  the
seeing  eye  and  the  believing  heart  might
now  find  all  that  righteous  men  had  long
and  wearily  desired.  This  was  the  great
opportunity  which  his  mercy  offered  to  Jeru-
salem, if  only  she  would  accept  it  and  turn
it  to  account.  In  fact,  she  acknowledged
him  as  King  one  day,  and  then  rejected  and
crucified  him.

Ver.  2. — The  village  over  against  yon.
Bethphage,  to  which  he  points  as  he  speaks.
He  gives  their  commission  to  the  two  dis-
ciples, mentioning  even  some  minute  details.
Straightway.  "As  soon  as  ye  be  entered
into  it "  (Mark).  Te  shall  find  an  ass  (a  ihe-
088)  tied,  and  a  colt  with  her.  St.  Matthew
alone  meutions  the  ass,  the  mother  of  the
foal.  This  doubtless  he  does  with  exact
reference  to  the  prophecy,  which,  writing
for  Jews,  he  afterwards  cites  (ver.  4).     St


on.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


SIS


Jerome  gives  a  mystical  reason :  the  ass  re-
pregents  the  Jewish  people,  which  hud  long
borne  the  yoke  of  the  Law  j  the  colt  adum-
brates the  Gentiles,  as  yet  nnhroken,"  where-
on never  man  sat."  Christ  called  them
both,  Jew  and  Gentile,  by  his  apostles.
Loose  tliem,  and  brin^  them  unto  me.
He  speaks  with  anthority,  as  One  able  to
make  a  requisition  and  command  obe-
dience.

Ver.  3. — Say  anght  onto  yon.  This  might
naturally  he  expected.  Christ  foresaw  the
opposition,  and  instructed  the  disciples  how
to  overcome  it  with  a  word.  The  Lord;  6
Kipioj,  equivalent  to  "  Jehovah,"  or  the  King
Messiah.  Doubtless  the  owner  of  the  ani-
mals was  a  disciple,  and  acknowledged  the
claims  of  Jesus.  His  presence  here  was  a
providentially  gnided  coincidence.  If  he
was  a  stranger,  as  others  snppose,  he  must
have  been  divinely  prompted  to  acquiesce
in  the  appropriation  of  his  beasts.  He  will
send  them.  Some  manuscripts  read,  "ha
sends  them,"  here,  as  in  St.  Mark.  The
present  is  more  forcible,  but  the  future  is
well  attested.  The  simple  announcement
that  the  asses  were  needed  for  Ood's  service
would  silence  all  refnsal.  The  disciples,  in-
deed, were  to  act  at  once,  ai  executing  the
orders  of  the  supreme  liord,  and  were  to  use
the  given  answer  only  in  case  of  any  objec-
tion. Throughout  the  transaction  Christ
assiunes  the  character  of  the  Divine  Messiah,
King  of  his  people,  the  real  Owner  of  kll  that
they  possess.

Yer.  4. — All  this  was  done ;  now  (Si)  all
this  hath  come  to  pau.  Many  manuscripts
omit  "  all,"  bnt  it  is  probably  genuine,  as  in
other  similar  passages ;  e.g.  ch.  i.  22 ;  xivL
56.  This  observation  of  the  evangelist  is
intended  to  convey  the  truth  that  Christ
was  acting  consciously  on  the  lines  of  old
prophecy,  working  out  the  will  of  God  de-
clared beforehand  by  divinely  inspired  seers.
The  disciples  acted  in  blind  obedience  to
Christ's  command,  not  knowing  that  they
were  thus  fulfilling  prophecy,  or  having  any
such  purpose  in  mind.  The  knowledge  came
afterwards  (see  John  xii.  16).  That  it  might
be  fulfilled  (iva  irKripaBy').  The  conjunction
in  this  phrase  is  certainly  nsed  in  its  final,
not  in  a  consecutive  or  ecbatic  sense ;  it  de-
notes the  purpose  or  design  of  the  action  of
Christ,  not  the  result.  Not  only  the  wiU  of
the  Father,  but  the  words  of  Scripture,  had
delineated  the  life  of  Christ,  and  in  obeying
that  will  he  purposed  to  show  that  he  ful-
filled tlie  prophecies  which  spake  of  him.
Til  us  any  who  knew  the  Scriptures,  and
were  open  to  conviction,  might  see  that  it
was  be  alone  to  whom  these  ancient  oracles
pointed,  and  in  him  alone  were  their  words
accomplished.  By  (through,  Sii)  the  pro-
phet.    Zeeh.  ix.  9,  with  b  hint  of  Isa.  Ixii.


II,  a  qnotation  being  often  woven  tnm  two
or  more  passages  (see  on  oh.  xxvii.  9).

Ver.  5. — Tell  ye. the  daughter  of  Zion.
This  is  from  Isaiah  (comp.  Zeph.  iil  J  4).
The  passage  in  Zechariah  begins,  "  Bejoica
greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion;  shont,  O
daughter  of  Jerusalem."  The  "  daughter  of
Zion  "  is  Jerusalem  herself,  named  from  the
chief  of  the  hills  on  which  the  city  was  bnilt
Of  course,  the  term  includes  all  the  inhabi-
tants. Behold ;  marking  the  suddenness  and
unexpected  nature  of  the  event.  Thy  King.
A  King  of  thine  own  race,  no  stranger,  one
predestined  for  thee,  foretold  by  all  the  pro-
phets, who  was  to  occupy  the  throne  of
David  and  to  reign  for  ever.  Unto  thee.
For  thy  special  good,  to  make  his  abode  with
thee  (comp.  Isa.  ix.  6).  Meek.  As  Christ
himself  says,  "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in
heart "  (ch.  xi.  29),  far  removed  from  pomp
and  warlike  greatness ;  and  yet,  according  to
his  own  Beatitude,  the  meek  shall  inherit  the
earth  (ch.  v.' 5),  win  victories  which  material
forces  can  never  obtain,  triumph  through
humiliation.  Theoriginal  in  Zechariah  gives
other  characteristics  of  Messiah :  "He  is  just,
and  having  salvation;"  «.«.  endowed  with
salvation,  either  as  being  protected  by  God,
or  victorious  and  so  able  to  save  his  people.
Sitting  npon  an  ass.  Coming  as  King,  he
could  not  walk  undistinguished  among  the
crowd ;  he  must  ride.  But  to  mount  a  war-
horse  would  denote  that  he  was  leader  of  an
army  or  a  worldly  potentate;  so  he  rides
upon  an  ass,  an  animal  used  by  the  judges
of  Israel,  and  chieftains  on  peaceful  errands
(Jndg.  V.  10  ;|x.  4) ;  one,  too,  greatly  valued,
and  often  of  stately  appearance  in  Palestine.
And  (hsI)  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  ass ;  such  as
ghe-asses  bear,and  one  not  trained.  It  is  ques-
tioned whethertheconjunotionhereexpresses
addition,  implying  that  Christ  mounted  both
animals  in  succession,  or  is  merely  explana-
tory, equivalent  to  videlicet,  an  ais,  yea,
even  the  foal  of  an  ait.  It  seems  unlikely
that,  in  accomplishing  the  short  distance
between  Bethphage  and  Jerusalem  (only  a
mile  or  two),  our  Lord  should  have  changed
from  one  beast  to  the  other ;  and  the  other
three  evangelists  say  expressly  that  Christ
rode  the  colt,  omitting  uU  mention  of  the
mother.  The  she-ass  doubtless  kept  close
to  its  foal,  BO  the  prophecy  was  exactly  ful-
filled, but  the  animal  that  bore  the  Saviour
was  the  colt.  If  the  two  animals  represent
respectively  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  (see  on
ver.  2),  it  seems  hardly  necessary  for  typical
reasons  that  Jesus  should  thus  S}  mbolize  his
triumph  over  the  disciplined  Jews,  while  it
is  obvious  that  the  lesson  of  his  supremacy
over  the  untaught  Gentiles  needed  exempli-
fication. The  prophet  certainly  contem-
plates the  two  animals  in  the  procession.
"  The  old  theocracy  runs  idly  and  instino


814


THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1—46.


lively  by  the  side  of  the  young  Church,
which  has  become  the  true  bearer  of  the
Divinity  of  Christ "  (Lange).  No  king  had
ever  thus  come  to  Jerusalem;  Buoh  a  cir-
onmstanoe  was  predicted  of  Messiah  alone,
end  Christ  alone  fulfilled  it  to  the  letter,
showing  of  what  nature  his  kingdom  was.

Ver.  6. — As  Jesus  commanded  them.  They
simply  obeyed  the  order,  not  yet  knowing
what  it  portended,  or  how  it  carried  out  the
will  of  God  declared  by  his  prophets.

Ver.  7. — Brought  the  ass.  The  unbroken
foal  would  be  more  easily  subdued  and
guided  when  its  mother  was  with  it;  such
an  addition  to  the  ridden  animal  would
usually  be  employed  to  carry  the  rider's
luggage.  They  put  on  them  (_eTriva>  avTuii)
their  clothes  (f/idiTia).  The  two  disciples,
stripping  off  their  heavy  outer  garments,
abbas,  or  burnouses,  put  them  as  trappings
on  the  two  beasts,  not  knowing  on  which
their  Master  meant  to  ride.  They  set  him
thereon  (iiriiva  avrav).  Thus'the  received
text,  and  the  Vulgate,  Et  eum  desuper  tedere
fecerunt.  But  most  modem  editors,  with
great  manuscriptural  authority,  read,  "he
sat  thereon."  Some  have  taken  the  pro-
noun aiiTav  to  refer  to  the  beasts,  and  Alford
supports  the  opinion  by  the  common  say-
ing, "  The  postilion  rode  on  the  horses,"
when,  in  fact,  he  rode  only  one  of  the  pair.
But  the  analogy  is  erroneous.  The  po&tilion
really  guides  and  controls  both ;  but  no  one
contends  that  Christ  kept  the  mother-ass  in
hand  while  mounted  on  the  colt.  The  pro-
noun is  more  suitably  referred  to  the  gar-
ments, which  formed  a  saddle  for  the
Saviour,  or  housings  and  ornamental  ap-
pendages (comp.  2  Kings  ix.  13).  He  came
invested  with  a  certain  dignity  and  pump,
yet  in  such  humble  guise  as  to  discounte-
nance all  idea  of  temporal  sovereignty.

Ver.  8. — A  very  great  multitude;  i  Sh
TrAeuTTOi  ix^^s :  Bevised  Version,  the  most
part  of  the  multitude.  This  interpretation
has  classical  authority  (see  Alford),  but  the
words  may  well  mean, "  the  very  great  mul-
titude ; "  Vulgate,  plmrima  autem  turha.
This  crowd  was  composed  of  pilgrims  who
were  coming  to  the  festival  at  Jerusalem,
and  "the  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  "
(Luke  ziz.  37).  Spread  their  garment!
QfiiTia)  in  the  way.  Fired  with  enthusiasm,
they  stripped  off  their  abbas,  as  the  two  dis-
ciples had  done,  and  with  them  made  a
carpet  over  which  the  Saviour  should  ride.
Such  honours  were  often  paid  to  great  men,
and  indeed,  as  we  well  know,  are  offered  now
on  state  occasions.  Branches  from  the  trees.
St.  John  (xii.  13)  particularizes  palm  trees
as  having  been  used  on  this  occasion ;  but
there  was  abundance  of  olive  and  other  trees,
from  which  branches  and  leaves  could  be
cut  or  plucked  to  adorn  the  BaTiooi'B  road.


The  people  appear  to  have  behaved  on  this
occasion  as  if  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,
roused  by  enthusiasm  to  unpremeditated
action.  Of  the  three  routes  which  lay  be-
fore him,  Jesus  is  supposed  to  have  taken  the
southern  and  most  frequented,  between  the
Mount  of  Olives  and  tfie  Hill  of  Offence.

Ver.  9. — The  multitudes  that  went  before,
and  that  followed.    These  expressioiis  point
to  two  separate  bodies,  which  combined  in
escorting  Jesus  at  a  certain  portion  of  the
route.  We  learn  from  St.  John  (xii.  18)  that
much  people,  greatly  excited  by  the  news  of
the  raising  of  Lazarus,  when  they  heard  that
he  was  in  the  neighbourhood,  hurried  forth
from  Jerusalem  to  meet  and  do  him  honour.
These,  when  they  met  the  other  procession
with  Jesus  riding  in  the  midst,  turned  back
again  and  preceded  him  into  the  city.    St.
Luke  identifies  the  spot  as  "  at  the  descent
of  the  Mount  of  Olives."     "As  they  ap-
proached the  shoulder  of  the  hill,"   says
Dr.  Geikie  ('The  Life  of  Christ,'  ii.  397),
"where  the  road  bends  downwards  to  the
north,  the  sparse  vegetation  of  the  eastern
slope  changed,  as  in  a  moment,  to  the  rich
green  of  garden  and  trees,  and  Jerusalem  in
its  glory  rose  before  them.    It  is  hard  for
us  to  imagine  now  the  splendour  of  the  view.
The  city  of  God,  seated  on  her  hills,  shone  at
the  moment  in  the  morning  sun.     Straight
before  stretched  the  vast  white  walls  and
buildings  of  the  temple,  its  courts  glittering
with  golJ,  rising  one  above  the  other ;  the
steep  sides  of  the  hill  of  David  crowned  with
lofty  walls;  the  mighty  castles  towering  above
them;  the  sumptuous  palace  of  Herod  in
its  green  parks;  and  the  picturesque  outlines
of  the  streets."  Eosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  I
"Hosannal"   is  compounded  of  two  words
meaning  "save"  and  "now,"  or,  "I  pray,"
and  is  written  in  full  Hoshia-na,  translated
by  the  Septuagint,  'Xaaov  5^.    The  expres-
sions uttered  by  the  people  are  mostly  de-
rived from  Ps.  cxviii,,  which  formed  part  of
the  great  Hallel  (Ps.  cxiii. — cxviii.)  sung  at
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.   "  Hosanna  1 "  was
originally  a  formula  of  prayer  and  supplica-
tion, but  later  became  a  term  of  joy  and
congratulation.     So  here  the  cry  signifies
"  Blessings  on  [or, '  Jehovah  bless ']  the  Son
of  Davidl"  i.e.  the  Messiah,  acknowledging
Jesus   to  be  he,  the  promised  Prince  of
David's  line.    Thus  we  say,  "  God  save  the
king  I "    This,  which  Ewald  calls  the  first
Christian  hymn,  gave  to  Palm  Sunday,  in
some  parts  of  the  Church,  the  name  of  the
"day  of  Hosannas,"  and  was  incorporated
into  the  liturgical  service  both  in  Bast  and
West.  Blessed  ...  of  the  Lord  I  (Ps.  cxviii.
26).    The  formula  is  taken  in  two  ways,  the
words,  "  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,"  'being
connected   either  with   "blessed"  or  with
"  Cometh."     Ib  the  former  case  tha    ory


Ol.  XXL  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


SIS


■igniflee,  "  The  bleising  of  Jehovah  rest  on
him  who  oomethl"  i.e.  Messiah  (ch,  xi.  8;
Bev.  i  8);  Id  the  latter,  the  meaning  ig,
"  Blessing  on  him  who  cometh  with  Divine
mission,  sent  with  the  authority  of  Jehovah  I "
The  second  interpretation  seems  to  be  correct.
In  the  highest  (comp.  Lnke  ii.  14).  The
people  ory  to  G<>d  to  ratify  in  heaven  the
blessing  which  they  invoke  on  earth.  This
homage  and  the  title  of  Messiah  Jesus  now
accepts  as  his  due,  openly  asserting  his
claims,  and  by  his  acquiescence  encouraging
the  excitement.  St.  Matthew  omits  the
touching  scene  of  Christ's  lamentations  over
Jerusalem,  as  he  passed  the  spot  where
Roman  legions  would,  a  generation  hence,
encamp  against  the  doomed  city.

Yer.  10.  —  Was  come  into  Jernsalem.
Those  who  consider  that  the  day  of  this
event  was  the  tenth  of  Kisan  see  a  peculiar
fitness  in  the  entry  occurring  on  this  day.
On  the  tenth  of  this  month  the  Paschal  lamb
was  selected  and  taken  up  preparatory  to
its  sacrifice  four  days  after  (Bzod.  xii.  3, 6).
8o  the  true  Paschal  Lamb  now  is  escorted  to
the  place  where  alone  the  Passover  could  be
sacrificed.  Taking  a.d.  30  to  be  the  date  of
the  Crucifixion,  astronomers  inform  us  that
in  that  year  the  first  day  of  Nisan  fell  on
March  24.  Consequently,  the  tenth  would  be
on  Sunday,  April  2,  and  the  fourteenth  was
reckoned  from  sunset  of  Thursday,  April
6,  to  the  sunset  of  Friday,  April  7  (see  on
ver.  1,  and  preliminary  note  ch.  xxvi.).
Was  moved  (_iael<rSri) ;  wan  eJiaJcen,  as  by  an
earthquake.  St.  Matthew  alone  mentions
this  commotion,  though  St.  John  (xii.  19)
makes  allusion  to  it,  wlien  he  reports  the
vindictive  exclamation  of  the  Pharisees,
•'  Behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  him  I "
Jerusalem  had  been  stirred  and  troubled
once  before,  when  the  Wise  Men  walked
through  the  streets,  inquiring, "  Where  is  he
that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  (ch.  ii.  2,  S).
But  the  excitement  was  far  greater  now,
more  general,  composed  of  many  difTereiit
elements.  The  Bomans  expected  some  public
rising ;  the  Pharisaical  party  was  aroused  to
new  envy  and  malice ;  the  Herodians  dreaded
■  possible  usurper ;  but  the  populace  enter-
tained for  the  moment  the  idea  that  their
hopes  were  now  fulfilled,  that  the  long-
desired  Messiah  had  at  last  appeared,  and
would  lead  them  to  victory.  Who  is  this  1
The  question  may  have  been  put  by  the
strangers  who  came  from  all  parts  of  the
world  to  celebrate  the  Passover  at  Jerusalem,
or  by  the  crowds  in  the  streets,  when  they
beheld  the  unusual  procession  that  was
advancing.

Ver.  11. — The  multitude;  al  tx^ot:  the
mtUtitudet.  These  were  the  people  who  took
part  in  the  procession ;  they  kept  repeating
((%*y«r,  imperfect}  to  all  inquiriM,  Ihi«  ii


Jesus  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.  They  give
his  name,  title,  and  dwelling-place.  They
call  him  "  the  Prophet,"  either  as  being  the
One  that  was  foretold  (John  i.  21 ;  vi.  14),  or
as  being  inspired  and  commissioned  by  God
(John  LX.  17).  The  appellation, "  of  Nazareth,"
clung  to  our  Lord  through  all  his  earthly
life.  St.  Matthew  (ch.  ii.  23)  notes  that  the
prophets  had  foretold  that  he  was  to  be
called  a  Nazarene,  aud  that  this  prediction
was  in  some  sort  fulfilled  by  his  dwelling
at  Nazareth.  We  know  not  who  were  the
prophets  to  whom  the  evangelist  refers,  and
in  this  obscurity  the  attempted  explanations
of  exegetes  are  far  from  satisfactory ;  so  it  is
safer  to  fall  back  upon  the  inspired  historian's
verdict,  and  to  mark  the  providential  ac-
complishment of  the  prediction  in  the  title
by  which  Jesus  was  generally  known.  Says
Isaac  Williams,  "Friends  and  foes,  chief
priests  in  hate,  Pilate  in  mockery,  angels  in
adoration,  disciples  in  love,  Christ  himself  in
lowliness  (Acts  xxii.  8),  and  now  the  multi-
tudes in  simplicity,  e^  proclaim  him  'of
Nazareth.'"

Vers.  12 — 17. — The  tecond  eleanstng  of  tlie
temple.  (MarkxLlS — 19;  Lukexix.45 — 18.)

Ver.  12. — Went  into  the  temple.  The
event  here  narrated  seems  to  have,taken  place
on  the  day  following  the  triumphal  entry;
i.e.  on  the  Monday  of  the  Holy  Week.  This
can  be  gathered  from  St.  Mark's  narrative,
where  it  is  stated  that,  on  the  day  of  triumph,
Jesus  was  escorted  to  the  temple,  but  merely
"looked  round  about  on  all  things,"  and  then
returned  for  the  night  to  Bethany,  visiting
the  temple  again  on  the  following  morning,
and  driving  out  those  who  profaned  it.  St.
Matthew  often  groups  events,  not  in  their
proper  chronological  order,  but  in  a  certain
logical  sequence  which  corresponded  with
his  design.  Thus  he  connects  the  cleansing
with  the  triumphal  entry,  in  order  to  display
another  example  of  Christ's  self-manifesta-
tion at  this  time,  and  his  purpose  to  show
who  he  was  and  to  put  forth  hii  claims
publicly.  In  this  visit  of  Christ  we  see  the
King  coming  to  his  palace,  the  place  where
his  honour  dwelletb,  the  fitting  termination
of  his  glorious  march.  This  cleansing  of
the  temple  must  not  be  confounded  with  the
earlier  incident  narrated  by  St.  John  (ii.  13,
eto.).  The  two  acts  marked  respectively
the  beginning  and  close  of  Christ's  earthly
ministry,  and  denote  the  reverence  which  he
taught  for  the  house  and  the  worship  of  God,
The  part  of  the  temple  which  he  now  visited,
aud  which  was  profaned  to  secular  use,  was
the  court  of  the  Gentiles,  separated  from  the
sanctuary  by  a  stone  partition,  and  considered
of  lesser  sanctity,  though  really  an  integral
part  of  the  temple.  Cast  out  aU  them  that
sold  and  bought    In  this  large  open  tpaoe


316


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xh.  1—46.


a  market  had  been  established,  with  the
connivance,  and  much  to  the  peonniary
emolument,  of  the  priests.  These  let  out  the
sacred  area,  of  which  they  were  the  appointed
guardians,  to  greedy  and  irreligious  traders,
who  made  a  gain  of  others'  piety.  We  find
no  trace  of  this  market  in  the  Old  Testament;
it  probably  was  established  after  the  Cap-
tivity, whence  the  Jews  brought  back  that
taste  for  commercial  business  and  skill  in
iinancial  matters  for  which  they  have  ever
since  been  celebrated.  In  the  eyes  of  worldly-
minded  men  the  sanctity  of  a  building  and
its  appendages  was  no  impediment  to  traffic
and  trade,  hence  they  were  glad  to  utilize
the  temple  court,  under  the  sanction  of  the
priests,  for  the  convenience  of  those  who
came  from  all  regions  to  celebrate  the  great
festivals.  Here  was  sold  all  that  was  re-
quired for  tlie  sacrifices  which  worshippers
were  minded  to  offer — animals  for  victims,
meal,  incense,  salt,  etc.  The  soandalons
abuse  of  the  holy  precincts,  or  the  plain  traces
of  it  (if,  as  it  was  late  in  the  day,  the
traffickers  themselves  had  departed  for  a
time),  Christ  had  observed  at  his  previous
visit,  when  he  "  looked  round  about  upon  all
things"  (Mark  xi.  11),  and  now  he  pro-
ceeded to  remedy  the  crying  evil.  The
details  of  the  expulsion  are  not  given.  On  the
first  occasion,  we  are  told,  he  used  "  a  scourge
of  small  cords ; "  as  far  as  we  know,  at  this
time  he  effected  the  purification  unarmed
and  alone.  It  was  a  marvellous  impulse  that
forced  the  greedy  crew  to  obey  the  order  of
this  unknown  Man;  their  own  consciences
made  them  timid ;  they  fled  in  dismay  before
the  stem  indignation  of  his  eye,  deserted
their  gainful  trade  to  escape  the  reproach
of  that  invincible  zeal.  Money-obangers.
These  persons  ex<'hanged  (for  a  certain  per-
centage) foreign  money  or  other  coins  for  the
half-shekel  demanded  from  all  adults  for  the
service  of  the  temple  (see  on  oh.  ivii.  24).
They  may  have  lent  money  to  the  needy.
The  sellers  also  probably  played  into  their
bands  by  refusing  to  receive  any  but  current
Jewish  money  in  exchange  for  their  wares.
It  is  also  certain  that  no  coins  stamped  with
a  heathen  symbol,  or  bearing  a  heathen
monarch's  image,  could  be  paid  into  the
temple  treasury.  The  seats  of  them  that
sold  (the)  doves.  These  birds  were  used  by
the  poor  in  the  place  of  costlier  victims  (see
Lev.  xii.  6 ;  xiv.  22 ;  Lukeii.  24).  The  sellers
were  often  women,  who  sat  with  tables  before
them  on  which  were  set  cages  containing  the
doves.

Yer.  13. — It  is  written.  Jesus  confirms
his  action  by  the  word  of  Scripture.  He
combines  in  one  severe  sentence  a  passage
from  Isa.  Ivi.  7  ("  Mine  house  shall  be  calK  J
an  house  of  prayer  for  all  people! "),  and
one  from  Jer.  vii.  11  ("  Is  this  home,  Trhioh


is  called  b  j  my  Name,  become  a  den  of  robbers
in  your  eyes?").  He  brings  out  in  strong
contrast  the  high  design  and  use  of  the
house  of  God  (an  allusion  specially  appro-
priate at  the  coming  festival),  and  the  vile
and  profane'purposes  to  which  the  greed  and
impiety  of  men  had  subjected  it.  Te  have
made  it ;  Gevised  Version,  ye  make  it ;  and
80  many  modern  editors  on  good  manuscript
authority.  These  base  traffickers  had  turned
the  hallowed  courts  into  a  cavern  where  rub-
bers stored  their  ill-gotten  plunder.  It  may
also  be  said  that  to  make  the  place  of
prayer  for  all  the  nations  a  market  for
beasts  was  a  robbery  of  the  rights  of  the  Gen-
tiles (Lange).  And  Christ  here  vindicated
the  sanctity  of  the  house  of  God ;  the  Lord,
according  to  the  prophecy  of  Malaehi  (iii.
1 — 3),  had  suddenly  come  to  his  temple  to
refine  and  purify,  to  show  that  none  can
profane  what  is  dedicated  to  the  service  of
God  without  most  certain  less  and  punish-
ment.

Yer.  14.— The  blind  and  the  lame  oame
to  him  in  the  temple.  This  notice  is  peculiar
to  St.  Matthew,  though  St.  Luke  (xiz.  47)
mentions  that  "he  taught  daily  in  the
temple."  An  old  expositor  has  remarked
that  Christ  first  as  King  purified  his  palace,
and  then  took  his  seat  therein,  and  of  his
royal  bounty  distributed  gifts  to  his  people.
It  was  a  new  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of
Isaiah  (xxiv.  4—  6),  which  spake  of  Messiah
coming  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  to  un-
stop tlie  ears  of  the  deaf,  to  make  the  lame
man  leap  aa  an  hart.  For  acts  of  sacrilege
which  profaned  the  temple  precincts,  he  sub-
stituted acts  of  mercy  which  hallowed  them ;
the  good  Physician  takes  the  place  of  the
greedy  trafficker ;  the  den  of  tl  neves  becomes
a  beneficent  hospital.  How  many  were  the
acts  of  healing,  we  are  not  told ;  but  the
words  point  to  the  relief  of  numberless
sufferers,  none  of  whom  were  sent  empty
away.

Yer.  15.— The  chief  priests.  This  term
is  generally  applied  to  the  high  priest's
deputies  and  the  heads  of  the  twenty-four
courses,  but  it  seems  here  to  mean  certain
sacerdotal  members  of  the  Sanhedrin,  to
whom  supreme  authority  was  delegated  by
the  Romans  or  Heroiliana  (see  Josepbus,
•  Ant.,'  XX.  10.  5).  They  formed  a  wealthy,
aristocratioal  body,  and  were  many  of  them
Sadduoees.  They  joined  with  the  scribes
in  expressing  their  outraged  fceKng,  whether
simulated  or  real.  The  wonderful  things  (ret
Bavudiria) ;  an  expression  found  nowhere  else
in  the  New  Testament.  It  refers  to  the
cleansing  of  the  temple  and  the  cures  lately
performed  there.  Children  crying  in  the
temple.  This  foot  is  mentioned  only  by.  St.
Matthew.  Jesus  loved  children,  and  they
loved  and   followed  Urn,  taking   np  the


OH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  OOBPEL  AOCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


817


cry  which  they  had  heard  the  day  before
from  the  multitude,  and  in  simple  faith
applying  it  again  to  Christ.  While  grown
men  are  silent  or  blaspheming,  little  children
boldly  sing  his  praises.  Were  sore  dis-
pleased. Their  envious  hearts  could  not
.bear  to  see  Jesus  honoured,  elevated  in
men'i  eyes  by  his  own  beneficent  actions,
and  now  gloriBed  by  the  spontaueoua  accla-
mations of  these  little  ones.

Vor.  16.— Hearest  then  what  these  sayl
They  profess  a  great  zeal  for  God's  honour.
Tiiey  recognize  that  these  cries  implied
high  homage,  if  not  actual  worship,,  and
appeal  to  Jesus  to  put  a  stop  to  such  un-
seemly behaviour,  approaching,  as  they
would  pretend,  to  formal  blasphemy.  Yea,
Jesus  replies  that  he  hears  what  the  children
say,  but  sees  no  reason  for  silencing  them ;
rather  he  proves  that  they  were  only  ful-
iilliag  an  old  prophecy,  originally,  indeed,
applied  to  Jehovah,  but  one  which  he  claims
as  addressed  to  himself.  Have  ye  never
read  1  (ch.  xii.  5).  The  quotation  is  from
the  confessedly  Messianic  psalm  (Ps.  viii.),  a
psalm  very  often  quoted  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  as  speaking  of  Christ  (see  1  Cor.
i.  27 ;  XV.  27 ;  Bph.  i.  22 ;  Heb.  ii.  6,  etc.).
Sucklings.  This  term  was  applied  to  children
up  to  the  age  of  three  years  (see  2  Maoo.  vii.
27),  but  might  be  used  metaphorically  of
those  of  tender  age,  though  long  weaned.
Thou  hast  perfected  praise.  The  words  are
from  the  Septuagint,  which  seems  to  have
preserved  the  original  reading.  The  pre-
sent Hebrew  text  gives, "  Thou  hast  ordained
strength,"  or  "  established  a  power."  In  the
Lord's  mouth  the  citation  signifies  that  God
is  praised  acceptably  by  the  weak  and
ignorant  when,  following  the  impulse  of
their  simple  nature,  they  do  him  homage.
Some  expositors  combine  the  force  of  the
Hebrew  and  Greek  by  explaining  that  "  the
strength  of  the  weak  is  praise,  and  that
worship  of  Christ  is  strength"  (Words-
worth). It  is  more  simple  to  say,  with
Nosgen,  that  for  the  Hubrew  "strength,"
"  praise  "  is  substituted,  in  order  to  give  the
idea  that  the  children's  acclamation  was
that  which  would  still  the  enemy,  as  it  cer-
tainly put  to  shame  the  captious  objections
of  the  Pharisees.

Ver.  17. — He  left  them.  The  chief  priests
had  nothing  to  say  in  reply  to  this  testi-
mony of  Scripture.  They  feared  to  arrest
him  in  the  face  of  the  enthusiastic  multi-
tude ;  they  bided  their  time,  for  the  present
apparently  silenced.  Jesus,  wasting  no
further  argument  on  these  wilfully  unbe-
lieving people,  turned  and  left  them.  The
King  had  no  home  in  his  royal  city;  he
sought  one  in  lowly  Bethany,  where  he  was
always  sure  of  a  welcome  in  the  house  of
Martha  and  Mary.    It  is  somewhat  doubt-


ful whether  he  availed  himself  of  his
friends'  hospitality  at  this  time.  The  term
"Bethany"  would  include  the  district  so
called  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town,  as  in  the
description  of  the  scene  of  the  Ascension
(Luke  xiiv.  50).  lodged  (TjiiKiaeri).  This
word,  if  its  stiict  classical  use  is  pressed,
would  imply  that  Jesus  passed  the  night  in
the  open  air;  but  it  may  mean  merely
"  lodge,"  or  "  pass  the  night,"  without  any
further  connotation ;  so  no  certain  Inference
can  be  drawn  from  its  employment  in  this
passage.  This  withdrawal  of  Jesus  obviated
all  danger  of  a  rising  in  his  favour,  which,
supported  by  the  vast  resources  of  the
temple,  might  have  had  momentous  con-
sequences at  this  time  of  popular  concourse
and  excitement.

Vers.  18— 22.— 5ra«  eureing  of  tht  barren
fig  tree.    (Mark  xL  12—14,  20—26.)

Ver.  18, — In  the  morning  (rpaias,  which
implies  a  very  early  time  of  the  day,  and  is
a  term  used  for  the  fourth  or  last  watch  of
the  night,  Mark  i.  35).  St.  Matthew  has
combined  in  one  view  a  transaction  which
bad  two  separate  stages,  as  we  gather  from
the  narrative  of  St.  Mark.  The  curse  was
uttered  on  the  Monday  morning,  before  the
cleansing  of  the  temple ;  the  efTect  was  be-
held and  the  lesson  given  on  the  Tuesday,
when  Jesus  was  visiting  Jerusalem  for  the
third  time  (vers.  20—22).  Strauss  and  his
followers,  resenting  the  miraculous  in  the
incident,  have  imagined  that  the  whole  story
is  merely  an  embodiment  and  development
of  the  parable  of  the  fruitless  fig  tree  recorded
by  St.  Luke  (xiii.  6,  etc.),  which  in  course  of
time  assumed  this  historical  form.  There
is  no  ground  whatever  for  this  idea.  It  claims
to  be,  end  doubtless  is,  the  account  of  a  real
fact,  naturally  connected  with  the  oircum-
stanoes  of  the  time,  and  of  great  practical
importance.  He  hungered.  True  Man,  he
showed  the  weakness  of  his  human  nature,
even  when  about  to  exert  his  power  in  the
Divine.  There  is  no  need,  rather  it  is  un-
seemly to  suppose  (as  many  old  commenta-
tors have  done),  that  this  hunger  was  mira<
oulouB  or  assumed,  in  order  to  give  occasion
for  the  coming  miracle.  Christ  had  either
passed  the  night  on  the  mountain-side  in
prayer  and  fasting,  or  had  started  from  his
lodging  without  breaking  his  fast.  His  fol-
lowers do  not  seem  to  have  suffered  in  the
same  way ;  and  it  was  doubtless  owing  to  his
mental  preoccupation  and  self-forgetfulness
that  the  Lord  had  not  attended  to  bodily
wants.

Ver.  19. — When  he  saw  a  iidav,  a  tingle)
fig  tree  in  the  way.  The  tree  stood  all
alone  in  a  conspicuous  situation  by  the
roadside,  as  if  courting  observation.  It  wag
allowable   to  pluck   and    eat   fruit    in   an


813  THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh  xxi.  1—46.


orchard  (Deut.  xxiH.  24,  25) ;  but  this  tree,
pinced  where  it  was,  seemed  to  be  common
property,  belonging  to  no  private  owner.
The  sight  of  the  leaves  thereon,  as  St.  Mark
tells  ns,  attracted  the  notice  of  Christ,  wiio
beheld  with  pleasure  the  prospect  of  re-
lieving his  long  abstinence  with  the  refresh-
ment of  cool  and  juicy  fruit.  He  oame  to  it.
Knowing  the  nature  of  the  tree,  and  that
under  some  circumstances  the  fruit  ripens
before  the  leaves  are  fully  out,  Jesus
naturally  expected  to  find  on  it  some  figs
fit  to  eat.  Further,  besides  the  fruit  which
comes  to  maturity  in  the  usual  way  during
the  summer,  there  are  often  late  figs  pro-
duced in  autumn  which  hang  on  the  tree
during  winter,  and  ripen  at  the  reawaken-
ing of  vegetation  in  the  spring.  The  vigour
of  this  particular  tree  was  apparently  proved
Isy  the  luxuriance  of  its  foliage,  and  it
might  reasonably  be  expected  to  retain
some  of  its  winter  produce.  Foand  nothing
thereon,  but  leaves  only.  It  was  all  outward
show,  promise  without  performance,  seem-
ing precocity  with  uo  adequate  results.
There  is  no  question  here  of  Christ's  omni-
science being  at  fault.  He  acted  as  a  man
would  act;  he  was  not  deceived  himself,
nor  did  he  deceive  the  apostles,  though
they  at  first  misapprehended  his  purpose.
The  whole  action  was  symbolical,  and  was
meant  so  to  appear.  In  strict  propriety  of
conduct,  as  a  man  led  by  the  appearance  of
the  tree  might  act,  he  carried  out  the
figure,  at  the  same  time  showing,  by  his
treatment  of  this  inanimate  object,  that  hu
bad  something  higher  in  view,  and  that  he
does  not  mean  that  which  his  outward
conduct  seemed  to  imply.  He  is  enacting
a  parable  where  all  the  parts  are  in  due
keeping,  and  all  have  their  twofold  signifi-
cation in  the  world  of  nature  and  the  world
of  grace.  The  hunger  is  real,  the  tree  is
real,  the  expectation  of  fruit  legitimate,
the  barrenness  disappointing  and  criminal ;
the  spiritual  side,  however,  is  left  to  be
inferred,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  only  one  of
many  possible  lessons  is  drawn  &om  the
result  of  the  incident.  let  no  fruit  grow
on  thee  (let  there  be  no  fruit  from  thee)
henceforward  for  ever.  Such  is  the  sentence
passed  on  this  ostentatious  tree.  Christ
addresses  it  as  if  replying  to  the  profession
made  by_  its  show  of  leaves.  It  had  the  sap
of  life,  it  had  power  to  produce  luxhriant
leaves;  therefore  it  might  and  ought  to
have  borne  fruit.  It  vaunted  itself  as  being
superior  to  its  neighbours,  and  the  boast
was  utterly  empty.  Presently  (irapaxp^iia)
the  fig  tree  withered  away.  The  process
was  doubtless  gradual,  commencing  at
Christ's  word,  and  continuing  till  the  tree
died ;  but  St.  Matthew  completes  the
account  at  onoe,  gfiving  in  one  picture  the


event,  with  Its  surroundings  and  results.
It  was  a  moral  necessity  that  what  had
incurred  Christ's  censure  should  perish  j
the  spiritual  controlled  the  material;  the
higher  overbore  the  lower.  Thus  the
designed  teaching  was  placed  in  visible
shape  before  the  eyes,  and  silently  uttered
its  important  lesson.  It  has  been  remarked
(by  Neander)  that  we  are  not  to  suppose
that  the  tree  thus  handled  was  previously
altogether  sound  and  healthy.  Its  show
of  leaves  at  an  unusual  period  without  fruit
may  point  to  some  abnormal  development
of  activity  whicli  was  consequent  upon
some  radical  defect.  Had  it  been  in  vigorous
health,  it  would  not  have  been  a  fitting
symbol  of  the  Jewish  Church;  por  would
it  have  corresponded  with  the  idea  wliich
Christ  designed  to  bring  to  the  notice  of
his  apostles.  There  was  already  some
process  at  work  which  would  have  issued  in
decay,  and  Christ's  curse  merely  accelerated
this  natural  result.  This  is  considered  to
be  the  only  instance  in  which  our  Lord
exerted  his  miraculous  power  in  destruction ;
all  his  other  actions  were  beneficent,  saving,
gracious.  The  drowning  of  the  swine  at
Gradara  was  only  permitted  for  a  wise
purpose ;  it  was  not  commanded  or  inflicted
by  him.  The  whole  transaction  in  our  text
is  mysterious.  That  the  Son  of  man  should
show  wrath  against  a  senseless  tree,  as  a
tree,  is,  of  course,  not  conceivable.  There
was  an  apparent  unfitness,  if  not  injustice,
in  the  proceeding,  which  at  onoe  demon-
strated that  the  tree  was  not  the  real
object  of  the  action — that  something  more
important  was  in  view.  Christ  does  not
treat  trees  as  moral  agents,  responsible  for
life  and  action.  He  uses  inanimate  objects
to  convey  lessons  to  men,  dealing  with
them  according  to  hia  good  pleasure,  even
his  supreme  will,  which  is  the  law  by  which
they  are  controlled.  In  themselves  they
have  no  fault  and  incur  no  punishment,
but  they  are  treated  in  such  a  way  as  to
profit  the  nobler  creatures  of  God's  hand.
There  may  have  been  two  reasons  for
Christ's  conduct  which  were  not  set  promi-
nently forward  at  the  time.  First,  he
desired  to  show  his  power,  his  absolute
control,  over  material  forces,  so  that,  in
what  was  about  to  happen  to  him,  his
apostles  might  be  sure  that  he  sufiercd
not  through  weakness  or  compulsion,  but
because  he  willed  to  have  it  bo.  This
would  prepare  his  followers  for  his  own
and  their  coming  trials.  Then  there  was
another  great  lesson  taught  by  the  sign.
The  fig  tree  is  a  symbol  of  the  Jevrisli
Chnroh.  The  prophets  had  nsed  both  it
and  the  vine  in  this  connection  (comp,  Hos,
ix.  10),  and  our  Lord  himself  makes  an
unmistakable  allusion  1q  hia  parable  of


OH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  (JOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  819


the  fig  tree  planted  in  the  vineyaid,  from
which  the  owner  for  three  years  sought
fruit  in  vain  (Luke  xili.  6,  etc.).  Many  of
his  subsequent  discourses  are,  as  it  were,
commentaries  upon  this  incident  (see  vers.
28 — 44;  ch.zxii.  1 — 14;  xxiii. — ^xxv.).  Here
was  a  parable  enacted.  The  Saviour  had
seen  this  tree,  the  Jewish  Church,  afar  off,
looking  down  upon  it  from  heaven ;  it  was
one,  single,  standing  conspicuous  among  all
nations  ag  that  whereon  the  Lord  had
•lavished  most  care,  that  which  ought  to
have  shown  the  effect  of  this  culture  in
abundant  produce  of  holiness  and  righteous-
ness. But  what  was  the  result?  Boasting
to  be  children  of  Abraham,  the  special
heritage  of  Jehovah,  gifted  with  highest
privileges,  the  sole  possessors  of  the  know-
ledge of  God,  the  Israelites  professed  to
have  what  no  other  people  had,  and  were
in  reality  empty  and  bare.  There  was
plenty  sf  outward  show — rites,  ceremoniei,
scrupulous  observances,  much  speaking —
but  no  real  devotion,  no  righteousness,  no
heart-worship,  no  good  works.  Other  nations,
indeed,  were  equally  fruitless,  but  they  did
not  profess  to  be  holy ;  they  were  sinners,
and  offered  no  cloak  for  their  sinfulness.
The  Jews  were  no  less  unrighteous ;  but
they  were  hypocrites,  and  boasted  of  the
good  which  they  had  not.  Other  nations
were  unproductive,  for  their  time  had  not
come;  but  for  Israel  the  season  had  arrived;
she  ought  to  have  been  the  first  to  accept
the  Messiah,  to  unite  the  new  with  the  old
fruit,  to  pass  from  tlie  Law  to  the  gospel,
and  to  learn  and  practise  the  lesson  of  faith.
Perfect  fruit  was  not  yet  to  be  expected;
but  Israel's  sin  was  that  she  vaunted  her
perfection,  counted  herself  sound  and  whole,
while  rotten  at  the  very  core,  and  barren  of
all  good  results.  Her  falsehood,  hypocrisy,
and  arrogant  complacency  were  fearfully
punished.  The  terms  of  the  curse  pro-
nounced by  the  Judge  are  very  emphatic.
It  denounces  perpetual  barrenness  on  the
Jewish  Church  and  people.  From  Judtea
was  to  have  gone  forth  the  healing  of  the
nations;  from  it  all  peoples  of  the  earth
were  to  be  blessed.  The  complete  fulfil-
ment of  this  promise  is  no  longer  in  the
literal  Israel ;  she  is  nothing  in  the  world ;
no  one  resorts  to  her  for  food  and  refresh-
ment; she  has  none  to  offer  the  wayfarer.
For  eighteen  centuries  has  that  fruitless-
ness  oontinued ;  the  withered  tree  still
stands,  •  monument  of  unbelief  and  its
punishment.  The  Lord's  sentence,  "for
ever,"  must  be  understood  with  some  limita-
tion. In  his  parable  of  the  fig  tree,  which
adumbrates  the  last  days,  he  intimates  that
it  shall  some  day  bud  and  blossom,  and  be
elothed  once  more  with  leaf  and  fruit ;  and
6t.  Paul  looks  forward  to  the  oonversioo  of


Israel,  when  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are
fulfilled  (Kom.  xi.  23—26).

Ver.  20. — They  mai-velled,  saying.  The
apostles'  remark  on  the  incident  was  made
on  the  Tuesday,  as  we  learn  from  St.  Marie's
moie  accurate  account.  After  Christ  had
spoken  his  malediction,  the  little  band  went
on  their  way  to  Jerusalem,  where  was
performed  the  cleansing  of  the  temple.  On
their  return  to  Bethany,  if  they  passed  the
tree,  it  was  doubtless  too  dark  to  observe
its  present  condition,  and  it  was  not  till  the
next  morning  that  they  noticed  what  had
happened.  St.  Matthew  does  not  name  the
apostle  who  was  the  mouthpiece  of  the
others  in  expressing  astonishment  at  the
miracle ;  he  is  satisfied  with  speaking  gene-
rally of  "  the  disciples  "  (comp.  ch.  xxvi.  8
witli  John  xii.  4).  We  learn  ftom  St.  Mark
that  it  was  Peter  who  made  the  observation
recorded,  deeply  affected  by  the  sight  of
this  instance  of  Christ's  power,  and  awe-
struck by  the  speedy  and  complete  accom-
plishment of  the  curse.  How  soon  is  the  fig
tree  withered  away !  better.  Sow  did  the  fig
tree  immediately  wither  awayl  Vulgate,
Quomodo  corttinuo  aruitf  They  saw,  but
could  not  comprehend,  the  effect  of  Christ's
word,  and  wonderingly  inquired  how  it  came
to  pass.  They  did  not  at  present  realize
the  teaching  of  this  parabolic  act — how  it
gave  solemn  warning  of  the  certainty  of
judgment  on  the  unfruitful  Jewish  Church,
which,  hopelessly  barren,  must  no  longer
cumber  the  earth.  Christ  did  not  help
them  to  understand  the  typical  nature  of
the  transaction.  He  is  not  wont  to  explain
in  words  the  spiritual  significance  of  his
miracles;  the  connection  between  miracle
and  teaching  is  left  to  be  inferred,  to  be
brought  out  by  meditation,  prayer,  faith,
and  subsequent  circumstances.  The  total
rejection  of  the  Jews  was  a  doctrine  for
which  the  apostles  were  not  yet  prepared ;
BO  the  Lord,  in  wisdom  and  mercy,  withheld
its  express  ennnciation  at  this  moment.  In
mercy  too  he  exemplified  the  sternness  and
severity  of  God's  judgment  by  inflicting
pnnisliment  on  an  inanimate  object,  and  not
on  a  sentient  being;  he  withered  a  tree,  not
a  sinful  man,  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth.

Ver.  21.  —  Jesus  answered.  To  the
apostles'  question  the  Lord  makes  reply,
Rawing  a  lesson,  not  such  as  we  should
have  expected,  but  one  of  quite  a  different
nature,  yet  one  which  was  naturally  deduced
from  the  transaction  which  had  excited  such
astonishment.  They  marvelled  at  this
incident;  let  them  have  and  exercise  faith,
and  they  should  do  greater  things  than  this.
Christ  had  already  made  a  similar  answer
after  the  cure  of  the  demoniac  boy  (ch.  xvii.
20,  where  see  note).  If  ye  have  faith,  and
doubt  not  (jiij  SMKpieijTe),   The  whole  phrase


320


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1—46.


expreuei  the  perfection  of  the  graoe.    The
latter  Teib  means  "  to  diaoriminate,"  to  see
a.  difference  in  things,  hence  to  debate   in
one's  mind.   The  Vulgate  gives,  Si  habueritit
fidem,  et  non  hasitaveritit.    What  ia  here
enjoined  is  that  temper  of  mind  which  does
not  stop  hesitatingly  to  consider  whether  a
thing  can  be  done  or  not,  but  believes  that
all  is  pussible — that  one  can  do  all  things
through  Ohiist  who  strengthens  hun.     So
the  apostles  are  assured  by  Christ  that  they
should  not  only  be  able  to  wither  a  tree
with  a  word,  but  should  accomplish  far
more  difBoult  undertakings.    This  which  is
done  to  the  flg  tree  (t^  t^s  <ruK7jt);   as,
"  what   was  befallen   to  them  that  were
posBea<!edwithdevil8(rjiTiSvSai|UO)'i^o;u^i'«y)"
(oh.  Tiii.  83).    The  promise  may  intimate
that  it  was  to  be  through  the  preaching  of
the  apostles,  and  the  Jews'  rejection  of  ^the
salvation  offered  by  them,  that  the  judgment
should  fall  on  the  chosen  people.   Thus  they
would  do  what  was  done  to  the  fig  tree.
And  in  the  following  words  we  may  see  a
prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  the  mountain
of  paganism.     Or  it  may  mean  that  theo-
cratic Judaism  must  be  cast  into  the  sea
of  nations  before  the    Church  of  Christ
should  reach  its  full  development  (Lange).
This  mountain.     As  he  speaks,  he  points
to  the  Mount  of  Olivet,  on  which   they
were   standing,  or  to  Moriah  crowned   by
the  glorious  temple.    Be  thou  removed ;  be
thou  taken  up ;  &pBi]Ti,  not  the  same  word  as
in  ch.  xvii.  20    The  sea.   The  Mediterranean
(See  a  similar  promise,  Luke  xvii.  6).    It
shall  he  done.    It  was  not  likely  that  any
such  material  miracle   would  literally  be
needed,  and  no  one  would   ever  pray  for
such  a  sign;  but  the  expression  is  hyper-
bolically  used  to  denote  the  performance  of
things  most  difSoult  and   apparently  im-
possible (see  Zeoh.  iv.  7 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  2).

Yer.  22. — All  things.  The  promise  is  ex-
tended beyond  the  sphere  of  extraordinary
miracles.  In  prayer;  iy  rp  Trpoirevx^'-  t'n
ihe  prayer ;  or,  in  your  prayer.  The  use  of
the  article  may  point  to  the  prayer  given  by
our  Lord  to  his  disciples,  or  to  some  definite
form  used  from  the  earliest  times  in  public
worship  (comp.  Acta  i.  11;  Bom.  xii.  12;
1  Cor.  vii.  5 ;  Col.  iv.  2).  Believing,  ye  shall
receive.  The  condition  for  the  success  of
prayer  is  stringent.  A  man  must  liave  no
latent  doubt  in  his  heart ;  be  must  not  de-
bate whether  the  thing  desired  can  be  done
or  not;  he  must  have  absolute  trust  in  the
power  and  good  will  of  God ;  and  he  must
believe  that  "  what  hesaitltcometh  to  pass"
(Mark  xi.  23).  The  faith  required  is  the
assurance  of  things  hoped  for,  such  as  gives
substance  and  being  to  them  while  yet  out
of  sight.  The  words  bad  their  special
application  to  the  apostles,  instructing  them


that  they  were  not  to  expect  to  be  able,  like
their  Master,  to  work  the  wonders  needed
for  the  confirmation  of  the  gospel  by  their
own  power.  Such  effects  could  be  achieved
only  by  prayer  and  faith.  (On  the  general
promiue  to  faithful  prayer,  see  oh.  vii.  7 — 1 1.)

Ver.  23— oh.  xxii.  li.— Our  Lord'i
authority  questioned:  lie  replies  by  uttering
three  parable*.  (Mark  xi.  27 — xii.  12 ;
Lukexz.  1— 18.)

Vera.  23 — 27. — First  attaeic,  re  'erring  to
his  late  actions ;  and  Chrisfi  answer.

Ver.  23. — ^When  he  was  come  into  the
temple.      The  conversation  recorded  here
belongs  to  the  Tuesday  of  the  Holy  Week,
and  took  place  in  the  courts  of  the  temple,
at  this  time  filled  with  pilgrima  from  all
parta  of  the  world,  who  hung  upon  Ohrist'a
worda,  and  beheld  his  doings  with  wonder
and  awe.    This  sight  roused  to  fury  the
envy  and  anger  of  the  authoritiea,  and  they
sent  forth  sections  of  their  cleverest  men  to
unilermine  hia  authority  in  the  eyes  of  the
people,  or  to  force  from  him  statements  on
which  they  might  found  criminal  accusation
against  him.     The  chief  priests  and  the
elders  of  the  people.    According  to  the  other
evangeliate,  there  were  alao  scribes,  teachers
of  the  Law,  united  with  them  in  this  deputa-
tion, which  thus  comprised  all  the  elements
of  the  Sanhedrin.    This  seems  to  have  been
the  first  time  that  the  council  took  formal
notice  of  Jesus'  claims  and  actions,  and  de-
manded from  him  personally  an  account  of
himself.    They  had  been  quick  enough  in
inquiring  into    the    Baptist's    credentials,
when  he  suddenly  appeared  on  the  banks  of
Jordan  (see  John  i.  19,  etc.) ;  but  they  had
studiously,  tiU  quite  lately,  avoided  any
regular  investigation  of  the  pretensions  of
Jesus.    In  the  face  of  late  proceedings,  this
could  no  longer  be  delayed.    A  crisis  had
arrived;  their  own  peculiar  province  was
publicly    invaded,    and    their    authority
attacked ;  the  opponent  must  be  withatood
by  t^e  action  of  the  constituted  court    As
he  was  teaching.     Jesus  did  not  confine
himself  to  beneficent  acta ;  he  used  the  op-
portunity of  the  gathering  of  crowds  around
him  to  preach  unto  them  the  gospel  (Luke
XX.  1),  to  teach  truths  which  came  with
double  force  from  One  who  had  done  such
marvellous    things.      By    what    authority
doest  thou  these  things  \    They  refer  to  the
triumphal    entry,    the    reception    of    the
homage  offered,  the  healing  of  the  blind  and
lame,  the  teaching  as  with  the  authority  of
a  rabbi,  and  especially  to  the  cleansing  of
the  temple.    No  one  could  presume  to  teach
witliout  a  proper  commission:  where  was
his  authorization  ?   They  were  the  guardians
and  rulers  of  the  temple-  what  right  had  he


OH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ   TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


321


to  interfere  with  their  management,  and
to  use  the  sacred  precincts  for  his  own
purposes?  These  and  such  like  questions
were  iu  their  mind  when  they  addressed
him  thus.  Wilfully  ignoring  the  many
proofs  they  had  of  (Jhrist's  Divine  mission
(which  one  of  them,  Nicodemus,  had  long
before  been  constrained  to  own,  John  iii.  2),
they  raised  the  question  now  as  a  novel  and
unanswered  one.  Who  gave  thee  this
authority  J  They  resolve  the  general  inquiry
into  the  personal  one — Who  was  it  that  coii-
foired  upon  you  this  authority  which  you
presume  to  exercise  7  Was  it  some  earthly
ruler,  or  was  It  God  himself?  Perhaps  they
mean  to  insinuate  that  Satan  was  the  master
whose  power  he  wielded — an  accusation
already  often  made.  They  thought  thus
to  place  Christ  in  an  embarrassing  position,
from  which  he  could  not  emerge  without
affording  the  opportunity  which  they  de-
sired. The  trap  was  cleverly  set,  and,  as
they  deemed,  unavoidable.  If  he  was
forced  to  confess  that  he  spoke  and  acted
without  any  proper  authorization,  he  would
be  humiliated  in  the  eyes  of  the  people,  and
might  be  officially  silenced  by  the  strong
hand.  If  he  asserted  himself  to  be  the
Messiah  and  the  bearer  of  a  Divine  com-
mission, they  would  at  once  bring  against
him  a  charge  of  blasphemy  (ch.  xxvi.  65).

Ver.  24. — I  also  TvUi  ask  yon  one  thing ;
\iyov  iva :  one  word,  quettion,  Jesus  does
not  reply  direotly  to  their  insidious  demand.
He  might  have  asserted  his  Divine  mission,
and  appealed  to  his  miracles  in  confirmation
of  such  claim,  which  would  have  beeu  in
stilct  conformity  with  the  old-established
rule  for  discrimiiiatiiig  false  and  true
prophets  (see  Dent,  xviii.  22;  Jer.  xxviii.
9) ;  but  he  knew  too  well  their  scepticism
and  malice  and  inveterate  prejudice  to  lay
stress  on  this  allegation  at  the  present
moment.  BHfore  he  safisfied  their  inquiry,
he  must  have  their  opinion  concerning  one
whom  they  had  received  as  a  prophet  a  few
years  ago,  and  whose  memory  was  still  held
iu  the  highest  jeepect,  John  the  Baptist.
The  manner  in  which  they  regarded  him  and
his  testimony  would  enable  them  to  answer
their  own  interrogation.

Ver.  25. — The  baptism  of  John  (rhfiiirTtiriia
rh  'laivvov).  By  "  the  baptism  which  was
of  John  "  Christ  means  his  whole  ministry,
dootrine, preaching,  etc.;  as  by  circumcision
is  implied  the  whole  Mosaic  Law,  and  the
doctrine  of  the  cross  comprises  all  the
teaching  of  the  gospel,  the  chief  charac-
teristic connoting  all  particulars.  From
heaven,  or  of  men?  Did  they  regard
John  as  one  inspired  and  commissioned  by
God,  or  as  a  fanatic  and  impostor,  who  was
self-sent  and  had  received  no  external
authorization  ?    Now,  two  facts  were  plain

MATTHEW — n.


and  eonid  not  be  denied.  The  rulers  and
the  people  with  them  had  allowed  John  to
be  a  prophet,  and  had  never  questioned  his
claims  hitherto.  This  wag  one  fact;  the
other  was  that  John  had  borne  unmistakable
evidence  to  Christ.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of
Godl"  etc.  (John  i.  32—86),  he  bad  said.
He  came  and  asserted  that  he  came  as
Christ's  forerunner ;  his  mission  was  to  pro
pai  e  Christ's  way,  and  had  no  meaning  or
intention  but  this.  Here  was  a  dilemma.
They  had  asked  for  Jesus'  credentials ;  the
prophet,  whose  mission  they  had  virtually
endorsed  testified  that  Jesus  was  the
Messiah ;  if  they  believed  that  John  spoke
by  inspiration,  they  must  accept  Christ ;  if
now  they  discredited  John,  they  would
stultify  themselves  and  endanger  their  in-
fluence with  the  people.  Tkey  reasoned
with  themselves  (rap'  eavrois).  The  some-
what unusual  introduction  of  this  preposition
instead  of  the  more  common  ir  implies  that
the  reflection  was  not  couflned  to  their  own
breast,  but  passed  in  consultation  from  one
to  another.  They  saw  the  difficulty,  and
deliberated  how  they  could  meet  it  without
compromising  themselves,  seeking,  not  truth,
but  evasion.  Why  did  ye  not  then  (Siari
oSi/ :  why  tlien  did  ye  not)  believe  him  1  i.e.
when  he  bore  such  plain  testimony  to  me.
This  appeal  could  be  silenced  only  by  deny-
ipg  John's  mission,  or  asserting  that  he  was
mistaken  in  what  he  said.

Ver.  26. — We  fear  the  people.  They  dared
not,  as  they  would  gladly  have  done,  affirm
that  John  was  a  false  prophet  and  impostor ;
for  then,  as  according  to  St.  Luke  they
said,"  All  the  people  will  stone  us."  Public
opinion  was  too  strong  for  them.  Whatever
view  they  really  took  of  John's  position,
they  were  forced,  for  the  sake  of  retaining
popularity,  to  uphold  its  Divine  character.
AH  hold  John  as  a  prophet.  Even  Herod,
for  the  same  reason,  long  hesitated  to  put
the  Baptist  to  death  (ch.  xiv.  5) ;  and  many
of  the  Jews  believed  that  Herod'i  defeat  by
Aretas  was  a  judgment  upon  him  for  this
murder  (Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xviii.  5.  2) ;  comp.
Luke  vii.  29,  which  shows  how  extensive  was
the  influence  of  this  holy  teacher,  who  indeed
did  no  miracle,  but  persuaded  men  by  pure
doctrine,  holy  life,  genuine  love  of  souls,
courageous  reproof  of  sin  wherever  found.
Others  had  drawn  the  very  inference  which
Christ  now  demanded  (see  John  x.  11,  42).

Ver.  27. — We  cannot  tell ;  oiw  oiSapLfv :  we
know  not ;  Vulgate,  nesoinmt.  The  Autho-
rized Version  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  be  in-
tended to  give  a  false  emphasis  to  "  tell "
in  Christ's  answer ;  but  our  translators  often
render  the  verb  olfSa  in  this  way  (see  John
iii.  8;  viii.  14 ;  xvi  18 ;  2  Cor.  xil.  2).  The
questioners  oould  find  no  way  out  of  the
dilemma  in  which  Christ's  unerring  wisdom


322


THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1—46.


Iiad  placed  them.  Their  evasiTe  answer  was
a  confession  of  defeat,  and  that  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  gaping  crowd  who  stood  around
listening  to  the  conversation.  They  bad
every  opportunity  of  judging  the  character
of  John's  mission  and  that  of  Christ ;  it  was
their  duty  to  form  an  opinion  and  to  pro-
nounce a  verdict  on  such  claims ;  and  yet
they,  the  leaders  and  teachers  of  Israel,  for
fear  of  compromising  themselves,  evade  the
obligation,  refuse  to  solve  or  even  to  enter-
tain the  question,  and,  like  a  modem
agnostic,  content  themselves  with  a  pro-
fession of  ignorance.  Many  people,  to  avoid
looking  a  disagreeable  truth  in  the  face,  re-
spond to  all  appeals  with  the  stereotyped
phrase,  "  We  cannot  tell."  P.  M.  appositely
quotes  the  comment  of  Donatus  on  Terent.,
'Eunuch.,'  T.  4,  31,  "Perturbatur  Par-
meno;  neo  negare  potuit,  nee  consentire
volebat;  sed  quasi  defensionis  loco  dixit,
Neteio."  And  he  said  unto  them ;  i^  avrots
Ka\  air6s :  he  alio  said  unto  them.  The  Lord
answers  the  thought  which  had  dictated
their  words  to  him.  If  either  tell  I  yon,  etc.
With  such  double-minded  men,  who  could
give  no  clear  decision  concerning  the  mission
of  such  a  one  as  John  the  Baptist,  it  would
be  mere  waste  of  words  to  ar.e;ue  further.
They  would  not  accept  Ms  testimony,  and
recognizing  their  malice  and  perversity,  he
declined  to  instruct  them  further.  "  Christ
show*,"  says  Jerome,  "  that  they  knew  and
were  unwilling  to  answer ;  and  that  lie  knew,
but  held  his  peace,  because  they  refused  to
utter  what  they  well  knew."

Yen.  28 — 32. — The  parable  (^  the  two  loni.
(Peouliar  to  St.  Matthew.)

Ver.  28. — But  what  think  ye  1  A  formula
connecting  what  follows  with  what  has  pre-
ceded, and  makiug  the  hearers  themselves
the  judges.  By  this  and  the  succeeding
parables,  J'esus  shows  his  interlocutors  their
true  guilty  position  and  the  punishment  that
awaited  them.  He  himself  explains  the
present  parable  in  reference  to  his  liearers,
though,  of  course,  it  has,  and  is  meant  to
have,  a  much  wider  application.  A  certain
man  (Jivepairos,  a  man)  had  two  sons.  The
"  man  "  represents  God  ;  the  "  two  sons "
symbolize  two  classes  of  Jews — ^the  Pharisees,
with  their  followers  and  imitators ;  and  the
lawless  and  sinful,  who  made  no  preteuce  of
religion.  The  former  are  those  who  profess
to  keep  the  Law  strictly,  to  the  very  letter,
though  they  care  nothing  for  its  spirit,  aud
virtually  divorce  religion  from  morality.
The  latter  are  careless  and  profane  persons,
whom  the  Lord  calls  "publicans  and
harlots  "  (ver.  31).  The  first.  Westoott  and
Hort,  relying  on  no  very  weighty  authority,
reverse  the  order  of  the  sons'  iinswers,  alter-
ing ver,  81  in  agreement  with  this  arrange-


ment. Christ's  reply  countenances  the
received  text,  setting  the  reijentant  before
the  professing  son.  It  is  a  matter  of  small
importance  (see  Tischendorf,  in  loo.),  "  The
first  son  "here  typifies  the  evil  and  immoral
among  the  Jewish  people.  6o,  work  to-day.
Two  emphatic  imperatives.  Immediate
obedience  is  required.  "  To-day,  if  ye  will
hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts"
(Ps.  xov.  7, 8).  God  called  his  sons  to  serve
in  his  vineyard — the  Chui^h.  He  called
them  by  the  prophets,  and  more  especially
by  John  the  Baptist,  to  turn  from  evil  ways,
and  to  do  works  meet  tor  repentance  (ch.  iiL
8).  Christ  gives  two  examples,  showing
how  this  call  was  received.

Ver.  29. — I  will  not.  The  answer  is  rude,
curt,  and  disrespectful,  such  a  one  as  would
naturally  issue  from  the  lips  of  a  person  who
was  selfishly  wrapped  in  his  own  pleasures,
and  cared  nothing  for  the  Law  of  God,  the
claims  of  relationship,  the  decencies  of
society.  Bepented,  and  went ;  i.e.  into  the
vineyard  to  work.  The  worst  sinners,  when
converted,  often  make  great  saints.  There
is  more  hope  of  their  repentance  than  of  the
self-righteous  or  hypocrites,  who  profess  the
form  of  religion  without  the  reality,  and  in
their  own  view  need  no  repentance.

Ver.  30. — The  second.  He  typifies  the
Pharisees,  the  scrupulous  observers  of  out-
ward fonn,  while  neglectful  of  the  weightier
matters — judgment,  mercy,  and  faith  (ch.
xxiii.  23).  I  go,  sir,  '£711;,  xipte :  Eo,  domine.
This  son  is  outwardly  respectful  and  duti-
ful ;  his  answer  is  in  marked  contrast  tu  the
rough  "  I  will  not "  of  his  brother.  He  pro-
fesses zeal  for  the  Law,  aud  ready  obedience.
And  went  not.  Such  men  did  no  real  work
for  God,  honouring  him  with  their  lips  aud
outward  observances,  while  their  heart  was
far  from  him,  and  their  morality  was  un-
principled and  impure.

Ver.  31.— Whether  of  them  (the)  twain  1
Christ  forces  from  the  unwilling  hearers  an
answer  which,  at  the  moment,  they  do  not
see  will  condemn  tliemselves.  Unaccus-
tomed to  be  criticized  and  put  to  the  ques-
tion, wrapped  in  a  self-complacent  righteous-
ness, which  was  generally  undisturbed,  they
missed  the  bearing  of  the  parable  on  their
own  case,  and  answered  without  hesitation,
as  any  unprejudiced  person  would  have
decided.  The  first;  i.e.  the  son  who  first
refused,  but  afterwards  repented  and  went.
Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Jesus  drives  the  moral
home  to  the  hearts  of  these  hypocrites.
The  publicans  and  the  harlots.  He  specifies
these  excommunicated  sinners  as  examples  of
those  represented  by  the  iirst  son.  Go  into
the  kingdom  of  God  before  you ;  itpodyov<ri,v
iiitts  :  are  preceding  you.  This  was  the  fact
which  Jesus  saw  and  declared.  He  doei
not  out  off  all  hope  that  the  Phariseas  might


OH.  ml— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


823


follow,  if  they  willed  to  do  so;  he  only
showB  that  they  have  lost  the  position  which
tliey  ought  to  have  occupied,  aud  that  those
whom  they  despised  and  spurned  have
accepted  the  offered  salvation,  and  shall
have  their  reward.  We  must  remark  that
the  Lord  has  no  censure  for  those  who  some-
time were  disobedient,  but  afterwards  re-
pented; his  rebuke  falls  on  the  professors
aud  self-righteous,  who  ought  to  have  been
leaders  and  guides,  and  were  in  truth  im-
pious and  ineligiouB.

Ver.  32.— For  John  came  unto  you.    This
gives  the  reason    for  Christ's   assertion  at
the  end  of  the  last  verse.    John  came  with
a  special  call  to  the  rulers  of  the  people,
and  they  made  some  show  of  interest,  by
sending  a  deputation  to  demand  his   cre-
dentials, and  by  coming  to  his  baptism ;  but
that  was  all.    They  did  not  alter  their  lives
or   change    their   faulty  opinions   at    his
preaching,  though  they  "were  willing  for  a
season  to  rejoice  in  his  light "  (John  v.  35)
In  the  way  of  righteousntss.     In  that  path
of  strict  obedience  to   law,  and  of   ascetic
holiness,  which  you   profess   to  regard   so
highly.     If   they  had    followed   the  path
which  John   indicated,   they  would   have
attained   to  righteousness    and    salvation.
John  preached  Christ  who  is  "  the  Way  "
(John  xiv.  6).    (For  "way,"  meaning  doc-
rine,  religious  tenet  and  practice,  see  ch.
xxii.  16;  Acts  ix.  2;  xix.  9,  23;  2  Pet.  ii.
21.)     Ye  believed  him  not,  to  any  prac-
tical   purpose,   even    as   it    is    said    else-
where (Luke  vii.  30),  "  The  Pharisees  and
the  lawyers  lojeoted  for   themselves    the
counsel  of  God,  not  having  been  baptized  of
him."    Those  who  did  receive  his  baptism
were   the  exception;    the  great   majority
stood  aloof.     Believed  him.    Though  these
sinners  may  have  first  rejected  him,  yet  his
preaching  softened  their   hearts ;   they  re-
pented, confessed  their  sins,  and  were  bap-
tized   (see     for  examples,    Luke    iii.   10,
etc. ;  vii.  29).    This  was  another  call  to  the
Pharisees  to  go  and  do  likewise.    When  ye
had  seen  it  j  i.e.  the  fruits  of  true  repent-
ance in  these  sinners,  which  conversion  was
indeed  a  loud  appeal  to  the  rulers  to  con-
sider their  own  ways,  and  to  bow  to  God's
Rand.     Bepented  not  (see  ver.  29).    They
profited  not  by  this  miracle  of  grace.    That
ye  might  believe  him.     The  end  and  result
of  repentance  would  be  to  believe  in  John's
mis.sion,    and    to   attend   to   his   teaching.
Christ  offers  the  above  explanation  of  the
parable  (vers.  31,  32)  in  view  of  the  purpose
for  which  he  utterc!d  it.    It  has  been,  aud
may  be,  taken  in  different  senses,   aud  in
wider  application.     "What  is  set  forth  in
individual  cases  is  but  a  sample  of  what
takes  place  in  whole  classes  of  persons,  and
even   natious"  (I.  William%\     Many  ex-


positors consider  the  two  sons  to  represent
Gentiles  aud  Jews ;  the  former  making  no
profession  of  serving  God,  and  yet  in  time
being  converted  and  turning  to  him;  the
latter  making  much  outward  show  of
obedience,  yet  in  reality  denying  him  and
rejecting  salvation.  It  is  obvious  that  such
explanation  is  allowable,  and  coincides  with
the  letter  of  the  parable ;  but  it  does  not
satisfy  the  context,  and  fails  in  not  answer-
ing to  Christ's  intention  in  uttering  this
similitude.  Others  see  herein  a  picture  of
what  happens  in  Christian  lands,  and  is  the
experience  of  every  Christian  minister — ^how
the  irreligious  and  apparently  irreclaimable
are  by  God's  grace  brought  to  repentance
unto  life;  how  the  seemingly  pious  often
make  much  show,  but  fall  away,  or  bring
no  fruit  unto  perfection.  And  as  the  parable
involves  a  general  principle,  so  it  may  be
applied  universally  to  those  who  make  great
professions  of  religion,  and  are  for  a  time
full  of  good  resolutions,  but  in  practice  fall
very  short;  and  to  those  who  have  been  the
slaves  of  lust,  covetousness,  or  some  other
wickedness,  but  have  been  recovered  from
the  snares  of  the  devil,  and  have  learned  to
lead  a  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life.

Vers.  33 — 46. — Parable  of  tie  vineyard  let
out  to  husbandmen.  (Markxii.1 — 12;  Luke
IX.  9—19.)

Ver.  33. — Hear  another  parable.  The
domineering  and  lately  imperious  party  are
reduced  to  the  position  of  pupils ;  they  have
to  listen  to  teaching,  not  to  give  it ;  to  answer,
not  to  put  questions.  This  parable  sets  forth,
under  the  guise  of  history,  the  Pharisaical
party  in  its  official  character,  and  as  the
representative  of  the  nation.  It  also  de-
nounces the  punishment  that  surely  awaited
these  rejecters  of  the  offered  salvation ;  thus
exemplifying  the  teaching  of  the  withered
fig  tree  (vers.  17 — 20).  As  applicable  to
the  Jewish  nation  generally,  it  represents
the  long-suffering  of  God  and  the  various
means  which,  in  the  course  of  their  history,
he  had  used  to  urge  them  to  do  their  duty
as  his  servants ;  and  it  ends  with  a  prophecy
of  the  coming  events,  and  the  terrible  issue
of  impenitence.  We  must  take  the  parable
as  partly  retrospective,  and  partly  predictive.
There  was  a  certain  householder;  a  man
(6,vBpiaTTos)  that  was  an  householder.  Christ
in  his  parables  often,  as  here,  introduces
God  in  bis  dealings  with  mankind  as  a  man.
His  house  is  the  house  of  Israel  in  particular,
and  in  general  the  whole  human  family.
A  vineyard.  God's  kingdom  upon  earth,
and  particularly  the  Jewish  Church.  The
figure  is  common  throughout  Scripture  (see
on  ch.  XX.  1).  It  was  planted  when  God
gave  Israel  a  law,and  put  them  in  possession
of  the  proQiiEed  land.     The  parable  itself  is


324


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxl  1—46.


founded  on  Tea.  r.  1 — 7,  where,  however,  the
vineyard  is  tended  by  the  Lord  himself,
not  by  husbandmen,  and  it  bears  wild
grapes,  not  good  grapes.  By  these  differ-
enoea  diiferent  deyelopments  of  declension
are  indicated.  In  the  earlier  times  it  was
the  nation  that  apostatized,  fell  into  idolatry
and  rebellion  against  God,  the  theocratloal
Head  of  their  race  and  polity.  In  later
days  it  is  the  teachers,  rabbis,  priests,  false
prophets,  who  neglect  the  paths  of  righteous-
ness, and  lead  people  astray.  In  the  parable
these  last  come  into  painful  prominence  as
criminally  guilty  of  opposing  God's  mes-
sengers. Hedged  it  round;  pu<  a  hedge
around  it.  Tlie  fence  would  be  a  stone  wall
— a  necessary  defence  against  the  incursions
of  wild  animals.  Tiiis  fence  has  been  re-
garded in  two  senses — first,  as  referring  to
the  physical  peculiarities  of  the  position  of
the  Holy  Land,  separated  from  alien  nationi
by  deserts,  seas,  rivers,  and  so  isolated  from
evil  contagion ;  second,  as  intimating  the
peculiar  laws  and  minute  restrictions  of  the
Jewish  polity,  which  differentiated  Judaism
from  all  other  systems  of  religion,  and  tended
to  preserve  purity  and  incorruption.  Pro-
bably the  "hedge  "  is  meant  to  adumbrate
both  senses.  Many,  however,  seeinit  th  e
protection  of  angels,  or  the  righteousness  of
saints,  which  seem  hardly  to  be  sufSciently
precise  for  the  context.  Digged  a  winepress.
The  phrase  refers,  not  to  the  ordinary  wooden
troughs  or  vats  which  were  used  for  the
purpose  of  expressing  and  receiving  the
juice  of  the  grapes,  but  to  such  as  were  cut
in  the  rook,  and  were  common  in  all  parts
of  the  country.  Bemains  of  these  recep-
tacles meet  the  traveller  everywhere  on  the
hill-slopes  of  Judtea,  and  notably  in  the
valleys  of  Carmel.  The  winepress  is  taken
to  signify  the  prophetic  spirit,  the  temple
services,  or  all  things  that  typified  the  sacri-
fice and  death  of  Christ.  A  tower ;  for  the
purpose  of  watching  and  guarding  the  vine-
yard. This  may  represent  the  temple  itself,
or  the  civil  power.  Whatever  interpretation
may  be  put  upon  the  various  details,  which,
indeed,  should  not  be  unduly  pressed,  the
general  notion  is  that  every  care  was  taken
of  the  Lord's  inheritance,  nothing  was
wanting  for  its  convenience  and  security.
Let  it  out  to  husbandmen.  This  is  a  new
feature  introduced  into  Isaiah's  parable.
Instead  of  paying  an  annual  sum  of  money
to  the  proprietor,  these  vine-dresaers  payed
in  kind,  furnishing  a  stipulated  amount  of
fruit  or  wine  as  the  hire  of  the  vineyard.
We  have  a  lease  on  the  former  terms  in  Cant.
viii.  11,  where  the  keepers  have  "  to  bring
a  thousand  pieces  of  silver  for  the  fruit."
The  husbandmon  are  the  children  of  Israel,
who  had  to  do  their  part  in  the  Cliuroh,  and
•how  £niita  of  piety  and  devotion.    Went


intoa&rooantry;  ImeHniiffey:  wentahroad.
In  the  parabolic  sense,  God  vrithdrew  for  a
time  the  sensible  tokens  of  his  presence,  no
longer  manifested  himself  as  at  Sinai,  and
in  the  cloud  and  pillar  of  fire.  "  Innuitur
tempuB  divinsa  taoitumitatis,  nbi  homines
agunt  pro  arbitrio  "  (Bengel).  God's  long-
suffering  gives  time  of  probation.

Ver.  34.— When  the  time  of  the  fmit  drew
near.  The  vintage  season,  when  the  rent,
whether  in  money  or  kind,  became  due.  In
the  Jewish  history  no  particular  time  seems
to  be  signified,  but  rather  such  periods  or
crises  which  forced  God's  claims  upon  men's
notice,  and  made  them  consider  what  fruits
they  had  to  show  for  all  the  Lord's  care,
how  they  had  lived  after  receiving  the  Law.
Such  times  were  tbe  ages  of  Samuel,  Elijah,
the  great  prophets,  tbe  Maccabees,  and  John
the  Baptist.  His  servants.  The  prophets,
good  kings,  priests,  and  governors.  "  I  have
sent  unto  you  all  my  servants  the  prophets,
rising  up  early  and  sending  them,  saying,
Betum  ye  now  every  man  from  his  evil  way,
and  amend  your  doings"  (Jer.  xxxv.  15).
To  reoeive  the  fmlts  of  it  (robt  Ku/ntoit
abrov);  or,  hiifruiti,  as  rent.

Ver.  35. — Took  Ms  servant*.  The  ex-
action of  rent  in  kind  has  always  been  a
fruitful  source  of  dispute,  fraud,  and  diaoon-
tofit.  In  the  Jewish  Church  God's  mes-
sengers had  been  ill  treated  and  put  to
death  (see  oh.  xiiii.  84—37).  "Which  of
the  prophets  have  not  your  fathers  perse-
cuted ?  "  cried  St.  Stephen;  "  and  they  have
slain  them  which  showed  before  the  coming
of  the  Just  One;  of  whom  ye  have  been
the  betrayers  and  murderers"  (Acts  vii.
52).  Beat . .  .  killed  ,  .  .  stoned.  A  climax
of  iniquity  and  guilt.  The  statement  ii
probably  meant  to  be  general ;  some,  how-
ever, endeavour  to  individualize  it,  referring
the  "beating"  to  the  treatment  of  Jeremiah
(Jer.  XI.  1, 2),  "  killing  "  to  Isaiah  (Heb.  xi.
37,  "sawn  asunder"),  "stoning"  to  Zeoha-
riali  son  of  Jehoiada  (2  Ohron.  xxiv.  20,  21).
Doubtless,  the  incidents  in  such  persecutions
were  often  repeated.

Ver.  36.— Other  servants.  God's  loving-
kindness  was  not  wearied  out  with  the
hnsbandmen's  cruelty  and  violence.  Each
step  of  their  wickedness  and  obstinacy  was
met  with  renewed  mercy,  with  fresh  calls
to  repentance.  More  (irKfioyca).  More  in
number.  In  the  latter  days  the  number  of
God's  messengers  was  much  greater  than
in  earlier  times ;  so  it  is  unnecessary  to  take
irKfiovas  in  the  sense  of  "  more  honourable,"
"  of  higher  dignity,"  though  snoh  interpre-
tation IS  supported  by  its  use  in  oh.  vi.  25 ;
Mark  xii.  88 ;  Heb.  xi.  4.  Likewise.  They
resisted  these  new  envoys  as  they  h»d  re-
sisted those  first  sent,  treating  them  with
equal  ornelt;  and  violence.


OH.  m.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


826


Ver.  37. — last  of  all;  So-Tcpav:  afterwardt,
later  on.  The  parable  now  allegorizes  the
near  present,  and  future,  in  snoh  a  way  as
for  the  moment  to  conceal  its  bearing,
and  to  lead  the  hearers  to  pronounce  their
own  condemnation.  His  son.  Even  Jesus
Christ,  who  was  now  among  them,  incarnate,
teaching,  and  demanding  of  them  fruits  of
righteousness.  Here  was  the  authorization
which  they  bad  required  (ver.  23).  God
sent  his  Bon.  They  will  reverence  my  Son,
God  condescends  to  speak  in  human  lan-
guage, as  ho  [ling  for  a  good  result  from
thid  last  effort  for  man's  salvation.  He,  aa
it  were,  puts  aside  his  foreknowledge,  and
gives  scope  to  man's  free-will.  Though  the
sad  issue  is  known  to  him,  he  often  acts
towards  men  as  if  he  had  liope  that  they
would  still  use  the  occasion  profitably.  In
the  present  case,  whereas  tlie  immediate
result  of  the  last  measure  was  disastrous,
the  expectation  was  ultimately  realized  in
the  couversionof  many  Jews  to  Christianity,
which  led  to  the  bringing  of  all  nations  to
the  obedience  of  the  faith.

Ver.  38. — ^When  the  husbandmen,  saw  the
Son,  As  soon  as  they  recognized  this  new
and  important  messenger.  This  is  the  great
element  in  the  guilt  of  his  rejection.  They
might  have  had  the  Eame  consciousness  of
ChSist's  Divine  mission  as  Nioodemus  (John
iii.  2),  having  possessed  the  same  opportu-
nities of  judging.  Ancient  prophecy,  the
signs  of  the  times,  the  miracles  and  teaching
of  Christ,  the  testimony  of  the  Baptist,
pointed  to  one  evident  conclusion ;  evidence
had  been  accumulating  on  all  sides.  A
latent  feeling  had  grown  up  that  he  was
the  Messiah  (see  John  li.  49^-52),  and  it
was  obstinate  prejudice  and  perversity  alone
that  prevented  his  open  acknowledgment.
"If  I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,"
said  Christ,  "tbey  had  not  had  sin;  but
now  they  have  no  cloke  for  their  sin  "  (John
XV.  22;  comp.  John  ix.  41).  They  said
among  themselves.  They  plotted  his  destruc-
tion (see  John  zi.  53).  We  are  reminded  of
the  conspiracy  against  Joseph,  his  father's
well-belowed  son  (Gen.  xxxvii.  20).  Let  us
seize  on  (KOToirxai/iEi',  take  potsesiion  of,
keep  as  our  own)  his  inheritance.  It  would
have  been  a  wild  and  ignorant  scheme  of
the  husbandmen  to  consider  that  by  murder-
ring  the  heir  they  could  obtain  and  hold
possession  of  the  vineyard.  Here  the  parable
bursts  from  the  allegorical  form,  and  becomes
history  and  prophecy.  In  fact,  the  possession
which  the  rulers  coveted  was  supremacy
over  the  minds  and  consciences  of  men;
they  wished  to  lord  it  over  God's  heritage ;
to  retain  their  rights  and  prerogatives  in  the
present  system.  This  amiiition  Christ's
teaching  and  action  entirely  overthrew.
They  felt  no  security  in  their  possession  of


authority  while  he  was  present  and  working
in  their  midst.  Were  he  removed,  their
position  would  be  safe,  their  claims  undis-
puted. Hence  their  conspiracy  and  its
result — a  result  very  far  from  what  they
expected.  They  had  their  own  way,  but
their  gain  was  ruin.  Says  St.  Augustine,
"  Ut  possiderent,  oociderunt ;  et  quia  occi-
derunt,  perdiderunt."

Ver.  39. — Cast  him  out  of  the  vineyard,
and  slew  him.  This  is  prophecy,  and  alludes
to  a  particular  circumstance  utteuding  the
death  of  Christ,  viz.  that  he  suffered  with-
out the  city  Jerusalem,  Calvary  being  out-
side the  walls  (see  John  xix.  17,  and  the
parallel  passages  in  the  other  evangelists,
and  especially  Heb.  liii.  11,  12,  where  it
is  signiiioantly  noted  that  Jesus  "suffered
without  the  gate").  The  words  may  also
contain  a  reference  to  the  fact  that  he  was
excommunicated  and  given  over  to  the
heathen  to  be  judged  and  condemned,  thus
Buffering  not  actually  at  the  hands  of  "  the
husbandmen  "  (comp.  Acts  ii.  23 ;  iv.  27).
Christ,  in  his  Divine  prescience,  speaks  of
his  Passion  and  death  as  already  accom-
plished.

Ver.  40. — When  the  lord  therefore  of  the
vineyard  cometh;  when  therefore  the  lord,
etc.  Christ  asks  his  hearers,  who  are  both
rulers  and  people,  wliat  in  their  opinion  will
be  the  course  taken  by  the  lord  when  he
visits  his  vineyard,  knowing  all  that  has
transpired.  So  Isaiah  (v.  3)  makes  the
people  give  the  verdict:  "And  now,  O  in-
habitants of  Jerusalem,  and  men  of  judab,
judge,  I  pray  you,  betwixt  me  and  my  vine-
yard."

Ver.  41. — They  say  unto  him.  The
Pharisees  probably  made  the  reply,  not  at
the  moment  apprehending  the  sense  of  the
parable.  Or  the  words  were  spoken  by  some
of  the  bystanders,  and  taken  up  and  em-
phatically repeated  by  our  Lord  with  an
unmistakable  application  (ver.  43).  The
conclusion  was  a  necessary  consequence,
and  this  will  account  for  Mark  and  Luke
apparently  making  them  a  part  of  Christ's
speech.  By  their  answer  they  blindly  con-
demn themselves,  as  David  did  at  heaiing
Nathan's  parable  (2  Sam.  xii.  5).  He  will
miserably  (xaKuO  destroy  those  wicked  men
(/caKoiis,  miserable  meri) ;  or,  he  will  evilly
destroy  those  evil  men  ;  Vulgate,  Malos  male
perdet.  He  will  make  their  punishment  equal
their  crime.  The  slaughter  and  mortality
at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  accomplished  this
prediction  to  the  letter.  TTnto  other  husband-
men ;  i.e.  the  Christian  ministry,  which  took
the  place  of  the  Jewish  priests  and  teachers.
As  the  husbandmen  in  the  parable  were
rather  the  rulers  and  rabbis  than  the  nhule
nation  (which,  indeed,  only  followed  their
guides),  BO  these  others  are  not  the  whol«


326  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xil  1-46.


Gentile  world,  but  those  who  sustained  the
iiiinisterial  offices  in  the  Christian  Ohuroh.
Which  (oJVires) ;  of  such  hind  ae,  denoting  a
class  of  servants.  The  clause  is  peculiar  to
Matthew.  The  speakers  did  not  clearly
apprehend  the  bearing  of  this  detail  of  the
parable.  In  their  seasons.  The  times
when  the  various  fruits  are  ripe  and  ready
for  harvesting.  These  would  vary  in  dif-
ferent climates  and  under  differing  oircum-
stanceB;  but  the  good  husbandmen  would
be  always  ready  to  remler  to  their  Lord  the
fruits  of  faith  and  obedience,  at  every  holy
season  and  in  due  proportion.  This  parable,
spoken  originally  of  Israel,  applies,  like  all
such  similitudes,  to  the  Christian  Church
and  to  the  human  soul.  How  God  deals
with  individual  Churches  we  see  in  his
words  to  tlie  seven  Chinches  of  Asia  (EeT.
i. — ^iii.).  Ecclesiastical  history  furnishes
similar  examples  throughout  all  ages.  God
gives  privileges,  and  looks  for  results  worthy
of  these  graces.  He  sends  warnings ;  he
raises  up  apostles,  preachers,  evangelists ;
and  if  a  Church  is  still  unfaithful,  he  takes
away  his  Spirit,  and  lets  it  lapse,  and  gives
its  inheritance  to  others.  In  the  other  case,
the  vineyard  is  the  soul  of  man,  which  he  has
to  cultivate  for  hia  Master's  use.  God  has
hedged  it  round  witli  the  law,  external  and
internal,  given  it  the  ministry  and  sacra-
ments and  the  Scripture,  and  looks  to  it  to
bring  forth  the  fruits  of  obedience,  service,,
worship.  He  sends  times  of  visitation,  teach-
ing, warning ;  he  speaks  to  it  by  secret
inspiration;  he  calls  it  in  loving  tones  to
closer  union.  If  it  hearkons  to  the  call,  it
walks  in  the  way  of  salvation ;  if  it  refuses
to  hear,  it  casts  away  the  hope  of  its  calling,
and  must  share  the  lot  of  Christ's  enemies.
Ver.  42. — Did  ye  never  readl  It  is  as
though  Clirist  said,  "  Yc  have  answered
rightly.  You  profess  to  know  the  Scriptures
well ;  do  you  not,  then,  apprehend  that  Holy
Writ  foretells  that  concerning  Messiah  and
hisenemies  which  you  have  just  announced?"
The  imagery  is  changed,  but  the  subject  is
the  same  as  in  the  preceding  parable.  Tlie
vineyard  is  now  a  building ;  the  husband-
men are  the  builders ;  the  Son  is  the  stone.
In  the  Scriptures.  The  quotation  is  from
Ps.  cxviii.  22, 23 — the  same  psalm  which  was
used  on  the  day  of  triumph  when  Christ  was
saluted  with  cries  of  "  Hosanna  I "  and  wl  i  ich,
as  some  say,  was  first  sung  by  Israel  at  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles  on  the  return  from
Captivity.  The  stone.  This  fignre  was
generally  understood  to  represent  Messiah,
on  whom  depended  the  existence  an4  sup-
port of  tiie  kingdom  of  God.  Many  pro-
phecies contiiining  this  metaphor  wore
applied  to  him  ;  e.g.  Isa.  xxviii.  16 ;  Dan.  ii.
84;  Zech.iii.  9;  so  that  the  Pharisees  could
be  at  no  loss  to  understand  the  allusion,


seeing  that  Jesus  claimed  to  be  that  Stone.
Bejeoted ;  as  being  not  suitable  to  the  build-
ing, or  useless  in  its  construction.  So  the
husbandmen  rejected  the  Son.  The  ignor-
ance and  contempt  of  men  are  overruled  by
the  great  Architect.  The  head  of  the  comer.
The  corner-stone,  which  stands  at  the  base
and  binds  together  two  principal  walls  (see
St.  Paul's  grand  words,  Eph.  ii.  19—22).  We
learn  that  Christ  unites  Jew  and  Gentile  in
one  holy  house  (comp.  I  Pet.  ii.  6,  7).  This
(oSttj),  being  feminine,  is  thought  by  gome
to  refer  to  "  head  of  the  comer  "  (Ke0o^^v
yuplas);  but  it  is  better  to  take  it  as  used  by
a  Hebrew  idiom  for  the  neuter,  and  to  refer
generally  to  what  has  preceded,  viz.  the
settlement  of  the  comer-stone  in  its  destined
position,  which  is  effected  by  the  Lord  him-
self The  ultimate  victory  of  the  rejected
Son  is  thus  distinctly  predicted  (comp.  Acts
iv.  11 ;  Eom.  ix.  33).

Ver.  43. — Therefore  I  saynntoyon.  Having
denounced  the  sin,  Christ  now  enunciates
the  punishment  thereof,  in  continuation  of
his  parable.  Because  ye  slay  the  Son,  reject
the  Comer-stone,  the  vineyard,  i.e.  the  king-
dom of  fiod,  shall  be  taken  bom  you.  Ye  shall
no  longer  be  God's  peculiar  i  eople ;  your
special  privileges  shall  be  taken  away.  A
nation.  The  Christian  Church,  the  spiritual
Israel,  formed  chietiy  from  the  Gentile
peoples  (Acts  xv.  14 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  The
fruits  thereof  (auT^s) ;  ».«.  of  the  kingdom  cf
God,  such  faith,  life,  good  works,  as  become
those  thus  favoured  by  Divine  grace.

Ver.  44.— Christ  proceeds  to  show  the
positive  and  terrible  results  i  if  such  unbelief.
Whosoever  shall  fall  (ireo-ij',  hath  fallen)  on
this  stone  shall  he  broken  (jrvii9\aisei\aerai,
shall  be  shattered  to  pieces).  This  may  refer  to
the  practice  of  executing  the  punishment  of
stoning  by  first  hurling  the  culprit  from  a
raised  platform  on  to  a  rock  or  stone,  and
then  stoning  him  to  death.  The  falling  on
the  stone  has  been  explained  in  more  ways
than  one.  Some  think  that  it  implies  com-
ing to  Christ  in  repentance  and  humility,
with  a  contrite  heart,  which  he  will  not
despise.  But  the  subject  here  is  the  punish-
ment of  the  obdurate.  Others  take  it  to
represent  an  attack  made  by  the  enemies  of
Christ,  who  shall  demolish  themselves  by
such  onslaught.  The  original  will  hardly
allow  this  iuterpretation.  Doubtless  the
allusion  is  to  those  who  found  in  Christ's
low  estate  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  rock  of
offence.  These  suffered  grievous  loss  and
danger  even  in  this  present  time.  The  re-
jection of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  crucified
involves  the  loss  of  spiritual  privileges,  moral
debility,  and  what  is  elsewhere  called  "  the
scattering  abroad  "  (oh.  xii.  30  ;  comp.  Isa.
viii.  14,  15).  On  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it
will  grind  him  to  powder  (Aix/i^o-ei  niritv,  U


OH.  XH.  1-46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  827


iotR  leaUer  him  a$  chaff).  The  persons  heie
epoken  of  ue  not  those  who  are  offended  at
Ohiist's  low  estate;  they  are  such  as  put
themselvea  in  active  opposition  to  him  and
his  kingdom ;  on  them  he  will  fall  in  terrible
vengeance,  and  will  utterly  destroy  them
withoat  hope  of  rcoovery.  The  idea  is  re-
peated from  Dan.  ii.  34,  85,  and  44,  45.
Christ  in  hia  humiliation  is  the  Stone
against  which  men  fall ;  Christ  in  his  glory
and  exaltation  is  the  Stone  which  falls  on
them.

Vor.  45. — Pharisees.  They  have  not  been
specially  mentioned  hitherto,  but  they  formed
the  majority  in  the  Sauhedrin,  and  are  pro-
perly here  named  by  the  evangelist.  He
spake  of  them.  They  coald  not  fail,  especi-
ally after  vei.  43,  to  see  the  drift  of  the
parables ;  their  own  consciences  must  have


made  them  feel  that  they  themselves  were
herein  siguified,  tlieir  motives  and  conduct
fully  discovered.  But,  as  bad  men  always
act,  instead  of  repenting  of  the  evil,  they
are  only  exasperated  against  him  who  de-
tected them,  and  only  desire  the  more  to
wreak  their  vengeance  upon  him.

Ver.  46.— They  feared  the  multitude.  They
did  not  dare  to  lay  violent  hands  on  Jesus
in  the  presence  of  the  excited  crowd,  which
would  have  withstood  any  such  attack  at
this  moment.  A  Prophet  (see  ver.  1 1).  If
they  did  not  recognize  him  as  Messiah,  they
regarded  him  as  one  inspired  by  God,  and
having  a  Divine  mission.  This  accounts  fof
the  joyful  acquiescence  of  the  Pharisaical
party  in  the  offer  of  Judas,  when  he  proposed
to  betray  his  Master  in  the  absence  of  tlie
multitude.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  entry  into  Jerusalem.  I.  The  fulfilment  of  prophkot.  1.
Bethphage.  The  Lord  had  spent  the  sabbath  in  that  holy  home  at  Bethany,  where
he  was  always  a  welcome  Guest,  with  that  family  which  was  now  more  than  ever
devoted  to  his  service,  and  bound  to  him  by  the  ties  of  the  very  deepest  gratitude.  On
the  Sunday  morning  (Palm  Sunday)  he  made  his  solemn  entry  iuto  the  holy  city.  He
set  out  from  Bethany  on  foot ;  but  he  intended  to  enter  Jerusalem  as  the  King  Messiah.
He  had  hitherto  avoided  anything  like  a  public  announcement  of  his  office  and  his
claims.  When  the  multitude  wished  to  "  take  him  by  force  to  make  him  a  King,  he
departed  again  into  a  mountain  himself  alone."  Not  long  ago  he  had  forbidden  his
disciples  to  tell  any  man  that  he  was  the  Christ.  He  had  charged  them  to  tell  no  man
of  the  heavenly  glory  of  the  Transfiguration.  The  earthly  view  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom
was  universal.  The  apostles  themselves,  warned  as  they  had  been  again  and  again  of
its  untruth,  again  and  again  reverted  to  it.  So  strong  was  the  hold  which  it  had  upon
their  minds,  that  even  after  the  awful  scenes  of  the  Passion, "  they  asked  of  him,  saying,
Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ?  "  The  Lord  would  do
nothing  to  sanction  this  vain  expectation.  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  But
now  his  hour  was  come — the  hour  that  he  should  depart  out  of  this  world.  It  was  time
for  him  now  to  make  a  public  assertion  of  his  claims.  That  assertion,  he  knew,  would
lead  to  his  death,  and,  through  his  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension,  to  the  establish-
ment of  his  spiritual  kingdom  over  the  hearts  of  men.  He  was  drawing  near  to  Jeru-
salem. He  was  come  to  Bethphage,  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  He  sent  two  disciples,
bidding  them  fetch  an  ass  and  a  colt  whereon  yet  never  man  sat.  He  described  the  place
minutely.  If  any  man  interfered,  they  were  to  say, "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them."  The
Lord,  the  Lord  of  all ;  all  things  are  his ;  he  claims  them  when  they  are  needed  for  his
service.  The  words  were  simple,  but  they  seem  to  convey  a  great  meaning,  to  imply  far-
reaching  claims.  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them."  The  Saviour  describes  himself  simply
as  the  Lord,  just  as  the  Septuagint  writers  express  the  covenant  name  of  God.  The  words
would  be  understood  as  meaning  that  the  ass  was  wanted  in  some  way  for  God's  service.
The  owners  knew  not  how ;  but  they  saw  the  solemn  procession  passing  by ;  they  saw
the  lowly  majesty  of  Christ,  They  mast  have  knowo  him.  He  had  been  a  frequent
visitor  at  Bethany.  But  a  short  time  ago  he  had  raised  Lazarus  from  the  dead.  Possibly
they  may  have  been  among  the  number  of  his  disciples.  Even  if  not  so,  they  must
have  felt  something  of  the  enthusiasm  and  excited  expectation  which  were  so  widely
diffused.  They  sent  the  ass.  We  must  give  readily  and  cheerfully  when  the  Lord
calls  upon  us ;  we  must  keep  nothing  back  which  he  requires.  "  All  things  come  of
thee,  and  of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee."  2.  Hie  prophecy.  (1)  It  must  be  ful-
filled.  "  All  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  sDoken  by  the  prophet."


328  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  m.  1—46.

The  apostles  were  not  consciously  fulfilling  the  prophecy.  They  understood  not  these
things  at  the  first;  they  did  not  consider  that  they  were  doing  the  things  that  had  beeu
written  of  the  Christ  (John  xii.  16).  They  knew  it  afterwards;  the  Lord  knew  It
now.  The  prophecy  came  through  the  prophet,  but  it  came  from  G-od ;  and  now  God,
the  Author  of  the  prophecy,  brought  about  its  fulfilment.  The  prophecy  announced
the  coming  of  the  Christ  as  E^Dg.  G-od  brought  it  to  pass,  for  that  coming  to  Jerusalem
as  Messiah  the  King  was  the  beginning  of  the  great  series  of  events  by  which  the
rtidemption  of  the  world  was  wrought.  (2)  Its  substance.  It  is  taken  from  the
Prophet  Zecliariah,  but  prefaced  by  a  few  words  from  a  similar  prophecy  In  Isaiah
(Ixii.  11),  "  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of  Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh."  Prophets,
apostles,  evangelists,  all  proclaim  the  advent  of  the  King.  All  his  people  must  swell
that  proclamation,  telling  of  his  presence,  sometimes  with  their  lips,  always  in  their
lives.  "  Bejoice  greatly,"  the  prophet  said  (Zech,  ix.  9).  The  coming  of  Christ  brings
exceeding  great  joy  to  the  Christian  heart.  Those  who  know  that  joy  must  declare  its
sweetness  to  others,  that  their  joy,  too,  may  he  full.  "  Behold;  thy  King  cometh  unto
thee."  The  earthly  Zion  had  not  been  the  usual  dwelling-place  of  the  incarnate  Lord.
Yet  he  cometh  now  to  Zion ;  he  is  the  King  of  Zion,  her  King  from  the  times  of  old.
He  is  our  King  now — King  of  the  Israel  of  God.  He  cometh  to  us — to  each  individual
soul,  as  on  that  first  Palm  Sunday  he  came  to  the  earthly  Zion.  Let  us  receive  him  witli
joy ;  and  oh  1  let  us  take  heed  lest  we  fall  away  like  so  many  of  those  who  then  shouted,
"  Hosanna  to  the  King! "  He  is  meek;  not,  like  earthly  kings,  proud  and  haughty.
He  is  lowly,  bowed  down  by  much  afiBiotion,  a  Man  of  sorrows.  The  Hebrew  word
means  "afflicted,"  "  poor;"  the  Greek  word  expresses  that  meekness  which  is  the  blessed
fruit  of  affliction  borne  in  faith  and  patience.  The  King  is  meek  ;  his  followers  must
learn  of  him.  Pride  and  violence  are  hateful  in  his  sight.  Blessed  are  the  meek ;  for
they  are  like  the  Lord.  He  sat  upon  an  ass.  He  approached  Jerusalem  as  a  King,  but
not  as  one  of  the  kings  of  the  earth ;  in  festal  procession,  but  not  with  pomp  and  mag-
nificence ;  riding,  but  not  as  earthly  kings  would  ride — riding  meekly  on  an  ass.  He
was  a  King,  indeed,  surrounded  with  a  halo  of  sweet  dignity,  and  something  of  unearthly
majesty  that  enforced  reverence  and  repelled  presumptuous  liberties.  But  his  kingdom
was  hot  of  this  world.  The  procession  of  Palm  Sunday  set  forth  both  sides  of  the  truth.
He  was  a  King;  he  claimed  no-earthly  crown.  (3)  Its  fulfilment.  The  two  disciples
obeyed  at  once.  The  owners  of  the  asses  recognized  the  mandate  of  the  Lord.  The
disciples  put  their  clothes  upon  the  colt  whereon  never  man  sat,  and  they  set  the
Lord  thereon.

II.  Thb  peoobsbion.  1.  The  approach  to  Jerusalent,  The  modest  procession  climbed
the  road  that  slopes  up  the  Mount  of  Olives  till,  as  they  passed  the  shoulder  of  the  hill,
Jerusalem  lay  clear  before  them,  the  temple  glittering  in  all  its  glory  of  gold  and
marble.  The  Lord  wept  as  he  gazed  upon  it.  He,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  was  coming  to
the  holy  city ;  but  that  city,  Jerusalem,  the  inheritance  of  peace,  had  not  known  the
things  that  belonged  to  her  peace ;  now  they  were  hid  from  her  eyes.  There  were
outward  demonstrations  of  joy ;  in  some  that  joy  was  deep  and  true ;  in  others  it  was,
though  not  insincere,  founded  on  mistaken  hopes  which  would  soon  be  dissipated ;  in
very  many  it  was  mere  excitement,  worthless  and  unreal,— one  of  those  transitory  bursts
of  apparent  enthusiasm  which  are  so  contagious  for  a  time,  which  run  through
unthinking  crowds.  The  Lord  was  not  dazzled  by  the  popular  applause ;  he  estimated
it  at  its  true  value.  He  wept  as  he  looked  upon  Jerusalem :  his  eye  gazed  through
the  future,  resting,  not  on  his  own  approaching  sufferings,  but  on  the  fearful  doom
which  awaited  the  impenitent  city.  2.  The  multitudes.  The  tidings  of  the  Lord's
approach  reached  Jerusalem ;  crowds  of  pilgrims,  who  had  come  thither  for  the  Passover,
went  out  to  meet  him.  There  wore  pilgrims  from  Galilee,  who  could  teU  of  many
mighty  deeds ;  there  were  others  who  were  present  when  he  called  Lazarus  out  of  his
grave  (John  xii.  17).  That  last  wondrous  miracle  had  for  a  time  rekindled  the  old
enthusiasm.  The  crowd  issuing  from  Jerusalem  joined  the  procession  which  came
from  Bethany ;  they  swelled  its  numbers  and  increased  the  excitement.  They  hailed
the  Lord  as  King,  spreading  their  garments  in  the  way,  as  men  had  done  to  welcome
kings  (2  Kings  ix.  13) ;  they  strewed  his  path  with  branches  from  the  trees ;  they
cried,  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David ! "  they  hailed  the  Lord  as  the  Messiah.  The
Pharisees  had  agreed  that  if  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was  Christ,  he  should  be  pat


OH.  XXI.1— 46J    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  829

out  of  the  Bynagogue  (John  ix.  22).  But  they  were  powerless  that  day;  they  felt  that
they  could  prevail  nothing ;  the  world,  they  said,  had  gone  after  him.  The  multitude
owned  him  to  be  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  the  King  of  Israel.  They  raised  the
shout  of  "Hosannal" — originally  a  prayer,  "Save  us  now  I"  (comp.  Ps,  cxviii.  25);
but  now,  it  seems,  a  cry  of  triumphant  welcome ;  a  cry,  however,  which  recognized
him  as  the  Saviour,  and  ascribed  salvation  to  him.  That  prayer,  they  hoped,  would
reach  the  heavens;  that  cry  would  be  heard  there;  they  prayed  for  blessings  upon
him,  using  again  the  words  of  Ps.  cxviii. ;  they  prayed  that  God's  blessing  might  rest
upon  him,  and  bring  to  pass  that  salvation  which  was  the  real  meaning  of  the
hosanna  cry.  "  Hosanna  in  the  highest  1 "  In  the  highest  the  hosts  of  angels  need  not
lift  the  prayer,  "  Save  us  now  1 "  for  themselves ;  but  they  rejoice,  we  know,  over  each
repentant  sinner,  over  each  lost  sheep  brought  home  to  the  fold  on  the  shoulders  of
the  good  Shepherd ;  they  may  well  re-echo  the  suppliant  hosannas  as  they  add  the
licavenly  incense  to  the  prayers  of  the  saints  which  go  up  before  God  (Bev.  viii.  3,  4).
We  may  well  believe  that,  on  that  great  Palm  Sunday,  the  heavenly  boat  bent  in
reverent  adoration  from  their  thrones  of  light,  watched  that  lowly  procession  as  it
escorted  the  King  of  heaven  into  the  holy  city,  listened  to  the  earthly  hosannas  that
welcomed  his  approach,  and  repeated  with  more  solemn  tones,  more  awful  expectations,
the  high  chant  of  praise  which  celebrated  the  Nativity,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,
and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men."  Let  us  make  that  welcome  our  own.  He
who  then  came  to  Jerusalem  comes  now  to  us.  Each  day  he  cometh  to  expectant
hearts,  to  souls  craving  peace  and  mercy.  He  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord ;  him-
self the  Lord,  he  cometh  from  the  Lord,  to  do  hia  Father's  will, "  to  perform  the  mercy
promised  to  our  fathers,  and  to  remember  his  holy  covenant."  "  Blessed  be  he  that
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lordl"  Let  us  welcome  him  into  our  hearts  with  the
hosanna  cry  of  adoration  and  earnest  supplication,  "  Save  now,  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord ;
0  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  send  now  prosperity  1 "  3.  The  inhabitants.  "  All  the  city  was
moved" — stirred,  shaken  (so  the  Greek  word  means),  at  the  approach  of  the  jubilant
procession.  It  was  filled  with  crowds  waiting  for  the  celebration  of  the  Passover —
eager,  excited  crowds,  ready  to  be  stirred  into  commotion  by  any  sudden  impulse.
"  Who  is  this  ?  "  they  said.  The  form  of  the  Lord  must  have  been  well  known  to
most  of  the  dwellers  in  Jerusalem.  Perhaps  the  question  was  asked  by  strangers  (see
Acts  ii.  6,  9 — 11) ;  perhaps  it  was  asked  with  something  of  scorn,  "  Who  is  this  who
comes  with  such  a  retinue,  with  all  this  festal  applause  ?  "  The  multitude,  mostly
perhaps  Galileeans,  under=itood  the  suppressed  contempt  of  the  proud  Pharisees,  and
answered  with  something  of  provincial  pride,  "  This  is  Jesus  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth
of  Galilee."  He  belonged  to  them  in  a  sense ;  the  Pharisees  had  maintained,  with
ignorant  icornfulness,  that  "out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet."  Even  Nathanael,  the
Israelite  in  whom  there  was  no  guile,  had  asked,  "  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out
of  Nazareth?"  The  6alil«eans  had  a  Prophet  now,  a  Prophet  mighty  in  word  and
deed ;  nay,  more  than  a  Prophet,  the  Messiah  that  was  to  come.  They  were  proud
of  his  eminence,  they  shouted  their  hosannas.  Before  the  week  was  ended,  some  of
them,  it  may  be,  would  change  that  cry  to  "  Crucify  him  I  crucify  him  1 "  Alf  would
forsake  him  and  leave  him  to  his  death.  Popular  excitement  is  a  poor  thing ;  the
Christian  must  trust  neither  in  crowds  nor  in  princes,  but  only  in  God.  "  Who  is
this  ?  "  the  world  stiU  asks,  some  in  the  spirit  of  anxious  inquiry,  some  in  scorn  and
unbelief;  and  still  the  Christian  answers  in  faith  and  adoring  love, "This is  Jesus,  the
Prophet,  the  great  High  Priest,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  He  cometh  to
claim  his  kingdom  in  each  human  heart.     Beceive  liim ;  he  bringeth  peace.

Lessons.  1.  The  King  cometh ;  he  is  lowly.  Only  the  lowly  heart  can  receive  the
lowly  King.  2.  Greet  him  with  holy  joy ;  pray  that  that  joy  may  be  deep  and  true,
founded  on  a  living  faith.  3.  Seek  to  know  him,  to  say,  "  This  is  Jesus,"  out  of  a
true  personal  knowledge.

Vers.  12—16. — l%e  temple.  L  The  Lobd'b  actions  thbbb.  1.  Hii  entrance.
Jesus  went  into  the  temple  of  God.  It  was  a  fulfilment  of  the  great  prophecy  of
Malachi,  "  The  Lord,  whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple."  He  came,
but,  alas !  they  delighted  not  in  him.  He  came  to  "purify  the  sons  of  Levi,  that  they
might  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  o.Tering  in.  righteousness."    But,  alas  1  they  worjd  not  be


S30  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1—46.

purified.    The  Lord  might  cleanse  the  temple  ;  the  priests  who  ministered  there  would
not  yield  up  their  hearts  to  him,  that  he  might  cleanse  them.     He  looked  round  ahout
upon  all  things  (according  to  St.  Mark,  the  actual  cleansing  of  the  temple  was  deferred
liil  the  Lord's  second  visit,  on  the  Monday).     So  the  Lord  comes  to  his  temple  now,
BO  he  looks  round  about  upon  all  things ;  he  notes  the  formal  services,  he  notes  the
careless  hearts.     It  is  right  that  the  house  of  God  be  kept  in  decent  order  and  beauty,
but  far  more  deeply  necessary  that  all  who  minister  and  all  who  worship  there  should
offer  up  their  hearts  to  him- cleansed,  purified  through  faith  in  him;  a  reasonable,  holy,
and  lively  sacrifice.     2.  His  ejection  of  the  buyers  and  sellers.    He  had  cleansed  the
temple  once  before,  at  the  beginning  of  his  ministry  (John  ii.  13 — 17).     The  irreverent
practices  which  he  then  checked  had  been  resumed.    The  court  of  the  Gentiles  had
again  become  a  market  for  the  oxen,  sheep,  and  doves,  which  the  worshippers  needed
for  the  various  sacrifices.    Again  the  money-changers  had  established  themselves  there
to  exchange  the  foreign  money  brought  by  the  worshippers  from  many  lands  for  the
sacred  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  which  alone  could  be  accepted  in  the  temple.    Probably
now,  in  the  Passover  week,  the  traffic  was  busier  than  ever,  the  noise  more  unseemly,
the  baigaining  more  eager  than  at  other  times.     It  was  a  sad  scene,  an  unholy  intru-
sion of  earth  and  earthly  doings  into  the  house  of  God.    The  Saviour's  holy  soul  was
moved  within  him.    Filled  with  that  zeal  for  the  house  of  God  which  had  so  much
struck  the  apostles  on  the  former  occasion,  he  cast  out  all  that  sold  and  bought  in  the
temple.    There  was  a  majesty  in  his  look  and  bearing  which  could  not  be  resisted ;
they  fled  before  him,  conscience-stricken.     They  felt  that  he  was  right ;  he  was  vindi-
cating a  great  truth ;  God's  house  must  be  htld  in  honour ;  they  who  reverence  God
must  reverence  his  temple.     "  Lord,  I  have  loved  the  habitation  of  thy  house,  and  the
place  where  thy  honour  dwelleth."    3.  Eis  rebuke.    He  told  them  what  the  temple
should  be — a  house  of  prayer ;  it  should  be  pervaded  with  an  atmosphere  of  prayei ;
those  who  came  there  should  come  in  the  spirit  of  prayer ;  they  should  go  up  into  the
temple  to  pray.     But  how  was  prayer  possible  amid  this  noise  and  hubbub?    This
unseemly  trafficking  unsettled  the  minds  of  the  worshippers  as  they  passed  into  the
inner  courts.    The  court  of  the  Gentiles  was  like  a  den  of  robbers  now;  thej^  were
robbing  God  of  the  honour  due  to  him ;  they  were  driving  this  unholy  traffic  in  his
courts,  their  thoughts  bent  on  dishonest  gains.     It  must  not  be  so,  he  said ;  God's
house  is  a  sacred  place.    We  dishonour  God's  house  if  we  allow  worldly,  covetous
thoughts  to  occupy  our  minds  when  our  bodies  are  present  there.     When  the  heart  is
like  a  den  of  robbers,  the  prayer  of  the  lips  will  not  reach  the  mercy-seat.    We  must  do
each  of  us  our  part  to  make  God's  house  indeed  the  house  of  prayer  by  praying  our-
selves, and  that  in  sphit  and  in  truth.    4.  His  mirades.     The  blind  and  the  lame
came  to  him  in  the  temple,  and  he  healed  them.    He  would  do  works  of  mercy  in  the
temple  courts,  as  he  would  do  them  on  the  sabbath ;  for,  indeed,  such  deeds  done  in
faith  and  love  are  acts  of  worship,  pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the
Father  (Jas.  i.  27).    It  does  our  churches  no  dishonour  to  use  them,  as  sometimes  they
have  been  used  in  times  of  special  need,  for  the  service  of  the  sick  and  suffering.    Still
in  the  temple  the  Lord.performs  his  miracles  of  grace ;  there  ho  opens  the  eyes  of  those
who  came  praying,  "  Lord,  mcrease  our  faith ;  "  there  he  gives  strength  and  energy  to
the  hands  that  hang  down  and  the  feeble  knees.

n.  The  displbasuee  of  thk  chief  priests.  1.  Their  remonstrcmce.  They  saw
the  wonderful  things  that  he  did.  The  miracles  were  wonderful ;  wonderful,  too,  was
that  strange  majesty  which  so  impressed  the  crowd  of  dealers  and  money-changers  that
they  obeyed  him,  as  it  seems,  without  a  word.  It  was  a  wonderful  thing  indeed  that
one  Man  and  one  without  any  recognized  position  in  the  temple,  without  any  official
character,  could  overawe  that  concourse  of  traders.  They  heard  the  children  crying  in
the  temple,  repeating  the  hoaannas  of  the  festal  procession.  They  were  sore  displeased.
They  called  the  Lord's  attention.  Thoy  did  not  regard  him  as  the  Messiah.  He
ought  not,  they  thought,  to  allow  those  untanght  children  to  hail  him  with  such  a
title  2.  The  Lord's  reply.  He  would  not  check  the  little  ones.  He  ever  loved  chil-
dren and  children  ever  loved  to  flock  arouad  him  and  to  listen  to  his  voice.  Besides,
the  children  were  right;  their  childlike  he»rto  recognized  the  dignity  of  Christ.  Their
hearts  taught  them,  with  an  intuitive  knowledge,  lessons  which  the  learned  rabbis,  the
dignitaries  of  the  temple,  could  not  reach.    So  now  holy  children  often  utter  profound


OH.  XXL  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  831

truths  in  their  simple,  innocent  talk.  Still  God  perfecteth  praise  out  the  months  of
babes  and  sucklings.  He  accepts  the  children's  prayer ;  he  listens  to  the  children's
hymn.  Nay,  the  prayers  and  praises  of  children  are  our  example ;  for  they  are  offered
up  in  simplicity  and  truth.

Lessons.  1.  "The  Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple : "  enter  it  with  reverence.  2.  His
house  is  a  house  of  prayer ;  drive  out  worldly  thoughts ;  hush  your  hearts  into  solemn
attention.  3.  Bring  the  little  ones  early  to  church ;  teach  thera  the  words  of  prayer
and  praise ;  their  praises  are  acceptable  unto  God.

Vers.  17 — 22. — The  return  to  the  temple.  I,  The  walk  to  and  fbom  Bethany.
1.  The  Sunday  evening.  The  Lord  left  the  temple  "  when  he  had  looked  round  upon
all  thing.s."  He  had  no  home  in  the  royal  city.  He  went  out  unto  Bethany,  and  there
he  lodged,  perhaps  in  the  house  of  Lazarus,  perhaps,  as  many  pilgrims  did,  in  a  booth
on  the  hillside,  or  under  the  shelter  of  the  trees.  "  The  Son  of  man  hath  not  where
to  lay  his  head."  2.  Monday.  Very  early  the  Lord  returned  to  the  city.  It  seems
he  had  eaten  nothing ;  he  hungered  on  the  way.  He  was  poor  in  this  world.  Let  us
learn  of  him  to  be  content  in  poverty  and  hardships.

II.  Thb  barren  fio  tree.  1.  The  curse.  It  stood  alone,  a  conspicuous  object.  It
was  full  of  leaves.  The  time  for  figs  was  not  yet,  but  this  tree  was  singularly  forward,
precocious ;  the  leaves  promised  early  fruit,  "  hasty  fruit  before  the  summer "  (Isa.
xxviii.  4).  It  had  none ;  it  was  barren.  The  Lord  said,  "  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee
henceforward  for  ever ; "  "  and  presently  the  fig  tree  withered  away."  The  miracle  was
symbolical,  an  acted  parable.  The  priests  and  scribes  whom  the  Lord  was  about  to
confront  were  like  that  fig  tree — fair  to  look  upon.  Tliey  were  held  in  honour,  some
for  their  official  rank,  some  for  their  supposed  righteousness,  but  they  brought  not
forth  the  fruits  of  holiness.  Such  must  wither  when  the  Lord's  searching  eye  is  fixed
upon  them,  when  he  comes  seeking  fruit.  Leaves  will  not  take  the  place  of  fruit,  out-
ward profession  will  not  atone  for  the  absence  of  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  That  fig
tree  was  a  meet  emblem  of  the  hypocrite.  There  were  other  trees  without  fruit ;  but
they  made  no  show  of  special  forwardness — they  were  leafless  still.  This  one  tree  was
conspicuous  for  its  foliage,  but  it  had  no  fruit  hidden  beneath  its  leaves.  The  other
trees  might  yet  bring  forth  fruit  in  due  time ;  this  one  had  exhausted  itself  in  leaves.
Such  a  show  of  life  is  worthless  in  the  sight  of  God ;  it  is  not  life,  it  is  only  a  false
appearance ;  it  may  deceive  men,  it  cannot  deceive  God.  "  I  know  thy  works,  that
thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."  Many  professing  Christians  seem
to  UB  like  that  fig  tree.  Take  we  heed  to  ourselves.  The  Lord  passed  on,  his  hunger
unappeased.  The  whole  world  was  his,  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hiEs ;  yet  he  hungered,
for  he  had  taken  our  flesh.  He  suffered  as  we  suffer ;  he  is  touched  with  the  feeling
of  our  infirmities.  He  went  on  to  Jerusalem,  to  the  temple.  Now  apparently  (accord-
ing to  the  more  exact  order  of  St.  Mark)  took  place  that  expulsion  of  unhallowed
traffic,  the  miracles,  the  hosannas  of  the  children,  and  the  interference  of  the  priests,
which  have  been  already  related  by  anticipation  in  St.  Matthew's  Gospel.  "  When
even  was  come,  he  went  out  of  the  city."  2.  Tlie  astonishment  of  the  disciples.  The
words  of  the  Lord  produced  an  immediate  effect.  The  life  of  the  tree,  such  as  it
was,  was  at  once  arrested ;  the  sap  ceased  to  circulate,  the  leaves  began  to  wither.
But  it  seems  from  the  more  minute  account  in  St.  Mark,  that  the  disciples  did  not
observe  the  result  till  they  passed  the  tree  again  in  going  to  Jerusalem  on  the  Tuesday
morning.  Then  they  marvelled,  saying,  "  How  soon  is  the  fig  tree  withered  away  1 "
We  wonder  at  their  wonder.  They  had  seen  many  wondrous  manifestations  of  the
Lord's  mighty  power :  why  should  they  wonder  now  ?  They  were  still  weak  in  faith —
as  the  nine  had  been  when  they  sought  in  vain  to  cast  out  the  evil  spirit  beneath  the
Mount  of  the  Transfiguration.  The  Lord  repeats  the  lesson  which  he  gave  them  then,
"  Have  faith  in  God ; "  doubt  not.  Doubt  destroys  the  strength  of  prayer.  He  that
doubteth  will  not  receive  anything  of  the  Lord ;  but  if  we  ask  in  steadfast,  undoubting
faith,  then  there  is  the  blessed  promise, "  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth,"
for  the  prayer  of  undoubting  faith  availeth  much  with  God.  What  was  done  to  the
fig  tree,  the  Lord  said,  was  a  small  thing  for  faith  to  do  ;  faith  could  do  things  greater
far.  The  psalmist  had  sung  of  the  Mount  Zion,  "  It  cannot  be  removed :  it  abideth  for
OTer."    But  the  Lord  st^id,  pointing,  it  may  be,  to  the  mountains  round  Jerusalem.


332  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  mi.  1— 4&

^ I

i
"  If  ye  shall  say  to  this  mountain,  Be  thou  removed,  and  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea,  it  j
shall  be  done."  Faith  can  remove  mountains ;  difficulties  vanish  before  the  prayer
of  faith.  Set  the  Lord's  promises  before  you  when  you  pray ;  claim  them  as  your
OWQ  ;  realize  them,  trust  in  them  ;  pray  with  persevering  importunity,  and,  doubt  not,
you  shall  receive  what  you  ask  in  faithful  prayer.  This  or  that  sin  may  seem  like  a
mountain,  rooted  deep  in  the  heart,  immovable ;  but  pray  against  it,  pray  that  it  may
be  cast  out ;  pray  in  faith,  believing  in  God's  power,  believing  in  his .  love,  and  it  shall
be  done.  It  is  our  want  of  faith  which  makes  our  prayers  so  weak.  If  we  fully
believed  that  God  is  able  and  willing  to  cleantie  us  from  all  uorigbteousness,  to  make
us  whiter  than  snow,  we  should,  in  our  own  actual  lives,  overcome  the  world,  the  flesh,
and  the  devil,  and  be  more  than  conquerors  through  him  who  loved  us.

Lessons.  1.  Let  it  be  our  most  earnest  effort  to  be  true  and  faithful,  not  to  seem  to  be
30.  Hypocrisy  is  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God.  2.  Pray  for  a  strong,  undoubting  faith ;
it  is  God's  most  precious  gift.     3.  Pray  always;  beUeve  in  the  power  of  prayer.

Vers,  23—46. — The  controversy  in  the  temple.  I.  Thk  Lobd'b  AtrrHOBirr  callsd
IN  QUESTION.  1.  The  intervention  of  the  chief  priests.  St.  Luke  tells  us  that  they  had
resolved  to  destroy  our  Lord.  He  had  now  allowed  himself  to  be  saluted  openly  as  the
Ohrist,  the  Son  of  David.  He  had  accepted  the  hosannas  of  the  multitude  in  the  city,
in  the  temple  itself.  He  had  assumed  a  paramount  authority  in  the  temple.  The
chief  priests  regarded  themselves  as  rulers  there;  the  market  in  the  court  of  the
Gentiles  was  held  by  their  licence;  it  was  a  source  of  profit  to  them.  They  now
determined  to  interpose  publicly.  They  sent  an  official  deputation,  composed  of
members  of  the  three  classes  of  the  Sanhedrin— chief  priests,  scribes,  and  elders — to
demand  the  Lord's  authority  for  his  conduct.  What  right  had  he  thus  to  intrude,  as
they  deemed,  into  their  province,  to  interfere  with  the  administration  of  the  temple  ?
What  right  had  he  to  teach  publicly  iu  the  temple  courts  without  licence  from  the
rabbis  ?  What  right  had  he  to  the  titles  of  "  King  of  Israel,"  "  Son  of  David,"  which
he  had  accepted  from  the  people  as  his  due?  2.  The  Lord's  reply.  His  enemies  had
hoped  to  ensnare  him.  They  expected,  doubtless,  that  he  would  openly  assert  his
Divine  mission,  and  they  might  then  make  his  claims  the  basis  of  a  formal  accusation.
But  in  that  wonderful  calmness  and  self-possession  which  we  note  so  often  in  the  history
of  our  Lord,  he  answered  at  once  with  another  question,  "The  baptism  of  John,
whence  was  it  ?  from  heaven,  or  of  men  ?  "  They  could  not  deny  his  right  to  ask
this ;  it  was  closely  connected  with  their  question.  John  had  repeatedly  asserted  in
the  strongest  terms  the  authority,  the  Divine  mission  of  him  whose  way  he  had  come
to  prepare.  They  dared  not  deny  openly  the  prophetic  character  of  the  Baptist ;  they
feared  the  people,  for  the  belief  in  John's  sanctity  was  universal  and  enthusiastic.
"  All  the  people  will  stone  us,"  they  said.  They  were  completely  foiled.  They  could
only  say,  in  confusion  and  disappointed  malice,  "  We  cannot  tell."  It  was  a  bitter
humiliation.  They  were  masters  of  Israel,  and  yet  could  not  guide  the  people  in  a
matter  which  had  so  profoundly  stirred  the  religious  thought  of  the  time.  They  could
only  answer,  "We  cannot  tell"  to  a  question  of  such  great  spiritual  importance.
They  were  as  ignorant  as  "  the  people  of  the  earth,"  whom  they  so  much  despised.
Alas  for  a  country  whose  spiritual  rulers  are  like  those  priests  and  scribes  1  Let  us
pray  that  our  teachers  may  be  taught  of  God.

II.  The  parable  op  the  two  sons.  1.  The  story.  It  is  very  simple.  One  of  the
sons,  when  bidden  to  vioik  in  the  vineyard,  rudely  refused  to  obey  his  father;  the  other
respectfully  promised  obedience.  The  first  afterwards  repented  and  went.  The  second
broke  his  promise  and  went  not  to  the  vineyard.  2.  T/ie  spiritual  meaning.  There
are  open  and  notorious  evil  livers,  who  make  no  profession  of  religion,  and  exhibit  in
their  lives  an  open  and  wilful  disobedience.  Some  of  these  are  brought  to  repentance
by  the  grace  of  God.  They  learn  to  see  the  guilt,  the  awful  danger,  of  disobedience ;  a
great  change  is  wrought  in  their  souls ;  they  do  their  best  to  redeem  the  time ;  they  go
at  last  and  work  for  God ;  and  God,  in  his  sovereign  grace  and  generous  bounty,  accepts
their  service,  though,  it  may  be,  they  have  wrought  but  one  hour  in  their  Father's  vine-
yard. There  are  others,  brought  up,  perhaps,  in  Christian  families,  among  good
examples  and  surroundings,  who  maintain  a  respectful  attitude  towards  religion,  and
regularly  observe  all  the  outward  ordinances  of  the  Church.     But,  alas  I  there  are


OH.  m.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDLNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  333

many  such  who  have  not  given  their  hearts  to  God ;  they  say  from  time  to  time  (at
Oonfirmation,  for  instance),  "I  go,  sir,"  aiid  perhaps  at  the  moment  they  really  liave  a
sort  of  intention  to  keep  God's  holy  will  and  commandments,  and  to  walk  in  the  same
all  the  days  of  their  life.  But  they  have  no  strength  of  purpose,  they  have  not
attained  to  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice ;  and  when  they  are  called  to  do  work  for  God

i whether  inward  or  outward)  which  requires  effort  and  self-denial,  they  shrink  hack
rom  the  Master's  service.  The  yoke  which  the  Lord  calls  "  easy  "  seems  to  them  hard
and  rough ;  the  burden  which  the  Lord  calls  "  light "  seems  to  them  heavy  and  crushing ;
the  cross  terrifies  them.  They  go  not  into  the  vineyard;  they  do  not  keep  their
promises ;  they  do  not  work  out  their  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  and  so
they  do  no  real  work  for  God.  3.  The  application.  The  Lord  gives  his  testimony  to
John  the  Baptist,  as  he  had  done  before;  John  came  from  God,  a  preacher  of
righteousness.  He  came  "  in  the  way  of  righteousness ;  "  he  had  the  righteousness  of
strict  Levitical  purity  and  the  loftiest  asceticism ;  he  told  men  their  duty  plainly  and
sternly.  Many  notorious  sinners,  publicans  and  harlots,  who  had  lived  in  open
disobedience  to  God,  heard  him  and  repented.  These  priests  and  scribes  and  elders
saw  and  heard  him ;  they  felt  the  holiness  of  his  life,  the  power  of  his  preaching ;  they
had  asked  him  if  he  was  the  Christ,  or  Elijah,  or  the  prophet  that  was  to  come.  But
they  repented  not;  they  l]elieved  not.  The  publicans  and  harlots  went  into  the
kingdom  of  God  before  the  priests  and  scribes.  They  ought  to  have  led  the  way ;  they
ministered  in  the  temple  of  God;  they  were  the  recognized  teachers  of  the  people.
Ifet  the  Lord  does  not  shut  out  all  hope.  "  The  publicans  go  before  you ; "  they  might
follow,  if  they  would  humble  their  proud  hearts  into  self-abasement  and  lowly
obedience.  Pride  hardens  the  heart  in  disobedience  and  wilfulness ;  humility  opens  it
n  repentance,  to  the  gracious  voice  of  the  Saviour.  Oh  that  we  may  listen,  and
fepent,  and  work  for  God  before  it  be  too  late !

III.  The  pabable  or  the  wicked  husbandmen.  1.  The  story.  It  was  the  well-
snown  parable  of  Isaiah  (v.  1 — 7),  related  again  with  more  authority  and  in  greater
ietail.  The  lord  of  the  vineyard  asks  again,  "  What  could  have  been  done  more  to  my
vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done  in  it?"  Hodye,  winepress,  tower,^everything  needful
had  been  carefully  provided.  But  the  husbandmen  were  rebellious;  they  beat  and
murdered  the  servants  who  were  sent  to  receive  the  fruits  of  the  vineyard,  and  at  last
they  cast  out  and  slew  their  lord's  only  son.  The  end  of  those  men  must  be  utter
destruction.  Judaea  was  a  land  of  vineyards.  The  Lord  often  drew  his  parables  from
surrounding  circumstances ;  in  Galilee,  from  the  corn-land  or  the  lake ;  in  Judasa,
from  the  vine  or  the  fig  tree.  So  Christian  teachers  should  try  to  give  life  and  interest
to  their  teaching  by  connecting  it  with  matters  of  daily  life.  2.  The  meaning.  Isaiah
tells  us,  "The  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  men  of
Judah  his  pleasant  plant."  The  hedge  must  bo  the  Law,  with  its  ordinances,  oircumci
sion,  and  other  rites  which  served  to  separate  Israel,  as  God's  peculiar  people,  from  othe:
nations.  The  tower  and  winepress  have  been  interpreted  of  the  temple  and  the  altar.
But  it  is  enough,  without  pressing  these  details,  to  understand  the  parable  as  meaning
that  God  had  given  his  people  all  things  necessary  for  their  spiritual  welfare.  The
latter  part  of  the  parable  differs  from  that  in  Isaiah.  There  the  men  of  Israel  are
reproved:  they  brought  forth  wild  grapes,  not  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  Here  the
Lord  rebukes  the  husbandmen,  the  spiritual  rulers  of  his  people.  The  Lord  of  the
vineyard  went  into  a  far  country.  God  did  not  always  manifest  himself  as  he  had
done  on  Mount  Sinai.  He  sent  his  servants  to  the  husbandmen,  that  they  might
receive  the  fruits  of  the  vineyard.  Those  servants  were  the  prophets,  sent  again  and
again,  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  the  ordinary  ministry,  to  warn  both  priests  and
people  of  their  sins,  to  call  both  priests  and  people  to  repentance.  "  I  sent  unto  you,"
God  said,  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  (xliy.  4),  "  all  my  servants  the  prophets,  rising
early  and  sending  theni,  saying.  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hatel"  Some
of  these  were  persecuted,  some  were  slain.  "  They  cast  thy  Law  behind  their  backs
(we  read,  in  the  confession  of  the  Levites  in  Neh.  ix.  26),  "  and  slew  thy  prophets  which
testified  against  them  to  turn  them  unto  thee."  But  now  the  Lord's  eye,  which  had
ranged  over  the  past  history  of  the  nation,  turns  towards  the  future.  The  lord  of  the
vineyard  had  yet  one  son,  his  well-beloved ;  he  sent  him  last,  saying,  "  They  will
reverence  my  son."    The  parable  veiU  the  awful  mysteries  which  hang  around  the


334  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxi.  1—46.

relations  between  the  infinite  foreknowledge  of  God  and  the  free-will  of  man.  Human
thought  cannot  grapple  with  these  mysteries;  human  words  cannot  express  them.
God  gave  bis  only  begotten  Son ;  the  Son  of  Gnd  came  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for
many.  The  purpose,  the  fore-knowledge  of  God,  did  not  destroy  the  free  agency  or
remove  the  guilt  of  those  who  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  These  priests  had  already
taken  counsel  to  put  the  Lord  to  death.  Cai  iphas  had  already  "prophesied  that  Jesus
should  die  for  that  nation"  (John  xi.  47 — 53).  They  had  already  said,  "This  is  the
heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  let  us  seize  oa  his  inheritance."  They  wished  to  keep
possession  of  their  old  authority,  their  olil  exclusive  privileges.  Those  privileges  had
been  given  them  for  a  time ;  their  priesthood  was  transitory.  Christ  was  the  Heii  ot
all  things ;  he  was  the  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  MeJchizedek.  The  Lord  knew
what  was  coming;  they  would  cast  liim  out  (Heb.  xiii.  12),  they  would  kill  him.
How  calmly  he  prophesies  his  own  death  1  how  simply  he  asserts  his  own  Divine
character !  yet  in  words  which  his  enemies  could  no;  take  hold  of.  He  was  tlic  Son,  the
one  only  Son,  the  well-beloved,  of  the  Lord  of  the  vinej'ard.  They  felt  his  meaning,
but  the  parable  afforded  no  ground  for  accusation.  3.  The  warning.  "  When  the
lord  therefore  of  the  vineyard  cometh,  what  will  he  do  unto  those  husbandmen?"
Christ  puts  the  question  to  the  guilty  meu  themselves,  and  forces  them  to  pronounce
their  own  condemnation.  Perhaps  they  pretended  not  to  see  the  drift  of  the  parable,
and  to  regard  it  as  a  story,  mnd  nothing  more.  Perhaps  (and  this  surely  is  more
probable)  they  were  OTerawed  by  the  Lord's  d,ignily,  by  the  solemn  power  of  his  words,
and  so,  like  Caiaphas, became  prophets  against  their  will.  "He  will  miserably  destroy
those  miserable  men."  They  prophesied  their  own  doom.  Alas,  that  the  approaehing
danger  did  not  lead  them  to  repentance!  They  prophesied  also  the  loss  of  those
exclusive  privileges  which  they  guarded  so  jealously.  "  He  will  let  out  kis  vineyard
unto  other  husbandmen."  The  Gentiles  were  to  succeed  to  the  privileges  which  the
Jews  possessed;  they  had  been  strangers  and  fireigneis,  but  soon  they  would  become
fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God.  "I  will  also  take  of  them
for  priests  and  for  Levites,  saith  the  Lord"  (Isa.  Ixvi.  21).  They  would  tend  the
Church  of  God  ;  they  would  render  the  fruit  in  due  season  to  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard.
IV.  Thb  chief  Uoknek-stone.  1.  Its  exaltation.  The  par.ible,  like  every  other
parable,  was  inadequate  to  express  the  whole  spiritual  truth.  The  heir  was  slain ;  he
could  not  appear  ayain  in  the  story  as  the  judge.  The  Lord  adds  another  illusiration,
quoting  the  psalm  (the  hundred  and  eighteenth)  from  which  the  "  Hosannal "  of  Palm
Sunday  had  been  derived :  "  The  stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  the  same  is  become
the  head  of  the  corner."  The  priests  and  scribes  were  the  builders ;  it  was  their  duty  to
rear  up  the  spiritual  temple.  One  stone  they  had  rejected;  it  was  mean  and  poor  in
their  eyes.  Gud  himself  woiild  raise  that  stone  to  the  highest  place  of  honour.  It  should
become  the  head  stone,  with  shoutings, "  Grace,  grace  unto  it ! "  (Zech.  iv.  7).  This  is  the
Lord's  doing.  God  highly  exalted  him  whom  the  Jews  rejected.  2.  The  application.
The  Lord  now  applies  both  parables  directly  and  distinctly  to  the  priests  and  scribes.
They  were  the  husbandmen,  he  told  them — the  rebellious  husbandmen.  The  vineyard  was
the  kingdom  of  God ;  it  should  be  taken  from  them ;  they  should  no  longer  possess  its
privileges.  The  spiritual  Israel,  the  Israel  ol  God,  is  the  nation  to  whom  the  kingdom
should  be  given ;  not  one  earthly  nation,  but  the  nations  of  the  saved  ;  of  all  nations,
and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues.  And  that  nation,  the  great  Catholic  Church
ol  Christ,  would  bring  forth  the  fruits  which  the  vineyard  ought  to  yield,  not  wild
grapes,  but  good  grapes,  the  precious  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  The  priests  and  scribes  were
also  the  foolish  builders.  They  had  rejected  the  chief  Corner-stone,  elect,  precious,
which  the  Lord  would  lay  in  Zion ;  it  was  becoming  to  them  a  stone  of  stumbling,
and  a  rock  of  offence.  The  low  estate  of  Christ  was  a  stumbling-block  now ;  the  cross  ol
Christ  would  be  a  stumbling-block  afte'wards.  "Whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  stone
shall  be  broken,"  the  Lord  said,  referring  ag  lin  to  Isaiah  (viii.  .15),  where  we  observe
that  the  stone  of  stumbling  (vers.  13,  14J  is  the  Lord  of  hosts  himself.  The  Jews
were  now  incurring  this  guilt  and  this  danger  (comp.  Luke  ii.  34 ;  Mark  vi.  3 ;  ch.
xi.  6).  But  a  greater  danger  remained;  when  the  stone  is  become  the  head  of  the
corner,  when  it  is  raised  to  its  place  of  honour,  it  shall  grind  to  powder  those  on  whom
it  will  fall.  When  the  ascended  Lord  is  exalted  to  the  judgment-throne,  utter
destruction  will  overtake  those  hardened,  impenitent  sinners  who  reject  his  offers  of


OH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  835

mercy  unto  the  end,  and  will  not  know  him  as  a  Saviour,  but  must  at  last  see  him,
when  every  eye  shall  see  him,  upon  the  great  white  throne.  3.  The  anger  of  the  priests.
They  perceived  that  he  spake  of  tliem ;  they  felt  the  stern  rebuke  of  his  words;  they
felt,  too,  their  truth.  Their  own  consciences  smote  them.  They  blazed  into  fierce  anger ;
they  sought  to  seise  him ;  but  for  the  moment  they  were  powerless ;  they  could  do
nothing  while  the  multitude  regarded  him  as  a  prophet.  May  God  give  us  grace  to
take  reproof  in  a  becoming  spirit!     It  should  produce,  not  anger,  but  repentance.

Lessons.  1,  Profession  without  obedience  is  worthless.  God  bids  us  work  in  his
vineyard  ;  let  us  obey  him.  2.  God  has  a  right  to  the  fruits  of  vineyard.  His
ministers  must  tend  the  vineyard.  They  must  see,  as  far  as  lieth  in  them,  that  the
fruit  is  rendered  to  the  Lord.  3.  Christ  is  the  chief  Comer-stone ;  the  living  stones  of
the  Boiritual  temple  must  be  built  upon  that  one  Corner-stone,  elect,  precious.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.l — 6. — The  as>  of  Bethphage.  We  cannot  tell  whether  our  Lord's  exact
description  of  the  locality  where  the  ass  and  colt  were  to  be  found  was  derived  from
his  superhuman  knowledge,  or  whether,  as  seems  more  likely  in  so  simple  a  case,  he
had  agreed  with  one  of  his  Jud^ao  disciples  to  have  the  aniiuals  iti  readiness  at  an
appointed  time.  However  this  may  be,  we  can  see  from  the  whole  incident  that  Jesus
paid  especial  attention  to  the  arrangements  for  his  entry  into  Jerusalem.  This  was  very
unlike  his  usual  habit.     Let  us  consider  its  significance  from  two  points  of  view.

I.  The  Lobd's  need.  1.  Jesvs  needed  one  of  Ood's  humblest  creatures.  (1)  This
throws  light  on  the  lowliness  of  Jesus.  Iq  his  Divine  glory  all  the  wealth  of  the
universe  was  at  his  disposal.  But  in  his  earthly  humiliation  he  had  very  simple  wants.
Ho  required  bread,  water,  rest.  It  is  a  mark  of  a  genuinely  low  estate  to  have  need  of
what  the  great  despise.  (2)  This  shows  how  what  is  most  humble  may  yet  serve  the
highest.  The  ass  is  needed  by  the  Christ.  If  a  very  lowly  animal  can  be  thus
honoured,  much  more  may  the  most  obscure  of  men  and  women,  Christ's  own  brothers
and  sisters,  render  him  valuable  service.  2.  Disciples  obtained  what  their  Master  needed.
He  told  his  ueed  ;  at  once  the  two  chosen  messengers  set  off  to  have  it  supplied.  It  is
not  enough  that  we  serve  Christ  in  our  own  way.  We  have  to  discover  what  he  really
wants.  Sometimes  it  may  not  be  at  all  what  we  have  chosen.  But  if  it  is  serviceable
to  our  Lord,  that  should  be  enough  to  determine  our  ccairsi'  of  action.  3.  The  unknown
owner  of  the  animals  was  obedient  to  the  message  of  Christ's  need.  "  The  Lord  hath
need  of  them"  was  the  talisman  to  silence  all  remonstrances.  Jesus  may  claim  what
is  far  more  precious  to  us  than  any  dumb  animal.  Yet  if  he  calls,  he  needs ;  and  if  he
needs,  his  claim  is  paramount.  He  may  want  a  child  in  the  other  world ;  or  he  may
require  the  child  in  the  mission  field.  Then  it  is  not  for  us  to  withhold  our  dearest
from  him.

"  Why  should  I  keep  one  precious  thing  from  thee,
When  thon  hast  given  thine  own  dear  self  for  me  7  "

II.  Thkuss  of  the  ass.  Why  did  the  Lord  need  the  ass  and  its  colt?  1.  To
fulfil  prophecy.  We  do  not  often  come  across  the  conscious  and  intentioned  fulfilment
of  prophecy.  Usually  the  prediction  comes  true  in  spite  of  the  ignorance  of  the  actors
in  the  fulfilment,  or  while  they  are  aimm,'  at  something  else  than  simply  carrying  out
what  a  seer  of  old  foretold.  But  now  Christ  sets  himself  deliberately  to  put  into
practice  an  idea  of  Zechariah  (see  again  John  xix.  28).  What  is  best  in  the  Old
Testament  is  followed  by  Christ  in  the  New.  2.  To  aid  in  a  solemn  triumph.  Jesus
hail  long  forbidden  a  public  confession  of  his  Messiahship.  But  now  he  will  make  it
for  himself;  for  now  it  can  do  no  harm.  He  is  to  ride  in  triumph,  but  in  triumph  to
the  cross.  That  glad  entry  to  Jerusalem  was  to  be  just  marching  into  the  jaws  of
death.  3.  To  express  the  peaceful  and  gentle  character  of  Ohrisfs  Kingship.  Jesus
did  not  choose  the  spirited  war-horse.  Following  the  idea  of  the  prophet,  he  selected
the  lowly  ass,  an  animal  which,  although  it  was  very  superior  in  the  East  to  the  ill-
treated  ass  of  the  West,  was  still  associated  with  quietness  and  simplicity.  It  was
to  be  a  rustic  triumph,  an  old-world  triumph,  quaint  and  antique,  and  therefore  a  protest
against  the  vulgar  fashion  of  earthly  glory. — W.  F.  A.


536  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [on.  xxi  1—46.

■^ers.  6—11.— The  Mumphantride.  This  was  arranged  by  Christ,  and  en  i  h  iislastically
promoted  by  his  disciples.  Here  was  a  last  glint  of  sunshine  before  the  storm.  The
gliidness  of  the  scene  is  in  strange  contrast  with  the  awful  sequel.  Palm  Sunday
ushers  In  Passion  Week.  "  Suflioient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  While  the
evil  day  has  not  yet  come,  gladness  and  the  assurance  of  victory  may  be  the  best
preparation  for  it,

L  The  Eikq'b  tihcmph.  Few  spectators  would  see  anything  kingly  la  this  rustic
fSU.  To  the  ruling  classes  of  Jerusalem  it  would  seem  but  child's  play.  But  to  the
childlike  followers  of  Jesus  it  had  a  deep  meaning.  These  Galilasan  pilgrims  recogniaod
in  it  the  acceptance  by  Jesus  of  his  royal  rights.  The  question  arises — Were  they  mis-
taken? He  was  riding  in  triumph  to  Jerusalem.  But  it  was  a  simple,  homely,
unconventional  triumph.  Moreover,  it  did  not  lead  to  the  throne,  but  its  promise
ended  at  Calvary,  or  seemed  to  end  there.  We  know  that  the  issue  was  disappointing
to  the  early  disciples  (Luke  xxiv.  21).  Nevertheless,  we  also  know  that,  with  Jesus,
■  the  way  to  death  was  the  way  to  victory.  He  was  most  kingly  wlien  he  suCfered  most.
His  Passion  was  his  coronation.  He  reigns  now  in  the  hearts  of  his  people,  just  because
he  died  for  them.

IL  The  peoplb'b  enthususm.  Long-suppressed  emotions  now  break  forth  into
unrestrained  utterance.  It  seems  to  be  impossible  to  do  too  much,  in  the  hastily
improvised  procession,  to  show  devotion  to  the  Christ.  This  is  expressed  in  two  ways.
1.  By  actiwM.  Garments  laid  on  the  animal  he  rides,  garments  flung  on  the  road  for
the  honour  of  being  trampled  on,  sprigs  from  the  wayside  trees  scattered  on  the  ground,
palm  branches  waved  overhead, — these  things  show  the  utmost  enthusiasm.  Strong
feeling  muit  manifest  itself  in  action.  2.  By  words.  The  people  quoted  a  well-known
Messianic  psalm,  praying  for  a  blessing  on  the  Clirist.  Their  words  had  nearly  the
same  meaning  as  our  "  God  save  the  king ! "  and  they  were  prompted  by  an  over-
mastering passion  of  enthusiasm.  This  is  not  at  all  wonderful.  The  only  wonder  is
that  there  was  but  one  Palm  Sunday,  and  that  our  Lord's  last  Sunday  on  earth  before
his  death.  To  know  him  is  to  see  grounds  for  unbounded  devotion,  for  love  beyond
measure,  for  glad  praises  which  no  words  can  contain.  This  is  the  great  distinction  of
our  Christian  faith,  its  key-note  is  enthusiasm  for  Christ.

IIL  The  oitt's  wondbe.  The  happy,  noisy  procession  was  heani  in  Jerusalem,  and
the  oitiiens  looked  up  from  their  trades  and  forgot  their  bargaining  for  a  moment,  iu
surprise  at  the  unexpected  commotion.  We  may  preach  the  gospel  by  singing  the
praises  of  Christ  One  reason  why  the  world  is  apathetic  about  Christianity  is  that
the  Church  is  apathetic  about  Christ  A  fearless  enthusiasm  for  Christ  will  arouse
the  slumbering  world.  But  we  want  to  go  furthei'.  In  Jerusalem  the  effect  was  but
slight  and  transitory.  A  deeper  and  more  permanent  impression  was  made  at  Pente-
cost ;  for  it  is  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  no  merely  external  excitement,  that
really  touches  and  changes  the  hearts  of  people.  Yet  even  this  did  not  move  the
greater  part  of  Jerusalem.  Rejecting  the  peaceful  coming  of  Christ,  hardened  smners
awMt  his  next  coming,  which  is  in  wrath  and  judgment. — W.  P.  A.

Vers.  12,  Vi.—Ohritt  chanting  the  temple.  According  to  St  Mark's  more  detailed
account,  Jesus  "  looked  round"  on  the  day  of  his  triumphant  entrance  to  Jerusalem,
and  effected  his  drastic  reformation  of  temple  abuses  on  the  following  morning.  Thus
we  see  that  his  action  did  not  spring  from  a  hasty  outburst  of  passion.  It  was  the
result  of  deliberation.  He  had  had  a  night  in  which  to  brood  over  the  shameful
desecration  of  his  Father's  house.  .  ,  .     ^  ,.    .

L  The  OESEOfiATios.  L  Vie  nature  of%t.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
the' temple  was  being  used  as  a  common  market  The  animals  sold  were  not  to  be
treated  as  meat  at  the  shambles.  They  were  for  sacrifices.  The  money-changing  was
not  for  the  convenience  of  foreigners  wanting  to  be  able  to  do  business  in  the  city  with
the  current  coin.  This  was  carried  on  in  order  to  provide  for  visitors  the  Hebrew
shekel  with  which  to  pay  the  t«mple  dues.  Therefore,  it  was  thought  the  business
was  of  a  religious  character,  and  could  be  carried  on  in  the  temple  as  part  of  the  sacred
work  Animals  were  sacrificed  there :  why  should  they  not  be  sold  there  ?  Money
was  collected  there  i  why  should  it  not  be  exchanged  there?  2,  2%e  evil  of  it.  (1)  It
iuttiferod  with  worship.     The  outer  courts  of  the  temple  were  used  for  private  prayer.


oa.  XXI.  1—46.]    TBE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  83?

But  the  confusion  of  a  market  was  most  distracting  to  the  spirit  of  devotion.  (2)  It
was  unjust  to  the  Gentiles.  This  trafSo  seems  to  have  been  carried  on  in  the  court  of
the  Gentiles.  The  Jews  stiil  reserved  their  own  court  in  decorum.  The  prophecy
from  which  our  Lord  quoted  says  that  God's  house  "  shall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer
for  M jpeopU  "  (Isa.  Ivi.  7).  Thus  the  rights  of  the  Gentiles  were  scornfully  outraged.
(3)  It  imported  dishonest  dealing.  The  keen  eye  of  Christ  detected  wrong-dealing.  It
was  not  only  trade,  it  was  cheating  that  dishonoured  the  temple.

II.  The  cleansing.  1.  An  ad  of  My  indignation.  Jesus  was  angry ;  he  could  be
angry  j  sometimes  he  was  "  moved  with  indignation."  It  is  no  sign  of  sanctity  to  be
unmoved  at  the  sight  of  what  dishonours  God  and  wrongs  our  fellow-men.  There  ia
A  guilty  complacency,  a  culpable  silence,  a  sinful  calm.  2.  An  act  of  Divine  authority.
It  was  his  Father's  house  that  Christ  was  cleansing.  He  spoke  and  acted  as  the
messenger  of  God  even  to  those  who  did  not  know  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God.  Christ
has  power  and  authority.  3.  An  act  of  righteousness.  He  used  force,  but  of  course,  if
he  had  met  with  resistance,  the  merely  physical  power  he  put  forth  would  soon  have
been  overborne.  Why,  then,  did  he  succeed?  Because  he  had  an  ally  in  the  breast  of
every  man  whom  he  opposed ;  the  consciences  of  the  traders  fought  with  Jesus  against
their  guilty  traffic.     He  who  fights  for  the  right  has  mighty  unseen  allies.

Do  not  we  need  a  temple-cleansing?  The  trade  spirit  desecrates  religious  work.
Finance  takes  too  prominent  a  place  in  the  Church.  It  is  possible  to  crush  the  sprit
of  private  worship  in  low,  unworthy  ways  of  providing  the  means  of  public  worship.
We  want  the  scourge  of  small  cords  to  drive  out  the  worldly  methods  of  Christian
work.— W.  P.  A.

Ver.  19. — The  fruitless  Jig  tree.  We  may  wonder  how  Jesus  covlA  have  hungered
during  the  short  walk  over  the  Mount  of  Olives  from  Bethany,  if  he  had  just  left  the
hospitable  roof  of  Martha.  Had  she  taken  his  mild  rebuke  too  literally  wheu  she  was
busying  herself  in  providing  a  bountiful  table  on  a  former  occasion  ?  Or  may  we  not
think  with  more  probability  that  Jesus,  who  was  an  early  riser,  had  left  the  house  before
breakfast?  If  so,  this  would  have  beeu  a  trial  to  Martha  ;  but  it  would  have  shown
her  and  all  the  disciples  how  eager  he  was  to  be  about  his  Father's  business.  Yet  he
is  a  man,  and  the  fresh  morning  air  on  the  hills  awakens  the  natural  appetite  of  hunger.
A  few  verses  back  it  is  said  that  Jesus  had  need  of  an  ass  and  its  colt  (ver.  3).  Here
we  see  that  he  had  need  of  a  few  wild  flgs— commonest  of  wayside  fruit,  so  real  was
his  human  nature,  so  perfect  the  lowliness  of  his  earthly  state.

I.  The  condition  of  the  tree.  1.  It  had  promise.  This  was  a  forward  tree  as  far
as  leaves  were  concerned.  Earlier  than  others  of  the  same  species  in  putting  forth  its
foliage,  it  gave  promise  of  an  early  supply  of  fruit,  because  the  figs  appear  before  the
leaves.  It  is  dangerous  to  make  great  pretensions.  To  stand  out  from  our  brother  men
with  some  claim  to  exceptional  honour  is  to  raise  expectations  of  exceptional  worth.
We  should  do  well  to  avoid  taking  such  a  position  unless  we  are  sure  we  can  sustain
it  without  disappointing  the  hopes  we  raise.  2.  It  was  not  true  to  its  promise.  This
was  the  unhappy  thing  about  the  tree.  If  it  had  been  like  the  backward  trees,  nothing
would  have  been  expected  of  it.  But  by  giving  a  sign  which  in  the  course  of  nature
should  follow  the  putting  forth  of  fruit,  it  made  a  false  pretension.  Possibly  the  vigour
of  the  foliage  absorbed  the  sap  which  should  have  helped  the  fruit-buds.  Great
attention  to  display  directly  injures  the  cultivation  of  really  worthy  qualities.
Beligious  ostentation  is  generally  barren.

II.  The  doom  of  the  tree.  It  is  to  wither.  The  fig  tree  is  only  valued  for  the
sake  of  its  figs.  If  these  are  wanting,  the  tree  is  worthless.  Its  luxuriance  of  leaves  is
worse  than  useless,  because  it  prevents  other  plants  from  growing  where  the  fruitless
branches  overshadow  the  ground.  1.  What  is  fruitless  is  worthless.  (1)  The  nation.
Here  was  typified  the  miserable  state  of  Israel.  The  splendid  temple,  with  its  gold  so
dazzling  that  no  one  could  look  steadily  at  it  when  the  sun  shone  on  it,  was  in  full
Hew  of  Jesus  as  he  passed  the  fruitless  fig  tree.  There  on  the  opposite  hill  were  the
signs  of  the  unbounded  claims  and  pride  of  Israel.  Yet  what  had  come  out  of  them
all  ?  (2)  The  Church.  A  Church  exists  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men.  If
it  bears  no  such  fruit,  though  it  may  flourish  numerically  and  financially,  it  is  quite
worthles.s.    (3)  The  individual  man  or  woman.    God  cares  absolutely  nothing  for  our

MATTHEW — n,  B


338  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxl  1—48.

professions  of  piety ;  the  showy  religion  that  imposes  en  men  is  an  abomination  in  the
sight  of  Qod.  He  looks  for  fruit  in  deeds  of  useful  service.  All  else  is  but  a  mass  of
worthless  leavei.  2.  What  is  worthless  must  he  destroyed.  The  fruitless  Jerusalem
was  destroyed.  Barren  Churches  have  been  swept  away  from  Asia  Minor  and  North
Africa ;  barren  Churches  will  be  swept  fi'om  other  parts  of  Christendom  in  the  future.
Fruitless  souls  will  be  cast  out  of  the  garden  of  the  Lord.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  22. — 2%«  hmindless  possibiliUes  of  prayer.  Read  literally,  this  is  a  very  difficult
Terse.  We  cannot  see  how  it  is  verified  in  experience.  We  should  be  horrified  at  its
exact  and  verbal  fulKiment,  because  this  would  be  handing  over  the  control  of  the
universe  to  the  praying  mortal.  The  coachman  would  not  put  the  reins  in  the  hands
of  hb  infant  son,  however  much  the  child  begged  for  them ;  yet  the  disaster  which
would  follow  such  an  action  would  be  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  unspeakable
calamities  which  would  visit  the  universe  if  we,  in  our  blindness,  our  ignorance,  our
folly,  could  have  done  for  us  whatever  we  chose  to  wish  for,  and  that  merely  for  the
asking.  We  may  indeed  be  thankful  that  no  such  fearful  power  has  been  entrusted  to
us.     But  then  how  are  we  to  interpret  the  very  clear  and  emphatic  words  of  our  Lord  ?

L  It  is  faith  that  oivbb  BFriciENOT  to  pbater.  Many  prayers  are  absolutely
void  and  useless  because  they  are  not  borne  upon  the  wings  of  faith.  They  grovel  in
the  earth-mists  of  unbelief,  and  never  see  the  light  of  God's  presence.  The  connection
of  the  verses  seems  to  imply  that  it  was  his  faith  that  gave  Christ  power  to  bring  its
doom  to  the  barren  fig  tree  (ver.  21).  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  God  will  give
many  things  to  those  who  trust  him,  which  he  will  deny  to  people  who  will  not  rely
upon  him.  At  all  events,  the  setting  forth  of  faith  as  a  condition  of  the  prayer  that  is
to  be  answered  shows  that  it  is  absolutely  useless  to  practise  an  experiment  with  prayer
by  testing  its  efficacy  in  order  to  dispel  doubt.  The  purpose  of  the  experiment,  and
the  grounds  on  which  it  is  made,  presuppose  the  absence  of  an  essential  condition  of
successful  prayer.  Therefore,  if  prayer  is  heard,  as  Christ  tells  us  it  is,  such  an  experi-
ment is  foredoomed  to  failure.  We  want  grounds  for  faith,  but  we  cannot  find  them
here;  or  rather  we  cannot  have  our  first  grounds  here.  The  response  to  prayer  will
doubtless  confirm  and  strengthen  the  faith  which  prompted  the  prayer.  But  there
must  be  this  prior  faith.

XL  The  pkayeb  or  faith  has  boundless  efficaot.  We  got  slight  answers  to
prayer  because  we  have  little  faith.  Yet  we  cannot  expect  to  have  just  what  we  choose
to  ask  for,  even  though  we  ask  in  faith.  No;  but  observe:  1.  Faith  is  not  confidenct  in
our  own  prayer,  hut  trust  in  Christ.  Now,  when  we  trust  him  we  are  led  near  to  him,
we  begin  to  understand  him,  we  learn  to  think  as  he  thiiiks  and  to  desire  what  he
desires.  Thus  faith  brings  us  into  sympathy  with  Christ.  But  our  foolish  desires
are  quite  un-Christlike.  We  shall  no  longer  cherish  them  when  he  is  by  our  side.
Thus  faith  chastens  prayer,  purges  it,  elevates  it,  and  brings  it  into  harmony  with
the  will  of  God,  The  prayer  of  faith  will  be  such  a  prayer  that  God  can  hear,
just  in  proportion  as  the  faith  is  a  spiritual  power  that  unites  ns  with  God.  2.  The
prayer  of  faith  will  certainly  he  answered,  though  not  necessarUy  in  the  way  in  which
we  expect.  Jesus  promised  to  those  who  lost  lands  and  friends  for  the  gospel's  sake,
more  lands  and  friends  (ch.  xix.  29),  and  his  disciples  did  not  receive  a  literJil
fulfilment  of  this  promise.  But  they  had  a  good  equivalent.  The  prayer  of  faith
is  answered  in  God's  large,  wise  way— ^answered  to  the  full,  but  by  the  gift  of  what  he
sees  best,  and  not  always  of  what  we  happen  to  name. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  23 — 27. — Question  met  hy  question.  Perhaps  we  shall  best  gather  up  the
lessons  of  this  incident  if  we  look  first  at  the  form  it  assumed,  then  at  the  underlying
substance.

I,  The  forh.  1,  The  question  of  the  rulers.  (1)  An  insulting  question.  What
right  had  they  thus  to  challenge  One  before  whom  they  should  have  bowed  in  humble
adoration  ?  Technically,  they  were  in  the  right  in  so  far  as  they  acted  as  guardians  of
the  Law  and  religion  of  IsraeL  Yet  they  had  proved  themselves  false  to  their  trust  by
their  permission  of  the  desecration  of  the  temple,  aud  by  the  too  common  hypocrisy  of
their  religion.  Some  people  |iiit  the  same  question  to-day  without  a  shadow  of  the
claim  of  the  Jewish  leaders.     Tin-  human  intellect  has  a  right  to  search  for  truth ;  we


CH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  S:;'J


all  ought  to  look  for  good  grounds  of  faith.  But  the  attitude  of  humility  will  be  that
of  an  inquirer,  not  tliat  of  a  judge.  (2)  An  irrelevant  question.  The  charges  Christ
made  were  true;  the  things  he  denounced  were  wrong.  Why,  then, care  so  much
about  the  question  of  his  authority  ?  People  raise  technical  questions  and  abstract
difficulties,  but  often  these  only  obscure  the  plain  moral  truths  which  cannot  be  denied.
(3)  An  insincere  question.  Did  these  rulers  thirst  for  knowledge  conoerniag  the
mission  of  Christ?  Were  they  troubled  with  grave  doubls?  We  know  that  they
were  only  anxious  to  entrap  our  Lord.  Flippant  doubt  is  culpable,  but  the  most
deadly  doubt  is  that  which  hates  the  light.  2.  The  counter-question  of  Christ.  He
postpones  his  reply  to  a  question  he  desires  to  have  answered  by  the  rulers.  (1)
Showing  his  skill  and  wisdom.  Christian  apologists  have  acted  too  much  on  the
defensive.  It  would  be  wiser  to  follow  tlie  ejsample  of  Christ,  and  carry  the  war  into
the  enemy's  territory.  (2)  Proving  the  weakness  of  the  rulers'  position.  They
cliallenged  Christ's  status.  Wl. at  was  theirs?  People  who  reject  Divine  revelation,
and  the  larger  number  who  simply  ignore  it,  will  liave  to  account  for  their  conduct.  At
least  they  should  be  prepared  to  justify  themselves.  (3)  Turning  from  a  formal  to  a
moral  inquiry,  John  the  Baptist  was  an  embodiment  of  the  national  conscience.  How
was  such  a  man  to  be  treated  ?  We  make  too  much  of  questions  of  rank  and  office,
and  too  little  of  those  that  touch  right  and  wrong  conduct.

II.  The  BtjBSTANCE.  That  was  indeed  an  important  question  which  the  rulers  put
to  Christ.  If  it  were  asked  humbly  and  sincerely,  it  might  be  regarded  as  most  just
and  reasonable.  When  it  is  so  asked,  Christ  does  answer  it.  Indeed,  if  the  rulers  had
not  been  blind,  they  would  have  found  a  twofold  reply  close  at  hand.  Christ  justifies
and  confirms  his  claims :  1.  By  (he  authority  of  conscience.  When  he  startled  the
people  in  the  temple  by  an  unwonted  exercise  of  authority,  they  submitted  without  an
attempt  at  resistance,  because  their  consciences  confirmed  his  action.  Christ  speaks  to
the  conscience,  and  the  conscience  echoes  what  he  says.  2.  By  the  authority  of  know-
ledge. Who  are  the  authoritative  teachers  ?  Surely  the  only  teachers  who  can  speak
to  us  with  authority  are  those  who  know  the  subjects  they  undertake  to  teach.  Jesus
"  spoke  with  authority  "  (ch.  vii.  29),  because  he  spoke  out  of  knowledge.  There  was
a  self-evidencing  truthfulness  and  oleaitiess  of  vision  in  him.  3.  By  the  authority  of
God.  The  rulers  could  not  see  this.  If  their  blindness  ha^j  not  been  morally  culpable,
they  would  have  been  excused  for  rejecting  the  claims  of  Christ,  because  those  claims
were  so  great  that  ho  mere  man  could  have  a  right  to  put  them  forth.  When  we  per-
ceive the  Divine  nature  of  Christ,  all  his  words  and  deeds  are  justified,  and  his  authority
comes  upon  us  with  more  than  kingly  power. — W.  P.  A.

Vers.  28 — 32. — The  two  sons.  In  this  parable  our  Lord  illustrates  the  great
principle  which  he  more  than  once  enunciated — that  "  many  shall  be  last  that  are
first;  and  first  that  are  last."  It  has  a  special  reference  to  the  Pharisees  and  publicans
of  Christ's  time.  Cut  there  are  publicans  and  Pharisees  in  our  own  day.  Let  us
consider  the  parable  in  its  bearing  on  ourselves  and  the  present  conduct  of  people.

I.  The  son  who  kefused  and  repented.  1.  His  hasty  refusal.  Doubtless  ho
spoke  in  impatience.  His  temper  was  hot,  and  the  call  to  work  amazed  him.  Thus
he  began  the  day  badly,  as  many  people  begin  life  badly.  This  is  altogether  deplor-
able, because  no  subsequent  amendment  can  obliterate  the  fact  that  the  beginning  was
spoilt.  2.  His  later  repentance.  We  need  not  be  the  slaves  of  our  own  past.  If  we
started  wrong,  we  are  not  forced  to  continue  in  the  path  of  evil.  "  It  is  never  too  late
to  mend."  There  is  a  pride  of  consistency  which  only  comes  of  folly ;  and  there  is  a
noble  inconsistency,  a  sublime  inconsequence.  The  change  in  the  son  showed  (1)
reflectiveness ;  (2)  humility ;  (3)  a  willingness  to  own  himself  wrong ;  (4)  a  desire  to
do  better  in  future.  These  are  all  hopeful  qualities.  3.  His  obedient  action.  He
"  went."  That  was  everything.  He  may  not  have  said  another  word ;  but  he  obeyed
his  father,  though  in  silence.  The  one  thing  God  looks  for  is  obedience.  The  way  to
make  amends  for  past  negligence  is  not  to  promise  better  things  for  the  future,  but
just  to  do  them.  4.  His  improving  conduct.  We  see  this  son  in  two  stages,  and  the
second  is  better  than  the  first.  He  was  evidently  moving  in  the  right  direction.  The
most  important  question  is  not — ^To  what  have  we  attained  hitherto?  but — Which  way
are  we  moving  ?  towards  the  light  or  from  it  2     5.  His  accejited  obedience.     This  was


S40  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOiinmG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxi.  1 -4d,

the  obedient  son.  His  insolent  words  were  forgiven  when  his  subsequent  conduct  was
penitent  and  obedient.  God  forgives  the  bad  past  la  his  penitent  children.  If  they
are  now  in  the  right  path,  he  accepts  them,  although  they  wore  once  far  from  it.

11.  The  BON  WHO  consekted  and  disobeyed.  1.  Eis  ready  assent.  This  was
good  in  its  way.  But,  being  only  Yerbal,  or  at  best  an  intention  not  yet  executed,  it
was  of  slight  worth.  God  does  not  value  religious  professions  as  men  prize  them.  2.
Bis  courtesy.  The  second  son  was  courteous  to  his  father,  addressing  him  as  "  sir,"
while  his  brother  was  rude  and  insolent.  Now,  it  is  ovu:  duty  to  be  courteous  to  all
men,  and  to  be  especially  respectful  to  parents.  Yet  there  is  an  hypocritical  tone  about
good  mannei's  when  they  are  not  accompanied  by  good  actions.  God  prefers  rude
obedience  to  polite  disobedience.  3.  His  subsequent  disobedience.  We  need  not
suppose  that  this  second  son  had  lied  to  his  father,  promising  in  smooth  words  what
he  never  intended  to  perform.  It  is  more  probable  that  our  Lord  would  have  us  think
of  him  as  honest  in  his  profession.  He  really  intended  to  obey.  But  he  did  not  count
the  cost,  or  the  good  mood  of  acquiescence  passed  away,  or  some  other  more  fascinating
attraction  led  him  to  forget,  or  at  least  to  neglect,  his  promise.  There  is  an  enormous
step  to  be  taken  from  good  resolutions  to  good  actions. .  Many  a  hindrance,  many  a
temptation,  comes  between.  4.  ffis  fust  condemnation.  Jesus  appealed  to  the  by-
standers for  their  verdict.  He  wished  to  convince  their  conscience  j  he  desires  now  to
make  us  see  and  feel  the  truth  of  what  he  says.  Could  there  be  a  question  as  to  the
verdict?  Good  promises  count  for  nothing,  or  rather  they  count  against  the  man  who
disobeys  in  conduct.    God  judges  by  conduct  alone. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  33 — 41. — The  parable  of  the  vineyard.  The  vineyard  is  a  favourite  image  in
the  Bible,  and  the  mention  of  it  by  Christ  would  call  to  mind  in  his  hearers  the  Old
Testament  illustrations  of  Israel.  But  more  than  Israel  the  nation  must  be  intended
by  our  Lord,  because  the  vineyard  is  to  go  on  after  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  state.
Our  thoughts  are  therefore  directed  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  partially  realized  in
Israel,  more  fully  realized  in  the  Christian  Church,  but  always  a  spiritual  vineyard.

I.  God  himself  founds  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  owner  of  the  vineyard
i.as  it  properly  planted  and  all  its  arrangements  completed  before  he  sends  husband-
men into  it.  They  have  not  to  begin  in  the  wilderness.  God  does  not  behave  like
the  Pharaoh  who  ordered  the  Israelites  to  make  bricks  without  straw.  He  plants.
Therefore  he  has  a  right  to  look  for  fruit.

II.  God  entrusts  the  work  of  his  vineyard  to  men.    There  is  work  for  God  .
to  be  done  in  his  kingdom.     This  is  a  high  privilege,  and  it  carries  with  it  a  grave
responsibility.    God  will  not  have  the  just  return  for  all  his  gifts  if  his  husbandniou
are  not  faithful  in  his  service.     The  Jewish  leaders  were  God's  husbandmen.     So  are
Christian  workers  to-day.

III.  God  expects  fruits  from  his  vinetard.  God  gives  freely ;  but  he  looks  for
a  return.  It  is  not  that  he  needs  anything.  But  he  does  not  desire  his  work  to  be
wasted.  He  asks  for  grapes  where  he  has  planted  a  vine.  This,  then,  is  the  one
question  for  the  Church, — Is  it  bearing  fruit?  By  so  doing  it  can  glorify  God  (John
XV.  8).

IV.  The  mbsbengbes  of  God  have  been  shamefully  treated.  Evidently  the
servants  represent  the  prophets  of  ancient  Israel,  ending  with  John  the  Baptist,  who
was  beheaded,  though  not  by  the  Jews.  The  reason  for  this  ill-treatment  is  here
explained.  It  is  selfishness.  The  leaders  of  Israel  governed  for  their  own  advantage,
and  not  for  the  glory  of  God.  The  leaders  of  the  Church  have  too  often  shown  a  self-
seeking  spirit,  and  therefore  they  have  rejected  God's  true  servants,  "such  as  Savonarola,
Huss,  Latimer,  Wesley.

V.  The  advent  of  Christ  is  a  mark  op  God's  long- suffering  patience.  The
owner  of  the  vineyard  would  try  a  last  means.  He  would  see  if  the  husbandmen
would  reject  his  son.  It  was  a  great  risk  to  run ;  but  the  fruit  was  precious,  and  the
vineyard  was  worth  rescuing  from  those  who  usurped  the  rights  of  ownership.  God
would  not  cast  out  Israel  till  Christ  had  come.  But  now  Christ  has  come  to  us  as
God's  last  Messenger.

VI.  The  rejection  of  Christ  is  a  fatal  sin.  After  the  husbandmen,  had  killed
the  heir  to  the  estate,  no  more  patience  could  be  shown  to  them.    They  had  filled  up


en.  Xii.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  441


their  oup  of  gmlt  to  the  brim.  They  had  rejected  the  last  and  greatest  -message  from
their  Master.  To  be  cast  forth  and  destroyed  is  their  rightful  doom.  This  doom  came
upon  the  leaders  of  Israel  in  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.  It  awaits  those
false  and  traitorous  leaders  of  the  Church  who  repeat  the  sin  of  the  Hebrew  hierarchy.
It  awaits  all  who  work  in  the  midst  of  the  privileges  of  Christendom  without  rendering
any  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God.

VII.  The  sooii  of  thh  faithless  is  followed  bt  the  appointmbnt  op  new
WORKERS.  Gentiles  took  the  place  of  Jews.  God's  work  cannot  stand  stilL  He  will
have  fruit — if  not  through  our  agency,  then  by  other  means.  When  the  official
leaders  of  the  Church  are  unfaithful,  God  sets  them  aside,  so  that,  though  their  doom
is  postponed,  they  are  really  no  longer  entrusted  with  any  powers  by  God.  Then  he
raises  up  men  from  outside  the  ranks  of  office — a  John  Bunyan  or  a  George  Pox,  Thus
the  vineyard  is  baved,  and  God  has  the  fruit  of  true  service, — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  1 — 22. — Entry  into  Jerusalem.  Our  Lord  had  now  entered  on  the  last  week
of  his  life  upon  earth,  but,  save  in  liis  own  heart,  there  is  no  premonition  of  his  death.
Having  spent  the  sabbath  in  Betliany,  he  proceeds  on  Sunday  morning  to  the  city.
That  was  the  day,  four  days  before  the  Passover,  on  which  the  Jews  were  commanded
to  choose  the  Paschal  lamb.  Our  Lord,  conscious  of  his  calling  to  die  for  his  people,
puts  himself  into  their  hands.  He  now  feels  that  his  hour  has  come,  and  proclaims
himself  as  the  promised  Messiah,  the  King  of  Peace,  by  entering  into  Jerusalem,  the
metropolis  of  peace,  in  a  manner  which  no  one  could  fail  to  interpret,  as  One  who
would  certainly  furnish  men  with  that  which  would  not  give  one  strong  race  power
over  others,  but  which  would  weld  all  men  together  and  give  them  common  feelings
and  interests,  and  restore  in  truth  the  unity  of  men.  The  points  in  the  entry  whicli
Matthew  consiciored  siguificant  are —

I,  OuB  Lord's  proclamation  of  himself  as  Kino  of  Peace  by  riding  into
Jehitsalem  on  an  ass.  He  did  not  choose  a  horse,  because  that  animal  would  have
suggested  royalty  of  quite  another  kind  from  his — royalty  which  was  maintained  by
war  and  outward  force,  1,  What  is  it,  then,  that  Christ  daimst  No  one  could  have
the  slightest  doubt  that  he  claimed  to  fulfil  Old  Testament  prophecy,  and  to  be  that
very  Person  who  was  to  come  and  bring  with  him  to  earth  everything  which  the  love
of  God  could  bestow.  He  professes  his  willingness  to  take  command  of  earth,  not  in
the  easier  sense  of  being  able  to  lay  down  a  political  constitution  for  all  races,  but  in
the  sense  of  being  able  to  satisfy  every  individual,  to  give  peace  to  every  soul,  however
distracted  by  trouble  and  overwhelmed  by  sin.  And  some  have  through  him  actually
entered  into  such  peace  that  they  are  impregnable  to  this  world's  assaults,  and  have
gained  the  mastery  over  its  temptations.  They  have  fouud  him  to  be  all  he  claims  to
be.  2,  They  proclaimed  him  as  the  Saviour  and  King  of  men,  and  he  accepted  these
offices  in  a  very  different  spirit  from  that  in  which  they  were  ascribed  to  him.  He  knew
that  to  he  the  King  of  a  people  so  down-trodden  with  sin,  so  entangled  in  ancient  evils,
was  full  of  danger  and  suffering ;  that  in  order  to  deliver  such  a  people  he  must  die  fur
them.  And  it  is  his  expectation  that  we  on  our  side  should  open  our  eyes  to  what  he
has  done,  and  acknowledge  him  as  our  King.  We  must  not  grudge  if  it  comes  in  the
way  of  our  duty  lo  him  to  make  real  sacrifices,  3.  It  must,  indeed,  have  ieeii  a  humbling
eocperience  for  orr  Lord  to  have  himself  ushered  into  Jerusalem  by  a  crowd  through
whose  hosannas  he  already  heard  the  mutter  of  their  curses.  Such  is  the  homage  a
perfect  life  has  won,

II,  Although  our  Lord  makes  no  moan  over  his  own  fate  as  the  rejected
Messiah,  he  quite  breaks  down  at  the  thought  of  the  doom  of  his  rejeotehs.
Terrible,  indeed,  must  the  responsibility  often  have  seemed  to  him  of  being  set  as  the
test  of  men,  of  being  the  occasion  of  so  many  being  found  wanting.  Are  we  in  a
condition  so  full  of  hazard  and  foreboding  that  it  might  justly  bring  tears  to  the  eyes
of  Christ?

III,  The  withering  of  the  fruitless  fig  tree  was  a  stmbolio  act.  Our
Lord  saw  in  it  the  very-image  of  Jerusalem.  There  was  there  an  exuberant  display  of
all  kinds  of  religious  activity,  with  absolutely  nothing  that  could  feed  the  soul  or  satisfy
God.  And  the  withering  of  the  fig  tree  reveals  the  other  side  of  our  Lord's  character
is  connection  with  this  rejection  by  the  Jews,   He  wept,  but  he  also  pronoimced  doom.


342  THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1— 46.

To  calculate  our  own  future  we  must  keep  in  view  not  only  the  tears  of  Christ,  but
also  his  judgment.  Throughout  his  life  the  one  is  as  prominent  as  the  other.  Words
which  were  rarely  or  never  heard  froia  the  sternest  Old  Testament  prophet  are  common
on  his  lips.  There  is  a  day  of  visitation  for  each  man — a  day  in  which  to  us  in  our
turn  there  appears  a  possibility  and  an  invitation  to  enter  into  the  presence  of  God
and  be  for  ever  satisfied  in  him  and  with  his  likeness.  Picture  to  yourself  the  shame
of  being  a  failure,  such  a  failure  that  the  truest  love  and  most  inventive  wisdom  must
give  you  tip  and  pronounce  you  useless. — D.

Vers.  33 — 44. — Parable  of  the  wicked  husbandmen.  The  priests  and  elders  already
stood  convicted  of  having  incapacitated  themselves  for  recognizing  the  Divine  in  Jesus.
But  theirs  was  not  the  guilt  of  common  unbelievers.  It  was  not  merely  their  personal,
but  their  ofiRcial  duty  to  keep  themselves  awake  to  the  Divine,  by  righteousness  of  life.
It  was  the  duty  for  which  their  ofBce  existed.  They  are  as  agents  whona  a  man  has
appointed  to  manage  his  business,  and  who  use  their  position  only  to  enrich  themselves.
The  parable  under  which  this  judgment  is  carried  home  to  them  is  one  they  could  not
fail  to  understand.  The  vineyard  whs  Israel — the  small  section  of  humanity  railed  off
from  the  degrading  barbarism  around,  as  if  to  try  what  could  be  done  by  bestowing
every  advantage  that  could  help  men  to  produce  the  proper  fruit  of  men.  Nothing
was  wanting  which  could  win  them  to  holiness,  nothing  which  could  enlarge,  purify,
fertilize  human  nature.  The  result  was  that  they  were  content,  as  many  professing
religion  are  content  now,  with  receiving  and  doing  nothing.  They  measured  themselves
by  the  care  God  spent  on  them,  not  by  the  fruit  they  yielded;  by  the  amount  of
instruction,  the  grace  they  received,  not  by  the  use  that  they  made  of  it.  Again  and
again  God  sent  to  remind  them  he  was  expecting  fruit  of  his  care,  but  bis  messengers
speedily  found  that  they  were  willing  enough  to  live  upora  God,  but  not  to  live  to  him.
But  it  is  the  keepers  of  the  vineyard  who  are  here  censured  for  unfaithfulness,  and
that  on  two  grounds.  1.  They  used  their  position  solely  for  their  own  advantage.
They  had  failed  to  remember  they  were  servants.  The  religious  leader  is  as  liable  as
the  political  or  military  leader  to  be  led  by  a  desire  for  distinction,  applause,  power.
Success  may  be  the  idol  of  the  one  as  truly  as  of  the  other.  It  is  not  the  sphere  in
which  one's  work  is  done  that  proves  it*  spirituality  or  worthiness,  nor  even  the  nature
of  it,  but  the  motive.  2.  They  are  censured  for  their  zeal  in  proselytizing — a  more
insidious  form  of  the  temptation  to  use  their  position  for  their  own  ends.  The  incMgna-
tion  of  OUT  Lord  was  roused  by  the  same  element  in  their  zeal,  which  so  often  still
taints  zeal  for  the  propagation  of  religious  truth.  It  was  the  desire  rather  to  bring
men  to  their  way  of  thinking  than  to  bring  them  to  the  truth.  How  widespreading
and  deep-reaching  this  evil  is  those  well  know  who  have  observed  how  dangerously
near  propagandism  is  to  persecution.  The  zeal  that  proceeds  from  loving  consideration
of  others  does  not,  when  opposed,  darken  into  violence  and  ferocity.  If  we  become
bitter  and  fierce  when  contradicted,  we  may  recognize  our  zeal  as  springing  from  desire
to  have  our  own  influence  acknowledged,  rather  than  from  deep  love  of  others,  or  regard
for  the  truth  as  truth.  The  condemnation  of  the  parable  our  Lord  enforces  by  reference
to  the  Scriptures  of  which  they  professed  to  be  guardians.  Rejection  by  the  builders
was  one  of  the  marks  of  the .  Foundation-stone  chosen  by  God.  They  cavilled  at  his
allowing  the  hosanna  psalm  to  be  applied  to  himself,  but  this  was  itself  proof  that  he
was  what  the  crowd  affirmed  him  to  be.  Note :  (1)  That  Jesus  claims  to  be  the  Heir
of  God.  In  Acting  for  God  he  acted  for  himself.  (2)  He  implies  that  this  was  known
to  the  Jewish  leaders.  "  It  was  because  they  knew  he  was  the  Heir  they  were  so  eager
to  remove  him.  Their  state  of  mind  is  intelligible  and  very  common.  There  are
thousands  who  have  a  haunting  suspicion  that  Jesus  deserves  very  different  kind  of
recognition  from  what  they  give  him,  but  who  will  not  let  their  minds  dwell  on  the
conviction,  lest  it  should  urge  them  to  unwelcome  action.  (3)  The  very  fact  that  Christ
is  rejected  by  so  many  is  proof  that  he  is  Divine.  The  higher  the  blessing  the  fewer
there  we  who  acknowledge  and  accept  it.  Our  Lord  completes  the  warning,  abandon-
ing the  figure  of  the  parable,  and  making  use  of  the  figure  of  the  stone.  (I)  Christ  is  a
Stone  of  stumbling  to  those  to  whom  he  is  presented.  The  gospel  once  heard  must
henceforward  be  an  element  in  the  condition  of  the  hearer.  No  man  who  has  heard
can  be  as  if  he  had  not  heard.    Men  are  often  conscious  that  he  is  the  one  Foundation


CH.  XXL  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  843

on  whom  life  can  be  safely  built,  and  yet  they  try  to  pass  on  in  life  as  if  he  were  not
there.  While  they  do  so  they  are  held  back,  distracted ;  their  life  is  a  mere  make-
believe.  Or  habitual  falseness  of  spirit  is  produced,  it  may  be  unconsciously  to  them-
selves. But  the  frost  that  has  only  lasted  a  few  minutes  is  as  surely  frost  as  when  it
has  formed  a  strength  of  surface  the  hammer  cannot  break.  Each  refusal  to  determine
regarding  Christ  leaves  the  conscience  a  little  blunter.  It  is  thus  men  are  bruised  on
this  Stone  of  stumbling.  (2)  The  second  action  of  the  Stone  is  final.  Those  who
determinedly  oppose  Christ  lie  at  once  slain  and  buried  by  what  should  have  been
their  joy.  Their  dwelling  and  refuge  become  their  tomb.  Things  are  to  more  on
eternally  in  fulfilment  of  the  will  of  Christ.  To  oppose  his  course;  to  attempt  to  work
out  an  eternal  success  apart  from  him,  is  as  idle  as  to  stand  on  the  path  of  an  avalanche
of  stone  in  order  to  stem  it.  Acceptance  or  rejection  of  Christ  is  the  determining
element  in  human  destiny.  Without  him  we  can  make  nothing  or  worse  than  nothing
of  life.  "  Better,"  will  a  man  say — "  better  that  a  millstone  had  been  hanged  about  my
neck,  and  that  I  had  been  cast  into  the  sea,  than  that  I  should  have  lived  to  reject  him."
Think  of  it  more,  go  closer  to  him,  keep  yourself  in  the  light  of  his  words  and  life,  and
you  will  see  that  it  is  so,  and  must  be  so,  that  he  is  the  Hand  of  God  stretched  out  to
us,  the  Word  of  God  spoken  to  us  out  of  the  silence. — D.

Ver.  45 — ch.  xxii.  14. — The  marriage  of  the  King's  Son.  This  parable,  taken  along
with  the  parable  of  the  two  sons  and  the  parable  of  the  wicked  husbandmen,  forms  a
climax  to  them.  In  the  first,  God  is  represented  as  a  Father  issuing  a  command ;  in
the  second,  as  a  Eouseliolder  who  expects  the  performance  of  a  contract ;  in  the  third
parable,  God  appears  as  a  King,  not  commanding,  but  looking  for  acceptance  of  an
enviable  invitation.  Already  the  kingdom  of  God  had  been  likened  to  a  feast,  but  here
prominence  is  given  to  the  circumstance  of  the  host  being  a  King,  and  the  occasion  the
marriage  of  his  son,  and  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  impression  that  our  Lord  meant
to  indicate  that  he  was  the  King's  Son.  He  and  Jdhn  had  both  familiarized  the  people
with  the  title  Bridegroom  as  applied  to  the  Messiah.  Bi\t  it  is  rather  from  God's  side
than  from  man's  the  Bridegroom  is  here  viewed.  In  Christ  God  and  man  are  made
one.  No  union  can  be  so  close.  And  in  this,  the  greatest  event  in  God's  reign,  and
the  indestructible  glory  of  humanity,  God  miglit  well  expect  that  men  should  rejoice
with  him.  Proclamation  had  been  made,  invitation  given,  and  people  remained
wholly  indifferent.  The  earnest  sincerity  of  God  in  seeking  our  good  in  this  matter
is  marked  by  one  or  two  unmistakable  traits.  1.  By  the  King's  willing  observance  of
every  form  of  courtesy.  One  of  these  is  the  sending  of  a  second  messenger  to  announce
the  actual  readiness  of  the  feast.  And  so  God  had  not  only  sent  the  prophets,  bidding
the  Jews  expect  this  festival,  but  sent  John  to  remind  and  bring  them.  And  so  he
still  ofiers  his  blessings  in  ways  which  leave  the  reluctant  without  apology.  He
considers  your  needs  and  your  feelings,  and  what  he  offers  is  that  in  which  he  has  his
own  chief  joy — fellowship  with  his  Son.  2.  By  his  wrath  against  the  murderers.
Tou  may  be  so  little  in  earnest  about  God's  invitation  that  you  scarcely  seriously
consider  whether  it  is  to  be  accepted  or  not,  but  nothing  can  so  occupy  him  as  to  turn
his  observation  from  you.  To  save  sinners  from  destruction  is  his  grand  purpose,  and
no  success  in  other  parts  of  his  government  can  repay  him  for  failure  here.  The  last
scene  in  the  parable  forms  an  appendix  directed  to  a  special  section  in  the  audience.
Seeing  the  gates  of  the  kingdom  thrown  open,  and  absolute,  unconditioned  freedom  of
entrance  given,  the  ill  living  and  godless  might  be  led  to  overlook  the  great  moral
change  requisite  in  all  who  enter  God's  presence  and  propose  to  hold  intercourse  with
him.  The  refusal  of  the  wedding  dress  provided  was  not  only  studied  contempt  and
insult,  but  showed  alienation  of  spirit,  disaffection,  want  of  sympathy  with  the  feelings
of  the  king.  The  guest  must  have  lacked  the  festive  spirit,  and  was  therefore  "  a  spot
in  the  feast."  He  sits  there  out  of  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  occasion,  and  dis-
loyal to  his  king.  Therefore  is  his  punishment  swift  and  sudden.  The  eye  of  the
king  marks  the  intruder,  and  neither  the  outer  darkness  of  an  Eastern  street,  nor  thb
pitchy  blackness  in  which  he  lies  unseen  and  helpless,  can  hide  him  from  that  gaze  ol
his  Lord  which  he  feels  to  be  imprinted  on  his  conscience  for  ever.  In  applying  this
parable,  we  may  mark :  (1)  That  there  is  no  way  of  accepting  God's  invitation  without
accepting  his  spirit,  character,  and  ways.     There  is  no  real  acceptance,  no  abiding  in


Ui  *HiS  GOST-EL  according  to  ST.  MATTHEW.    Icn.  xxi.  l-4t

God's  favour,  where  there  is  no  growing  likeness  to  him.  Conformity  to  God,  ability
to  rejoice  with  God  and  in  God,  humble  and  devoted  reverence, — these  are  great  attain-
ments ;  but  these  constitute  our  wedding  garment,  without  which  we  cannot  remain  in
his  presence  or  abide  his  searching  eye.  No  associating  of  yourself  with  those  that
Jove  him,  no  outward  entrance  into  his  presence,  will  avail ;  it  is  the  heart  you  bear
towards  him  that  will  determine  your  destiny.  (2)  There  is  abundant  encouragement
to  all  who  are  willing  and  desirous  to  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  the  first  duty  of
every  host  to  make  his  gUest  feel  at  home,  and  therefore  does  God  provide  us  not  only
with  great  outward  blessings,  but  with  all  that  can  make  us  feel  easy  and  glad  in  his
presence.  He  offers  not  only  enjoyment,  but  power  to  enjoy.  If  you  are  conscious
that  you  could  not  bo  easy  in  God's  presence  without  great  alterations  in  your
character,  your  invitation  is  guarantee  that  these  will  be  made.  If  you  could  not  be
easy  in  his  presence  without  knowing  that  he  was  aware  of  all  you  had  thought  and
done  against  him,  and  forgave  you ;  if  you  could  not  eat  at  the  table  of  one  against
whom  you  harboured  ill  will,  nor  enjoy  any  entertainment  without  genuine  love  of
your  host; — then  this  will  be  communicated  to  you  on  your  acceptance  of  God's  invi-
tation. Does  your  unfitness,  even  more  than  your  unworthiness,  deter  you  ?  Here
you  see  that  God  invites  you  os  you  are. — P.

Vers.  1 — 11. — 3%«  triumph  of  Christ.  In  his  journey  to  Jerusalem  Jesus  rested  at
Bethany,  where,  stopping  at  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper,  Mary  anointed  his  feet  (cf  ch.
xxvi.  6 ;  John  xii.  2).    His  progress  on  the  day  following  is  here  recorded.   Observe —

I.    'HlUfV   JjlSUS   ENTBBED  THE  CAPITAL  IN  THE  ROYALTY  OP   MEEKNESS.      1.    He  came

in  sacred  character.  (1)  Animals  which  had  never  borne  the  yoke  were  employed  for
(iacred  purposes  (see  Deut.  zxi,  3).  The  colt  upon  which  Jesus  rode  was  such  (see
Mark  xi,  2).  Specially  acceptable  to  Christ  is  the  consecration  of  virgin  youth.  (2)
His  sacred  character  was  recognized  in  the  acclamations  of  the  multitude.  "  Hosanna  1 "
was  a  fona  of  acclamation  used  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  when  the  people  carried
boughs  (gee  Neh.viiL16).  "Save  now,  I  beseech  thee,OLordl"  equivalent  to  "Hosaiina,
O  Lord  1 "  (see  Ps.  xx.  9).  "  Hosanna  in  the  highest  I  "  i.e.  in  the  heavens,  which  is  an
invitation  to  holy  angels  to  join  with  the  sons  of  men  in  praising  the  Messianic  King
(cf,  Ps.  cxlviii.  1, 2 ;  Luke  ii.  14 ;  xix.  38).  (3)  That  a  colt  never  before  ridden  should
have  borne  Jesus  amidst  the  shoutings  of  the  multitude  was  a  miracle  (cf.  1  Sam.  vL
7).  That  miracle  set  forth  the  power  by  which  Christ  can  subject  to  his  will  the
unruly  heart  of  man  (see  Job  xi.  12).  (4)  While  Jesus  entered  Jerusalem  as  a  King,
he  showed  that  his  kingdom  was  not  of  the  world.  So  Pilate  acquitted  him  of  treason
against  Caesar.  2.  He  came  as  the  "  Prince  of  Peace."  (1)  He  rode  not  upon  the  war-
like horse.  To  have  done  so  would  have  been  unbecoming  him  as  King  of  Israel  (cf.
Deut.  xvii.  16 ;  Ps.  xx.  7).  Has  his  royalty  peacefully  entered  in  triumph  into  your
soul  ?  Has  he  received  a  welcome — a  hosanna,  in  your  heart  ?  (2)  As  "  the  Judge
of  Israel "  ho  rode  upon  the  colt  of  an  aas  (cf.  Judg.  v.  10 ;  x.  4 ;  xii.  13, 14).  The
kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  force,  but  righteousness.  (3)  His  coming  was  therefore  the
triumph  of  pure  joy.  This  the  multitude  expressed  by  acclamation  and  by  spreading
their  garments  and  palm  branches  (cf.  2- Kings  ix.  13;  Ps.  cxviii.  26;  John  xiii.  13;
Bev.  vii.  9).  (4)  The  hosannas  of  earth  are  the  prelude  to  the  hallelujahs  of  heaven.
3.  He  came  inhumhh  state.  (1)  He  condescended  to  have  "need"  of  the  ass's  colt.
If  he  is  pleased  to  have  need  of  our  poor  services,  this  is  reason  sufficient  for  any
sacrifice.  To  render  service  needed  by  the  Lord  is  at  once  the  highest  honour  and  the
greatest  blessing.  (2)  He  condescended  to  accept  his  praises  from  the  lips  of  "  babes."
Not  from  the  heads  and  rulers  of  the  nation,  but  from  his  poor  disciples.  Their  great-
ness is  childlikeness  (cf.  oh.  xviii.  1 — 4).  (3)  He  condescended  to  come  in  meekness
to  those  who  plotted  his  destruction.  Lol  the  King  comes  to  be  murdered  by  his  crea-
tures, and  in  his  death  to  redeem  them  from  wrath  1  (4)  What  triumphs  are  here  1
He  triumphs  over  pride  in  his  humility,  over  afBuence  in  his  poverty,  over  rage  and
malice  in  his  meeknesa,  "  Was  it  a  mean  attitude  wherein  our  Lord  appeared?  Mean
to  contempt  ?  I  grant  it.  I  glory  in  it.  It  is  for  the  comfort  of  my  soul,  for  the
honour  of  his  humility,  and  for  the  utter  confusion  of  all  worldly  pomp  and  grandeur  "
(Wesley).
JL  That  Jbsub  bntkbbd  thb  capital  fob  thb  tbiumph  or  dbstint.     I,  Ht


OH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.  845

cwmefor  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  (1)  This  last  Journey  of  our  Lord  from  Jericho  to
Jerusalem  was  in  the  same  line  as  the  triumphant  march  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  the
time  of  their  first  entry  into  the  holy  land  to  the  taking  of  Jerusnlem.  The  spiritual
progress  ia  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  from  the  place  accursed  to  the  place  of  the
Name  of  our  Lord.  (2)  He  came  as  the  very  Paschal  Lamb.  It  was  now  the  tenth
day  of  the  month,  when  the  Law  appointed  that  the  Paschal  lamb  should  be  taken  up
(see  Exod.  xii.  2 ;  1  Cor.  v.  7).  (3)  He  rode  in  triumph  to  his  death.  The  priest
according  to  the  order  of  Melchizedek  suffers  as  a  Priest  and  triumphs  as  a  King.  His
victory  is  moral,  viz.  over  sin,  death,  and  hell.  lie  is  the  King  in  his  death,  according
to  the  inscription  on  his  cross  (see  ch.  xxvii.  37).  How  appropriate  upi>n  this  occasion,
then,  was  the  "  Hosanna" — "  Save  now  "  t  (4)  The  history  of  this  remarkable  progress
was  pre-written  (see  Isa.  Ixii.  11 ;  Zech.  ix.  9).  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  ways
from  the  beginning.  2.  His  coming  was  itself  a  prophecy.  (1)  It  suggested,  by  what
Elliot  calls  "allusive  contrast,"  the  ascension  of  Jusus  into  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.
Some  of  the  multitude  "  went  before  him,"  viz.  those  who  met  him  from  the  city,  as
the  angels  met  Jesus  in  his  ascension.  Some  "  followed  after,"  viz,  those  who  came
with  him  from  Bethany,  as  the  risen  saints  ascended  with  their  risen  Lord  (of,  Ps,  xxiv. ;
ch.  xxvii.  52,  53).  Those  who  would  follow  Chri.st  in  his  ascension  must  follow  him
now  in  his  lowly  state.  (2)  It  suggested  also  the  second,  glorious,  advent  of  Messiah
to  this  earth.  Then  coming  forth  to  vengeance,  he  is  described  as  riding  upon  a  horse
(see  Eev.  xix.  11).  Coming  forth  in  glory,  without  a  sin  sacrifice,  he  will  descend  upon
a  throne  of  white  light.  He  will  come  with  the  sound  of  the  great  trutnpet,  wMch
shall  wake  the  very  diad.  Instead  of  the  retinue  of  poor  Galileans,  he  will  cume  with
a  myriad  retinue  of  mighty  angels.  Then  will  be  understood  the  "  Hosanna  in  the
highest  I "  (3)  The  Lord's  day  is  the  Christian  type  of  the  everlasting  sabbath.  As  the
day  of  the  triumphal  entry  of  Christ  into  the  earthly  .Jerusaletn  was  the  tenth  of  the
month,  so  was  it  also  the^rrf  day  of  the  week.  It  was  the  first  of  that  series  of  events
which  took  place  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  entitling  that  day  to  be  called  "  the  day
of  the  Lord."  Is  there  no  prophetic  reference  to  this  in  the  words  of  the  psalm  which
was  evidently  in  the  minds  of  the  disciples :  "  This  is  the  day  which  the  lord  hath
made ;  we  will  rejoice  and  be  glad  in  it.  Save  now,  I  beseech  thee  [n3  np'tsiiny  hoshiah
nna,  from  which  the  disciples  had  their  hosannaj,"  etc.  (see  Ps.  cxviii.  24—26)?
—J.  A.  M.

Vers.  12 — 17. — I%e  Lord  of  the  temple.  "  The  temple  of  God  "  (ver.  12)  Jesus  calls
"  my  house  "  (ver,  13),  asserting  himself  to  be  the  Divine  Lord  of  the  temple.  And
quoting  as  he  does  from  Isa.  Ivi.  7  and  Jer.  vii.  11,  he  identifies  himself  as  "  Jehovah."
Acting  in  this  quality,  he  surveyed  the  characters  he  found  in  the  temple  and  dealt
with  them  accordingly.  But  the  temple  stands  forth  as  a  type  of  Christ's  Church  (of.
1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  21,  22 ;  Heb.  iii.  6),  so  the  subject  has  its  lessons
for  us.     We  may  ask,  then —

I.  What  bobt  op  persons  dobs  Jbsus  find  in  his  Church?  1.  Be  finds  the
secularist  there.  (1)  The  secularist  is  in  his  place  in  the  world.  The  calling  of  the
money-changer  is  lawful  when  honestly  fulfilled.  So  is.  that  of  the  vendor  of  doves  (see
Deut.  xiv.  24).  (2)  The  calling  of  the  secularist  is  a  desecration  in  the  "  house  of
prayer."  Lawful  things  become  sinful  when  ill-timed  and  ill-placed.  The  temple  of
God  is  defiled  by  merchandise,  (a)  By  that  scandalous  trafiic  in  holy  things,  which  is
80  largely  carried  on  wfthin  the  borders  of  the  professing  Church,  in  sitnoniaoal  presen-
tation, fraudulent  exchanges,  preferment  obtained  through  flattery.  (6)  By  that
worldly,  covetous,  money-getting  spirit  which  dwells  in  so  many  of  its  members.  This
spirit  is  demoralizing.  It  is  also  distractiujj  to  worship.  (3)  Worldly  gain  must  not
be  made  the  end  of  godliness  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  5).  Men  should  not  enter  the  membership
or  seek  office  in  Churches  with  a  view  to  increasing  their  business.  2.  He  finds  the
afflicted  there.  (1)  "The  blind  and  the  lame  "  are  in  the  world.  Sin  begets  suffering.
The  prevalence  of  suffering  evinces  the  prevalence  of  sin.  But  there  must  be  qualification
here  (see  John  ix.  3).  (2)  «  The  blind  and  the  lame  "  are  in  the  temple.  The  Church
on  ewth  is  not  so  perfect  as  to  be  free  from  afflictions.  (3)  The  afflicted  are  where
they  should  be  in  the  Church.  Christ  the  Healer  is  still  in  his  temple.  Religion  has
its  remedies.    Religion  has  its  reliefs.    3.  He  finds  the  true  diseijale  there.    (1)  The


315  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxL  1— 46.

Christian  in  tbo  world  is  not  of  it.  (2)  In  the  Church  he  is  at  home.  (3)  He  meets
Jesus  there.  (4)  He  see  his  "  wonders  "  there — miracles  of  moral  healing,  miracles  of
wholesome  discipline.  (5)  He  raises  the  "Hosannal  "  there.  The  " babes  and  suck-
lings," who  perfected  praise,  were  not  infants  literally,  but  childlike  disciples  (cf.  ch.
xviiL  1 — 6;  xi.  25;  IPet.  ii.  2).    4.  He  finds  the  ritualist  amd  the  traditionalist  there.

(1)  "  The  chief  priests  and  the  scribes  "  (ver.  15).  Ritualist  and  traditionalist  are  fre-
quently met  in  company.  (2)  They  saw,  but  could  not  interpret,  the  wonders  wrought
by  Christ.  They  could  not  see  his  Godhead  in  the  wonderful  submission  of  the  traffickers.
Neither  could  they  see  this  in  his  miracles  of  healing.  (3)  They  were  angry  with  those
who  could  interpret  the  wonders.  They  were  scandalized  that  the  disciples  should
shout  "  Hosanna  to  tlie  Son  of  David ! "  Proud  men  cannot  bear  that  honour  should
be  given  to  any  but  themselves.  To  hypocrites  everything  that  is  not  commonplace
and  traditional  is  extravagant.  (4)  Prejudice  could  censure  "the  blind  and  the
lame  "  for  coming  into  the  temple  to  be  healed,  but  could  see  no  evil  in  the  traffickers
stalling  their  oxen  there.  Superstition  is  often  the  companion  of  irreverence.  The
priests  probably  had  a  pecuniary  interest  in  the  traffic,  particularly  in  those  animals
sold  for  sacrifice  which  they  had  to  examine  and  approve.     Interest  blinds.

II.  What  sobt  of  tkeatment  have  thbt  to  expect  fbom  him?  1.  Whai  ha*
the  secularist  to  expect  ?  (1)  To  be  violently  ejected  from  the  Church.  See  the  tables
and  seats  overthrown  and  tlie  money  scattered.  What  a  different  estimate  of  its  value
has  Jesus  to  that  cherished  by  men  of  the  world !  (2)  To  have  their  characters  exposed.
"  Robbers  I"  Extortioners  and  cheats,  viz.  in  their  business,  are  robbers.  The  slyness
of  the  fraud  does  not  diminish  its  villainy.  How  monstrous  the  sin  when  the  very
Church  of  God  is  made  a  "  den  of  thieves  " !  (3)  Those  who  are  not  admonished  by
the  searchings  of  truth  must  suffer  the  retributions  o/ power.  On  the  first  day  when
Jesus  entered  the  temple  he  "  looked  round  about  upon  all  things."  It  was  not  until
the  second  day  that  he  gave  the  sterner  rebuke  (cf.  Mark  xi.  11, 15).  (4)  This  was
the  second  time  that  Jesus  purged  the  temple.  The  fi^rst  was  about  three  years
earlier  (see  John  ii.  14).  Note :  Secularists  ejected  from  the  Church  will  return.  They
must  be  expelled  again.  (5)  As  our  Lord  purged  the  temple  first  at  the  commence-
ment of  his  ministry  and  now  again  at  the  close  of  it,  so  at  the  beginning  of  the
Christian  dispensation  the  Jewish  anti-Messiah  was  driven  out  by  the  Romans,  and
at  the  end  of  it  the  Gentile  antichrist  will  be  cast  out.  (6)  Never,  until  the  anti-
christian  secularism  is  purged  out  of  the  temple  of  the  Lordj  will  the  glory  of  the  Lord
come  into  it  as  in  ancient  times.  The  milltimial  reign  will  set  in  with  the  return  of
the  Sheohinah.  2.  What  have  the  afflicted  to  expect  f  (1)  Miracles  of  healing.  The
physical  miracles  have  their  moral  counterparts.  The  "blind"  come  to  spiritual
conception.     The  "  lame "  come  to  render  moral  obedience  in  a  steady,  even  walk.

(2)  Christ  alone  wrought  miracles  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  He  only  can  work
out  spiritual  marvels.  (3)  Note:  Christ  brought  in  the  afiiicted  as  he  turned  out
the  secularists.'  Concession  to  the  spirit  of  tbe  world  is  not  the  way  to  win  men  to
Jesus.  We  have  too  many  sensuous  "entertainments."  (4)  Spiritual  glory  is
grander  than  material  splendour.  By  his  healing  mercy  Jesus  made  the  glory  of
the  latter  house  to  surpass  that  of  the  former.  3.  What  have  the  true  disciples  to
expect*  (1)  Mutual  encouragement.  The  hosannas  were  in  chorus.  If  "children,"
literally  taken,  raised  their  voices,  it  was  in  imitation  of  the  childlike  disciples.
(2)  The  defence  of  Christ.  The  expulsion  of  the  traffickers  was  for  the  defeuce
of  pious  Gentiles ;  for  it  was  in  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  the  traffic  was  carried  on.
The  privileges  of  the  Gentile  believer  must  not  be  diverted  from  him.  Jesus  also
defended  his  disciples  against  their  enemies,  the  ritualists  and  traditionalists.  (3)  His
conimendation.  God  makes  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  him.  But  his  praise  is  "  per-
fected" by  his  disciples.  With  them  his  praise  is  intelligent,  generous,  and  free.
4.  What  have  the  haughty  to  expect  f  (1)  Rebuke  from  Christ.  There  is  a  keen
sarcasm  in  the  question,  "  Did  ye  never  read?"  when  addressed  to  the  "  chief  priests
and  scribes."  (2)  Abandonment  by  Christ.  "And  he  left  them."  He  had  no
sympathy  with  their  spirit.  He  found  a  more  congenial  lodging  in  the  olive-shade
of  Bethany.     (3)  The  groat  Redeemer  is  a  great  Reformer. — J.  A.  M.

Vera.  18 — 22. — 2%e  omnipotence  of  faith.    The  miracles  of  Jesus  were  generally


CH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  317

miracles  of  mercy.  There  are  a  few  exceptions.  Conspicuous  amongst  these  is  the
withering  of  the  fig  tree  with  a  word.  When  the  disciples  maiTelled  Jesus  expounded
to  them  his  astonishing  doctrine  of  the  power  of  faith.     We  learn —

I.  That  BELIEVING  18  ESSENTIAL  TO  PEBVAii.iNo  PRAYER.  1.  Then  can  }>€  710  prayer
mthoutfmth  in  a  personal  God.  (1)  The  atheist  cannot  pray.  The  reason  is  obvious.
He  has  no  God  to  pray  to.  His  is  a  melancholy  orphanage.  (2)  The  pantheist  cannot
pray.  His,  god  is  an  infinite  It,  unsusceptible  to  prayer.  "  He  thJit  cometh  to  God
must  believe  that  he  is  "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  (3)  The  Christian  can  pray.  He  believes  in
s  personal  God,  who  created  ns  after  his  image.  As  a  man  can  intelligently  speak  to
his  friend,  so,  etc.  (see  Exod.  xxxiii.  11).  2.  There  can  he  no  prayer  vnthout  faith  in
a  Person  susceptible  to  human  appeals.  (1)  The  dui.st  cannot  pray.  His  god  is  too
far  removed  from  his  works  to  notice  the  specks  upon  a  tiny  planet.  (2)  The  Christian
can  pray.  For  he  has  loftier  views  of  God.  He  is  so  great  that  nothing  can  escape
him.  While  he  rules  firmaments  of  suns  and  systems  of  worlds,  he  feeds  tlie  animalculse.
(3)  The  Christian,  moreover,  is  encouraged  to  pray  by  his  faith  in  tlie  mediation  of
OHrist.  Without  such  mediation  the  sinner  might  shrink  from  approaching  the  infinitely
Hilly.  In  it  mercy  in  iiarraony  with  justice  is  assured.  3.  Faith  is  active  in  success-
ful prayer.  (1)  The  power  of  faith  is  like  that  of  water,  impotent  in  quiescence,  hut
efficient  when  in  motion.  It  is  like  heat,  impotent  when  latent,  but  whose  energy
when  molecules  are  in  motion  is  tremendous.  (2)  It  is  the  active  faith  of  saints
that  alarms  Satan.     It  stirs  three  worlds,  viz.  heaven,  earth,  and  hull.

II.  That  believing  pbayer  is  infallibly  efi'ECTIVb.  1.  Because  Qod  has  pledged
himself  to  it.  (1)  He  is  ahle  to  do  whatever  he  will.  The  power  of  the  Promiser  was
exemplified  in  the  withering  of  the  fig  tree.  The  moral  is  drawn  from  this  example :
"  If  ye  have  faith,  and  doubt  not,"  etc.  (vei  s.  21,  22).  (2)  He  is  willing  to  do  what-
ever he  promises.  He  cannot  deny  himself.  "  Heaven  and  earth  Tnay  pass  away."
The  Creator  may  reverse  his  act  of  creation.  But  the  Uncreate  cannot  annihilate
himself.  But  to  falsify,  would  he  to  annihilate  Infinite  Truth.  2.  But  how  is  the
infallible  effectiveness  of  believing  prayer  reconciled  with  the  wisdom  of  Qod  f  (1)  If
omnipotence  is  pledged  to  faith,  may  not  omnipotence  be  put  into  commission  to
folly;  for  man  is  confessedly  fallible?  (2)  Faith,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  pre-
supposes a  promise.  Where  has  the  God  of  wisdom  promised  a  foolish  thing?  (3)  But
is  there  not  here  an  opeu  cheque :  "  All  things,  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,
believing,  ye  shall  receive"?  The  particular  promise  is  still  implied  in  the  term
"  h,elieviug ; "  for  faith  itself  is  the  gift  of  God.  The  God  of  wisdom  cannot  inspire  faith
in  the  interests  of  folly.  3.  /Jut  how  can  efficacy  in  prayer  comport  with  the  uniforinity
of  nature's  processes  ?  (1)  So  uuduviating  is  the  order  in  the  revolutions  of  the  spheres
that  eclipses,  occultations,  conjunctions,  epacts,  and  other  matters  may  be  calculated
with  certainty.  In  like  manner,  chemical  changes  never  vary  when  the  conditions  are
the  same.  Can  prayer  disturb  these  things?  (2)  Who  wants  it  to  do  so?  There  is
no  need  to  disturb  matter  when  prayer  is  made  for  spiritual  hlessings.  Wliat  relation
is  there  to  eclipses  and  epacts  in  answering  the  cry  for  mercy  ?  A  whole  millennium
of  spiritual  glory  may  flood  this  earth  in  answer  to  prayer,  without  touching  the
properties  of  a  molecule  of  matter.  (3)  But  how  does  the  argument  stand  in  relation
to  providence  ?  There  is  a  sphere  in  nature  for  human  providence.  The  farmer  does
not  violate  the  order  of  nature  when  he  grows  corn  in  response  to  tho  cry  of  a  nation
for  food.  By  draining  and  tillage  he  can  alter  the  climate  of  his  country  and  alter  its
flora  and  fauna,  and  all  this  without  altering  the  properties  of  a  sinj^le  molecule  of
matter.  In  like  manner,  on  a  far  grander  scale,  God  also  has  reserved  to  himself  a
sphere  for  his  providence  in  natm'e,  within  which  he  can  answer  every  prayer  he
pleases  to  inspire.

III.  That  pbateb  fails  theouoh  thk  influence  of  conditions  inimical  to
active  faith.  1.  Ai  when  the  matter  of  the  suit  is  unwise.  (1)  "Ye  ask,  and
receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss"  (Jas.  iv.  3).  In  such  a  case  God  will  in  mercy
withhold  his  gift  of  faith.  (2)  Or  he  may  honour  the  sincerity  of  the  prayer  by  con-
ferring an  equivalent  to  that  which  his  grace  withholds.  So  he  dealt  with  Paul  when
he  sought  the  removal  of  his  "  thorn  in  the  flesh."  (3)  Honest  prayer  is  never  vain.
Its  very  exercise  ennobles.  As  the  domestic  animal  is  ennobled  by  his  conversation
with  man,  infinitely  more  is  man  ennobled  by  conversing  with  his  Maker.    2.  Am  when


848  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1— 4«.

the  motive  is  utvworthy  of  the  suit.  (1)  Is  our  prayer  for  business  prospsrity  ?  But  is
the  motive  good?  Else  the  answer  may  come  in  anger,  To  how  many  is  the  acces-
sion of  material  wealth  the  wasting  of  the  infinitely  more  precious  moral  properties  I
(2)  Is  our  prayer  for  the  spiritual  conversion  of  a  child  ?  The  end  here  is  undoubtedly
good.  But  what  is  the  motive  ?  Is  it  that  his  consequent  dutifuloess  may  increase
the  comfort  of  the  home,  rather  than  bring  glory  to  God  and  save  a  Soul  from
death?  Feather  the  arrows  of  prayer  with  the  very  best  motives.  8.  Aa  when  the
disposition  of  the  suppliant  is  inconsistent  with  sincerity.  (1)  Such  is  the  case  when
the  lazy  pray  for  a  revival.  Work  for  it  while  you  pray.  (2)  When  the  impenitent
seek  salvation.  This  is  like  a  rebel  suing  to  his  sovereign  for  pardon  with  a  loaded
revolver  in  his  hand.  The  salvation  of  the  gospel  is  a  salvation  from  siu.  Repentance
is  therefore  indispensible  (see  Fs.  Ixvi.  18;  Isa.  L  15—20;  ch.T.  23 — 26).  There  is  no
mercy  for  the  implacable  (see  ch.  vi.  12 — 15). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  23 — 32. — The  authority  of  Jesus.  The  "  things  "  in  reference  to  the  doing  of
which  this  question  of  the  authority  of  Jesus  was  raised  by  the  chief  priests  and  elders,
were  his  purging  the  temple  from  the  traffickers,  his  publicly  teaching  and  working
miracles  of  healing  there.  Mark,  by  mure  clearly  placing  the  miracle  of  the  withering
of  the  fig  tree  in  order  before  these  things,  brings  them  into  closer  connection  with  the
passage  before  us.    We  may  profitably  consider  the  authority  of  Jesus —

I.  As  IT  IS  EVIDBNT  IN  HIS  CONDUCT.  1.  His  questiouevs  were  not  ignorant  of  his
claims.  (1)  He  had  long  before  plainly  told  them  who  he  was  (see  John  v.  36,  43).
(2)  He  had  but  the  day  before  claimed  to  be  the  Lord  of  the  temple.  He  called  It  the
"  temple  of  God,"  and  spoke  of  it  as  his  own  house  (see  vers.  12, 13).  And  the  jjassnges
he  quoted  in  connection  with  this  claiiii  spake  of  the  temple  as  the  house  of  Jehovah
(see  Isa.  Ivi.  7;  Jer.  vii.  11).  (3)  Their  object  was  now  to  get  him  to  assert  this
again,  that  they  might  make  it  a  pretext  to  fix  upon  him  the  chiirge  of  blasphemy ;  for
they  had  plotted  to  destroy  him  (see  Mark  xi.  18).  2.  Sis  conduct  vindicated  his
dainu.  (1)  His  expulsion  of  the  traffickers  was  a  miracle.  It  was  a  work  which  an
army  migiit  hesitate  to  undertake.  Yet  single-handed  he  did  it  effectually.  (2)  He
wrought  miracles  of  healing  which,  the  rulers  and  Pharisees  themselves  being  witnesses^,
no  man  could  do  unless  God  were  with  him  (see  John  iii.  1,  2).  (3)  Moral  miracles
also  attended  his  ministry.  Publicans  and  harlots — unjust  and  immodest  persons —
notorious  sinners,  were  converted  into  reputable  citizens  and  exemplary  saints.  These
were  the  people  represented  by  the  son  iu  the  parable  who  "  said,  I  will  not ;  but
afterwards  repented,  and  went "  (ver.  29).  The  life  of  the  sinner  is  an  actual  clamour
of  "  I  will  not."  But  as  there  are  those  who  promise  better  than  they  prove,  so  are
there  those  who  prove  better  than  they  promise.

"  Scest  thou  yon  harlot,  wooing  all  she  meets ;
The  worn-out  nuisance  of  tlie  public  streets ;
Herself  from  morn  to  night,  from  night  to  morn.
Her  own  abliorrenoe,  and  as  much  your  scorn?
The  gracious  shower,  unlimited  and  free,
Shall  fall  on  her  when  Heaven  denies  it  thee."

(Cowper.)

3.  Note  here  the  gospel  call.  (1)  It  is  a  call  to  work  for  Christ.  "  Go,  work  in  my
vineyard."  It  is,  charged  upon  the  Pharisees  that  they  say,  and  do  not  (ch.  xxiii.  3) ;
upon  the  chief  priests  and  rulers  liere  that  they  said,  "  1  go,  sir,  and  went  not."  liuds
and  blossoms  are  not  fruit.  (2)  It  is  a  call  to  work  for  Christ  now.  "  Go,  work  to-day
in  my  vineyard."  (3)  It  is  a  call  from  the  common  Father.  It  comes  to  the  "  two
sons,"  and  these  repiesent  the  two  great  classes  of  sinners,  viz.  the  openly  irreligious
«nd  the  hypocritical  professors.  (4)  But  though  coming  equally  to  all,  it  differs  in  its
effects.  There  is  more  hope  of  the  openly  irreligious  than  of  the  hypocritical  professor.
(5)  True  repentance  is  practical.     When  he  reijented  "he  went."

II.  A«  IT  IB  EVIDENT  IN  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  JOHN.      1.   John's  hoptism  WOS  prOVed   tO

be  "from  heaven."  (1)  By  the  scope  of  his  ministry.  He  "  came  in  the  way  of  right-
eousness." Ho  came  walking  in  it  as  well  as  preaching  it.  He  did  not  affect  the
"soft  clothing"  of  the  courtier,  as  he  might  have  done,  being  the  son  of  a  notabia


OH.  XXL  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  849

priest,  had  he  been  moved  by  a  vulgar  ambition.  Neither  did  he  flatter  princea,  but
lost  his  head  for  Ids  fidelity.  (2)  By  the  success  of  his  ministry,  (o)  "  The  baptism
of  John  "  is  here  put  for  his  doctrine.  '  (5)  Jesus,  by  submitting  to  John's  baptism,
accepted  and  sanctioned  his  doctrine,  (c)  The  vast  multitudes  who  came  to  his
baptism  thereby  professed  faith  in  his  teaching.  Hence  the  general  expression,  "  All
hold  John  as  a  prophet."  The  defeat  of  Herod's  army  in  the  war  with  Aretas,  King
of  Arabia,  was  esteemed  by  the  Jews  a  judgment  for  the  death  of  John  (Josephus,
'Ant.,'  xvili.  7).  2.  Jdhn'i  testimony  therefore  should  be  conclusive.  (1)  Prophecy
indicated  him  to  be  the  harbinger  of  Messiah.  Thus  laaiah  spake  of  him  (cf.  Isa.  xl.  3 ;
cb.  iiu  3 ;  John  i.  23).  So  Malachi  (cf.  Mai.  iv.  6 ;  ch.  xi.  14).  So  Zecharias  (see
Luke  i.  17).  (2)  He  indicated  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Lamb  of
God  that  boareth  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  (3)  The  questioners  had  no  reply  to  this
argument.  "  They  reasoned  with  themselves,"  not  what  was  true  to  be  believed,  but
what  it  was  safe  to  acknowledge.  Note ;  Truths  appear  in  the  clearest  light  when
taken  in  order.  The  resolving  of  the  previous  question  will  be  the  key  to  the  main
question.    If  the  questioners  answered  Christ's  question,  they  would  answer  their  own.

IIL  As  IT  IS  EVIDENT  IN  THE  DIBCOUFITDBE  OF  HIS  ENEMIES.      1.    They  set  Up  their

authority  against  his.  (1)  They  claimed  the  right  to  rule  in  the  temple.  They  were
"  chief  priests  " — judges  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts,  "  and  elders  " — judges  in  the  civil
(see  2  Chron.  xix.  5 — 11).  They  should  therefore  have  been  the  promoters  of  the
kingdom  of  Messiah  which  they  opposed.  (2)  They  questioned  the  right  of  Jesus  to
teach  in  the  temple,  he  being  neither  priest  nor  Levite.  They  were  more  concerned
about  the  right  of  our  Lord  to,  preach  than  about  the  character  of  his  preaching.  (3)
Their  question,  "Who  gave  thee  this  authority?"  suggests  that  they  were  offended
because  he  not  only  taught  without  their  permission,  but  contravened  their  concession
to  the  traffickers  when  he  drove  them  out.  (4)  Here,  then,  is  human  authority  disputing
with  the  Divine — office  in  conflict  with  wisdom.  Those  who  take  upon  themselves
to  act  with  authority  should  ask  themselves  the  question,  "  Who  gave  thee  this
authority?"  Those  who  run  before  their  warrant  run  without  their  blessing  (see
Jer.  xxiii.  21,  22).  2.  He  treated  their  presumption  with  contempt.  (1)  He  convicted
theen  as  hypocrites.  They  had  wit  enough  to  see  that  reason  was  against  them ;  for
the  Divinity  of  Christ  was  evident  from  the  testimony  of  John.  They  knew  that  their
"We  cannot  tell"  was  a  lie  for  "We  wUl  not  telL"  The  son  who  said,  "I  go,  sir,"  and
went  not,  dissembled  and  lied.  What  sort  of  truth-seekers  are  those  who  refuse  the
evidence  whose  cogency  they  see  ?  They  were  typical  infidels,  whose  heart  is  at  fault
rather  than  the  head.  Those  who  are  engaged  against  the  truth  are  abandoned  to  the
spirit  of  falsehood,  (2)  He  exposed  them  as  incompetents.  They  affected  to  bo
judges  as  to  the  authority  of  Jesus.  Jesus  forced  from  them  the  confession,  "We
cannot  tell,"  in  relation  to  the  previous  question  of  the  authority  of  John.  The
"  Neither  do  I  tell  you "  was  a  merited  repulse  in  which  Jesus  in  his  authority
triumphs.  (3)  He  humbled  their  pride  by  proving  them  to  be  slaves  to  the  fear  of  the
people.  But  for  the  fear  of  the  multitude,  they  would  have  questioned  the  authority
of  John.  Many  who  are  not  influenced  by  the  fear  of  sin  are  influenced  by  the  fear  of
shame.  (4)  He  shamed  them  by  the  example  of  the  publicans  and  harlots,  who
believed  John,  but  the  lesson  of  whose  reformation  was  lost  upon  them.  Examples  of
the  power  of  truth  are  of  little  avail  to  the  perverse, — J,  A.  M.

Vers.  33 — 46. — Goodness  and  severity.  In  this  parable  Jesus  sets  forth  the  privi-
leges, the  sins,  and  the  impending  ruin  of  the  Jewish  people.  It  brings  before  us  for
our  admonition —

I.  What  the  Lord  did  fob  his  people.  1.  Ee  became  a  Father  to  them.  (1)  By
virtue  of  creation  he  is  the  Father  of  the  whole  family  of  man.  (2)  By  the  Sinai
covenant  he  became  especially  the  Head  of  the  house  of  Israel.  (3)  By  the  everlasting
covenant  of  his  gospel  he  is  now  the  Father  of  all  believers  everywhere.  2.  He  gave
them  a  rich  inheritance.  (1)  The  land  of  promise  was  as  "  a  vineyard  "  in  distinction
from  the  surrounding  countries  (c£  Isa.  v.  1 — 7).  They  were  morally  as  well  as  phy-
sically  distinguished.  (2)  God  himself  "  planted  "  them  as  "  a  vine  from  Egypt  (cf^
Ps.  Ixxx.  8 — 15 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  3 ;  Jer.  ii.  21).  3.  He  made  every  provision  for  their  ben^t.
(1)  "  He  set  a  hedge  about  it."    (a)  By  the  "  Uw  of  commandments  copt^iped  ii)


350  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxl  1—46.


ordinancM  "  he  separated  hii  people  from  the  idolatrons  nations  surrounding.  (J)  His
providence  was  as  a  wall  of  fire  for  their  defence  (see  Zech.  ii.  6).  (2)  "  He  digged  a
winepress,"  or  yat  for  the  reception  of  the  wine.  To  conserve  the  purposes  of  their
planting  he  gave  them  the  serviceB  of  the  sanctuary— daily  offerings,  sabbaths,  new
moons,  annual  festivals.  (3)  "  He  built  a  tower "  whence  to  watch  the  approach  of
robbers.    Jerusalem  with  its  temple  was  the  watch-tower  of  the  vineyard.

IL  The  betubm  hb  beoeived  fob  his  ooodnesb.  1.  The  httsbandmen  kept  from
him  the/ruita.  (1)  The  rent  is  paid  in  produce.  The  fruits  are  those  of  righteous-
ness and  love.  When  the  people  entered  upon  the  inheritance  they  gave  verbal  and
intellectual  acknowledgment  of  their  obligations.  The  practical  acknowledgment  is
the  test  of  principle.  (2)  God  does  not  require  rent  paid  in  advance.  He  is  not
unreasonable.  There  is  a  time  in  which  he  looks  on  in  silence.  In  this  interval  he
looks  for  preparatory  labour.  (3)  Ho  does  expect  the  fruit  in  its  season,  in  "  the  time
for  gathering  the  fruit."  God  claims  the  firstfruits  of  all  our  increase.  (4)  The
husbandmen  were  here  radically  at  fault.  The  righteousness  of  the  priests  and  elders
was  selfishness  and  pride.  Their  goodness  was  hypocrisy.  2.  They  maltreated  his
messenger§.  (1)  After  they  demanded  a  king,  and  the  Lord  their  God  withdrew  bis
Shechinah,  he  sent  them  his  earlier  prophets,  down  to  the  time  of  the  Assyrian  cap-
tivity which  ended  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  (2)  To  the  remaining  two  tribes  "  he  sent
other  servants,  more  than  the  first."  The  later  prophets  were  more  in  number  and
greater  in  the  clearness  of  their  predictions.  These  ended  with  John  the  Baptist.
(3)  But  these  they  beat,  as  Jeremiah,  and  killed,  as  Isaiah  and  John,  and  stoned,  as
Zechariah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  (see  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16  ;'Neh.  ix.  26 ;  Jer.  xxv.  3 — 7  ;
Heb.  xi.  36,  37).  (4)  The  priests  and  rulers  were  the  descendants  of  the  race  that  had
killed  the  prophets  (see  ch.  v.  12 ;  xxiii.  34 — 37  ;  Acts  vii.  62 ;  1  Tbess.  ii.  15).  3.
They  murdered  the  heir.  (1)  "They  will  reverence  my  Son,"  armed  with  Divine  cre-
dentials, and  fully  representing  the  Householder.  The  Son  of  David,  and  Heir  to  the
kingdom.  The  Son  of  God,  and  "  Heir  of  all  things  "  (see  ch.  iii.  17  ;  xvii.  6 ;  John
iii.  35 ;  Heb.  i.  1,  2).  (2)  "  They  cast  him  forth  out  of  the  vineyavd."  Christ  was
cast  out  of  the  synagogue  as  a  profane  person,  and  delivered  to  the  Romans  to  be
executed,  and  relegated  to  Calvary  for  that  purpose,  "  outside  the  gate "  of  the  city.
(3)  There  they  "filled  him."    So  they  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity.

IIL  The  bevebitt  of  his  BETBisnTioN.  1.  Ood  dooms  the  sinner  to  the  judgment
of  his  sin.  (1)  The  priests  little  suspected  whither  Jesus  was  leading  them  when  he
led  them  to  say,  "  He  will  bring  these  wretches  to  a  wretched  death."  The  truth,
unpractised,  which  we  carry  with  us  into  the  other  world,  will  judge  us  to  perdition.
Jesus  expressed  this  in  those  words,  "  I  Judge  no  man  :  the  word  that  I  have  spoken
unto  you,  the  same  shall  vidge  you  in  the  last  day."  So  the  clearer  our  light  the
darker  our  condemnation.  (2)  The  priests  first  pronounced  their  condemnation  in  the
words  cited ;  Jesus  seems  to  have  afterwards  pronounced  it  in  the  same  terms  (see
Luke  XX.  16).  "  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  condemn  thee."  2.  Re  hrings  con-
fusion upon  his  schemes,  (1)  He  excludes  him  from  the  inheritance.  The  inheritance
was  the  very  thing  the  priests  sought  to  retain  (ver.  38).  Sin  is  the  direct  way  to
frustrate  the  sinner's  designs.  (2)  He  puts  another  in  his  place.  Nothing  so  angered
the  inveterate  Jew  as  the  proposal  to  carry  the  gospel  to  the  Gentile.  Little  did  the
priests  estimate  the  significance  of  their  sentence,  "  And  he  will  let  out  the  vineyard
unto  other  husbandmen,  which  shall  render  him  the  fruits  in  their  seasons."  Perse-
cution may  destroy  the  ministers,  but  cannot  destroy  the  Church.  (3)  They  will  exalt
the  stone  which  the  builders  rejected.  The  disciples  fetched  their  nosannas  from  the
context  of  the  passage  quoted  from  Fs.  cxviii.  22,  23,  which  carries  conviction  and
terror  to  the  enemies  of  Christ,  (4)  The  words  of  the  psalm  were  first  spoken  of  David,
who,  after  suffering  persecution  from  Saul  and  rejection  from  the  chiefs  of  Israel,  at
length  triumphed  over  his  enemies,  and  rose  to  unexampled  prosperity.  David,  that
rejected  stone  which  became  the  head  of  the  corner  (cf.  1  Sam,  ziv,  38),  was  therein
a  type  of  Christ,  In  his  resurrection,  ascension,  and  exaltation  as  the  Head  of  his
Church,  the  temple  of  the  living  stones,  the  cope-stone  was  brought  up  with  the  shout-
ings of  angelB,  What  s  confusion  to  the  murderers  of  the  Heir  was  his  triumphant
resuReotionl  3.  He  hrings  judgment  upon  them  to  destruction.  (1)  Falling  upon
the  Btumbling-itone  (Jesus  in  his  humiliation),  the  offender  is  "  broken  "  (see  Isa.  viii.


OH.  XXI.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDlNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  861

14, 16 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  8).  Jerusalem  became  a  desolation.  The  nation  was  broken.  The
■piritual  judgment  of  blindness  and  obduracy  is  more  terrible  than  the  temporal  suf-
fering (see  Eom.  xi.  8 — 10;  1  Thess.  ii.  15).  Instead  of  being  humbled,  the  sinner  is
exasperated  when  his  sin  is  pointed  out.  (2)  The  stone  becoming  actiVe  and  falling
upon  the  sinner,  he  is  crushed  into  dust  (see  Isa.  Ix.  12 ;  Dan.  ii.  44).  The  same  stone,
Christ,  now  however  coming,  not  in  humiliation,  but  in  the  glory  of  his  majesty  and
power,    "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  his  great  salvation  ?  " — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  3.—Seady  response  to  Divine  claims.  "Straightway  he  will  send  them.*  It
does  not  at  once  appear  whether  our  Lord  made  a  claim  on  this  animal,  in  a  general
way,  for  the  service  of  God,  or  in  a  particular  way,  as  a  personal  favour  to  himself.
He  must  have  been  well  known  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethany,  and  it  is  quite  con-
ceivable that  the  man  distinctly  lent  the  animal  to  Jesus.  It  was  not  a  working
animal,  and  there  was  no  loss  of  its  labour,  or  its  mother's,  in  this  use  of  it  by  Jesus.
What  stands  out  to  view,  as  suggestive  of  helpful  thoughts  and  useful  lessons,  is  the
ready  response  of  this  good  man.  Think  of  it  as  a  Divine  claim,  and  he  presents  an
example  of  prompt,  trustful,  unquestioning  obedience.  Think  of  it  as  a  request  from
the  great  Teacher,  and  then  you  have  revealed  a  secret  disciple,  or  at  least  one  who
felt  the  fascination  of  our  Lord's  presence.

I.  BisADY  BESFONSE  TO  DiviNE  CLAIMS  AS  AN  EXAMPLE.  There  was  no  questioning
or  dispute ;  no  hesitation  or  doubt ;  no  anxiety,  even,  as  to  how  the  animals  would  be
brought  back  again.  There  was  no  anxiety  as  to  what  was  to  be  done  with  them ;  no
fear  as  to  any  injury  coming  to  them ;  the  man  did  not  even  suggest  that  the  colt
would  be  of  no  use,  for  he  had  not  been  "  broken  in."  It  is  beautiful  and  suggestive
that  the  simple  sentence,  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  them,"  sufSced  to  quiet  and  satisfy
him.  He  could  shift  all  the  responsibility  on  the  Lord.  "  He  knows  everything ;  he
controls  everything.  What  I  have  to  do  is  to  obey.  Depend  upon  it,  the  rest  will  all
come  right."  So  away  at  once,  and  away  cheerfully,  went  the  animals.  That  is  a
noble  example  indeed.  We  spoil  so  much  of  our  obedience  by  criticizing  the  things
we  are.  called  to  do,  or  give,  or  bear.  Then  we  hesitate,  question,  doubt,  and  do
languidly  at  last  what  we  do.  If  we  know  what  God's  will  is,  that  should  always  be
enough.  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  how  or  the  vihy.  Send  the  animals  at  once
if  you  know  that  "  the  Lord  hath  need  of  them."

II.  Beadt  response  to  Divine  claims  as  a  eevblation  of  ohabaoteb.  I  like
this  man.  I  seem  to  know  thiii  man.  His  act  reveals  him.  A  simple-hearted  sort  of
man,  whose  natural  trustfulness  has  not  been  spoilt.  An  open-hearted,  generous  sort
of  man,  with  very  little  "calculation"  in  him.  He  reminds  one  of  Nathanael,  "In
whom  was  no  guile."    And  simple  souls  somehow  get  the  best  of  life. — B.  T.

Vers.  5,  8. — Signs  of  meekness  and  signs  of  Jog.  "  Thy  King  cometh  unto  thee,
meek  ; "  "  And  a  very  great  multitude  spread  their  garments  in  the  way."  The  word
"  meek  "  is  used  in  Scripture  for  "  not  self-assertive,"  "  not  seeking  one's  own."  It  is
not  to  be  confounded  with  "  humility."  The  apostle  puts  "  humbleness  of  mind  "  and
"meekness"  alongside  each  other  in  such  a  way  that  we  cannot  fail  to  observe  the  dis-
tinction between  them.  Moses  was  the  "  meekest  of  men,"  but  certainly  not  the  most
humble.  It  is  usual  to  associate  our  Lord's  "  meekness  "  with  his  riding  on  so  lowly
an  animal ;  but  this  is  to  transfer  our  Western  ideas  of  asses  to  Eastern  lands ;  and  it
also  fails  to  observe  that  in  ver.  6  there  are  two  assertions,  each  distinct  from  the  other.
Our  Lord  was  "  meek  ; "  and  our  Lord  was  "  sitting  upon  an  ass."  If  we  take  the
word  "meek"  here  in  its  usual  meaning,  "not  self-assertive,"  we  may  find  fresh
suggestion  in  the  passage.  The  signs  of  joy  given  in  vers.  8,  9  are  characteristically
Eastern.  Bishop  Heber  thus  describes  his  march  to  Colombo :  "  The  road  was  decorated
the  whole  way  as  for  a  festival,  with  long  strips  of  palm  branches  hung  upon  strings
on  either  side ;  and  whenever  we  stopped  we  found  the  ground  spread  with  white  cloth,
and  awnings  erected,  beautifully  decorated  with  flowers  and  fruit,  and  festooned  with
palm  branches.  These  remnants  of  the  ancient  custom  nientioned  in  the  Bible,  of
strewing  the  road  with  palm  branches  and  garments,  are  curious  and  interesting,"

I.  The  meekness  of  Jesus.  This  is  not  the  thing  which  first  arrests  attention.
Indeed,  on  this  one  occasion  Jesus  seems  to  be  asserting  himself.    Look  deeper,  wd


SSa  THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDINQ  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxi.  1—48.

it  wiH  be  found  that  he  is  not.  He  is  not  in  any  of  the  genses  men  put  into  that  term.
Theie,  riding  into  Jerusalem  as  a  King,  he  luis  no  intention  of  setting  up  any  such
kingdom  as  men  expect ;  he  does  not  mean  to  use  any  force ;  you  could  never  mistake
him  for  •  conqueror.    There  is  submission,  there  is  no  sd/-<tssertion.

n.  Tbb  jot  or  THK  pxoFU.  In  calling  Jesus  the  "  Son  of  David,"  the  people
recognized  him  as  the  long-promised  Messiah;  and,  without  dear  apprehensions  of
what  his  work  was  to  be,  tiiey  could  rejoice  in  the  realization  of  the  national  hope.
Their  joy  made  it  clear  to  the  Jerusalem  o£Bcials  that  Jesus  claimed  to  be  the
Messiah.    There  could  be  no  mistake.    They  must  accept  or  reject  the  claim. — B.  T.

Yen.  12, 13. — Unfitting  and  the  unfitting  in  Ood^s  Jumse.  "  My  house  shall  be  called
a  house  of  prayer;  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  thieres."  Selling  oxen,  sheep,  and
doTes,  and  changing  foreign  money  into  temple  shekels,  was  right  enough  in  its  place;
but  the  point  is,  that  all  this  was  being  done  in  the  wrong  place.  The  sense  of  the
appropriate,  of  the  becoming,  was  lost ;  it  was  covered  over  and  hidden  by  the  greed  of
the  trader,  and  the  avarice  of  the  money-changer.  Trade  is  not  wrong,  if  it  be  honest
trade^  and  buyer  and  seller  pass  fair  equivalents.  Banking  is  not  wrong  in  itself,
though  it  gives  great  opportimities  to  the  covetous.  Our  Lord  never  interfered  with
tradesfolk  or  with  money-changers;  he  only  taught  principles  that  would  ensure
their  I)argainiDg  fairly.  His  righteous  anger  was  roused  by  the  offence  these  trafBckers
gave  to  his  sense  of  the  fitting,  of  the  becoming.  The  true  consecration  of  a  building
is  no  mere  ceremony,  it  is  the  feeling  of  consecration  that  is  in  all  reverent  souls  in
relation  to  it.  The  consecration  should  have  been  in  these  traders,  it  was  fitting  to
the  place  where  they  were ;  if  it  had  been  in  them,  they  would  never  have  thought
of  bringing  the  beasts,  the  cages,  and  the  tables  inside  the  gates  of  the  temple  of
Jehovah.

I.  The  seksb  of  the  FimNO  ax  ntPULSE  to  Jesus.  We  might  properly  expect
that  this  "  sense "  would  be  at  its  keenest  in  the  case  of  Jesus.  The  honour  of  the
Father-Gk)d  was  the  one  all-mastering  purpose  of  his  life.  He  could  not  bear  any
slight  to  be  put  on  God,  on  anything  belonging  to  God,  on  anything  associated  with
his  Name.  He  was  specially  jealous,  with  a  sanctified  Jewish  jealousy,  of  the  temple
where  God  was  worshipped.  He  felt  what  was  fitting  to  it — stillness,  quiet,  prayer,
reverent  attitudes.  He  felt  what  was  unfitting — noise,  dirt,  quarrellings  over  bargains,
shouts  of  drovers,  and  the  greed  and  over-reaching  of  covetous  men.  So  the  consecra-
tion of  our  worship-places  is  really  the  response  to  our  quickened,  spiritual,  Christly,
sense  of  what  is  fitting.    The  one  thing  we  ask  for  is  the  sustained  sense  of  harmony

II.  Lack  op  the  sense  of  the  rrrriNO  oavb  licence  to  thb  tbamies.  In
them  the  spiritual  was  hidden.  Custom  had  covered  it.  Greed  had  covered  it.  They
were  thinking  about  themselves  and  their  gettings,  and  so  lost  all  sense  of  the
becoming.  They  must  learn,  by  a  hard,  humbling,  and  awakening  lesson,  that  God's
temple  is  for  God<— B.  T.

Ver.  16. — XTie  ministry  of  the  children.  Children  are  always  delighted  with  a  little
public  excitement,  and  readily  catch  up  the  common  enthusiasm;  but  we  do  not  look
to  children  for  calm  and  intelligent  judgments  on  great  issues.  To  our  Lord  children
always  represented  simple,  guileless,  unprejudiced  souls,  who  put  up  no  barriers
against  his  teachings,  or  a°;ain8t  the  gracious  influences  which  he  strove  to  exert.
These  children  would  be  lads  from  twelve  years  old  upward.  They  caught  up  the
words  of  the  excited  disciples,  and  kept  up  the  excitement  by  shouting,  even  in  the
temple  courts,  "Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  1"

I.  Thb  childben  comfobted  Jesus  by  what  they  did.  It  was  a  bit  of  simple
honest,  unrestrained  enthusiasm.  The  young  souls  were  carried  away  by  the  joyous
excitement  of  the  day.  It  comforted  Jesus  to  hear  some  people  speaking  of  him  who
were  unquestionably  sincere ;  who  just  uttered  their  hearts ;  who  were  glad,  and  said  so.
For  it  must  have  been  a  heavy  burden  to  our  Lord  that,  even  to  the  last,  his  disciples
were  so  guileful ;  the;^  seemed  as  if  they  could  never  rise  above  the  idea  that  they  were
about  to  "  get  something  good  "  by_  clinging  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  Hosanna  1 "  from  the
lads  who  wanted  nothing  from  him  must  have  been  very  comforting  to  our  Lord
TJi^t  (s  ^Iwajrs  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  pleasure  'm  ehjld^rea's  wprship ;  It  is  guile  W


OB.  XXI,  1—4(5.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  ,363

genufce,  the  free  unrestrained  utterance  of  tlie  passing  mood.  It  is  not  the  highest
thing.  That  is  the  worship  of  the  finally  redeemed,  who  have  won  innocence  through
experience  of  sin ;  but  it  is  the  earth-suggestion  of  it.  Children's  praise  is  still  the  joy
oi  Christian  hearts.

II.  The  ohiloben  comforted  Jesus  by  what  they  represented.  For  to  him  the
children  were  types.  "  Babes  and  sucklings  "  are  types  of  simple,  loving,  trustful  souls,
and  to  such  God's  revelations  come.  Now,  there  are  two  kinds  of  trustful,  humble,
gentle  souls.  1.  Those  who  are  trustful  without  ever  having  struggled.  Some  are
naturally  trustful,  believing,  receptive,  and  in  all  spheres  of  life  they  are  loved  and
loving  souls.  2.  Those  who  are  trustful  as  the  victory  out  of  struggle.  These  are  the
noblest  ones,  the  true  child-souls,  the  true  virgin-souls ;  these  walk  the  earth  in  white,
and  it  is  white  that  will  never  take  a  soil.  In  their  praise  Christ  finds  his  supreme
joy.— E.  T.

Ver.  19. — The  tree-type  of  the  hypocrite.  "  Pound  nothing  thereon,  but  leaves  only."
The  attempted  explanations  of  the  condition  of  this  fig  tree  bewilder  us.  Some  say  our
Lord  expected  to  find  some  stray  figs  on  the  tree  left  from  the  last  harvest.  Others
say  that,  as  he  saw  leaves,  he  naturally  expected  fruit,  because  the  figs  appear  on  the
trees  before  the  fruit.  We  must  suppose  that  it  was  the  custom  to  eat  green  figs,  for
it  is  certain  that  at  this  season  of  the  year  the  fresh  figs  could  not  be  ripened.  What
is  clear  is—

I.  OuB  Lord  taught  by  symbolio  actionb.  There  are  spoken  parables  and  acted
parables ;  both  were  used  in  all  teachings,  especially  in  Eastern  teachings ;  both  were
nsed  by  our  Lord.  All  suggestion  that  our  Lord  was  personally  vexed  at  the  failure
of  the  tree  must  be  carefully  eliminated.  With  the  genius  of  the  teacher,  our  Lord  at
Jince  saw,  and  seized,  the  opportunity  for  giving  an  impressive  object-lesson,  which  he
completed  by  consummating  at  once  the  destruction  of  the  tree.  Explain  that  the  tree
must  have  been  diseased,  or  it  would  have  borne  fruit.  Its  destruction  was  certain.
The  tree  did  not  sin  in  being  diseased  or  having  no  fruit ;  but  the  teacher  may  take
it  to  represent  one  who  sins  in  making  outward  show  that  has  no  answering  goodness
within  it.    Our  Lord  only  took  beasts  or  trees  to  illustrate  Divine  judgments.

II.  What  oub  Lord  taught  herb  was  the  certain  doom  of  the  hypocrite,
Christ  never  spoke  so  severely  of  any  one  as  of  the  hypocrites.  Insincerity  was  the
fault  most  personally  offensive  to  him.  The  tree  seemed  to  represent  a  hypocrite.  It
had  leaves.  There  was  fair  outward  show.  It  seemed  to  say,  "  Come  to  me  if  you  are
hungry;  I  can  refresh  you."  And  when  Christ  came  he  found  the  leaves  were  all  it.
had  to  give.  His  thoughts  were  much  occupied  at  this  time  with  the  Pharisees,  who
were  making  outside  show  of  superior  piety,  but  had  no  soul-piety  opening  their  hearts
to  give  him  welcome.  Perhaps  our  Lord  meant  to  picture  Judas  Iscariot.  Pair-
showing  as  any  disciple,  but  rotten-hearted.  Let  Pharisees  learn,  let  Judas  learn,  let
disciples  learn,  from  that  fig  tree.  It  is  dying ;  Christ  hastens  the  corrupting  process,
and  it  dies  in  a  day.  The  hypocrite  is  corrupting.  He  is  under  the  curse  of  God.
There  is  no  hope  in  this  life  or  the  next  for  the  man  who  is  consciously  insincere.
— R.  T.

Ver.  22, — Believing,  the  condition  of  aeeeptable  prayer.  The  immediate  lesson  which
Christ  drew  from  the  incident  was  not  taken  from  the  tree— that  lesson  he  left  the
disciples  to  think  out  for  themselves — but  from  their  surprise  at  the  result  which
followed  his  words.  Our  Lord  seems  always  to  have  spoken  of  prayer  in  a  large,
general,  and  comprehensive  way ;  and  yet  we  may  always  discern  some  intimation  of
the  qualifications  and  limitations  which  must  always  condition  answer  to  human
prayer.  It  is  true  that  "whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer  ye  shall  receive;"  but  it
is  also  true  that  we  must  meet  the  appointed  condition,  and  be  "  believers  " — those  who
cherish  the  spirit  of  openness  and  trust.  "  It  was  rather  the  power  and  wonder  of  their
Lord's  act,  than  the  d'eeper  significance  of  it,  that  moved  the  disciples.  Yet  Jesus
follows  the  turn  their  thoughts  take,  and  teaches  that  prayer  and  faith  will  remove
mountains  of  difficulty."

I.  Believinq  as  God's  oonditioh.  God's  conditions  are  never  to  be  thought  of
as  arbitrary;  they  are  always  necessities,  always  sweetly  reasonable.  The  term
MATTHEW — n.  2  A


354  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDtNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [bn.  xxt.  1-46,


"believing"  represents  that  state  of  mind  and  feeling  in  a  man  whioli  alone  fits  him
to  receive,  and  make  the  best  of,  God's  answer  to  his  prayer.  God  might  give,  but  his
gift  could  be  no  real  moral  blessing  if  there  was  no  fitness  to  receive.  It  is  the  "  right
state  of  mind  for  receiving  "  that  is  expressed  in-"  believing."  This  includes  humility,
dependence,  reliance,  and  hopefulness.  It  is  opposed  to  the  critical  spirit  that  questions,
and  the  doubting  spirit  that  fears.  Even  we  in  common  life  make  believing  a
condition.     We  gladly  do  things  for  others  when  they  trust  us  fully.

II.  Believing  ab  mak's  diffioultt.  Self-reliance  is  the  essence  of  man's  sin,
seeing  that  he  really  is  a  dependent  creature.  Man  does  not  care  to  trust  anybody ;  he
trusts  himself.  Other  people  may  lean  on  him ;  he  leans  on  nobody.  And  so  long  as
a  man  has  this  spirit,  all  prayer  must,  for  him,  be  a  formality  and  a  sham ;  because
prayer  is  the  expression  of  dependence  which  he  does  not  feeL  Keeping  the  spirit  of
full  trust  is  the  supreme  difficulty  of  the  Christian  man  all  through  his  Christian  course.
He  has  to  be  always  on  the  watch  lest  he  should  lose  the  right  to  answer  because  he  is
failing  to  believe,  to  trust.

III.  Belikvino  as  the  Christly  tbicmph.  The  man  who  has  altogether
abandoned  self-trust,  and  given  himself  wholly  into  the  hands  of  Christ  for  salvation,
has  won  the  power  of  trusting,  and  has  only  to  keep  it  up. — B.  T.

Ver.  24. — Christ  lecome  a  Questioner.  Those  who  came  to  Christ  on  this  occasion
were  distinctly  officials,  representatives  of  the  Sanhedrin,  the  council  which  claimed
and  exercised  authority  in  all  matters  related  to  religion.  "  Before  its  tribunal  false
prophets  were  arraigned.  It  dealt  with  questions  of  doctrine,  and,  when  occasion
arose,  could  exercise  the  functions  of  a  council."  "  In  the  New  Testament  we  see
Christ  before  the  Sanhedrin  as  a  llasphemer  (ch.  xxvi.  65) ;  the  Apostles  Peter  and
John,  as  false  prophets  and  seducers  of  the  people ;  the  Deacon  Stephen,  as  having
blasphemed  against  God ;  and  the  Apostle  Paul,  as  subverting  the  Law."  This  was,  no
doubt,  a  very  imposing  deputation.  Schemes  to  entangle  Christ  in  his  talk  had
miserably  failed ;  now  the  officials  resolved  to  act  straightforwardly  and  imposingly.
They  would  demand  to  know  the  authority  on  which  Jesus  acted.  The  three  elements
of  the  Sanhedrin — chief  priests,  elders,  and  scribes — were  all  represented,  and  we  seem  to
Bee  the  confident  haughtiness  of  their  approach.

I.  Chkist  asserting  a  superior  authority.  "He  knew  what  was  in  man."  He
was  not  in  the  least  alarmed.  He  knew  their  guilefulness  so  well  that  he  was  not  in
the  least  deferential.  The  prophet  was  never  submissive  to  the  temple  officials.  His
authority  was  his  commission  direct  from  God.    They  had  been  pleased  to  decide  that

•  no  one  could  be  permitted  to  teach  who  had  not  passed  through  a  rabbinical  school.
Jesus  knew  that  every  man  has  a  right  to  teach  who  is  himself  taught  of  God.  He,
moreover,  was  more  than  a  prophet;  he  was,  in  the  highest  and  holiest  sense,  the  Son
and  Sent  of  God.  They  had  no  right  to  question  him.  He  would  recognize  no  such
right,  and  give  to  their  questionings  no  answer.  He  would  exert  his  authority  and
question  them  ;  and  never  was  official  deputation  more  humiliated  than  when  these
men  found  themselves  questioned,  and  hopelessly  entangled  by  the  question  put  to
them.  All  putting  Christ  to  the  test  implies  a  wrong  state  of  mind.  He  speaks  in
the  name  of  God,  and  as  God,  and  our  duty  is  unquestioning  obedience.

II.  Christ  discomfiting  his  foes  by  his  superior  authority.  They  felt  his
authority,  and  did  not  for  a  moment  attempt  to  dispute  it.  They  did  not  think  of
saying,  "We  came  to  question  you,  and  cannot  allow  you  to  question  us."  They
were  mastered  by  his  calmness,  by  his  manifest  superiority,  by  the  skill  of  his  question,
which  put  them  into  the  most  awkward  and  humiliating  position.  They  retired
defeated  and  angry. — B.  T.

Ver.  29. — Speech  tested  hy  deed.  To  see  the  point  of  this  parable,  it  is  necessary  to
observe  the  connection  in  which  it  stands.  Our  Lord  was  dealing  with  men  who
proposed  to  entangle  him  in  his  talk,  and,  out  of  what  he  saidj,  find  accusation  against
him.  He  had  turned  the  tables  on  them,  by  putting  to  them  a  question  which  they
dared  not  answer ;  and  now,  in  this  parable  of  the  two  sons,  he  presents  to  them  a
picture  of  themselves,  which  they  coiild-not  fail  to  recognize.  They  were  like  the  son
who  made  great  professions  of  obedience,  but  did  not  obey.    "  The  parable  is  too  plaia-


Otxitl— 46J    TSS  GOSPEL  ACCO&DING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  35S

spoken  to  be  evaded.  They  oannot  deny  that  the  satisfactory  son  is  not  the  one  who
professes  great  respect  for  his  father's  authority,  while  he  does  only  what  pleases
himself,  but  the  one  who  does  his  father's  bidding,  even  though  he  has  at  first  disowned
his  authority.  These  men  were  so  unceremoniously  dealt  with  by  our  Lord  because
they  were  false.  They  may  not  have  clearly  seen  that  they  were  false,  but  they  were
Bo"(Dods).

L  Sfggoh  SHOWir  to  bk  wobthlebb  bt  deeds.  Professions  are  good  and  right ;  they
ought  to  be  made.  But  professions  must  not  stand  alone.  They  ought  to  express
purpose.  They  ought  to  be  followed  by  appropriate  action.  The  peril  of  religion  in
every  age  lies  in  the  fact  that  credit  is  to  be  gained  and  confidence  won  by  making
profession ;  and  so  the  insincere  man,  and  the  man  who  can  deceive  himself,  are  tempted
to  make  religious  profession  hide  their  self-seeking.  And  it  must  also  be  said  that
religious  profession,  and  observance  of  mere  religious  rites,  becomes  a  prevailing
custom,  by  which  men  are  carried  away,  and  relieved  of  anxiety  about  making  deeds
match  words.  The  Pharisee  class  are  evidently  pictured  in  this  son.  They  were
extremely  anxious  about  tptahing  right  and  showing  right,  but  they  were  sadly
indifierent  about  doing  right.  What  needs  to  be  continually  re-impressed  is,  that
supreme  importance  attaches  to  heing  right  and  doing  right ;  these  will  find  natural
and  proper  expression.     If  we  are  right,  our  profession  will  match  ourselves.

IL  Speech  put  to  shahb  by  deeds.  The  spn  is  in  no  way  to  be  commended  who
refused  obedience.  It  was  a  bad  profession,  and  found  expression  for  a  bad  mind.
But  when  he  came  to  a  good  mind,  and  went  and  obeyed,  the  obedience  put  to  shame
the  hasty  and  unworthy  words.  No  doubt  our  Lord  referred  to  the  publican  class,
who  had  taken  their  own  wilful  and  self-pleasing  way,  but  now  they  had  come  to  a
better  mind,  and  were  even  pressing  into  the  kingdom. — B,  T.

Yer.  33. — The  wicked  husbcmdmen.  This  parable  belongs  to  the  series  in  which  our
Lord  shows  up  his  enemies,  and  reveals  to  them  at  once  their  own  shameless  scbemings,
and  his  complete  knowledge  of  their  devices.  But  while  the  relation  of  the  parable  to
those  Pharisees  should  be  recognized,  it  is  necessary  also  to  see  that  the  man  of  God
can  never  let  the  evils  of  his  age  alone.  Those  Pharisees  were  holding  men  in  creed
and  ceremonial  bondage ;  Christ  did  not  attack  them  because  of  their  personal  enmity
to  him.  It  was  this — a  liberator  of  human  thought  can  never  let  the  thought-enslavers
alone.  Illustration :  Luther,  or  0.  Kingsley.  In  this  parable  we  have  the  dealings  of
God  with  men  illustrated  in  the  dealings  of  God  with  the  Jews,  and  pictured  in  the
parable  of  the  vineyard-renters.  Explain  the  first  references  of  the  parable.  Vineyard,
God's  chosen  people.  Hwbandmen,  the  ordinary  leaders  and  teachers  of  the  nation.
Servants,  the  prophets  or  special  messengers.  Destruction,  the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem,
Others,  the  transfer  of  gospel  privileges  to  the  Gentiles.  >

L  Thb  beabonablenebb  or  God'b  dealings  with  men.  Illustrate  this :  1.  From
the  vineyard-figureg.  (Compare  the  more  elaborate  description  in  Isa.  v.)  Chosen
ground.  Planted.  Nourished.  Guarded.  Pruned.  And  a  wine-vat  prepared  in
expectation  of  fruit.  What  could  have  been  done  more?  2.  Prom  tbe  historical
facts  of  God's  dealing)!  with  Israel.  God's  call,  redemption,  provision,  guidance,  and
prosperity.  The  final  seeking  fruit  was  Christ's  coming.  3.  From  our  own  personal
experience,  as  members  of  the  spiritual  Israel  of  God.  Becall  the  graclousuess  of  the
Divine  dealings  with  ui.

IL  The  nKBBABOHABLENESs  OF  uen'b  dbalinos  with  Goo.  Illustrate  this :  1.  From
the  vineyard-figures.  The  shame,  dishonesty,  ingratitude,  and  rebellion  of  these
husbandmen.  See  to  what  length  it  goes.  2.  From  the  historical  facts.  The  resist-
ance, again  and  again,  of  Jewish  prophets,  as  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Amos.  The  wilful
casting  out  of  the  Son.  3.  From  our  own  personal  experience.  Take  the  case  of  one
unsaved.  Up  to  this  resisted  motherhood,  friendship,  Bible,  inward  call  of  Christ,  etc.
How  must  man's  unreasonableness  be  divinely  met?  (1)  The  sinfulness  by  Divine
chastisement.  (2)  The  unworthy  response  to  privilege  by  the  loss  of  privilege.  (3)
The  persistent  wrong  by  judgment.  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we
persuade  men." — B.  T.

Ycr.  42. — The  history  of  the  Chmer-ston*.     Foundations  are  not  now  laid  as  in


366


THl:  GOSPEL  AdCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxn.  1— 4d.


olden  times.  Foundation-stones  are  now  mere  ornaments.  There  is  no  sense  in  which
buildings  now  rest  on  them.  Memorial-stones  are  taking  the  place  of  foundation-
stones.  Probably  the  figure  of  the  "  corner-stone  "  is  taken  from  the  corner  of  Mount
Moriah,  which  had  to  be  built  up  from  the  valley,  in  order  to  make  a  square  area  for
the  temple  courts.  Dean  Plumptre  says,  "  In  the  primary  meaning  of  the  psalm,  the
illustration  seems  to  have  been  drawn  from  one  of  the  stones,  quarried,  hewn,  and
marked,  away  from  the  site  of  the  temple,  which  the  builders,. ignorant  of  the  head
architect's  plans,  had  put  on  one  side,  as  having  no  place  in  the  building,  but  which
was  found  afterwards  to  be  that  on  which  the  completeness  of  the  structure  depended,
that  on  which,  as  the  chief  corner-stone,  the  two  walls  met,  and  were  bonded  together."
Take  this  suggestion,  and  consider —

I.  Ohbist  A8  the  fsepabed  Cobneb-btons.  Describe  the  work  done  on  the  lime-
stone block  in  order  to  fit  it  for  its  place  as  a  foundation-stone.  The  apostle  permits
us  to  think  of  the  experiences  of  our  Lord's  human  life  as  fitting  him  to  be  the
Saviour  he  became.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  made  perfect  through  suffering,
for  his  work  as  the  "  bringer-on  of  souls."  "  Though  he  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  he
obedience  by  the  things  that  he  suffered."  The  Corner-stone  was  being  chiselled  and
bevelled  for  its  place.     Work  out  this  figure.

IL  Ohbist  as  the  bejeotbd  Cobneb-stone.  When  our  Lord  spoke,  the  Comer-
stone  was  almost  ready ;  and  there  were  the  men  who  prided  themselves  on  being  the
builders  of  God's  temple  of  religion.  And  they  were,  then  and  there,  rejecting  that
"  tried  Stone,  that  precious  Corner-stone."  They  would  put  nothing  on  it.  It  was  not
to  their  mind.  It  may  lie  for  ever  in  the  quarry  for  all  ttiey  care.  But  happily  they
were  only  like  overseers,  or  clerks  of  works.  The  Architect  himself  may  order  this
Stone  to  be  brought,  and  made  the  "  Head  of  the  corner."

III.  Chbist  as  the  honoubed  Gokner-stone.  The  Architect  himself  did  interfere,
brushed  those  petty  officials  aside,  had  the  tried  Stone  brought  out,  and  on  it  he  has
Iiad  built  the  new  temple  of  the  ages.  That  temple  is  rising  into  ever  richer  and
nobler  proportions,  and  it  was  never  more  manifest  than  it  is  to-day,  that  the  "Corner-
stone is  Christ."— E.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIL


'■/tua.  1 — 14. — Parable  of  the  marriage  of
3e  hing's  son.    (Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.)

Ver.  ]. — Jesus  answered  and  spake  unto
them.  After  tliey  had  heard  our  Lord's
words  at  the  end  of  the  Inst  chapter,  the
Pharisees, according  to  St.  Mark,  "left  him,
and  went  their  way,"  bo  that  this  parable
was  spoken  in  the  audience  of  the  disciples
and  the  attendant  multitude  alone,  without
tlie  former  disturbing  element.  This  fact
may  account  for  its  exhibiting  certain
merciful  and  gracious  features,  setting  forth
the  priviliige  rather  than  the  duty  of  obey-
ing the  gospel  call.  The  term  "answered"
often  does  not  signify  a  reply  given  to  some
distinct  question,  but  is  equivalent  to  "toolc
occasion  to  observe"  (comp.  oli.  xi.  25,  etc.).
Hure  the  occasion  was  the  insidious  schemes
of  his  enemies.  Again.  With  reference  to
the  two  parables  in  tho  preceding  cliapter.
Parables.  The  plural  denotes  the  class  to
which  the  discourse  belongs;  or  it  may
refer  to  the  many  parabolic  details  con-
tained herein.     Only  one  parable  follows.


This  bears  great  reiemblanoe  to  the  parable
of  the  great  supper  (Luke  xiv.),  which,
however,  was  spoken  at  an  earlier  period,
in  another  locality,  and  with  a  dilfercut
object,  and  disagrees  in  many  details,  espe-
cially in  the  absence  of  the  wedding  gar-
ment, Christ,  doubtless,  often  repeated  his
parables  with  variations  in  particulars  to
suit  time,  audiences,  and  circumstances.

Ver.  2. — ^The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like
(comp.  oh,  IX.  1).  This  parable  supple-
ments that  of  the  wicked  husbandmen.  As
that  referred  to  Jewish  times,  so  this  refers
to  gospel  times.  The  householder  in  the
one  becomes  the  king  in  the  other ;  one
demands  work  and  duty,  the  other  bestows
gifts  and  blessings;  one  is  angered  at  in-
gratitude for  favours  received,  the  other
punishes  for  contempt  of  offered  bounty.  A
certain  king ;  &vBp^n(f  /3a<riXEi :  a  man  a  king,
even  God  the  Father,  the  expression  denot-
ing "  the  Almighty's  wonderful  oondesoen-
sion,  as  assimilating  himself  to  our  infirmi-
ties in  his  dispensations  towards  us"  (I.
Williams),  Hade  a  marriage ;  ydfiovs :
marriage  festivities ;  the  plural  perl  laps  denot-
ing thedays  consumed  m  the  celebration  (see


dM.  ±in.  i— 46.]    fflB  (SOSPJlL  ACCORDtNG  f 0  ST.  MATTHEW.  ^57


Gen.  xxix.  27;  Judg.  xiv.  12;  Tobit  viii.  19,
20).  Morison  oompares  our  English  word
"  nuptialB."  In  the  Old  Testament,  Jehovah
is  the  Husband  of  his  Chnrch ;  in  the  New,
Christ  is  represented  as  married  to  the  spiri-
tual Israel,  which  takes  the  place  of  the  older
dispensation.  For  bis  soil  Jesus  Christ,
whose  intimate  onion  with  his  Chcich  is
often  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  mar-
riage (see  oh.  ix.  15;  John  iii.  29;  2  Cor.
xi.  2 ;  Eph.  t.  23, 32;  BeT.  xix.  7).

Ver.  8. — Sent  forth  his  servants.  In  the
East,  the  original  invitation  to  a  solemn
festivity  is  followed  by  reminders  as  the
day  approaches  (comp.  Esth.  v.  8 ;  vi.  14).
The  servants  here  are  John  the  Baptist,  the
twelve  apostles,  the  seventy,  who  first
preached  the  gospel  to  the  Jewish  people.
Them  that  were  bidden.  The  Jews  had
abeady  been  invited  to  come  in ;  to  them
already  belonged  "  the  adoption,  and  the
glory,  and  the  covenants  .  .  .  and  the
promises"  (Bom.  ix.  4).  These  early
missionaries  were  sent  to  bring  such  things
to  their  remembrance,  and  to  bid  them  obey
the  call.  Xhey  would  not  (obic  ijee\ov)
come.  Their  reasons  for  refusal  are  not
given' here — a  fact  which  differentiates  this
parable  from  that  of  the  great  supper.  A
general  disinclination  or  aversion  is  denoted ;
no  actual  outrage  is  perpetrated  as  yet,  but
the  invited  guests  are  ripening  for  this  stage,
in  that  they  despise  the  King's  Son,  and
believe  not  in  his  Divine  mission.  Tbis
backwardness  and  obduracy  recall  Christ's
lamentation,  ^O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  I"
(Luke  xiii.  S4,  85).

Ver.  4. — Other  servants.  The  apostles
and  their  immediate  followers  after  the
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  the
effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  fresh  call
was  mercifully  given  with  new  graces  and
new  degrees  of  revelation.  Uy  dinner  (rb
Uptiri  iv  /iou).  This  is  the  ligh  ter  midday  meal,
which  was  the  commencement  of  the  festivi-
ties, and  was  followed  by  the  supper  (Suvfoi/')
in  the  evening.  Are  killed.  The  great
Sacrifice  has  been  offered,  the  Victim  slain
(John  vi.  51 — 59),  the  Holy  Spirit  has  made
all  things  ready.  Here  are  grace,  health,
abundance,  to  be  had  for  acceptance.  We
may  compare  the  invitation  of  Wisdom  in
the  Old  Testament  (Prov.  ix.  1,  etc.)  with
this  of  Christ.  In  Jewish  minds  the  bless-
ings of  Messiah's  kingdom  are  constantly
connected  with  the  idea  of  a  sumptuous
feust,  as  in  Luke  xiv.  15;  and  our  Lord
himself  uses  the  same  image  (ch.  viii.  11 ;
Luke  xxii.  30).

Ver.  5. — They  made  light  of  it,  and  went
their  ways.  They  who  refused  the  invita-
tion are  divided  into  two  classes — the  first
mentioned  in  this  verse,  the  second  in  the
following.    These  are  simply  careless,  in-


different scorners,  who  are  too  busy  with
their  worldly  concerns  to  attend  to  the
claims  of  the  gospel.  So  we  read,  "The
Pharisees,  who  were  lovers  of  money,  heard
all  these  things;  and  they  scoffed  at  him"
(Luke  XTi.  14 ;  comp.  oh.  xix.  23,  24).  His
farm ;  r'bv  tSiov  ayphv :  W»  oum  farm,  or
estate.  This  is  the  landed  proprietor,who  goes
to  the  selfish  enjoyment  of  his  possessions.
Els  merchandise.  Tiiis  is  the  busy  trader,
who  is  engrossed  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth
(compare  the  excuses  in  Luke  xiv.  18, 19).

Ver.  6.— The  remnant.  These  form  the
second  class  of  recalcitrant  guests.  They
are  actively  hostile  to  the  King  and  his
messengers,  rejecting  them  not  merely  for
worldly  or  interested  motives,  but  from  in-
tense hatred  to  the  doctrines  which  they
taught.  Such  were  the  scribes  and  Phari-
sees, who  could  not  endure  to  see  the  Law
superseded,  and  the  Gentiles  raised  to  their
level ;  such  were  the  Sadducees,  who  scoffed
at  a  faith  founded  on  the  resurrection,  and
refused  credit  to  the  miraculous  with  which
the  gospel  was  interwoven.  Took  his
servants.  The  narratives  in  the  Acts  give
many  instances  of  the  seizure  and  imprison-
ment of  apostles  and  believers  (see  Acts  iv.
3;  ix.  2;  xii.  4,  etc.).  Entreated  (treated)
them  spitefully  (see  Acts  v.  40 ;  xiv.  19 ;  xvi.
23,  etc. ;  2  Cor.  xi.  23—25).  Slew  them ;  e.g.
Stephen  (Acts  vii.  58),  James  (Acts  xii.  2).
All  but  one  of  the  apostles  died  violent
deaths  at  the  hands  of  those  who  rejected
the  gospel;  and  there  must  have  been
numbers  of  martyrs  of  whom  liistory  has
preserved  no  record,  though  their  names
are  written  in  heaven,  which  is  far  better.

Ver.  7. — ^When  the  king  heard  thereof.
The  text  varies  here.  Some  manuscripts
have  "that  king,"  to  whom  the  rejection  of
his  messengers  was  a  personal  insult  (comp.
2  Sam.  X.  4,  etc.).  The  Sinaitic,  Vatican,
and  other  authorities  omit  itKoia-as,  "  heard
thereof,"  and  it  may  well  he  a  gloss  from
the  human  view  that  the  king,  not  being
personally  present,  must  have  been  informed
of  the  incidents.  At  the  same  time,  the
King,  regarded  as  God,  needs  no  report  to
acquaint  him  with  what  is  going  on.  He
was  wroth.  The  injury  was  done  to  him,
and  he  resents  it  (comp.  Luke  x.  16 ;  John
xii.  48).  His  armies.  The  Bomans,  under
Vespasian  and  Titus,  the  unconscious  instru-
ments of  his  vengeance.  So  the  Assyriana
are  called  "  the  rod  of  God's  anger  "  (Isa.  x.
5 ;  xiii.  5 ;  comp.  Jer.  xxv.  9 ;  li.  20).  Some
regard  the  "  armies"  as  angels,  the  ministers
of  God's  punishment,  especially  in  war,
famine,  and  pestilence,  the  three  scourges
which  accomplished  the  ruin  of  the  Jews.
Probably  both  angels  and  men  are  included
in  the  term.  Destroyed  .  .  .  burned  np
their  city.  No  loi!ger  his  city,  but  theirs,  th«


m


TflE  GOStEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  rm.  1-46.


murderers'  city,  Jerusalem.  So  a  little  later,
foretelling  the  Bame  fate,  Jesus  speaks  of
"  your  house  "  (oh.  xxiii.  38).  The  Bomans,
in  fact,  some  forty  years  after,  put  to  the
sword  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and
burned  the  city  to  ashes.

Ver.  8. — ^Then  saith  he.  This  ij  supposed
to  take  place  after  the  destruction  of  the
murderers  and  their  city  ;  and,  indeed,  the
Bnal  rejection  of  the  Jews  and  the  substitu-
tion of  the  Gentiles  were  consummated  by
the  overthrow  of  Jei-usalem  and  the  Hebrew
polity.  The  wedding  is  ready.  God's  great
design  is  not  frustrated  by  the  neglect  of
those  first  invited,  only  the  guests  are
changed.  Not  worthy.  Their  un.worthi-
nesB  was  proved  by  their  rejection  of  the
gracious  call,  as  the  worthiness  of  those  sub-
sequently called  consisted  in  their  accept-
ance thereof.  The  passage  is  well  illus-
trated by  the  language  of  Paul  and  Barnabas
(Acts  xiii.  46,  47).

Ver.  9. — The  highways ;  rtkj  Sie{<!Soui  t&v
iScSv :  exitus  viarum ;  the  partingt,  or  out-
lett  of  the  ways.  The  places  where  roads
meet,  beyond  the  city  bounds  in  the  country,
which  would  naturally  be  a  centre  of  con-
course The  city  where  the  marriage  feast
was  now  held  is  not  named,  because  it  is
no  longer  Jerusalem,  but  somewhere,  any-
where, in  the  Gentile  world;  for  the  call
of  the  Gentiles  is  here  set  forth.  As  many
as  ye  shall  find.  The  invitation  is  no  longer
cunfined  to  the  Jews;  the  whole  human
race  is  called  to  tlie  marriage  of  the  Lamb,
to  participate  in  the  fruits  of  the  Incarnation.
This  general  evangelization  was  begun  in
apostolic  times  (see  Acts  viii.  5,  38 ;  x.  28,
48 ;  xiii.  46),  and  has  been  carried  on  ever
since.  The  apostles'  special  ministrations
to  the  Jews  seemed  to  have  ended  at  the
martyrdom  of  St.  James  the  Less,  A.D.  62
(Jost'phus, '  Ant.,'  XX.  9.  1).

Ver.  10. — Highways;  SSobs:  the  roads.
Not  "the  partings  of  the  ways,"  wliither
they  had  been  onlerod  to  go.  Some  see
liere  an  intimation  of  the  imperfection  of
the  work  of  human  agents;  but  it  is  very
doubtful  if  any  such  allusion  is  intended.
More  probably  tos  dSobs  is  only  a  synonym
for  Tocs  Ste^6Sovs  rav  iSuv.  Both  bad  and
good.  The  visible  Church  contains  a  mixed
company,  as  Christ  indicated  by  more  than
one  parable ;  e.g.  the  draw-net,  the  tares,  etc.
(ch.  xiii.).  Tlie  bad  are  named  first,  in
order  to  show  the  infinite  graoiousness  of
the  king.  In  the  earliest  times  converts
werebaptizedwitli  very  little  preparation  and
without  any  probation,  as  we  see  in  the  case
of  the  eunuch,  the  jailor,  and  many  more
mentioned  in  the  Acts;  and  doubtless  many
were  insincere  and  snon  lapsed.  When  we
read  of  whole  households  being  baptized,
itud  in  later  times  of  whole  nations  receiv-


ing Christian  initiation,  there  must  have
been  little  individual  preparation  of  heart
or  cleansing  of  consoienoe,  and  themissioner
had  to  take  for  granted  much  which  more
careful  examination  would  have  proved  to
be  fallacious,  The  mention  of  this  mixture
of  bad  and  good  in  the  company  introduces
the  final  scene.  The  wedding.  The  Sinaitic,
Vatican,  and  other  manuscripts  read  "  mar-
riage-chamber "  (i'u^<ti^>').  So  Tischendorf
and  Westcott  and  Hort,  But  the  received
text  is  well  founded,  and  seems  more
natural.  Guests ;  i^aKei/tcVvK :  literally,  re-
elitien  ;  Tulgate,  diicumbentium  ;  so  called
from  the  customary  attitude  at  meals.

Ver.  11. — The  king  came  in  to  see  the
guests,  who  by  this  time  had  taken  their
appointed  places  at  table.  This  second  por-
tion of  the  parable  teaches  that  admission
to  the  risible  Ohuroh  is  not  all  that  is  re-
quired ;  there  is  also  a  scrutiny  to  be  under-
gone and  an  award  to  be  made.  And  that
this  investigation  is  keen  and  searching  is
denoted  by  the  verb  used,  dedraaOat,  which
means  not  merely,  to  see  casually,  but  to
gaze  upon  with  the  intent  of  seeing  the  real
nature  and  character  of  an  object.  The
king  makes  Lis  appearance  in  the  banquet-
ing-hall,  not  to  feast  with  the  guests,  but
to  welcome  them,  and  to  examine  if  they  are
properly  ordered,  served,  and  fitted  for  the
high  honour  accorded  to  them.  How  close
and  personal  is  this  inquiry  is  shown  by  the
immediate  detection  of  one  unseemly  guest
among  the  multitude.  The  time  when  he
thus  comes  is,  in  one  view,  the  day  ot
judgment.;  but  such  visitation  and  scrutiny
are  always  recurring,  as  at  solemn  seasons,
in  days  of  trial,  sacred  services,  holy  com-
munion, when  he  searches  men's  hearts,  and
sees  if  they  are  prepared  for  his  presence.
Which  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment ;  ouk
4vS€Sufi4vor  IrSu/ia  ydnou :  not  garbed  in  wed-
ding garment,  the  genitive  expressing  the-
peouliar  character  or  quality  of  the  garment.
Wordsworth  compares  similar  phrases :  Luke
xvi.  9 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  9 ;  Jas.  i.  25 ;  2  Pet.
ii.  1,  etc.  Ii  is  said  to  have  been  an  Oriental
custom  to  present  each  guest  invited  to  n
royal  feast  with  a  festive  robe  to  be  worn  on
the  occasion,  as  nowadays  persons  admitted
to  the  royal  presence  are  clothed  with  a
caftan.  Traces  of  the  custom  have  been
found  in  Gen.  xlv.  22;  Judg.  xiv.  12;  2
Kings  V.  22 ;  x.  22 ;  but  they  are  not  very
convincing.  The  Bomans  seem  to  have  had
such  a  custom,  the  robes  being  called  "  cena-
toria."    Thus  Martial,  x,  87.  11,  writes —

"  Pugnorum  reus  ebriieque  nootis,
Cenatoria  mittat  advocato."

But  the  fact  remains  that  this  guest  had

not  presented  himself  in  attire  befitting  the

I  solemnity;  in  his  everyday  garb,  and  with


CH.  xxn.  1—46.]    THE  GOStEL  ACCOBDIKO-  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


m


no  propel  preparation,  he  had  dared  to  come
to  this  great  festival.  What  is  the  spiritual
meaning  of  the  wedding  garment  is  much
disputed.  It  is  evidently  some  virtue,  or
quality,  or  mark  which  conditions  admis-
sion to  the  enjoyment  of  the  kingdom  of  Gtod,
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  said  that  both  bad
and  good  guests  wear  it,  and  its  possession
does  not  alter  the  character  of  the  wearer.
Dress  is  something  external  and  visible,
therefore  the  garment  cannot  represent  an
inward  grace  or  feeling,  but  some  outward
token  by  which  Christians  are  distinguished,
such  as  open  reception  of  baptism  and  sacra-
ments, and  public  profession  of  the  faith.
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  contended  that  the
whole  matter  is  spiritual,  though  veiled  in
material  forms,  and  is  concerned  with  man's
moral  and  spiritual  nature.  Hence  it  by  no
means  follows  that  the  wedding  garment  is
not  intended  to  have  a  spiritual  significa-
tion. Ancient  commentators  universally
look  upon  it  in  this  light.  Some  regard  it
as  an  emblem  of  faith  in  Clirist ;  others,  of
faith  and  love  combined.  "  Habete  fidem
cum  dilectione,"  writes  St.  Augustine,
'  Serm.,'  xo.,  "  ista  est  vestis  nuptialis."
But  it  must  be  observed  that  faith  of  some
sort  was  shown  by  accepting  the  invitation ;
so  this  could  not  be  represented  by  the
special  garb  which  was  absent.  Others,
again,  see  in  it  good  works,  or  humility,  or
the  purity  effected  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  Some  moderns  take  it  of  "  imputed,
othurs  of  imparted,  righteousness,  bringing
their  c»ntroverisies  into  the  King's  presence-
chamber.  The  English  Church,  taking  the
marriage  feast  as  a  figure  of  the  Holy  Com-
munion, applies  the  wedding  garment  to
that  cleansing  of  the  conscience  which
enables  persons  to  come  holy  and  clean  to
that  heavenly  feast  (see  the  first  Exhorta^
tion  to  Holy  Communion).  This  is  legiti-
mate, but  too  restricted  in  its  reference.
The  feast  denotes  the  present  and  future
kingdom  of  God ;  the  entrance  to  this  is  a
matter  of  free  grace ;  the  garment  is  moral
fitness,  the  life  and  conduct  dependent  on
the  due  use  of  God's  grace.  This  is  in  the
power  of  all  who  have  received  the  call ;
they  have  to  act  up  to  the  high  calling,  to
be  wholly,  heartily,  really  what  they  pro-
fess to  be.  The  scrutiny,  whether  made  in
this  life  or  in  the  life  to  come,  shows  how
grace  has  been  used,  if  we  have  put  on
Christ,  if  we  have  kept  our  soul  pure  and
white,  nnsullied  by  sin,  or  washed  clean  by
penitential  tears  and  the  blood  of  Christ  (see
liev.  zix.  8).  The  metaphor  concerning
this  robe  of  righteousness  is  found  in  Isa.
Ixi.  10,  "He  hath  clothed  me  with  the
garments  of  salvation,  he  hath  covered  me
with  the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a  bride-
groom decketh  himsolf  with  a  garland,  and


as  a  bride  adometh  herself  with  her  jewels."
Commentators  compare  (hnt  with  doubtful
appositeuess)  Zeph.  i.  7,  8.
Ver.  12. — Friend ;   eraipf,  as  oh.  xi.  13.

It  was  thus  that  Christ  addressed  Judas  in
the  garden  (ch.  xxvi.  HO).  The  term  here
has  in  it  something  of  distrust  and  disappro-
bation. How  earnest  thou  in  hither?  The
question  may  mean — How  couldst  thou  pre-
sume to  approach  this  solemn  festival  with-
out the  indispensable  requisite  ?  Or,  how
couldst  thou  elnde  the  vigilance  of  the
servants,  and  enter  in  this  unseemly  garb?
The  former  is  doubtless  the  signification  of
the  inquiry.  The  contemptuous  rejection
of  propriety  is  an  outrage  offered  to  the
majesty  of  the  king,  and  one  worthy  of
severest  punishment.  He  was  speechless;
i(jn/i^0n :  literally,  he  toa^  muzzled,  tongue-
tied,  as  if  his  mouth  were  closed  with  a
muzzle  (comp.  ver.  34;  and  Luke  iv.  S5).
He  could  make  no  reply ;  he  had  no  excuse
to  offer.  His  silence  condemned  him.  It
is  observed  that  gags  were  used  for  rebel-
lions slaves  or  criminals  on  tijeir  way  to
execution  (Webst.  and  Wilk.).

Ver.  13. — The,  servants ;  to7s  SiaK6vois :
ministers,  or  attendants — not  the  same  as  the
servants  (BoCAoi)  who  originally  carried  out
the  invitations.  They  are  not  preachers,
but  the  guards  of  the  throne,  meaning
probably  the  ministering  angels  who  execute
the  King's  commands  (see  ch.  xiii.  41,  49).
Bind  hhu  hand  and  foot.  By  hand  and
foot  men  sin,  by  these  they  are  punished.
All  hope  of  escape  is  thus  removed.  Thero
is  no  trial;  the  offence  is  too  gross  and
evident  to  need  any  further  examination;
the  sentence  is  at  once  passed  and  carried
out.  He  who  strives  against  God  is  help-
less, and  immediately  condemned.  Take
him  away.  The  offender  is  thus  deprived
of  all  good.  This -clause  is  omitted  by
most  authorities,  and  has  probably  been
introduced  into  the  received  text  with  the
view  of  explaining  the  stages  and  progress
of  the  ejectment,  (r/ie)  outer  dariiness.
Far  away  from  the  glory  and  brightness
of  the  banquet  into  the  gloom  and  blackness
of  the  ouler  world,  which  represents  the
misery  of  lost  souls  (see  ch.  viii.  12,  where
the  same  expressions  occur).  "  There  are
no  longer  feet  to  run  to  God's  mercy  or
to  flee  from  his  justice;  no  longer  hands  to
do  good  or  make  amends  for  evil;  no  longer
saving  light,  whereby  to  know  God  or  one's
own  duties.  Nothing  but  darkness,  pain,
grief,  tears,  rage,  fury,  and  despair,  for  him
who  is  not  in  the  wedding  hall.  This  is
the  fruit  of  sin,  and  especially  of  the  abuse
of  faith  and  grace  "  (Quesnel).

Ver.  14. — Many  are  called  .  .  .  chosen,
The  rejected  guest  is  a  type  of  a  numeroue
class  (see  ch.  xz.  6).    All  the  Jews  had


m


5:fiEi  GosfEL  AdCOEbiiTd  to  st.  Matthew,  [on.  xxn.  1-46.


firat  been  called;  then  all  the  Gentiles;
many  were  they  who  obeyed  not  the  call  j
and  of  those  who  did  oome  in,  many  were
not  of  the  inner  election,  of  those,  that  is,
whose  life  and  character  were  worthy  of
the  Ohristian  name,  showing  the  graces  of
faith,  holiness,  and  loTe.  Applying  the
parable  generally,  Origen  (ap.  I.  Williams)
says,  "  If  any  one  will  observe  tlie  populous
congregations,  and  inquire  how  many  there
are  who  live  a  better  kind  of  life,  and  are
being  transformed  in  the  renewing  of  their
mind;  and  how  many  who  are  careless  in
their  conversation  and  conformed  to  this
world,  he  will  perceive  the  use  of  this
voice  of  our  Saviour's,  '  Many  are  called,
but  few  chosen ; '  and  in  another  place  it
has  been  said, '  Many  will  seelr  to  enter  in,
and  shall  not  be,able '  (Luke  xiii.  24) ;  and,
'  StriTe  earnestly  to  enter  in  by  the  narrow
gate :  for  few  there  be  tliat  find  it'  (ch.  vii.
13,  14)."

Vers.  15—22. — Second atUiek:  TItequestion
eoneeming  the  tribute  to  Ciesar.  (Mark  xii,
13—17 ;  Luke  xx.  20—26.)

Ver.  15.' — Then  went  the  Pharisees.  After
they  had  heard  the  parables,  and  were  for
the  time  silenced,  they  departed  from  the
public  couits  of  the  temple,  and  betook
themselves  to  the  hall  of  the  Sanhedrin,
that  they  might  plut  some  stratagem  against
Jesus.  How  they  might  entangle  (wayiSei-
aiaaiv)  him  in  his  talk.  The  verb  (not  else-
where found  in  the  New  Testament)  means
"to  lay  a  snare  for"  an  object.  The
Pharisees  did  nut  dare  to  use  open  violence,
but  they  now  endeavoured  by  insidious
questions  to  make  him  compromise  himself
either  vrith  the  Bomans,  their  political
masters,  or  with  the  national  and  patriotic
party.

Yer.  16. — Their  disciples.  Men  of  their
own  party,  or  students  in  the  rabbinical
schools,  like  Paul,  "  brought  up  at  the  feet
of -G  amaliel "  and  such-like  teachers.  They
Bunt  those  unknown  and  apparently  simple-
minded  persons,  that  they  tliemselves,  who
were  open  and  bitter  enemies  of  Christ,
might  not  appear  in  the  matter.  With  the
Herodians.  Tlie  two  bodies  hated  one
another,  but  made  now  an  unholy  alliance
for  the  purpose  of  attacking  Jesus.  Hatred,
like  poverty,  makes  men  acquainted  with
strange  companions.  The  Herodians  were
a  political  sect  which  supported  the  dynasty
of  Herod,  and  were  more  or  lees  favourable
to  the  dominion  of  Bome,  as  that  which
preserved  their  authority  in'  the  country.
In  religious  opinions  thiy  were  mostly
Sadducees.  The  Pharisees,  on  the  other
hand,  in  their  nominal  zeiil  for  God,  were
violeutly  opposed  t  >  Ih  ■  claims  of  Koine,
and  ready  to  rebel  at  the  first  favourable


opportunity.  They  regarded  the  Herodians
as  little  better  than  the  heathen  whom  they
favoured,  but  sunk  their  difi'erences  in  the
face  of  &  general  periL  Between  these  an-
tagonistic elements  an  impious  league  had
been  formed  earlier  in  Christ's  ministry  (see
Mark  iii.  6).  Uaster ;  AiSiaxaXe :  Teacher,
equivalent  to  "Babbi;"  owning  him  for
the  nonce  as  one  possessed  of  teaching
authority,  though  they  willed  not  to  be
his  disciples.  Erue ;  truthful.  Thoroughly
misapprehending  the  character  of  Jesus,
they  began  by  flattery.  Kicodemns  had
spoken  in  sincerity  when  he  said  (John
iii.  2),  "Babbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a
Teaolier  come  from  God ; "  but  these  make
the  admission  in  hypocrisy;  it  was  a
eaptatio  benevoleniim,  prompted  by  the  spirit
of  evil.  The  way  of  God.  The  precepts
and  rules  which  men  must  follow  if  they
would  please  God.  Tlie  phrase  is  common
in  the  Old  Testament  (Gen.xviii.  19;  Deut.
X.  12;  Ps.  xviii.  21,  etc.).  Neither  carest
then.  What  men  think  or  say  of  thee  is
no  concern  to  thee.  They  cannot  influence
thy  actions  or  disturb  thy  serenity.  The
person  of  men,  Thou  art  thoroughly  im-
partial ;  no  considerations  of  rank,  station,
power,  bias  thy  judgment,  words,  or  actions.
This  is  said  with  the  view  of  encouraging
him  to  answer  without  fear  of  offending  the
Boman  authorities.

Ver.  17.— Tell  us  therefore.  Because  yon
are  bo  truthful  and  impartial,  give  us  your
nnprejudiced  opinion  about  the  following
much-disputed  question.  These  people
assume  to  be  simple-minded  inquirers,  who
came  to  Jesus  to  have  a  perplexity  resolved.
St.  Lulte  gives  their  real  character,  "  They
sent  forth  spies,  which  should  feign  them-
selves just  men,  that  they  might  take  hold
of  his  words."  Is  it  lawful  (?f  eo-n)  to  give
tribute  (k^ixtov,  cemum)  onto  Caesar,  or  not  1
The  tribute  is  the  poll-tax  levied  by  the
Bomaus.  Ciesar  at  this  time  was  Tiberius ;
the  title  was  now  applied  to  the  emperors,
though  its  subsequent  use  was  different.  By
asking  concerning  the  lawfulness  of  the
payment,  they  do  not  inquire  whtther  it
was  expedient  or  advisable  to  make  it,  but
whether  it  was  morally  and  religiously  right,
consistent  with  their  obligation  as  subjects
of  the  theocratic  kingdom.  Some,  as  Judas
of  Galilee  (Acts  v.  37;  Josephus,  'Ant.,'
xviii.  1.  1,  6),  had  resorted  to  violence  in
their  opposition  to  the  tax;  and  indeed,
the  question  here  put  was  much  debated
between  opposite  parties.  The  Pharisees
were  strongly  opposed  to  foreign  domina-
tion, and  thought  it  derogatory  and  sacri-
legious for  the  people  of  Jehovah  to  pay
impoiit  to  a  foreign  and  heathen  autho-
rity. The  Herodians,  on  the  other  hand,
suhniittod  without  reserve  to  the  supremacj


OH.  xxn.  1— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


361


of  Borne,  and,  for  political  reasons,  silenced
all  nationalist  and  ultra-patriotio  feeling.
By  putting  this  question,  the  disputants
thought  to  force  Christ  into  a  dilemma,
where  he  must  answer  directly  "Yes"  or
"  No,"  and  where,  whichever  reply  he  made,
he  would  equally  offend  one  or  other  of
the  parties  into  which  the  state  was  divided.
If  he  affirmed  the  lawfulness  of  the  tax,  he
would  lose  his  popularity  with  the  mass  of
the  people,  as  one  who  disowned  the  sove-
reignty of  Jehovah,  and  would  give  the
death-blow  to  his  own  claims  as  Messiah-
Eing.  If  he  gave  a  negative  reply,  he  would
^•be  deemed  an  enemy  of  Borne  and  a  promoter
of  seditious  views,  and  be  liable  to  be  handed
over  to  the  oivil  power  for  the  punishment
of  disafTection  and  treason  (see  Luke  zx.
20).  They  falsely  brought  this  charge
against  him  before  Pilate  (Luke  xxiii.  2).

Ver.  IS. — ^Wickedness.  The  malice  end
hypocrisy  which  prompted  the  inquiry.
Why  tempt  ye  me,  ye  hypooritest  They
were  hypocrites  because  they  falsely  as-
sumed the  guise  of  conscientious  men,  who
had  no  sinister  motive,  and  desired  merely
to  hear  the  decision  of  a  much-esteemed
BabbL  Ohrist's  words  proved  in  a  moment
that  be  saw  through  them,  understood  the
meaning  of  the  temptation  to  wlu'cb  they
had  subjected  him — how  they  were  trying
to  involve  him  in  a  political  ^fBculty,  from
which  they  deemed  no  escape  was  possible.
The  character  which  they  had  flatteringly
given  to  Jesni  (ver.  16)  he  here  fidly
responds  to.

Ver.  19. — The  tribute  money;  t4  nf/tur/ta
raS  lelivaov :  the  coin  of  th»  tribute;  that  is,
the  coin  in  which  the  tribute  was  paid.  The
reply  to  ttie  question  was  wholly  unexpected.
The  Pharisaic  "disciples"  had  hoped  that
Christ  would  have  taken  part  against  the
Herodians ;  but  he  gives  no  decision  about
the  matter  in  dispute,  such  as  they  desired.
He  virtually  rebukes  their  dissimulation,
and  makes  their  own  action  supply  the
verdict  which  they  demanded.  Not  seeing
the  drift  of  his  request,  they  brought  unto
him  a  penny ;  a  denariut  (see  on  ch.  zviii.
28).  This  was  the  amount  of  the  capitation
tax,  and  it  was  paid  in  Soman,  not  Jewish,
coinage.  Just  at  this  period  the  Jews  had
no  mintage  of  their  own,  and  were  forced  to
use  Boman  coins,  which  might  well  be  called
"  tribute  money."

Yer.  20. — ^Image  and  snpersoription.  The
figure  and  inscription  on  the  denarius.
Jesus  takes  the  coin,  and  points  to  it  as  he
speaks.  It  must  have  borne  a  likeness  of  the
eniperor,and  th  erefore,as  Edenheim  remarks,
must  have  been  either  a  foreign  one  (Boman)
or  possibly  one  of  the  Tetrareh  Philip,
who  on  some  of  his  coins  introduced  the
iniage  of  Tiberius.    The  coins  struck  by  tii«


Bomans  in  or  for  Palestine  had,  in  accommo-
dation to  Jewish  prejudices,  no  represeato-
tion  of  any  personage  upon  them.  The
Boman  denarius  at  this  date  had  on  the
obverse  side  the  head  of  Tiberius,  crowned
with  laurel  leaves,  and  bore  the  legend,
"  TI OAESAB  DIVI AVG  P  AVGVSTVS."
and  on  the  reverse,  a  seated  female  Ugure,
with  the  inscription,  "PONTIF  MAXIM."

Ver.  21. — Csssar's.  They  are  constrained
to  answer  that  the  coin  bears  the  eiSgy  of  the
Boman  emperor.  Bender  (dTrfiSure,  give  back,
as  a  due)  therefore  unto  Caesar  the  things
which  are  Caesar's  (jb.  Kalaufiui).  Uabbiuisui
ruled  that  tlie  right  of  coinage  appertained
to  the  ruler  of  a  state,  and  was  a  proof  of
de/aeto  government,  which  it  was  unlawful
to  resist.  The  current  coin,  which  they
used  in  their  daily  transactions,  showed  that
the  Jews  were  no  longer  indepeudeut,  but
set  under  and  acquiesciug  in  a  foreigu
domination.  Being  subjects  of  Osssar,  it
was  their  duty  to  submit  to  his  demands,
and  to  pay  the  taxes  which  he  had  a  right
to  levy.  This  was  an  answer  to  the  insidioas
question  propounded.  Christ  does  njpt  take
either  side  in  the  controversy;  he  malies  no
question  of  tlie  mutual  rights  of  conquered
and  conquerors ;  he  utters  no  aspiration  for
the  recovery  of  independence;  he  uses
facts  as  they  are,  and  points  to  habi-
tual practice  as  a  sufficient  solution  of  the
difficulty.  No  reply  could  be  wiser  or
simpler.  Herein  he  gives  a  lesson  for  all
time.  No  plea  of  religion  can  hold  good
against  obedience  to  lawful  authority.
"  Bender  to  all  their  dues,"  says  St.  Paul
(Bom.  xiii.  7) :  "  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is
due ;  custom  to  whom  custom ;  fear  to  whom
fear ;  honour  to  whom  honour."  The  things
that  are  God's  j  ri.  toS  ®tov.  The  things  of
God  are  ourselves — our  life,  powers,  faculties,
means ;  to  use  these  in  God's  service  is  our
duty  and  our  privilege.  There  need  be  no
conflict  between  religion  and  politics.  Church
and  state.  Let  a  citizen  do  his  duty  to  God,
and  he  will  find  his  obligations  to  the  civil
power  are  coincident  and  harmonious.  Let
the  state  respect  the  rights  of  God  and  of
conscience,  and  there  will  be  no  collision
between  itself  and  the  Church,  but  both  will
peaceably  co-operate  for  tlie  good  of  the
community.  Had  the  Jews  rendered  to  God
his  dues,  they  would  never  have  been  re-
duced to  their  present  state  of  subjectiou
and  debasement ;  would  never  have  had  to
pay  tribute  to  a  foreign  nation.

Ver.  22. — They  marvelled.  Well  might
they  marvel.  Their  carefully  laid  plot,
which  had  seemed  so  irresistible,  was  utterly
frustrated.  The  view  of  the  relations  of
Church  and  state  set  forth  by  Christ  was
novel  and  incomprehensible,  ^itherlo  the
two  proviupes  had  b^ei^  considerod  ide«  ticitl.


362


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxn.  1— 4ft


The  emperor,  as  we  see  impreBsed  on  his
coins,  was  Fontifex  Maximus;  the  Jewish
piiesthood  had  a  political  oharacter,  and  the
civil  power  was  its  instrnment.  In  Christ's
theory  the  spheres  were  distinct  and  not  to
be  confounded.  The  state  compelled  obe-
dience to  its  enactments;  the  Church  left
the  conscience  free,  and  obedience  was  TOliin-
tary  and  enforced  by  no  external  powers.
The  new  society  stood  aloof  from  all  politi-
cal interests,  and  was  responsible  alone  to
God,  while  it  performed  its  duties.  Left
him.  They  had  no  answer  to  give.  There
was  nothing  in  Christ's  words  that  they
could  lay  hold  of;  nothing  treasonable,
nothing  unpatriotic.  Baffled,  thongh  not
convinced,  the  questioners  sullenly  with-
drew ;  but  they  or  their  comrades  after-
wards had  the  effrontery  to  accuse  Jesus
of  tbrbidding  to  pay  tribute  to  Gwsar  (Luke
xxiii.  2).

Vers.  23— 33.— I^tfd  attacJci  The  Sad-
duaeet  and  the  returreetion.  (Mark  xii.  18 —
27;  Luke  IX.  27— 10.)

Yer.  23. — ^Ihe  same  day;  on  that  day.
This  is  still  the  Tuesday  in  the  Holy  Week.
The  Sadduoees,  There  is  no  definite  article
here  in  the  original.  Which  say  ;  ol  Xiyovrts.
Many  good  manuscripts  and  some  modern
editors  (Lachmann,  Tregelles,  Tischendorf,
Westcott  and  Hort)  read  XeyoyTcs,  "say-
ing." The  received  reading  historically
describes  the  Badducees'  opinions ;  the
other  makes  them  come  buldly  stating  their
sentiments.  ,Where  authorities  are  pretty
evenly  balanced,  we  must  decide  the  word-
ing of  a  passage  by  other  than  literary
considerations ;  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  reading  which  denotes  the  charac-
teristic of  the  sect  is  more  appropriate  than
that  which  represents  them  offensively
parading  their  views  as  a  preparation  for
the  coming  question.  We  have  had  notice  of
the  Sadduoees  before  (ch.  iii.  7 ;  xvi.  1).  The
popular  account  of  their  religious  belief  is
given  in  Acts  xxiii.  8,  "  The  Sadduoees  say
tiiat  there  is  no  resurrection,  neither  angel,
nor  spirit."  They  were  rationalists  and
fcceptics,  who  denied  many  old-established
truths,  and  scorned  many  prevalent  observ-
ances. They  acknowledged  most  of  the  Old
Testament,  though,  curiously  enough,  they,
like  our  modern  neologians,  stumbled  at  the
supernatural  upon  which  the  Scriptures
were  built.  Tradition  and  traditional
interpretations  found  no  favour  with  them.
The  future  life  of  the  soul  they  utterly
repudiated,  and  the  resurrection  of  the
body,  when  it  was  brought  before  them,
met  with  contemptuous  ridicule.  The
claims  and  doctrine  of  Christ  were,  in  their
eyes,  puerile  and  unworthy  of  philosophic


consideration.  At  the  same  time,  they  re-
cognized that  the  people  were  with  him  for
the  moment,  and  that  it  was  expedient  that
his  teaching,  so  utterly  opposed  to  their
own  opinions,  should  be  discredited  and
repressed.  So  they  came  forward  asking
an  imaginary  question,  which,  as  they
thought,  would  reduce  to  an  absurdity  the
doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul  and
the  resurrection  of  the  flesh.  Doubtless
they  were  members  of  the  Sanhedrin,  and
it  was  at  the  instigation  of  this  body  that
they  proposed  the  presumed  case  of  con-
science. ,

Ver.  24.— Moses  said;  They  quote  the
substance  of  the  law  of  the  levirate  (i.e.
the  brother-in-law)  in  Deut.  xxv.  5,  6,
by  which  it  was  enacted  that  if  a  married
man  died  without  a  son,  his  brother  or
the  next  of  kin  should  marry  tlie  widow,
and  the  firstborn  son  of  this  union  should
be  regarded  and  registered  as  the  son  of
the  deceased.  This  was  a  law  not  pecu-
liar to  the  Hebrews,  but  prevalent  from
immemorial  times  among  mauy  ancient
peoples,  e.g.  Persians,  Egyptians,  and  found
in  force  among  some  nations  in  modern
times,  as  Arabians,  Druses,  Circassians,  etc.
It  seems  not  to  have  been  enforced  in  any
case,  but  to  have  been  left  to  the  good  wiU
of  the  survivor,  who  might  escape  the
obligation  by  submitting  to  a  certain  social
obloquy  (Deut.  xxv.  7 — 10).  The  motive  of
the  regulation  was  the  maintenance  of  a
family  and  the  non-alienatiou  of  property.
Many  authorities  assert  that  the  law  did
not  apply  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  left
daughters  (Numb,  xxvii.  8),  but  only  in
that  of  a  childless  widow.  Later  rabbinism
limited  the  obligation  to  a  betrothed  woman,
not  yet  actually  married.  But  whatever
may  have  been  the  limitations  allowed  iu
these  days,  the  question  of  the  Sadduoees
took  its  stand  on  the  old  legal  basis,  and
endeavoured  to  draw  therefrom  a  ridiculous
inference.  Shall  marry  ;  4inyaii.fipeia-ei.
The  verb,  found  in  the  Septuagint,  is  used
properly  signifying  "  to  take  a  woman  to
wife  as  the  husband's  kinsman"  (ya/ippos),
and  generally,  "  to  contract  affinity  by  mar-
riage." Baise  up  seed.  The  firstborn  son
of  such  a  mariiage  was  the  legal  heir  of  the
deceased  brother,  and  bore  his  name.  The
natural  aud  the  legal  paternities  are  seen  in
the  genealogies  of  our  Lord,  and  occasion
some  difficulties  in  adjustment.

Ver.  25.— Seven  brethren.  If  the  word
"  brethren  "  is  to  be  taken  in  the  strictest
sense,  and  not  as  equivalent  to  "  kiuemen,"
the  case  is  indeed  conceivable,  though  ex-
tremely improbable,  especially  as  at  this
time  the  custom  had  fallen  into  abeyance,
and  its  rigorous  fulfilment  was  neither
practised  nor  expected.    There  is  a  levity


CH.  xxiL  l-d6.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


863


and  a  coaigeness  in  the  queition  which  if
simply  levolting.

Yei.  26.— Unto  the  uventh;  iat  rSv
irrd,  unto  th«  uven — to  the  end  of  the
(even.

Ver.  27.— The  woman  died  also,  This
last  word  is  omitted  by  Alford,  Tisohendorf,
and  Westcott  and  Hoit,  and  seemingly
with  good  reason.  Tlien,  according  to  these
Sadduoees,  arose  the  difficulty  wliiob  thuy
deemed  insurmountable.

Ver.  28. — In  the  resurrection;  i.e.  in  tlie
life  beyond  the  grave,  to  wliioh  the  resur-
rection is  supposed  to  lead.  Whose  wife
shall  she  he  of  the  seven  1  0/  which  of
the  seven  thall  the  he  wife  (yvvit,  without
the  article,  predicate)?  The  evil  question
stands  in  its  naked  absurdity.  Had  the
woman  a  son  by  either  of  the  husbands,
the  difficulty  would  have  been  less  pro-
nounced, lu  their  coarse  materialism,  these
persons  carry  their  conceptions  of  the  pre-
sent visible  world  into  the  future  spiritual
world;  they  confuse  the  conditions  and
relations  of  one  with  those  of  the  other,
and  would  argue  that  if  such  insoluble
complications  arise  in  the  new  life,  the
resurrection  must  be  an  unfounded  figment.
Had  her.  All  were  lawfully  married  to
her,  and  therefore  all  had  equal  rights.
When  a  woman  was  twice  married,  the  rab-
binical gloss  declared  that  in  the  other
world  she  would  belong  to  her  first  hus-
band; but  this  opinion  was  not  generally
received,  and  the  present  supposititious  case
had  never  been  contemplated  and  fell  under
no  allowed  rule.

Ver.  29. — ^Ye  do  err.  Jesus  does  not  con-
descend to  answer  directly  to  the  contemp-
tuous question  proposed.  He  goes  to  the
root  of  the  matter,  and  shows  the  great
error  in  which  it  originated.  These  dis-
putants are  treated  with  patience  and  calm
argument,  because  they  are  not  hypocrites
like  the  Pharisees,  but  have  the  courage  of
tlieir  opinions,  and  do  not  seek  to  appear
other  than  they  are.  They  errod,  said
Christ,  for  two  reasons:  first,  not  knowing
the  Scriptures.  Whatever  might  be  the
lax  opinions  which  they  held  respecting  the
prophets,  there  was  no  dispute  about  the
supreme  authority  of  the  Pentateuch,  and
thebe .  Scriptures  (as  Christ  proceeded  to
prove)  plainly  implied  the  doctrine  of  the
resurrection.  Secondly,  they  ignored  the
power  of  Ood,  to  whom  nothing  is  impos-
sible, and  who,  in  the  resurrection,  would
perform  a  work  very  different  from  what
they  supposed — changing  the  natural  into
the  spiritual,  and  transforming  the  charac-
teristics of  the  life  that  now  is  into  a
different  and  higher  sphere,  yet  preserving
identity.

Ver,  30. — Por.    The  Lord  proceeds  first


to  show  the  power  of  God  as  displayed  tn
the  resurrection.  The  Sadduceei  would
limit  and  control  this  power  by  conceiving
that  it  could  not  change  the  qualities  of  the
body  or  alter  the  conditions  and  relations  of
the  human  consciousness.  In  the  resnrrec-
tion  (see  on  ver.  28).  Starry ;  as  men.  Are
given  i>  marriage;  as  women.  Marriage
is  an  earthly  relationship,  and  can  have
no  place  in  a  spiritual  condition.  All
that  is  of  the  earth,  all  that  is  carnal  and
gross,  all  human  passions,  all  that  is  con-
nected with  siu  and  corruption,  shall  pass
away.  The  risen  life  is  no  mere  reproduc-
tion of  the  present,  but  a  regeneration,  a
new  life  added  to  the  old,  with  new  powers,
acting  under  new  laws,  ranged  in  a  new
community.  On  earth  men  are  mortal,  and
marriage  is  necessary  to  perpetuate  the
race ;  no  such  necessity  obtains  in  the  other
life,  where  men  arp  immortal.  As  an  old
Father  says,  "Where  the  law  of  death  is
abolished,  the  cause  of  birth  is  abolished
likewise."  Are  as  the  angels  of  God  in
heaven;  i.e,  as  the  angels  who  dwell  in
heaveo.  The  worJe,  toi;  ©cow,  of  God,  are
omitted  by  some  manuscripts  and  editors.
The  Vulgate  has,  angeli  Dei  in  coelo.  Thus
Christ,  in  opposition  to  the  Sadducees'
creed,  admits  the  existence  of  angels.
Glorified  men  are  like  the  angels  in  these
characteristics  especially.  They  are  im-
mortal, no  longer  subject  to  human  wants,
passions,  failings,  or  temptations ;  they  serve
God  perfectly  without  weariness  or  distrac-
tion; they  have  no  conflict  between  flesh
and  spirit,  between  the  old  nature  and  the
new ;  their  life  is  peaceful,  harmonious,
satisfying.  Our  Lord  says  nothing  here
concerning  mutual  recognition  in  the  future
state ;  nothing  about  the  continuance  of
those  tender  relations  which  he  sanctions
and  blesses  on  earth,  and  in  the  absence
of  which  we  cannot  imagine  perfect  hap-
piness existing.  Analogy  supplies  some
answer  to  such  questions,  but  they  are
foreign  to  Christ's  statement,  and  need  not
be  here  discussed.

Ver.  31, — As  touching  (jte/jI)  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead,  Christ,  in  the  second
place,  shows  how  these  disputants  were
ignorant  of  Scripture.  They  may  have
known  the  letter,  they  certainly  knew  no-
thing of  the  spirit  of  the  Word  of  God,  its
depth  and  fulness.  The  key  to  tlie  inter-
pretation of  the  Scripture  is  faith.  It  is  not
enough  to  be  acquainted  with  the  literal
signification ;  this  is  always  inadequate,  and
denotes  not  the  chief  matter  intended.  To
know  the  Scripture,  in  ihe  sense  of  Christ,
is  to  have  a  clear  apprehension  of  its  spiritual
aspect,  to  feel  and  own  the  moral  and  mysti-
cal bearing  of  facts  and  statements,  and  to
recognize  that  herein  lies  the  real  signifi-


364  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxn.  1—46.


canoe  of  the  inspired  leoord.  The  want  of
this  discernment  vitiated  the  Saddncees'
treatment  and  reception  of  Holy  Writ,  and
iuTolved  tbem  in  lamentable  error.  Ohrist
proceeds  to  demonstrate  how  the  very  Penta-
teuch (reverenced  nnquestionably  by  their
party),  which  they  deemed  to  be  entirely
silent  on  the  subject  of  the  life  of  the  soul,
spoke  plainly  on  this  matter  to  all  who  had
faith  to  understand  and  appreciate  the
words  of  Divine  wisdom.  That  which  was
spoken  unto  you  by  Ood.  To  our  minds
Jesus  might  have  adduced  stronger  argu-
ments from  other  books  of  Scripture,  e.g.
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel ;  but  the  Sad-
dncees  had  drawn  their  objection  from  the
Pentateuch,  therefore  from  that  section  of
the  IBible  he  refutes  them.  To  the  books
of  Moses  was  always  inade  the  ultimate
appeal  in  confirmation  of  doctrine;  in  the
supreme  authority  of  these  writings  all  sects
agreed.  The  utterances  of  the  prophets
were  explained  away  as  allegorical,  poetical,
and  rhetorical;  the  plain,  historical  state-
ments of  the  Law  could  not  at  that  time  be
thus  treated.  Christ  endorses  unreservedly
the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  Pentateuch ;
he  intimates  that  it  was  the  voice  of  God  to
all  time,  and  providentially  directed  to  dis-
perse such  errors  as  those  now  produced.

Ver.  32. — I  am  (iyi  ei/xi).  The  quotation
is  from  Exod.  iii.  6,  where  God  gives  him-
self this  name,  as  the  Eternal,  Self-existent
One.  The  God  of  Abraham  ,  .  .  Jacob.
These  patriarchs  had  long  been  dead  when
this  revelation  was  made ;  had  they  been
annihilated,  the  Lord  could  not  have  called
himself  still  their  God.  By  this  utterance
he  implied  that  he  had  still  to  do  with  them
— had  a  blessing  and  a  reward  which  they
were  to  receive,  and  which  they  must  be
alive  to  enjoy.  How  can  they  who  are  his
cease  to  exist?  They  who  are  in  personal
relation  and  covenant  with  God  cannot
perish.  There  were  personal  promises  to
Abraham,  distinguished  from  those  made
to  his  seed  (see  Gen.  xiii.  15 ;  xv.  7 ;  xvii.
8,  etc.),  which  were  never  fulfilled  during
his  earthly  life,  and  await  realization  in  a
future  existence.  God  was  the  patriarelis'
Father,  Saviour,  Redeemer,  Judge,  Ee-
warder;  he  could  not  hold  these  relations
to  mere  dust  and  ashes,  but  only  to  con-
scious and  responsible  beings,  _  existing,
though  in  another  condition,  and  in  another
portion  of  God's  creation.  Thus  was  proved
the  continued  existence  and  personality  of
the  soul ;  and  the  resurrection  of  tlie  body
follows  consequentially  from  this.  Man  is  a
complex  being ;  he  has  body  and  soul,  neither
of  which  is  complete  without  the  other.  The
soul  is  not  perfect  man  without  tlie  body,
which  is  its  organ;  the  body  is  not  perfect
ilijin  without  the  soul,  which  animates  it.


In  giving  eternal  life  to  man,  God  gives  it
to  the  creature  as  origimilly  made,  not  to
one  portion  only  of  his  nature.  Of  the  living.
"For,"  as  St.  Luke  adds,  "all  live  unto
him."  The  so-called  dead  are  alive  in  God's
view;  they  have  an  abiding  relation  to  him,
live  in  his  world,  which  comprises  the  seen
and  unseen,  the  present  and  the  future.
Thus  St.  Paul  says  (Bom.  xiv.  8,  9),
"  Whether  we  live,  we  live  unto  the  Lord ;
and  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto  the  Lord :
whether  we  live  therefore  or  die,  we  are  the
Lord's.  For  to  this  end  Christ  both  died
and  rose  and  revived,  that  he  might  be  the
Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living."

Yer.  33.— They  were  astonished  at  hia
doctrine.  The  multitudes  were  amazed,  not
only  at  an  interpretation  which  was  entirely
new  to  them,  and  which  opened  to  them
some  of  the  depths  of  that  Scripture  oi
which  they  had  been  taught  and  knew  only
the  letter ;  but  because  Christ  showed  that
he  looked  into  men's  hearts,  saw  what  was
the  motive  and  cause  of  their  opinions,  and,
in  explaining  difficulties,  unfolded  eternal
truths.  The  Sadducees,  thus  answered  in
the  presence  of  the  listening  crowds,  at-
tempted no  reply,  slunk  away  confounded,
utterly  foiled  in  their  hope  of  casting  ridi-
cule on  the  teaching  of  Christ.  St.  Luke
notes  that  some  scribes  present,  doubtless
of  the  Pharisaic  faction,  were  highly  de-
lighted with  this  public  defeat  of  their
adversaries,  and  cried,  in  enforced  admira-
tion, "  Master,  thou  hast  well  said  I "

Vers.  34— 40.— fourift  attack :  The  Fhari-
seei  question  concerning  the  great  command-
ment.    (Mark  xii.  28—34.)

Yer.  34. — He  had  put  the  Sadducees  to
silence  (i<j>tiua<rev,  as  ver.  12).  The  Pharisees
were  informed  of,  and  some  of  them  had
witnessed,  the  discomfiture  of  the  Sadducees
(see  Luke  xx.  40) ;  hence  they  deemed  it
necessary  again  to  attack  Jesus  by  asking
a  question  which  specially  appertained  to
their  own  teaching.  They  felt  that,  if  they
were  ever  to  compass  his  overthrow,  they
must  first  lower  his  credit  with  the  people,
so  that  these  might  no  longer  care  to  sup-
port or  defend  him.  To  succeed  in  en-
tangling Jesus  in  a  difficulty  would  not
only  effect  this,  but  would  also  gain  them
a  triumph  over  their  adversaries,  who  had
been  so  completely  defeated.  Were  gathered
together;  M  to  avrb,  which  may  mean,
"  to  the  same  place,"  as  perhaps  Acts  ii.  1 ,
or  "on  the  sumo  ground,"  "for  the  same
purpose."  The  former  is  probably  correct.
The  English  versions  omit  the  words  (see
the  rendering  of  ver.  41,  where  in)  tJ  aurh
does  not  occur).  They  grouped  themselves
around  Christ,  or  ejse  gathered  in  a  coimiii-


OH.  xxn.  1— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.


365


ohamber,  taking  combined  action  against
him.

Ver.  35. — A  lawyer ;  vaniKis,  called,  by
St,  Mark  "a  eoribe  "—a  terra  of  wider  eigni-
fication,  which  would  include  "  lawyers."
Vulgate,  legis  doctor,  which  gives  the  right
sense;  for  such  were  teachers  and  ex-
pounders of  the  Mosaic  Law.  This  man
was  put  forth  by  the  Pharisees  as  an  expert,
who  would  not  be  so  easily  discomflted  as
the  Badducees  bad  been.  Tempting  him.
Trying  him  (oomp.  1  Kings  x.  1) ;  putting
him  to  the  test,  not  altogether  maliciously,
but  partly  from  curiosity,  and  partly  from
a  desire  to  hear  Christ's  opinion  on  a  much-
disputed  point.  It  is  evident,  from  St.
Mark's  account,  that  Christ  was  pleased  with
him  personally,  for  he  said  to  him,  "  Thou
art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God."
Those  who  put  this  lawyer  forward  had,  of
course,  sinister  motives,  and  hoped  to  make
capital  from  Christ's  answer ;  but  the  man
himself  seems  to  have  been  straightfor-
ward and  honest.  We  have  had  the  terra
"  tempting"  used  in  a  hostile  sense  (ch.  xvi.
1 ;  xix.  3),  but  there  is  no  necessity  for  so
taking  it ;  and  it  seems  to  imply  here  merely
the  renewal  of  the  attack  on  Christ.

Yer.  86. — Which  is  the  gpreat  command-
ment in  the  Lawt  Ilo^a  ivToKij  nfyAxi)  iv
t.y  vSiiip ;  What  lort  ofemnmandment  ii great
in  the  Law  ?  According  to  rabbinical  teach-
'ng,  tliere  were  more  than  six  hundred
precepts  In  the  Law ;  of  this  considerable
number  all  oou]|^  not  be  observed.  Which
were  of  absolute  obligation?  which  were
lot  ?  The  schools  made  a  distinction  between
hoayy  and  light  commandments,  as  though
some  were  of  less  importance  than  others,
and  might  be  neglected  with  impunity;
and  some  of  snch  exceeding  dignity  that
fulfilment  of  them  would  condone  imper-
fect obedience  in  the  case  of  others.  Some
taught  that  if  •  man  rightly  selected  some
great  precept  to  obserre,  he  might  safely
disregard  the  rest  of  the  Law  (see  ch.  xix.
16,  etc.).  This  was  the  kind  of  doctrine
against  which  St.  James  (ii.  10)  expostu-
lates: "Whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole
Law,  and  yet  stumble  in  one  point,  he  is
become  guilty  of  all."  The  Pharisees  may
hare  desired  to  discover  whether  Jesus
knew  and  sanctioned  these  rabbinical  dis-
tinctions. He  had  proved  himself  intimately
acquainted  with  the  inner  meaning  of  Scrip-
ture, and  able  to  evolve  doctrines  and  to
trace  analogies  which  their  dull  minds  had
never  comprehended ;  the  question  now  was
whether  he  entered  into  their  subtle  divisions
and  could  decide  this  dispute  for  them.  Such
is  the  Tiew  usually  taken  of  the  scribe's
question;  but  it  may  well  be  doubted,  if
regard  is  had  to  the  character  of  the  man,
whether  he  had  any  intention  of  entangling


Christ  in  these  snbtletiei,  bni  rather  asked
for  a  solution  of  the  general  problem — Of
what  nature  was  the  precept  which  should  be
regarded  as  "  first "  (Mark)  In  the  Law  1  We
may  compare  the  somewhat  similar  anestion  .
and  answer  in  Luke  x,  25—28.  Lange's
idea,  that  the  scribe  wished  to  force  Christ
to  make  some  answer  which,  by  implying
his  own  claim  to  be  Son  of  Ood,  would
trench  upon  the  doctrine  of  monotheism,
seems  wholly  unwarranted.  This  theory  is
based  on  the  supposition  that  the  Pharisee
took  it  for  granted  that  Jesus  would  answer,
"  Thou  Shalt  love  God  above  all,"  and  in-
tended to  fonnd  upon  that  reply  a  condemna-
tion for  having  made  himself  equal  with
God  by  his  assertion  of  Sonship.  But  the
text  gives  no  countenance  to  such  intention,
and  it  has  been  suggested  chiefly  for  the
purpose  of  accounting  for  Christ's  subse-
quent question  (vers.  41 — 45),  which,  how-
ever, needs  no  snoli  fonndation,  as  we  shall
see.

Ver.  87. — Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy
God ;  }^iftov  rhv  9€iv  aov  (Dent  vi.  5,  from
the  Septuagint,  with  some  slight  variation).
Christ  enunciates  the  two  great  moral  pre-
cepts of  God's  Law,  not,  indeed,  stated  in
these  words  in  the  Decalogue,  but  implied
throughout,  and  forming  the  basis  of  true
religion.  Heart  ,  .  ,  sonl  .  .  .  mind.  The
Septuagint  has  "mind,  soul,  strength."
The  expressions  mean  generally  that  God
is  to  be  loved  with  all  our  powers  and
faculties,  and  that  nothing  is  to  be  pre-
ferred to  him.  It  is  difficult  to  define  with
any  .precision  the  signification  of  eaoh  term
used,  and  much  unprofitable  labour  has
been  expended  in  the  endeavour  to  limit
their  exact  sense.  "  Quum,"  as  Orotiua
says,  "  vocum  multarum  cumulatio  nihil
quam  intensius  studium  designet."  It  is
usual  to  explain  thus  :  Heart ;  which
among  the  Hebrews  was  considered  to  be
the  seat  of  the  understanding,  is  here  con-
sidered as  the  home  of  the  affections  and  the
seat  of  the  will.  SauX ;  the  living  powers,
the  animal  life.  Mind)  Siavof^,  inteUectual
powers.  These  are  to  be  the  scat  and  abode
of  the  love  enjoined.

Ver.  38.— The  first  and  great  command-
ment ;  or  better,  the  great  and  first  command'
ment;  Vulgate,  flbo  erf  maximum  etprimum
mandatum.  Here  was  a  plain  answer  to  the
question  of  the  scribe,  which  no  one  could
gainsay  (comp.  Luke  i.  27).  They  who  re-
peated daily  in  their  devotions,  "Hear,  O
Israel,  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord"  (see
Mark),  could  not  help  acknowledging  that
love  of  him  whom  they  thus  confessed  was.
the  chief  duty  of  man — one  which  was
superior  to  every  other  obligation.

Ver.  39. — The  second.  The  scribe  had
not   asked   any  question    about  a   second


366  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxn.  1—46.


oommandment ;  but  Christ  is  not  eatisfled
■with  propounding  an  abstract  proposition;
he  shows  how  this  great  precept  is  to  be
made  practical,  how  one  command  inrolrei
'  and  leads  to  the  other.  Like  unto  it ;  t/iola
auT^ :  in  nature  and  extent,  of  nniveisal
obligation,  pure  and  unselfish.  Thou  sholt
love  thy  ueighboni  as  thyself.  From  Lev.
xix.  18.  The  verb,  both  here  and  ver.  37,
is  dymriiirus,  which  implies,  not  mere  animal
or  worldly  affection  (^<i>iKla),  but  love  from
the  highest  moral  considerations,  without
self-interest,  holy.  The  Latins  indicated
this  difference  by  amo  and  diligo.  Our
"neighbour"  is  every  one  with  whom  we
are  concerned,  i.e.  virtually  all  men.  He
is  to  be  loved  because  he  is  God's  Image
and  likeness,  heir  of  the  same  hope  as  we
ourselves,  and  presented  to  us  as  the  object
on  and  by  which  we  are  to  show  the  reality
of  our  love  to  God.  "This  commandment
have  we  from  him,  tliat  he  who  loveth  God
love  his  brother  also"  (1  John  iv.  21).
And  for  the  measure  of  our  love  to  man,
we  have  Christ's  word  in  another  place
(oh.  vii.  12),  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye
would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  .do  ye
even  so  to  them."

Ver.  40. — Hang  all  the  Law  and  the
prophets ;  t'.e.  all  Scripture,  which  is  com-
prised in  these  terms  (oomp.  ch.  v.  17 ;  viL
12);  in  other  words,  all  the  revelations
which  God  has  made  to  man  in  every  age.
The  clause  is  peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.  It
signifies  that  on  love  of  God  and  love  of
man  depend  all  the  moral  and  religions,
ceremonial  and  judicial  precepts  contained
in  the  Law,  all  the  utterances  of  the  pro-
phets, all  the  voices  of  history.  Scripture
enunciates  the  duty  to  God  and  our  neigh-
bour, shows  the  right  method  of  fulfilling  it,
warns  against  the  breach  of  it,  gives  ex-
amples of  punishment  and  reward  consequent
upon  the  way  in  which  the  obligation  has
been  treated.  Thus  the  unity  and  integrity
of  revelation  is  demonstrated.  Its  Author  is
one ;  its  design  is  uniform ;  it  teaches  one
path,  leading  to  one  great  end.

Vers.  41-^6. — Christ'i  question  to  tht
FharUea  concerning  the  Messiah.  (Mark
xii.  35—37 ;  Luke  xi.  41—44.)

Ver.  41. — Jesus  asked  them.  He  spake
generally  to  the  assembled  crowd  in  the
temple  (Mark),  addressing  no  one  in  parti-
cular. The  questioned  becomes  the  ques-
tioner, and  this  with  a  great  purpose.  He
bad  silenced  liis  opponents,  and  opened  pro-
fundities in  Scripture  hitherto  nnfathomed ;
he  would  now  raise  them  to  a  higher  theo-
logy ;  he  would  place  before  them  a  truth
concerning  the  nature  of  the  Mess'ah,
which,  if  they  received  it,  would  lead  them
to  accept  him.     It  was  as  it  were  a  last


hope.     He  and  the   Pharisees ,  had  some
common  ground,  which  was  wanting  in  the
case  of  the  Saddaoees  and  Herodians  (oompt
Acts  xxiii.  6);  he  would  use  this  to  support'
a  last  appeal    Let  us  observe  the  Divine
patience  and  tenderness  of  Christ.    Not  to
gain  a  victory  over  inveterate  enemies,  not
to  expose  the  ignorance  of  scribe  and  Phari-
see, not  to  exhibit  his  own  profound  know-
ledge of  the  inner  harmonies  of  God's  Word,
does  he  now  put  this  question.    He  desires
to  win  acceptance  of  his  claims  by  the  nn-
answerable  argument  of  the  Scripture  which
they  revered;  let  them  consider  the  exact
meaning  of  a  text  often  quoted,  let  them
weigh  each  word   with  reverent  care,  and
they  would  see  that  the  predicted  Messiah
was  not  merely  Son  of  David  according  to
eartUly  descent,  but  was  Jehovah  himself;
and  that  when  he  claimed  to  be  Son  of  God,
when  he  asserted,  "  I  and  my  Father  are
one,"  ho  was  vindicating  for  himself  only
what  the  prophet  had  aiBrmed  of  the  nature
of  the  Christ.    He  had,  so  to  speak,  hope
that  some  among  his  hearers  would  accept
this  teaching,  and   save  themselves  amid
that  untoward  generation.      It  was  when
this  last  hope  failed,  when  he  saw  nothing
but  hardened  hearts  and  wilful  prejudice,
that  he  uttered  the  woes  and  predictions  in
the  following  chapter.

Ver.  42. — What  think  ye  of  Christ  t  raS
XpiiTTov,  the  Christ,  the  Messiah.  What  is
your  belief?  What  do  you,  the  teachers  of
the  people  and  the  carefq^  interpreters  of
Scripture,  opine  concerning  the  Messiah  ?
Whose  Son  is  het  This  was  a  question
the  full  bearing  of  which  they  did  not  com-
prehend, thinking  that  it  referred  only  to
his  earthly  descent.  In  their  partial  know-
ledge, perhaps  half  contemptuously,  as  to
an  inquiry  familiar  to  all,  they  say  unto
him,  The  Son  of  David.  So  all  prophecy
had  said,  as  they  very  well  knew  (ch.  i.  1).

Ver.  43. — He  saith.  They  had  answered
glibly  enough,  not  knowing  what  was  to
come  of  their  natural  admission ;  now  Christ
puts  a  difficulty  before  them  which  might
have  led  them  to  pause  and  reflect  upon
what  that  assertion  might  connote.  How
theni  n&soZr;  If  Christ  is  David's  Son,
how  is  it  then,  in  what  sense  can  it  be  said,
etc.  ?  Doth  David  in  spirit  call  him  Lord.
"In  spirit"  means  speaking  under  the  in-
spiration of  the  Holy  Spirit — an  argument
surely  for  the  Divine  authority  of  the  Old
Testament,  when  "holy  men  of  God  spake
as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost"
(2  Pet.  i.  21).  Christ  proceeds  to  quote  a
passage  from  Ps.  ex.,  acknowledged  by
the  Jews  to  be  Davidio  and  Messianic.
Both  these  positions  have  been  called  in
question  in  modern  days,  and  sceptical
critics    have    hence    presumed    to    infer


m.  XXII.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


867


ignorance  or  deceit  on  the  part  of  Christ;
•'.«.  either  that  he  did  not  know  that  the
authorship  was  wrongly  attributed  to  David,
and  that  the  psalm  really  referred  to
Haccabean  times,  or  that,  knowing  these
facta,  he  deliberately  ignored  them  and
endorsed  a  popular  error  in  order  to  give
colour  to  his  argument.  The  statement
of  such  a  charge  against  our  Lord  is  a
sufficient  refutation.  Universal  tradition,
extending  to  this  very  time,  which  gave  to
the  psalm  u  Messianic  interpretation,  is
surely  more  worthy  of  credit  than  a  theory
elaborated  in  the  present  century,  which
in  no  respect  regards  the  natural  significa-
tion of  the  language,  and  can  be  made  to
support  the  novel  idea  only  by  forced  and
unreal  accommodations.  By  speaking  of
David  as  having  uttered  the  quoted  words,
Christ  does  not  formally  state  that  this  king
wrote  the  psalm;  he  merely  gives  the
accepted  view  which  classed  it  as  Davidio.
The  authorship  did  not  matter  in  his  appli-
cation; his  argument  was  equally  sound,
whoever  was  the  writer.

Yer.  ii. — The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord
(Ps.  ex.  1).  The  quotation  is  from  the
Septuagint.  But  neither  this  nor  our
English  Version  is  an  adequate  rendering
of  the  original,  where  the  word  translated
"  Lord  "  is  not  the  same  in  both  parts  of  the
clause.  More  accurately,  the  solemn  begin-
ning of  the  psalm  is  thug  given :  "  Utterance
[or,  '  oracle  'j  of  Jehovah  to  my  Lord
\Adonai)."  The  psalmist  acknowledges
the  recipient  of  the  utterance  as  his  sove-
reign Lord ;  this  could  be  no  earthly  poten-
tate, for  on  earth  he  had  no  such  superior ;
Jewisli  tradition  always  applied  the  term
unto  the  Messiah,  or  the  Word.  The  pre-
diction repeats  the  promise  made  by  Nathan
to  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  12),  which  had  no
fulfilment  in  his  natural  progeny,  and  could
be  regarded  as  looking  forward  only  to  the
Messiah.  Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand.
Thus  Messiah  is  exalted  to  the  highest
dignity  in  heaven.  Sitting  at  God's  right
hand  doea  not  necessarily  imply  complete
Divine  majesty  (as  Hengstenberg  remarks),
for  the  sons  of  Zebedee  had  asked  for  such
a  position  in  Messiah's  earthly  kingdom
(oh.  XX.  21) ;  but  it  denotes  supreme  honour,
association  in  government,  authority  second
only  to  that  of  Monarch.  This  is  said  of
Christ  in  his  human  nature.  He  is  "  equal
to  the  Father,  as  touching  his  Godhead;
inferior  to  the  Father,  as  touching  his
manhood."  In  his  Divine  natui-e  he  could
receive  nothing;  in  his  human  nature  all
"power  was  given  unto  him  in  heaven
and  earth"  (ch.  xxviii.  18).  Till  I  make
0a>s  &r  0^)  thine  enemies  thy  foot-
stool; iroiriSioy  tuv  iroSuy  irov.  This  is
the    Septuagint    reading.      Many    manu-


scripts here  give  AiroKdra  rmr  xoSSn  aov.
Till  I  put  thine  enemies  underneath  thy  feet.
Some  few"have  both  &irov6Sioy  and  vnoKara,
Vulgate,  Donee  ponam  inimieoi  tuot  tcdbel-
lum  pedum  tuorum.  The  complete  subjection
of  all  adversaries  is  denoted  (comp.  1  Cor.
XV.  25 — 27;  Heb.  i.  IS);  and  they  are
subjected  not  merely  for  punishment  and
destruction,  but,  it  may  be,  for  salvation  and
glory.  The  relative  particle  "till"  must
not  be  pressed,  as  if  Christ's  session  was
to  cease  when  bis  victory  was  completed.
We  have  before  had  occasion  to  observe
that  the  phrase.  Has  oS,  or  fus  &i>,  asserts
nothing  of  the  future  beyond  the  event
specific.  As  St.  Jerome  says  of  such
negative  phrases,  "Ita  negant  prnteritum
ut  non  ponant  fnturum "  (oomp.  oh.  i.  25 ;
V.  26;  xviii.  84).  Of  Christ'f  kingdom
there  is  no  end.

Ver.  45.— If  David  .  .  .  Son  1  The  argu-
ment is  this :  David  speaks  with  highest
reverence  of  Messiah,  calling  him  his  Lord :
how  is  this  attitude  consistent  with  the  fact
that  Messiah  is  David's  Son?  How  can
Messiah  be  both  Son  and  Lord  of  David?
We,  who  have  learned  the  trnth  concerning
the  two  natures  of  Christ,  can  readily  answer
the  question.  He  is  both  "  the  Boot  and  the
Offspring  of  David"  (Eev.  xxu.  16).  The
Athanasian  Creed  offers  the  required  solu-
tion of  the  seeming  paradox :  "  God,  of  the
substance  of  the  Father,  begotten  before
the  worlds ;  and  Man  of  the  substance  of
his  mother,  bom  in  the  world ;  perfect
God,  and  perfect  Man  .  .  .  who  although
he  be  God  and  Man,  yet  he  is  not  two,
but  one  Christ."  Here  was  an  explana-
tion (if  the  Pharisees  took  his  words  to
heart)  of  much  that  had  excited  their  indig-
nation, and  caused  cavil  and  carping.  He
claimed  to  be  the  Messiah ;  and  Messiah,  as
Scripture  presented  him,  had  a  twofold
nature.  When,  therefore,  he  asserted  equality
with  the  Father  when  he,  "being  man,
made  himself  God"  (John  x.  33),  he  was
vindicating  that  Divine  nature  which  he  as
Messiah  possessed.  Jesus  did  not  further
elucidate  this  mystery.  He  had  given  food
for  reflection ;  he  had  unfolded  the  hidden
meaning  of  Scripture;  he  had  shown  the
shallowness  of  the  popular  exegesis;  the
knowledge  was  here;  there  was  wanting
only  the  will  to  raise  the  flower  of  faith
in  the  heart  of  these  obdurate  hearers.

Ver.  46. — No  man  was  able  to  answer  him
a  word.  They  could  not  confute  Christ's
arguments;  they  would  not  receive  and
ponder  them;  so  they  held  their  peace.
Had  they  had  a  real  desire  to  be  instructed,
they  would  have  profited  by  the  present
occasion ;  coming  to  the  light  with  honest
and  good  hearts,  they  would  have  been
enlightened.    But  this  was  far  from  their


86y  THE  GOSPEL   ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxii.  1—46.


wish,  BO  they  went  away  empty.  Neither
durst  any  man.  They  perceived  that  they
could  gain  no  advantage  over  Christ  by  such
methode  of  attack.  Pharisees,  Herodians,
Fadduoeea,  had  ignominioualy  euooumbed;
to  make  a  fresli  assault  was  to  court  a  fresh
defeat    Seeing  tbli,  they  dared  no  longer


tempt  him  in  this  way.  Henceforward  they
would  use  other  tactics.  Treachery  and
viiilence  must  nosv  play  their  part.  Tliese
weapons  would  be  more  successful  in  com-
passing the  destruction  of  the  innocent
Victim.


HOMILETIOS,

Vers.  1—14. — The  parable  of  the  marriage  feast.  I.  The  first  invitatioh.  1.  TTie
King.  This  parable  resembles  the  parable  of  the  great  supper  in  Luke  xiv. ;  but
it  was  delivered  at  a  different  time,  under  different  circumstances.  It  differs  also
in  its  ending  and  in  many  of  its  details.  It  cannot  possibly  be,  as  some  have  thought,
a  more  variation  of  that  parable.  The  King  is  God  the  Father,  the  Lord  God
omnipotent.  He  made  a  marriage  for  his  Son.  The  marriage  is  the  union  between
Christ  and  his  Church — the  union  described  by  St.  Paul  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Bphesians
(v.  23 — 27);  the  union  which  is  to  reach  its  perfect .  consummation  and  bliss  in
God's  eternal  and  everlasting  glory  (Rev.  lix.  7 — 9 ;  xxi.  9,  10).  The  bride  is  the
Church,  regarded  in  its  ideal  character,  as  one,  holy,  catholic,  apostulic.  The  invited
guests  are  those  who  have  been  called  into  the  Church,  taken  individually.  So  in
Eev.  xxi,,  the  holy  city,  regarded  as  a  whole,  is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife  j  while  in  ver.
27,  individual  saints,  they  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,  are  described
as  entering  into  it.  The  King  made  the  marriage.  The  choice  of  the  Church  lies  in
the  eternal  purpose  of  God,  the  election  of  God  the  Father,  '"  God  so  loved  the
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son."  He  determined,  in  his  gracious  love,
to  sanctify  our  human  nature,  by  uniting  it  to  the  Divine  nature  in  the  Persun  of  hia
only  begotten  Son.  The  Son  of  God  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it,
that  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  The  parable  describes  the
preparations  for  the  marriage ;  not  the  glorious  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb,  when  the
bride  shall  have  made  herself  ready,  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  clean  and  white.  For  that
marriage  supper  is  the  blissful  consummation  of  the  mystical  union  of  the  bride  with
the  heavenly  Bridegroom ;  all  who  are  admitted  there  are  blessed.  The  marriage
feast  of  the  parable  is  the  kiijgdom  of  heaven  which  the  Lord  came  to  establish  upon
earth ;  the  Church,  his  bride,  is  not  yet  in  the  full  sense  ready ;  she  has  not  yet  been
transfigured  by  his  grace  into  the  likeness  of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom ;  her  robes  are
not  yet  whiter  than  snow,  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  But  she  is  even
now  his  chosen  bride,  though  she  needs  purification  and  sanctification.  The  great
Catholic  Church,  the  whole  congregation  of  Christian  people  upon  earth,  is  the  figure,
the  beginning,  of  the  congregation  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven.  The  privileges  offered
to  the  faithful  are  spiritual  communion  with  Christ  through  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
access  to  our  Father  in  heaven  through  the  atonement  once  made  upon  the  cross,  the
blessed  sacrament  in  which  all  true  believers  are  strengthened  and  refreshed  with
heavenly  food ;  all  these  are  a  foretaste  of  that  great  marriage  supper  which  the  Lurd
is  preparing  in  heaven  for  those  who  are  being  sanctified  by  his  Holy  Spirit  upon
earth,  2.  Eig  servants.  The  King  sent  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  vvkioh  were
bidden  (as  Esther  sent  the  chamberlain  to  bring  Haman  to  the  banquet  to  which  she
had  invited  him  the  day  before) ;  but  they  would  not  come.  The  servants  wore  John
the  Baptist,  the  twelve,  the  seventy.  They  called  the  Jews,  God's  chosen  people,
bidden  long  ago,  to  receive  the  salvation,  the  full  gospel  privileges  of  which  all  the
prophets  hstd  spoken.  The  Lord  himself  called  them,  "  If  any  man  thirst,"  he  said,
"let  him  come  unto  me,  and  drink;"  "He  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger;
and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  But,  alas  1  they  would  not  come.
"  Ye  will  not  come  to  lue,"  he  said  in  his  Divine  sorrow,  "that  ye  might  have  life."
Again  the  King  sent  otber  servants.  He  did  not  at  once  reject  bis  ancient  peoiile  for
their  stubbornness  and  disobedience.  He  sent  again,  and  now  the  message  was  more
urgent :  "  I  have  prepared  my  dinner  [it  was  not  the  sup|)er,  ii'imoy ;  but  the  midday
meal,  Hpurrov,  which  would  mark  the  beginning  of  the  marriage  festivities] :  my  oxeu
and  my  fatliugs  are  killed,  and  all  things  are  ready,"    The  other  servants  were  the


6ft.  tin.  1— 4d.]    tHB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  m

apostlei  and  evangelists  sent  forth  to  preach  after  the  great  Day  of  Pentecost.  Kow
the  Sacrifice  had  been  offered,  the  Victim  had  been  slain.  The  eternal  purpose  of  God
had  been  fulfilled  in  that  one  sufficient  Sacrifice,  Oblation,  and  Satisfaction  for  the  sins
of  the  whole  world.  All  things  were  now  ready.  These  other  servants  preached  first
to  the  Jews ;  but  still,  as  %  people,  they  would  not  come.  They  made  light  of  the
gracious  invitation ;  some,  heedless  and  thoi^htless,  went  their  ways,  caring  only
for  the  present  life,  its  business  or  its  pleasures.  One  went  to  his  field:  he  was
a  man  of  landed  property ;  he  had  all  that  he  wanted.  Another  went  to  his
merchandise ;  he  was  absorbed  in  the  pursuit  of  gain ;  he  had  no  time,  no  thoughts
for  other  things.  Both  neglected  the  King's  invitation :  they  had  no  desire  for  the
royal  banquet.  Others,  more  zealous  and  more  violent,  because  they  were  zealous  for
their  own  exclusive  privileges,  not  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  God,  persecuted  and
slew  the  servants  of  the  King — the  holy  Martyr  Stephen,  the  Apostle  St.  James,  and
many  other  saints  of  God.  3.  Uu  wrath  of  the  King.  The  King  marked  these
wicked  deeds.  There  was  no  need  that  others  should  repeat  them  to  him  (the  words,
"  when  he  heard  thereof,"  seem  not  to  be  genuine) ;  he  knoweth  all  things.  He  was
wroth.  Those  wicked  men  had  despised  his  grace  and  bounty ;  they  had  slain  his
messengers.  He  bore  with  them  in  his  long-sufiering  mercy  till  their  iniquity  was
fuU.  Then  he  sent  forth  his  armies;  he  destroyed  those  murderers,  and  burned  up
their  city.  The  Lord  saw  again  in  prophetic  vision  that  awful  visitation  over  which
he  had  wept  when  he  looked  upon  Jerusalem  from  the  Mount  of  Olives :  "  They
shall  lay  thee  even  with  the  ground,  and  thy  children  within  thee."  Then  he  spoke
in  Divine  pity  and  sorrow,  now  in  the  tones  of  awful  justice.  It  must  be  so;  they
are  hardened  in  their  wilful  unbelief;  they  will  add  sin  to  sin;  the  dreadful  day  must
come.  The  wrath  of  the  King  is  fearful  exceedingly;  the  terror  of  the  Lord  is  over-
irhelming.    Let  U8  listen  to  the  gentle  calling  of  his  grace  while  theria  is  time.

II.  The  beoono  invitation.  1.  The  message.  Again  the  King  sent  forth  his
servants.  The  marriage  feast  was  ready;  the  fountain  was  opened  for  sin  and
for  uncleannesB ;  the  living  Bread  which  came  down  from  heaven  was  offered  to  men  ;
all  were  invited  to  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely.  They  which  had  been  bidden  were
not  worthy.  They  judged  themselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life  (Acts  xiii.  46).
The  King  bade  his  servants  go  into  the  highways,  and  call  all,  without  distinction,
as  many  as  they  should  find :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel
to  every  creature."  2.  The  ohedience  of  the  servants.  They  did  according  to  the
bidding  of  the  King ;  they  went  into  the  highways,  and  gathered  together  as  many
as  they  found.'  The  apostles  and  evangelists  preached  everywhere,  whithersoever  they
could  go ;  they  gathered  together  a  great  company  from  all  parts  of  the  world.  And
now  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  guests,  the  halls  of  the  palace  were  filled.  For
the  messengers  had  worked  hard,  and  had  brought  all  who  would  come,  without
distinction  of  race,  or  social  position,  or  education,  or  even  of  moral  character ;  bad
and  good  alike  were  invited,  not  only  the  righteous,  but  publicans  and  sinners  also.
The  good  (in  the  human  sense  of  the  word)  would  become  better;  the  bad  might,
by  the  gift  of  grace,  be  cleansed  and  converted  and  saved.  All  alike  were  called  to
the  dinner ;  that  is,  tu  the  blessings  and  privileges  of  the  gospel,  which  are  an  antepast
of  the  full  joy  of  heaven.

JII.  The  WBDDINQ  GABMENT.  1.  The  Kin^s  qmstion.  The  King's  house  was  full ;
the  guests  were  alruaily  at  the  festal  board  (rois  hiaittiixivovs).  The  King  came  in
to  see  them.  His  eye  ranged  through  that  great  assembly.  He  saw  all^very  one.
There  was  one  who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment.  He  had  been  brought  irom  the
highways ;  he  had  come  just  as  he  was;  with  clothes,  perhaps,  worn  and  ragged,  soiled
and  filthy.  How  was  it  ?  The  ether  guests  were  all  suitably  attired.  They  too  had
been  gathered  from  the  highways ;  there  were  high  and  low,  good  and  bad,  among
them.  But  whatever  they  were  when  they  were  bidden,  whatever  was  their  condition
then,  all  had  wedding  garments  now.  This  one  alone  was  "clothed  with  filthy
garments,"  like  Joshua  the  high  priest  when  he  stood  before  the  angel  (Zeoh,  iii.  8) ;
but  he  was  not  now,  like  Joshua,  clothed  with  change  of  raiment.  The  King's  eye
found  him  out.  He  could  not  be  hid,  though,  we  may  well  believe,  he  sought  to
escape  that  piercing  look.  "  Friend,"  the  King  said  (the  word  does  not  imply  intimacy
and  afiection,  but  only  knowledge  and  acquaintance ;  it  is  used  in  the  rebuke  of  the
HATTHiew — Ti,  8  >


370  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxn.  1—46.

discontented  husbandmen,  ch.  sx.  13,  and  by  our  Lord  to  Judas,  ch.  xxtL  60),  «how
earnest  thou  in  hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment?"     The  question  is  gently
expressed,  but  the  negative  particle  used  (jiii  Hxar)  seems  to  appeal  to  the  man's
consciousness ;  it  seems  to  imply  that  he  was  aware  of  his  condition,  and  knew  that
he  was  transgressing  the  rules  of  decorum.    He  was  speechless;  he  could  find  no
answer,  no  excuse.    It  may  be  that  festal  garments  for  all  the  guests  were  provided
by  the  bounty  of  the  King;  this  unhappy  man  had  contemptuously  rejected  the
offered  gift;  he  had  preferred  his  own  mean  and  sordid  raiment;  he  appeared  at  the
King's  board  just  as  he  had  come  from  the  highway,  with  no  change,  no  preparation.
Certainly,  he  had  taken  no  pains  to  provide  himself  with  suitable  attire ;  plainly,
he  might  have  done  so ;  all  the  other  guests  were  clad  in  wedding  robes ;  why  was  be
in  this  unseemly  garb  ?    He  could  find  no  excuse ;  he  could  not  plead  want  of  time ;
the  rest  had  found  time.    He  could  not  plead  ignorance ;  the  others  knew  how  the
robes  were  to  be  procured.    He  could  not  plead  poverty ;  the  bounty  of  the  King  was
inexhaustible.    His  presence  in  that  guise  was  an  insult  to  the  King,  a  dishonour  to
the  high  festival  to  which  he  had  been  invited.    He  was  unworthy  of  a  place  among
the  chosen  guests.    The  wedding  garment  is  the  righteousness  of  saints  (Bev.  xix.  8) ;
"  but  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags  "
(Isa.  Ixiv.  6).    Yet,  thank  God,  we  may  find  a  place  among  the  guests  of  the  King,
for  Jesus  Ohrist  our  Lord  "  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sancti-
Qcation,  and  redemption."    We  must  "  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (Bom.  xiiL  14).
We  must  appear  before  the  King,  "  not  having  our  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the
Law,  but  that  which  is  through  tiie  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God
by  faith."    The  robe  of  righteousness  is  ours,  and  yet  not  ours.    It  is  the  righteousness
ot  saints,  because  it  has  been  given  to  them.    "  To  her  was  granted  that  she  should
be  arrayed  in  fine  linen"  (Rev.  xix.  8).    The  King  giveth  the  fair  garments  freely
in  his  large  and  generous  bounty.    But  that  righteousness  was  not  of  nature ;  they
were  bom  in  sin.  It  was  not  gained  by  any  works  of  theirs ;  by  the  deeds  of  the  Law
there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  the  sight  of  God  (Rom.  iii.  20).    It  is  a  gift ;  it
Cometh  of  grace,  the  grace  of  God, "  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not."
We  must  seek  it  of  him,  for  without  that  robe  of  righteousness  we  cannot  sit  among
the  guests  at  the  marriage  feast     2.  The  King's  sentence.    The  King  made  no  further
inquiries ;    he  read  the  heart  of  the  miserable  man ;    he  knew  his  history.    He
pronounced  at  once  the  awful  sentence:  "  Then  said  the  King  to  the  servants."    These
servants  (SidKovai)  are  not  the  same  as  the  servants  (5oC\oi)  who  were  sent  forth
to  call  the  guests.    They  were  Christ's  apostles  and  evangelists;  these  are  the  angels
of  judgment,  who  "shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend,  and  them
which  do  iniquity"  (ch.  xiiL  41).    They  were  bidden  to  bind  him  hand  and  foot,  and
cast  him  into  outer  darkness.      The  time  for  repentance  was  past;  he  might  have
procured  the  wedding  garment ;  he  had  taken  no  pains  to  obtain  it ;  he  had  not  even
asked  for  it ;  nay,  we  must  believe  he  had  rejected  it  when  it  was  offered  him  out  of
the  bounty  of  the  King.    Now  it  was  too  late;  he  was  helpless;  bound  hand  and  foot,
he  could  not  seek  it  now.     And  without  that  wedding  garment  there  was  no  place
for  him  in  the  palace  of  the  King.     He  must  be  cast  out  into  the  outer  darkness ;  that
outer  darkness   thrice  mention^  in  this   Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  (see  ch.  viii.  12
and  ixv.  30),  and  always  with  the  solemn  addition,  "  There  shall  be  the  weeping  and
gnashing  of  teeth."    Out  of  the  kingdom  of  light  into  the  kingdom  of  darkness  ;  away
from  the  joy  and  gladness,  away  from  the  presence  of  the  King,  away  from  the  happy
guests ;  into  that  place  of  remorse  and  misery  where  there  is  only  weeping  and  gnashing
of  teeth ;  bitter  remorse  for  the  past,  and,  alas  t  no  hope  for  the  future.     Bound  hand
and  foot  as  he  now  is,  through  his  own  contempt  of  the  great  King,  he  cannot  attain
unto  that  holiness  without  which  (let  us  well  ponder  the  awful  words)  no  man  shall  see
the  Lord.   3.  The  conclusion  of  the  parable.    "  For  many  are  called,  but  few  are  chosen."
The  words  have  a  more  awfiil  meaning  here  than  they  can  have  in  ch.  xx,  16,  if,  indeed,
they  are  genuine  in  that  place.    In  ch,  xx,  all  receive  the  reward ;  the  concluding  words
seem  to  point. to  the  few  who  are  chosen  for  the  highest  places  in  the  kingdom  of  God.
Here  the  distinction  is  plainly  between  the  saved  and  the  lost.    Many  were  called
to  the  marriage ;  few  only  came ;  of  those  few  one  was  oast  out,  even  as  the  traitor
Judas,  though  one  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lord,  went  to  his  own  pUoe.    So  now


OH.  ixii.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  371

there  are  many  open  sinners,  many  more  utterly  apathetic  and  indifferent,  and,  alas !
eyen  among  those  who  outwardly  obey  the  calling,  who  come  to  church,  and  use  the
appointed  means  of  grace,  even  among  those  who  come  to  the  holy  table  of  the  Lord,
there  are  (we  fear,  in  sadness  and  perplexity)  not  a  few  who  have  not  given  their  hearts
unto  the  Lord,  who  have  not  that  white  raiment  (Rev.  iii.  18)  which  may  be  bought
of  him  without  money  and  without  price.  In  the  parable  only  one  of  those  who
obeyed  the  calling  is  cast  out.  It  is  a  parable  of  the  long-suffering  mercy  of  our  God.
The  King  sends  again  and  again.  He  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  But
it  is  a  parable  also  of  his  all-seeing  justice.  His  eye  searches  out  that  one  unworthy
guest  among  the  crowd.  He  knows  the  sins,  the  negligences,  the  unbelief  of  each
individual  member  of  his  Church.  None  can  stand  before  his  face  without  that
holiness  which  is  so  great,  so  precious,  so  awful  a  thing,  which  so  few  of  ub  can  dare
to  say  or  think  that  we  have.  He  bids  us  buy  the  white  raiment  of  him ;  let  us  come
and  buy,  counting  all  things  else  as  dross,  that  we  may  "  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"
and  be  clothed  with  that  humility,  that  charity,  which  are  woven  into  the  white  robe
of  his  righteousness.  Few  are  chosen.  They  who  choose  God  for  their  portion  on
earth  are  chosen  by  him  to  be  with  him  in  heaven.  Our  choice  of  him  proves  that
his  choice  has  rested  upon  us.  He  first  called  us.  Let  us  give  diligence  to  make  our
calling  and  election  sure.

Lessons.  1.  It  is  God  himself  who  calls  ua ;  to  refuse  that  gracious  calling  must
be  fearful  guilt.  2.  The  privileges  of  the  Church  will  not  avail  without  holiness  of
heart  and  life.  8.  Think  of  that  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth ;  and  pray  and  strive
and  hunger,  after  righteousness.

Vers.  15 — 22. — The  question  of  tribute.  L  Thk  tbmptation.  1.  271«  coalition.
The  Pharisees  were  greatly  o£fended.  They  as  well  as  the  chief  priests  (ch.  xxi.  45)
perceived  that  these  parables  were  spoken  of  them.  Their  conscience  smote  them ;
they  felt  in  their  hearts  the  truthfulness  of  the  Saviour's  words ;  they  knew  that  his
censure  was  just,  ^ut,  instead  of  acknowledging  their  guilt,  they  blazed  into  wrath ;
instead  of  confessing  their  sin,  they  sought  to  destroy  the  great  Teacher  who  had
exposed  it.  They  shrank  from  nothing;  they  would  make  friends  even  with  the
Herodians  to  compass  their  designs,  as  they  had  done  once  before  (Mark  iii.  6).  The
two  parties  were  wholly  opposed  to  one  another;  the  one,  fiercely  zealous  for  the  Law ;
the  other,  merely  political,  utterly  indifferent  to  religion ;  now  they  acted  together  for
a  time,  united  by  their  common  hatred  to  our  Lord.  They  could  sink  their  differences,
fundamental  as  they  were,  to  bring  about  his  death,  to  murder  him  whose  teaching,
very  high  and  pure  and  holy  as  they  knew  it  to  he,  exposed  the  hollow  formalism  of
the  Pharisees,  the  time-serving  indifference  of  the  Herodians.  Surely  the  heart  of  man
is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked.  2,  The  snare.  They  determined
to  lay  a  trap  for  him.  The  Pharisees  sent  with  the  Herodians  their  own  disciples,  young
men  whom,  it  may  be,  they  thought  the  Lord  would  not  recognize ;  the  elders  of  the
party  bad  often  stood  opposed  to  him.  They  were  to  submit  to  the  Lord,  as  if  for  his
decision,  a  question  which  might  well  have  arisen  in  controversy  with  the  Herodians.
The  approached  him  with  flattery ;  they  called  him  "  Master,"  "  Teacher ; "  they
praised  his  impartiality,  his  justice,  his  truth.  Then  came  the  insidious  question,  "Is
it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Caasar,  or  not  ? "  They  thought  the  dilemma  one  from
which  there  was  no  escape.  Answer  as  he  might,  there  lay  on  either  side  a  terrible
danger:  he  might  take  his  choice  of  provoking  the  fanaticism  of  the  Jews  or  the
hostility  of  the  Romans.  The  only  other  source,  it  seemed  to  them,  would  be  that
ignominious  confession  of  ignorance  which  that  same  day  the  Lord  had  forced  from
the  chief  prieiits  and  scribes.

IL  The  Lord's  viotoby.  1.  ITie  exposure.  "  Why  tempt  ye  me,  ye  hypocrites  ?  "
He  was  high  above  the  reach  of  flattery ;  he  heeded  not  the  praise  of  men.  He  knew
their  hearts.  He  called  them  hypocrites ;  they  were  acting  a  part ;  smooth  words  were
on  their  lips;  the  malice  of  hell  was  in  their  hearts.  But  they  were  foiled.  "  Show
me  the  tribute  money,"  the  Lord  said.  The  coin  produced  lK>re  the  image  and  super-
scription of  Osssar.  2.  The  answer.  It  was  full  of  wisdom.  The  Lord  did  not  evade
the  question,  yet  he  did  not  expose  himself  to  their  malicious  accusations.  He  laid
down  a  great  principle — a  principle  far-reaching  in  its  applications,  and  fitted  to  regu-


St2  tHE  GOSf EL  ACCORbiNO  fO  SH.  MATtttEW.    [en.  xxii.  1-ig.

late  the  conduct  of  men  in  all  ages.  "Render  therefore  unto  Casar  the  things  which
are  Cwsm'b,  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's."  Cwsar  had  his  rights ;  the  fact
that  his  coin  was  current  in  Palestine  showed  that  the  Jews  were  under  his  govern-
meii(»  under  the  protection  of  his  laws.  The  Lord  does  not  enter  into  any  political
discussions ;  he  simply  refers  his  questioners  to  the  logic  of  facts.  As  a  fact,  C»sar  was
paramount ;  in  the  providence  of  God,  Palestine  had  come  under  his  dominion ;  tlie
Jews  used  money  coined  in  his  mint;  that  denarius  which  they  had  just  put  into  tlie
Lord's  hand  was  stamped  with  his  name  and  image.  Therefore  it  was  lawful,  it  was
more  than  lawful,  it  was  a  duty,  to  pay  tribute  unto  Cassar.for  that  tribute  was  Cassar's
due.  "  Bender  therefore  to  all  their  dues,"  St.  Paul  wrote  afterwards ;  "  tribute  to
whom  tribute  is  due ;  custom  to  whom  custom ;  fear  to  whom  fear  j  honour  to  whom
honour."  Christianity  does  not  interfere  with  the  obedience  duo  to  the  laws  under
which  we  live.  But  if  the  denarius  was  due  to  Ctesar,  the  half-shekel  was  due  to  God;
the  Herodians  must  not  forget  this.  "  Bender  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's."
The  principle  is  of  wide  application.  "  Ye  are  not  your  own,"  the  apostle  tells  us,
Chjd  made  man  after  his  own  image.  He  wrote  his  law  in  the  heart.  That  image
was  marred,  not  wholly  lost,  by  the  Fall  (see  Gen.  ix.  6 ;  Jas.  iii.  9).  It  may  be
recovered ;  God's  chosen  must  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly ;  they  must  be  conformed
to  the  image  of  his  Son,  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  renewed  in
knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  them.  Then  if  we  render  unto  God
the  things  that  are  God's,  we  shall  give  him  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies,  which  are
his — his  by  right  of  creation,  his  again  by  right  of  redemption,  for  we  are  bought  with
a  price.  The  second  clause  of  our  Saviour's  rule  both  qualifies  and  includes  the  first.
We  may  not  give  unto  Caasar  the  things  that  are  God's ;  if,  unhappily,  there  should
be  a  collision  between  our  duty  to  God  and  our  obedience  to  the  civil  power,  we  must
obey  God  rather  than  man.  Under  all  other  circumstances,  in  rendering  unto  Cffisar
the  things  which  are  Caesar's,  we  so  far  render  unto  God  the  things  which  are  God's;
for  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God :  whosoever  therefore  resisteth  the  power
resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God."  The  great  principle  of  obedience  to  God  covers  the
whole  of  the  Christian  life.  Our  duty  to  God  contains  and  implies  our  duty  to  our
neighbour.  Tlie  best  Christian  will  be  the  best  subject,  the  best  son,  the  best  servant.
Lbsbonb.  1.  Hate  flattery.  Do  not  flatter  others;  speak  the  truth.  2.  Bender
unto  all  their  dues.  The  Christian  must  be  just  in  his  dealings,  obedient  to  the  law.
3.  Give  God  his  dues — your  whole  heart.

Vers.  23 — 33. — The  Sadduceti.  L  Thbh  oasb  at  oabuistbt.  1.  Their  doctrine.
They  held  that  there  was  no  resurrection,  neither  angel,  nor  spirit  (Acts  xxiii.  8).
Some  of  them  now  came  to  Christ,  asserting  their  unbelief.  They  haa  not  hitherto,
like  the  Pharisees,  taken  a  decided  stand  against  our  Lord.  The  chief  priests,  indeed,
who  were  Sadducees,  had  been  provoked  into  hostility  by  our  Lord's  action  in  the
temple;  but  we  do  not  read  of  Sadducees,  as  such,  joining  in  the  opposition  against
the  Lord  before  this  time,  except  in  the  one  case  mentioned  by  St.  Matthew  (ch.  xvi.  1).
They  were  few  in  number,  but  rich  and  powerful  through  their  possession  of  the  chief
places  in  the  Church.  Their  rank,  their  sceptical  tendencies,  seem  to  have  led  them
to  regard  our  Lord  up  to  the  present  time  rather  with  indifference  than  with  active
hostility.  They  had  not  hitherto  taken  much  interest  in  his  teaching  and  miracles.
But  he  had  become  a  power  in  the  land,  the  most  conspiouons  Figure  in  Palestine ;
they  could  not  go  on  ignoring  him  as  they  had  done.  Sadduceeism  and  Pharisaism
represent  tendencies  diametrically  opposed  to  one  another,  yet  sometimes  united  in
opposition  to  the  truth.  Philosophic  iudiSerence  on  the  one  side,  superstition  and
hypocrisy  on  the  other,  are  the  two  opposite  poles  of  opinion.  Both  stand  aloof  from
that  simple,  loving,  earnest  faith  which  marks  the  real  follower  of  Christ ;  sometimes
they  unite  against  it.  2.  Their  question.  They  proposed  a  difBculty,  a  possible  com-
plication arising  out  of  the  institution  df  levirate  mariiage.  A  woman,  they  suppose,
had  married  in  succession  sevin  brothers ;  whose  wife  should  she  be  in  the  resurrec-
tion ?  Some  of  the  rabbis  had  already  decided  the  question — a  woman  who  had  been
married  more  than  once  would,  they  thought,  be  the  wife  of  the  flrst  husband  in  the
world  to  come.  So  said  the  rabbis  j  but  what  was  the  opinion  of  the  great  Teacher
from  Najareth  ?


oa.  *Xn.  1— 46.J    THE  GOSPfit  AdCOllDliTa  tO  St.  MAtTtiilW.  ^tS

II.  The  Lobd's  ebplt.  1.  To  their  guesUon.  "  Ye  do  err,"  he  said.  They  were
wandering  this  way  and  that,  far  from  the  truth ;  and  the  cause  of  that  error  was  :
(1)  Their  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures.  We  observe  that  the  Lord  did  not  attribute
the  error  of  the  Sadducees  to  their  rejection  of  an  oral  Mosaic  tradition,  which  was  one
of  the  fundamental  differences  between  them  and  the  Pharisees.  They  received  the
Pentateuch  as  of  Divine  authority ;  it  seems  certain  also  that  they  regarded  the  other
Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  as  sacred  books,  though  this  has  been  denied  by
Origen,  Epiphanius,  Jerome,  and  others  after  them.  But  they  held  the  Pentateuch  to
be  of  paramount  importance,  far  more  sacred  than  other  books  of  Holy  Scripture  j  and
they  could  not  find  there  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection.  The  Lord  accuses  them  of
ignorance;  they  knew  the  letter  of  Scripture,  though  probably  not  so  well  as  their
rivals  the  Pharisees ;  but  they  did  not  compare  Scripture  with  Scripture ;  they  had  no
spiritual  insight;  they  did  not  penetrate  into  its  inner  meaning.  Ignorance  of  the
Scriptures  is  a  fruitful  cause  of  error.  We  all  need  to  be  diligent  students  of  God's  Holy
Word ;  but  we  need  more  than  study ;  we  need  constant  earnest  prayur  for  the  Holy
Spirit's  guidance :  "  Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  ol
thy  Law."  (2)  Ignoratiee  of  the  power  of  God.  They  had  not  felt  the  power  of  God
in  their  own  hearts,  lifting  them  up  to  himself.  This  absence  of  spiritual  experience
had  led  them  to  disbelieve  that  marvellous  exercise  of  Divine  power  which  is  involved
in  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  The  Pharisees  accepted  the  doctrine,  but  they
held  it  in  a  gross  and  carnal  form.  This  the  Sadducees  rejected ;  but  they  would  not
believe  that,  though  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  yet  this  earthly
body,  sown  a  natural  body,  shall  by  the  power  of  God  be  raised  a  spiritual  body,  that
this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality.
In  the  resurrection  they  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in  marriage,  as  the  Pharisees
tauglit.  The  resurrection-life  is  wholly  different  from  this  earthly  life  of  ours.  The
resurrection-body  has  not  the  animal  nature  of  this  natural  body.  Love  will  con-
tinue, purified  and  deepened ;  husband  and  wife,  once  joined  together  by  God,  cannot
be  put  asunder.  But  the  bond  of  love  will  be  elevated,  refined,  spiritualized.  For
they  which  are  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world  and  the  resurrection  from  the
dead  can  die  no  more.  Marriage,  in  its  earthly  aspect,  is  no  longer  necessary.  3'ho
redeemed  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven ;  "  equal  to  the  angels"  (Luke  xx.  36) —
equal  to  them  in  purity  and  holiness  and  love ;  equal  to  them  in  joy  and  blessedness ;
equal  to  them  in  all  spiritual  endowments,  in  beauty  and  glory  and  strength ;  capable
of  serving  God  as  the  blessed  angels  serve  him,  of  loving  God  as  the  blessed  angels
love  him,  of  contemplating  with  adoring  gaze  his  infinite  perfections,  his  wisdom,  love,
power,  holiness,  as  the  blessed  angels  see  him  now ;  needing  rest  no  longer,  but  ever
fresh  and  glad  and  unwearied  in  the  ineffable  fruition  of  the  beatific  vision;  where
"  they  rest  not  day  and  night,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty,  which
was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  2.  To  their  doctrine.  The  Lord  turns  to  the  fundamental
error  of  the  Sadducees.  These  men  had  come  to  him  (according  to  the  reading  of
several  ancient  manuscripts)  asserting  that  error,  saying  that  there  is  no  resurrection.
The  Lord  refers  them  to  the  books  of  Moses.  "  Have  ye  not  read  ?  "  be  said,  in  the
form  of  words  which  he  used  so  often.  We  mark  how  he  insists  upon  the  duty  of
searching  the  Scriptures,  how  he  urges  it  again  and  again.  He  quotes  the  Book  of
Exodus.  There  are  more  distinct  assertions  of  the  great  truth  of  the  resurrection  in
other  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  the  Sadducees  regarded  the  Pentateuch  as  of
supreme  authority,  and  it  seems  that  their  rejection  of  the  doctrine  was  mainly  based
on  the  supposed  silence  of  Moses.  Therefore  the  Lord  refers  them  to  the  Law,  which
they  set  above  the  other  Scriptures.  He  insists  upon  the  revelation  made  to  Musei
when  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of
a  bush  :  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob."
The  Lord  draws  out  the  deep  meaning  of  the  sacred  words.  That  relation  to  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob  implies  their  continued  existence.  For  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  tlie
dead,  but  of  the  living."  He  is  the  Eterna/,  the  1  AM,  the  Self-existent  One,  absolute
and  unconditioned  in  his  everlasting,  infinite  Being.  He  is  the  Life ;  he  giveth  life ;  lie
breathed  into  man's  nubtiils  the  breath  of  life.  That  gift  of  life,  the  gift  which  he
gave  to  that  man  whom  he  created  in  his  own  image,  after  his  own  likeness,  is  not  a
mere  temporary  gift,  not  the  gift  of  a  few  short  years,  to  oe  spent,  perhaps,  in  trouble


374  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ.  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxii.  1—46.


and  sorrow.  Such  a  view  of  God's  great  gift  of  life  is  disparaging  to  the  Almighty,
the  all-loving  Giver.  Surely  more  than  this  is  contained  in  the  relation  in  which  he
stands  to  his  people ;  more  than  this  is  implied  in  the  simple  words  in  which  that
relation  is  expressed :  "  their  God."  Indeed,  he  himself  tella  us  so  in  his  Holy  Word ;
"  God  is  not  ashamed  to  he  called  their  God  :  f(yr  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city."
He  is  the  God  of  Ahraham.  Then  Abraham  is  not  dead.  Abraham  confessed  that  he
was  a  pilgrim  and  stranger  upon  earth ;  he  desired  a  better  country,  that  is,  a  heavenly
one ;  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God.
"Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets,"  the  Jews  said  to  our  Lord.  But  bis  life  is
hidden  with  God ;  "  all  live  unto  him."  God  knows,  sees,  comprehends,  in  his  Divine
omniscience,  the  separate  life  of  each  individual  soul,  that  from  the  time  of  the  creation
until  now  has  passed  into  the  assemblage  of  the  countless  millions  in  the  spirit-world.
They  do  not  sleep  idly;  they  live.  He  knows  them  every  one.  The  thought  is  to  us
overwhelming  in  its  vastness,  in  the  infinite  complexity  of  the  problems  which  it
suggests.  But  with  God  all  things  are  possible.  The  Sadducees  greatly  erred,  not
knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God.  Let  us  ask  hira  to  teach  us  by  the
grace  of  his  Holy  Spirit  the  deep  meaning  of  his  Holy  Word;  and  let  ua  believe  in  his
almighty  power,  and  walk  before  him  in  reverence  and  godly  fear.

Lessons.  1.  Guard  against  the  cold  indifference  of  the  Sadducees ;  pray  for  faith
and  love  and  zeal.  2.  Search  the  Scriptures ;  pray  for  grace  to  understand  them.  3.
Think  much  of  the  blessed  resurrection.  Oh  that  we  may  attain  unto  the  resurrection
of  the  just  I

Vers.  34 — 46. — Tht  Pharisees.  I.  The  question  of  the  lawteb.  1.  The  gather-
ing of  th«  Pharisees.  The  multitude  were  astonished  at  the  wisdom,  the  deep  and
holy  teaching,  of  the  blessed  Lord.  He  had  answered  the  pretended  dilliciilties  of  the
Sadducees,  and  had  proved  the.  great  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  from  the  very  books
which  they  prized  most  highly.  The  Pharisees  heard  that  he  had  put  their  adversaries
to  silence.  They  came  together.  Their  feelings,  doubtless,  were  various ;  many  of
them  were  angry  and  troubled  at  the  Lord's  success  and  popularity  ;  some  were  vexed
at  hie  superiority  in  theological  argument, — ^he  had  done  what  they  could  not  do;  some
few  had  better  motives.  2.  The  lawyer.  He  had  heard  the  Lord  reasoning  with  the
Sadducees;  like  the  scribes  mentioned  by  St.  Luke  (xx.  39),  he  perceived  that  he  had
answered  them  well,  that  he  knew  far  better  than  himself  the  meaning  of  that  Law  of
Moses  which  the  scribes  and  lawyers  professed  to  understand  and  to  teach.  Hu  asked
him  a  question,  tempting  him.  We  must  not  take  it  for  granted  that  the  intention
was  evil.  The  word  may  mean  no  more  than  "  trying  "  him,  as  "  God  did  tempt
Abraham,"  trying  his  faith ;  as  the  Queen  of  Sheba  came  to  "  prove  Solomon  with
hard  questions."  We  know  from  St.  Mark's  narrative  that  the  lawyer  or  scribe
belonged  to  the  better  class  of  Pharisees.  He  recognized  the  wisdom  of  our  Lord,  and
felt  the  truth  and  holiness  of  his  words.  "  Which  is  the  great  commandment  in  the
Law?"  he  said;  or,  as  the  words  may  perhaps  be  rendered,  "  What  sort  of  command-
ment is  great?  "  He  may  have  been  thinkii)g  of  the  Pharisaic  distinction  of  command-
ments into  great  and  small,  heavy  and  light.  3.  The  Lord's  answer.  (1)  The  great
commandment.  The  Lord  does  not  lay  down  mechanical  rules;  he  does  not  compare
the  commandments  with  one  another,  and  estimate  their  comparative  importance.  He
states  at  once  a  great  principle,  "  Thou  shalt  love."  Selfishness  is  the  bane  and  curse
of  our  nature.  Love  is  the  refining,  elevating  power.  The  highest  form  of  love  must
have  the  highest  object,  and  that  is  God  himself.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy
God."  The  Jews  owned  the  importance  of  this  commandment;  they  wore  it  in  their
phylacteries ;  the  Lord  bids  us  carry  it  in  our  hearts.  Men  may  say  that  the  affections
are  not  directly  under  our  own  control  like  individual  actions ;  we  cannot  hope  or
fear,  hate  or  love,  at  the  bidding  of  another.  Love  is  essentially  spontaneous ;  it  cannot
be  forced ;  forced  love  is  no  true  love ;  it  is  not  love  at  all.  But  God  bids  us  love
him ;  he  would  not  mock  us  with  an  impossible  commandment.  He  helps  us  to  obey
it  by  his  Word,  by  his  grace.  Love  produces  love.  God  reveals  to  us  his  own  great
love  in  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord;  Love  implies  personal  knowledge.
God  "  shineth  into  his  people's  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory
of  God  in  the  face  oi  Jesus  Christ."    The  love  of  God  is  the  first  of  all  the  command-


OH.  xxn.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  «76

mentg.  We  must  not  be  contented  with  our  spiritual  state  unless  we  are  sincerely  and
earnestly  striving  to  obey  it.  The  measure  of  that  love  is  the  measure  of  the  whole
heart  and  soul  and  mind :  the  heart,  the  centre  of  our  being ;  the  soul,  the  leat  of
the  affections  and  desires ;  the  mind,  the  home  of  thought  and  reason.  The  love  of
God  must  dwell  in  all  these  parts  of  our  complex  nature,  filling  the  whole  man  with
its  gracious  sanctifying  influence ;  we  must  try  to  love  him  with  the  whole  strength  of
all  our  highest  faculties.  Such  love,  the  first  duty  of  the  Christian,  is  also  the  source
of  his  sweetest,  holiest  joy.  There  is  no  earthly  joy  like  that  which  flows  from  the
love  of  those  dearest  to  us ;  and  as  the  love  of  God  is  of  all  forms  of  love  beyond  com-
parison the  highest,  so  the  joy  which  streams  from  that  love  is  of  all  joys  unutterably
the  deepest  and  the  most  blessed.  It  is  the  foretaste  of  heaven,  for  the  joy  of  heaven
is  to  love  God  perfectly,  and  to  know  and  feel  the  great  love  of  God.  St.  Peter  says
that  those  who  love  him  now  "  rejoice  in  him  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."
And  if  that  be  true  of  those  who  now  see  him  not  save  by  faith,  what  must  be  the
entrancing  gladness  of  those  who  see  him  face  to  face,  as  he  is,  in  his  kingdom  T  (2)
The  second  commandment.  There  is  a  second,  the  Lord  said,  like  unto  the  first :
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Like  the  first,  it  prescribes  a  pure  and
unselfish  love.  And  it  issues  from  the  first,  for  Christian  love  is  not  mere  human  good
nature ;  it  is  a  grace — it  is  the  love  of  those  whom  God  loves,  because  he  lovea  them.
The  two  commandments  are  like  one  another.  Both  say,  "Thou  shalt  love;"  the
word  "love"  in  both  is  the  same;  not  <pi\eTv,  which  expresses  feeling,  affection,
passion ;  but  ayairSi',  which  is  the  love  of  reverence,  respect.  We  are  bidden  to  honour
all  men;  to  respect  their  rights,  their  feelings;  to  reverence  in  all  men,  however
humble  and  ignorant,  the  image  of  God ;  to  remember  that  all  are  precious  in  the  sight
of  Christ,  ransomed  with  his  life,  redeemed  with  his  precious  blood.  And  that  love,
that  respect,  should  be  like  the  feelings  with  which  we  regard  ourselves — true,  real,
sincere.  As  we  care  for  ourselves,  for  our  own  comfort  and  happiness ;  go,  if  we  are
Christ's  true  disciples,  we  must  care  for  the  comfort  and  happiness  of  others.  Our  love
for  others  must  be  like  the  love  with  which  we  regard  ourselves — ^like  it  in  reality,  in
strength.  On  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the  Law  and  the  prophets.  "  He
that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the  Law ;  "  for  the  great  principle,  "  Thou  shalt  love,"
covers  the  whole  sphere  of  human  action  and  duties ;  and,  if  once  accepted  and  received
into  the  heart,  will  regulate  all  the  details  of  life,  and  guide  the  Christian  aright  in  all
his  relations  to  others,  at  all  times,  under  all  circumstances.  The  commandments  of
God,  whether  expressed  in  the  Law  or  the  prophets,  are  not  so  many  scattered,  nncon-
nected  rules ;  they  run  up  into  one  great  principle ;  they  are  all  developed  from  the
one  law  of  love.

II.  The  counteb-questions  of  the  Lobd.  1.  Uie  first  question.  The  Pharisees
were  still  gathered  together;  most  of  them. were  filled  with  jealousy  and  hatred.  All
so  understood  the  great  truth  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  as  to  suppose  it  impossible
to  regard  the  expected  Messiah  as  other  than  merely  human.  Hence  the  Saviour's
question,  "  What  think  ye  concerning  the  Christ  [the  Messiah]  ?  whose  Son  is  he  ?  "
They  thought  the  answer  easy.  They  knew  that  the  Scripture  had  said  that  the  Christ
cometh  of  the  seed  of  David ;  they  had  said  so  before  (John  vii.  42),  and  now  they
answered  at  once,  "  The  Son  of  David."  2.  The  second  question.  Jesus  quoted  the
hundred  and  tenth  psalm — a  psalm  regarded  by  the  rabbis  as  Messianic,  "  The  Lord
said  unto  my  Lord  [Jehovah  said  unto  Adoni],  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand."  How
could  David  speak  of  the  Christ  as  his  Lord  ?  How  could  the  Son  of  David  be  the
Lord  of  David?  David  spoke  in  the  Spirit,  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
How  did  they,  the  teachers  of  Israel,  understand  those  sacred  words  ?  They  could  not
answer  him.  They  did  not  deny  the  Messianic  character  of  the  psalm,  as,  alas  I  some
do  without  good  reason  now.  They  believed  that  the  psalm  was  David's,  and  that  he
was  speaking  of  the  Christ ;  but  they  did  not  know,  as  we  know,  that  Christ  "  was
made  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh ;  and  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God
with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead ; "
that  he  was  "  God,  of  the  substance  of  the  Father,  begotten  before  the  worlds ;  and  Man,
of  the  substance  of  his  mother,  born  in  the  world."  We  can  answer  the  Lord's  question
readily;  we  know  the  Christian  faith.  The  Pharisees  could  not  answer  him  a  wordj
and  none  from  that  time  durst  ask  him  any  more  questions.


tfite  GOSfSL  ACCofebiiTG  to  ST.  MATTlia#.   {oh.  txit.  i-i\\.


Lessons.  1.  "  The  great  commandment  1b,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  Keep
that  commandment,  and  you  are  safe ;  neglect  it,  and  no  exactness  of  external  obedi-
ence will  atone  for  that  neglect.  2.  The  second  commandment  is  like  it :  "  Thou  shalt
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  It  is  the  rule  which  must  guide  the  Christian  in  his
relations  to  others.  8.  "What  think  ye  of  Christ?"  He  is  the  Son  of  God;  he
became  for  our  sake  also  the  Son  of  man.  He  is  our  God,  our  Saviour,  our  Example,
our  Life,  our  All  in  all.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—14. — 2%e  marriage /east.  The  opening  of  this  parable  reminds  us  of  the
feast  of  wisdom  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs  (ix.  1 — 5).  But  there  is  an  advance  beyond
the  Old  Testament  ideas.  Now  the  interest  is  no  longer  centred  in  the  abstraction  ,
"  wisdom,"  but  the  king  and  his  son,  representing  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  make  the
feast  one  of  supreme  importance.  So  much  the  greater,  then,  must  be  the  folly  of  those
who  decline  to  attend.

I.  The  botal  pbepabationb.  Much  must  be  done  to  provide  so  great  and  sump-
tuous a  feast  as  shall  be  fit  for  the  wedding  of  a  king's  son.  But  all  these  elaborate
preparations  have  been  completed.  Much  was  needed  to  make  ready  the  gospel  and
its  privileges,  the  new  Christian  blessings,  the  festival  of  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb
with  his  bride  the  Church.  But  God  has  made  ail  ready ;  he  has  provided  the  Bread
of  life  and  all  the  bounties  of  the  gospel.  They  have  been  produced  at  the  greatest
possible  cost,  and  now  they  are  spread  out  in  readiness  for  the  guests.  We  have  not
to  manufacture  our  own  highest  blessings ;  God  offers  them  freely  to  us.  We  have  not
to  wait  for  them ;  they  are  all  ready  in  this  happy  Christian  era.

II.  The  shameful  befusals.  Those  first  invited  refuse  to  come.  Their  conduct
is  scandalous,  and  that  for  several  reasons.  1.  The  feast  was  important.  It  was  for
the  wedding  of  a  king's  son.  The  king  was  the  host,  and  a  king's  invitation  is  a  com-
mand. Yet  the  guests  made  light  of  it.  They  who  reject  the  gospel  reject  the  gift  of
God,  and  insult  him.  2.  The  guests  had  previously  consented  to  come.  This  is  plainly
implied,  because  the  message  sent  to  them  ia  merely  a  reminder  that  all  is  now  ready.
So  was  it  with  the  Jews,  So  is  it  with  those  who  once  showed  interest  in  Christ  and
have  since  grown  cold,  3.  There  was  no  valid  excuse/or  refusal.  The  men  went  their
ways,  one  to  his  farm  and  another  to  his  merchandise.  There  is  no  good  excuse  for
the  rejection  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Too  often  the  most  commonplace  worldly  interests
are  preferred  to  it.  4.  The  messengers  were  cruelly  maltreated.  A  certain  irritation
arising  from  a  consciousness  of  being  in  the  wrong  makes  people  angry  with  those  who
would  lead  them  into  the  right  way.

III.  The  aiTEBTS  fbom  the  hiohwats.  The  king  must  have  his  feast  stocked
with  guests,  if  only  with  tramps  and  beggars.  This  suggests  to  us  a  desire  on  the
part  of  God  to  find  those  on  whom  he  can  bestow  his  kindness.  It  is  as  though  he
were  possessed  with  social  sympathies  and  could  not  endure  to  be  alone  in  his  joy.
Thus  we  see  the  best  of  all  reasons  for  accepting  h|s  grace.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  he  will  welcome  all  who  come,  because  he  hungers  for  souls.  Observe  further  :
1.  Tlie  rejection  of  Christ  by  the  Jews  led  to  the  opening  of  the  kingdom  to  the  Oentiles.
This  would  have  happened  in  any  case,  but  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  expedited  and
facilitated  the  process  (e.g.  see  Acts  xiii.  46).  2.  It  i$  not  man's  desert,  but  Ocd's
loving-kindness,  that  invites  to  the  gospel  fea^t.

IV.  The  wedding  garment.  The  dramatic  incident  with  which  the  parable  closes
gives  us  a  shock  of  surprise.  Here  is  an  additional,  most  important  lesson.  AM
kinds  of  people  are  invited,  and  some  are  in  a  verj'  unfit  state  to  appear  at  the  wedding
feast.  But  the  king  provides  a  seemly  garment,  that  the  dingy  dress  of  everyday  lifo
may  not  mar  the  beauty  of  the  festival.  God  invites  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  Dicn
to  the  feast  of  the  gospel,  and  even  the  very  lowest  may  come  at  once.  But  God  )iro-
vides  them  a  new  ohavacter.  If  a  man  will  not  take  this,  if  he  seeks  the  privileges  of
the  gospel,  but  will  not  submit  to  its  changing  influence  on  his  character,  he  must  lie
cast  forth.  He  can  come  just  as  he  is;  but  he  must  not  remain  just  as  be  is,  ospeciali)'
as  God  provides  fur  him  a  better  way  of  life. — W.  f.  A.


OH.  xxn.  1—46.1    THR  GOSPEL  ACOORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  377

Vera."  15— 22. — Tribute  to  Gasar,  It  Is  easy  to  see  the  trap  that  the  Pharisees
induced  the  Herodiana  to  set  for  our  Lord.  If  he  refused  to  saaction  the  payiae  of
tribute  to  Gsssar,  he  could  he  accused  of  sedition  against  the  Bomaa  government;  if  he
consented  to  sanction  it,  he  could  be  held  up  to  the  Jews  as  uupatriotio,  and  therefore
not  fit  to  be  thought  of  as  the  Messiah.  His  skilful  answer  set  the  question  in  its
true  light,  and  also  lifted  it  into  a  higher  region,  and  added  what  his  tormentors  could
not  refute,  although  they  were  far  firom  being  prepared  to  carry  out  all  that  the  words
of  Christ  involved.

I.  The  duty  to  G^sab  is  not  to  be  denied.  The  words  and  actions  of  Christ
implied  an  affirmative  answer  to  the  question  of  the  Herodiaiis.  But  they  wen  t  further,
justifying  his  reply  by  deducing  it  from  their  conduct.  The  coinage  of  Osesar  was
accepted  by  the  Jews.  The  image  of  the  gloomy  Tiberias  was  on  the  denarii  tliat
circulated  in  their  metropolitan  markets.  This  fact  shows  that  the  Jews  were  submit-
ting to  the  Roman  yoke.  Then  they  must  act  accordingly.  1.  We  owe  duties  to  the
dvil  government.  Religion,  which  makes  us  citizens  of  heaven,  dues  not  allow  us  to
renounce  our  citizenship  on  earth.  It  is  a  duty  for  Christian  men  to  take  part  in
politics.  To  refuse  to  do  so  is  to  band  over  public  affairs  to  those  who  are  not  guided
by  Christian  principles,  i.e,  to  degrade  the  state.  Those  good  people  who  are  too  holy
to  touch  politics  are  not  above  profiting  by  the  good  laws  and  just  government  that
other  men  have  laboured  to  bring  about.  Under  a  tyranny  the  authorities  claim
tribute;  in  a  free  country  the  people  claim  self-sacrificing  service.  2.  Jesus  Christ  did
not  come  to  produce  a  political  revolution.  The  fanatics  expected  this  of  the  Messiah  ;
the  zealots  tried  to  effect  it ;  but  Jesus  always  behaved  as  a  law-abiding  citizen.  We
cannot  say  that  he  would  never  sanction  revolution,  or  the  attempt  of  brave  people  to
throw  off  the  yoke  of  a  cruel  tyranny.  There  was  no  opportunity  to  do  this  in  the
days  of  Christ.  Nor  did  our  Lord  come  as  a  political  agitator.  He  came  to  regenerate
the  state  as  well  as  the  individual,  but  he  wrought  at  this  task  from  within  and
spiritually,  by  inspiring  the  principles  on  which  good  government  must  be  carried  on.

n.  The  duty  to  God  is  not  to  be  neglected.  This  was  ignored  by  the
Herodians  in  their  "  wickedness "  (ver.  18).  1.  Ood  has  Claims  upon  us.  If  Cassar
has  his  due,  so — nay,  much  more — has  God.  His  claim,  like  Cesar's,  is  one  of  rule
and  authority.  He  expects  obedience.  While  Csesar  also  e"xpects  tribute,  God  too  claims
tribute — tribute  he  seeks  from  men ;  and  this  is  nothing  less  than  their  hearts.  What
is  due  to  God  is  the  surrender  of  ourselves  and  all  we  have.  2.  3%ere  is  no  collision
between  the  secular  and  the  religious.  We  can  render  Cassar's  due  while  we  are  also
rendering  God's,  and  God's  while  we  are  rendering  Csesar's.  Politics  do  not  exclude
religion,  any  more  than  religion  can  dispense  with  politics.  Each  subject  has  its  own
function.  Yet  they  are  not  co-ordinate,  and  if  there  were  a  conflict,  the  duty  to  God
must  prevail,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Christian  martyrs.  But  then  Csesar  required  of  the
martyrs  what  was  not  his  due.  3.  Politics  must  not  he  substituted  for  religion.  The
best  service  rendered  to  Csesar  will  not  free  a  man  from  his  duty  to  serve  God.  There
is  a  fascination  in  public  life  that  threatens  to  absorb  a  man's  total  energy.  This  is  a
temptation  that  must  be  resisted.  The  great  name  of  Csesar  dominated  the  old  world ;
other  exacting  influences  go  far  to  rule  our  own  age.  We  need  to  be  on  our  guard
lest  they  crowd  out  the  thought  of  God. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  32. — TTie  Ood  of  the  living.  According  to  his  wonderful  custom,  Jesus  turns
the  conversation  from  a  frivolous,  unworthy  course  to  a  subject  of  loftiest  import.  The
unneemly  Sadducean  jest  (vers.  23 — 28)  is  rebuked,  and  a  great  thought  is  suggested
in  its  stead,  Our  Lord  utterly  repudiates  the  notion  that  the  resuri-ection  will  be  a
return  to  such  a  life  as  we  now  see  on  earth.  But  that  there  is  a  fnture  life  he  dis-
tinctly teaches,  and  here  he  gives  us  a  reason  for  expecting  it.     Let  us  examine  this.

L  Thb  name  or  God  is  associated  with  the  patriarchs.  Thus  we  have  a
familiar  Divine  title,  for  God  is  known  by  his  revelation  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,
etc.  We  worship  the  same  God  whom  our  fathers  worshipped.  All  that  they  dis-
covered of  God  remains  to  us  as  an  inherited  possession  of  knowledge.  Thus  we  have
not  to  feel  after  an  unknown  God  if  haply  we  may  find  him.  History  has  revealed
God.  Kot  the  patriarchs  alone,  but  our  own  Christian  ancestors  have  handed  down
to  us  an  experience  of  God.    They  knew  and  loved  him,  and  he  is  presented  to  i&  fo(


378  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh,  xxii.  1—46.

love  and  faith  as  the  God  of  our  fathers.  Still,  it  may  be  said,  while  this  helps  us  in
relation  to  God,  it  does  not  reveal  anything  concerning  the  present  existence  of  the
blessed  dead.  We  think  of  God  aa  he  was  in  relation  to  those  departed  men ;  thus  we
come  to  a  certain  knowledge  of  God ;  but  this  rests  entirely  in  the  past.  What  does
it  tell  us  concerning  the  men  whose  histories  are  the  mirrors  in  which  it  is  reflected  to
us?    We  must  proceed  to  a  further  inquiry.

II.  God  is  ebsektiallt  immdiable.  What  he  was  to  the  patriarchs  that  he  is  to
us  now.  This  was  partially  confirmed — confirmed  as  far  as  the  time  would  allow,  in
the  days  of  the  patriarchs.  What  Abraham  learnt  of  God,  Isaac  found  to  be  true,
and  the  same  was  confirmed  in  the  e;cperience  of  Jacob.  The  three  generations  of  the
patriarchs  knew  one  and  the  same  God,  and  they  all  found  him  to  be  changeless.

III.  The  etbbnitt  of  God's  love  leads  us  to  believe  in  the  oontinubd  life  of
HIS  oaiLDBEN.  If  God  is  immutable,  his  love  must  be  eternal.  Loving  once,  he  loves
for  ever.  It  is  not  enough  for  him  to  transfer  his  affection  to  successive  generations.
It  is  of  the  nature  of  love  to  dwell  without  cessation  on  the  objects  beloved.  But  if  God
loves  his  children  on  earth,  he  will  not  cease  to  love  them  when  they  die ;  and  if  he
loves  them  still,  he  will  desire  to  see  them,  and  will  therefore  desire  their  continued
being.  Thus  the  love  of  God  is  a  great  reason  for  believing  that  he  will  not  suffer  his
children  to  perish,

IV.  The  eternal  life  of  God  is  an  asshbanoe  of  the  etebnal  life  of  his  chil-
dren. The  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  is  more  than  a  name,  and  more  than  a
passive  Object  of  worship,  for  he  is  the  Author  and  Sustainer  of  the  lives  of  the  patri-
archs. He  is  a  living  Gud ;  his  presence  brings  life ;  to  be  in  him  is  to  be  in  the  very
centre  of  the  best  life.  Such  a  God  does  not  content  himself  with  moving  among  the
tombs  of  the  dead  past.  His  own  outflowing  vitality  touches  and  quickens  all  with
whom  he  comes  into  contact.  If  he  in  any  way  associates  himself  with  the  men  of
a  far-distant  antiquity,  he  will  be  their  Preserver.  Their  contact  with  the  ever-living
God  gives  them  the  life  eternal. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  34 — 40. — Z%«  two  commandmenta.  Originality  of  mind  may  be  as  much
apparent  in  a  wise  selection  from  what  is  old  as  in  the  creation  of  what  is  new.
Some  of  the  most  striking  teaching  of  our  Lord  is  of  this  character.  Jesus  Christ  did
not  repudiate  the  Old  Testament,  nor  did  he  despise  its  truths  because  his  own  went
further,  but  he  pointed  out  what  was  most  important  in  the  ancient  revelation,  and
rescued  this  from  the  oblivion  into  which  it  had  fallen  with  many  people  in  theii
scrupulous  attention  to  the  petty  details  of  external  observances.  Thus  he  met  the
tempting  quastion  of  the  Pliarisees  by  weighty  words  from  their  own  Law,  the  very
solution  of  which  was  a  revelation  and  a  rebuke  of  Pharisaic  formalism.

I.  Christ  calls  us  back  to  fundamental  pbinciplbs.  The  error  of  the  rabbis
lay  in  a  tendency  to  confuse  the  minds  of  their  scholars  and  to  obscure  the  essential
truths  of  revelation  by  directing  too  much  attention  to  minute  questions  of  casuistry.
A  similar  mistake  was  made  by  the  Schoolmen  in  the  Middle  Ages,  although  these
masters  of  hair-splitting  dulighted  in  the  discussion  of  less  practical  subjects.  We  are
always  in  danger  of  missing  the  essential  truths  of  our  faith  in  the  consideration  of  dis-
tracting details.  But  Christianity  is  a  religion  of  principles.  This  is  most  characteristic
of  the  New  Testament.  1.  These  principles  a/re  fundamental.  2.  They  admit  of  wide
and  varied  application,.    3.  They  must  be  obeyed  internally — in  thought  and  heart.

II.  The  boot-peinoiplb  of  Christian  conduct  is  lovb.  This  was  found  in  the  old
Law  ;  it  belonged  to  Judaism,  because  it  is  always  the  source  of  the  best  life.  But  it
is  most  prominent  and  powerful  in  Christianity.  The  gospel  reveals  the  love  of  God,
and  it  instils  a  spirit  of  J  jve  in  man.  So  essential  is  this  that  no  one  can  be  accounted
a  Christian  who  is  hard-bearted  and  utterly  selfish,  however  saintly  he  may  be  in  other
respects.  Love  is  shown  in  two  principal  relations.  1.  It  seeks  the  welfare  of  those
who  are  loved — the  honour  of  God  and  the  good  of  fellow-men.  2.  It  delights  infdlow-
ship  with  those  who  are  loved.  Christian  love  draws  as  nearer  to  God  and  nearer  to
one  another.

III.  God  IB  the  FiBST  Object  OF  Ghbibtianlovb.  1.  Ee  deserves  love.  (1)  Because
he  is  good  and  glorious  in  the  beauty  of  holiness. .  There  is  no  other  object  of  affection
BO  supremely  worthy  of  our  heart's  devotion.    (2)  Because  he  first  loved  us.    Love  is


OH.  xxix.  1— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  379

the  cMld  of  lore.  Oar  lore  to  God  is  a  reflection  of  God's  love  to  us ;  it  is  our  respoose
to  hia  goodness  and  kindness.  2.  He  daimt  love.  God  is  not  indifferent  to  our  atti-
tude towards  bim.  He  cannot  be  if  he  loves  us.  In  his  own  wonderful  fatherly  love
he  seeks  the  affection  of  his  children.  Therefore  a  cold  morality,  or  a  philanthropy
(hat  ignores  Gh)d,  is  not  sufficient.

IV.  Man  is  the  second  object  of  Ohbistias  love.  In  practice  we  cannot  separate
the  second  commandment  &om  the  first.  St.  John  tells  us  that  we  cannot  love  God
if  we  do  not  love  our  brother  (1  Joha  iv.  20).  In  loving  what  is  good  in  man  we  love
God.  Therefore  neither  commandment  can  be  taken  without  the  other.  If  it  were
possible  to  seek  God  alone,  that  would  not  please  him.  He  does  not  desire  us  to  be
so  absorbed  in  heavenly  contemplation  as  to  forget  earthly  duties.  The  Christian
ritual  is  the  ministry  of  brotherly  charity  (Jas.  L  27).

To  all  this  it  may  be  objected  that  we  cannot  love  on  command.  True.  But  (1)
we  can  remove  the  selfish  hindrances  to  the  love  of  God  and  man.  (2)  We  can  direct
our  thoughts  to  those  considerations  out  of  which  lore  springs.  Thus  we  can  cultivate
the  affections.— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  41 — 46. — 2%e  Divine  Christ.  The  often-quoted  question,  '*  What  think  ye  of
Christ?"  should  be,  "What  think  ye  of  the  Christ?"  Jesus  was  not  asking  the
Pharisees  for  an  opinion  about  himself,  the-  speaker  addressing  them,  as  he  had  asked
his  disciples  on  a  previous  occasion  (ch.  xvi.  13).  He  was  referring  to  the  Jewish
expectation  of  the  Messiah,  and-  without  now  pressing  his  own  claim  to  be  the  Messiah,
he  was  asking  what  idea  the  Pharisees  had  as  to  this  great  Hope  of  Israel.  They  had
been  questioning  him ;  he  now  turns  upon  them  with  a  penetrating  inquiry.

L  Thbbe  IB  TESTiiioNT  TO  THE  Chbibt  IN  THE  Old  Testamekt.  Jcsus  quotes
ancient  prophecy.  It  may  be  said  that  he  would  thus  find  an  aryumentum  ad  hominem
when  arguing  with  a  Jew.  But  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord  appealed  to  the  Old  Testa-
ment as  to  an  authority  which  he  himself  valued.  Thus  he  gives  bis  own  authority
to  support  the  Divine  message  of  the  prophets,  and  he  justifies  us  in  searching  these
Scriptures  for  the  testimony  they  bear  concerning  him  (John  v.  39).  The  value  of  the
Old  Testament  in  this  respect  is  not  that  it  shows  how  certain  men  were  gifted  with  a
miraculous  foresight,  by  means  of  which  they  predicted  the  advent  and  Ufe  of  Christ.
This  would  be  interesting  chiefly  as  throwing  light  on  the  powers  of  the  piophets,  biit
it  would  not  be  of  much  practical  use  to  us.  We  may  see  the  Old  Testament  setting
forth  important  truths  aliout  Christ.  It  foreshadows  in  a  way  to  prepare  the  reader
for  understanding  Christ.    Thus  it  has  its  own  gospel  message.

II.  The  Old  Testament  testifies  to  the  Divine  olobt  of  the  Christ.  Jesus
selects  one  striking  instance  of  this  specific  testimony,  Ps.  ex.  plainly  represents  the
Messiah  as  greater  than  David,  for,  while  written  in  the  name  of  the  king,  it  yet
makes  the  founder  of  the  Jewish  dynasty  address  his  descendant  as  "my  Lord."
This  argument  holds  good,  whether  we  believe  the  psalm  to  have  been  composed  by
the  shepherd-king,  or  follow  the  recent  criticism  that  rejects  its  Davidic  authorship.
For  even  in  the  latter  case,  it  is  plain  that  the  inspired  writer  of  the  psalm  taught
that  the  Messiah  was  to  be  so  much  greater  than  his  famous  ancestor  that  it  would  be
seemly  for  David  to  address  him  as  "my  Lord."  This  truth,  then,  was  in  the  Old
Testament.  Yet  those  who  most  honoured  their  ancient  Scriptures  did  not  perceive  it.
We  need  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  help  us  to  understand  the  prophecies  of  Christ.

III.  Odb  Lobd  gave  the  highest  intekpbbtation  to  the  Old  Testament
pbofheoieb  of  the  Chbist.  This  fact  is  important  in  itself,  as  a  light  on  the  prophecies.
But  it  is  much  more  weighty  when  we  consider  it  in  relation  to  Jesus  himself.  We
know  that  he  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah,  although  he  did  not  make  that  claim  public
till  the  end  of  his  life.  Therefore  his  interpretation  of  prophecy  must  be  applied  to
his  thought  about  himself.  He  was  calm,  unselfish,  unambitious,  lowly  in  heart  and
life.  Tet  he  argued  for  the  very  highest  attributes  of  the  Name  which  he  knew  to  be
his  own.  Was  he  not  speaking  out  of  the  depth  of  his  self-consciousness  ?  If  he  used
su«h  words  as  are  here  befoi«  us,  he  could  not  have  been  satisfied  with  l>eing  regarded
as  only  *  man.  In  veiled  language  to  the  Jews,  but  in  language  that  is  open  as  the
day  to  us,  Jesus  claims  to  be  Divine,  and  his  character,  hu  Ufe,  and  hia  work  all
agree  with  his  unique  claim. — ^W.  F.  A.


380  THE  GOSPEL  AUCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW*    [ch.  xxn.  1—46.

Vera.  1 — 13. — Excuses,  I.  Oue  of  the  commonest  excuses  which  men  make  to
themselTea  for  not  accepting  God's  salvation  is  the  desibb  to  make  bomb  kind  of
FBEPASATION  FOB  OOMINO  TO  Chbist.  "  How  Can  I  come,  who  have  no  conviction  of
sin,  BO  deep  repentance,  no  earnestness?  "  But  uniformly  in  God's  Word  salvation  is
offered  to  men  as  they  are.  "Notv"  is  God's  accepted  time.  And  the  reason  is
obvious.  The  salvation  offered  in  Christ  is  the  one  thing  that  can  make  ub  any  better.
We  have  no  hope  of  getting  better  feelings,  more  spiritual  desires,  a  deep  and  genuine
repentance,  until  we  accept  Christ.  He  is  exalted  to  give  repentance,  and  you  cannot
have  it  without  him.  This  hard  impenitent  heart,  this  unconcern  about  God,  is
precisely  what  identifies  you  as  the  person  for  whom  salvation  is  urgently  needed  and
to  whom  it  is  offered.  "  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,"  eto.  God's  command  is
on  you  now,  and  bids  you  accept  Christ.  No  preparation  is  required.  Sin  is  the
preparation  for  salvation.  Christ  does  not  say,  "  Come  with  sufficient  earnestness,  and
T  will  save  you,"  but  "  Come,  and  I  will  give  you  all  you  need."

II.  But  possibly  you  say,  " I  can't  repent  in  mt  own  stbength ;  I  oan't  bblievk

IN    MT  OWK    STBEN8TH  ;    I    AM    WAITING    FOB    THE    SPIBIT,   WITHOOT    WHOSE    AID    I

CANNOT  COME  TO  CHKigT."  Certainly  this  is  true ;  but  are  you  more  ready  for  good
than  the  Spirit  is?  Is  it  not  rather  true  that  he  has  been  waiting  for  you,  working
in  you?  He  who  gives  the  command  to  come  gives  also  the  strength  to  obey  it.  Tlie
man  with  the  withered  hand  might  with  truth  have  said,  "  I  cannot,"  when  bidden  to
stretch  out  his  hand ;  but  he  believed  and  obeyed.  "  The  Father's  commandment  is
life  everlasting."  The  Father  is  willing  you  should  be  saved,  the  Son  is  willing,  the
Spirit  is  willing.  May  not  Christ  be  justified  in  saying  to  you,  as  he  did  to  others,
"  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  might  have  life  "  ?

III.  Another  common  excuse  is  that  frofessino  Chbistlanb  abb  no  betteb  than
MANY  wEO  MAKE  NO  FBOFESBION.  But  the  presence  of  what  is  counterfeit  in  religion
or  in  anything  else  should  only  make  us  careful  that  we  receive  the  real  thing  and
not  the  spurious.  No  man  refuses  his  week's  wage  because  his  fellow-workman  has
received  a  bad  shilling.  It  matters  not  to  you  what  other  men  have  made  of  religion ;
each  man  must  give  account  of  himself  to  God.  And  those  persons  of  whom  you
speak  so  bitterly  are  not  more  bound  to  set  you  an  example  than  you  are  to  set  them.
The  fact  that  you  make  no  profession  saves  you  indeed  from  the  faults  of  professing
Christians,  but  condemns  you  with  a  special  guilt,  "  He  that  believeth  not  is  con-
demned already,"  etc.  The  sins  of  others  cannot  save  you  from  this  great  con-
demnation.

IV.  A  man  sometimes  pleads  that  belioion  is  a  vebt  serious  matter,  asb

THAT  HE  HAS  HOT  TIME  TO  DETERMINE  WHAT  ATTITUDE   HE  BHOUIJ)  TAKE   UP  WITH

EBGABD  TO  IT.  If  this  is  true,  it  ought  not  to  be  so.  Time  has  no  right  to  cheat  a
man  out  of  eternity.  If  there  be  any  truth  in  what  Christ  says,  you  are  spending
your  strength  for  naught  and  in  vain.  Whatever  you  are  giving  yourself  to,  God's
judgment  about  man's  work  remains,  "  This  is  the  work  of  (Jod,  that  ye  believe  on  him
whom  he  hath  sent."  Until  this  be  done,  all  your  activity  is  like  the  hard  running  of
a  messenger  who  has  left  his  message  behind  him ;  the  harder  he  runs  the  further
back  he  has  to  go  before  he  can  be  of  any  use.  What  is  the  use  of  all  your  toil  if  you
are  not  at  one  with  God,  if  you  are  not  obeying  hiB  commands?

V.  There  are  those  who  sincerely  grieve  that  these  difficulties  stand  in  their

WAT,  BUT  TET  THERE  THET  ABE,  AND  WHAT  CAN  THKT  SAT  ?      But  he  who  determines

to  have  all  his  difficulties  solved  before  he  takes  the  practical  step  of  choosing  Christ
as  his  Saviour,  inverts  the  right  order  of  procedure,  inverts  God's  order;  for  his  law  is,
"  If  any  man  will  do  the  will  of  God,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of
God."  Do  you  see  your  way  to  attain  holiness  without  the  Spirit  and  the  other  aids
God  offers  ?  or,  if  you  do  not,  how  do  you  propose  to  justify  yourself  in  living  on  with-
out asking  God  for  these  aids  ?

It  may  be  that  for  some  such  reasons  as  these  you  may  be  declining  to  make  a
profession  which  you  ought  to  make.  But  is  there  really  any  need  to  bring  further
light  or  even  persuasion  to  bear  on  you?  Are  you  not  already  convinced  that  the  thing
for  you  now  is  distinctly  to  close  with  Christ  as  your  Lord  and  Saviour  ?  There  is
always  danger  in  delay ;  you  cannot  tell  what  influences  you  may  shortly  come  under
which  will  quite  turn  your  mind  away  from  serious  and  earnest  dealing  with  Christ.


on.  xsii.  1-4«J.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  881

But  apart  from  the  danger,  yOur  first  question  ought  to  be  in'thi^  as  in  kll  other
matteiB,  "  Is  it  my  duty  to  delay  ?    What  ought  I  now  to-  do  ?  " — D.

Vers.  15 — 33. — Qtcestionof  the  Sadduceea :  "  WKose  shall  she  he  1"  The  Jittenipt'oi
the  Pharisees  to  ensnare  our' Lord  in  his  talk  was  the  result  of  a  meetiiig  ceflled  for  the
purpose  of  considering  how  they  might  silence  a  critic  who  was  n^aking  himself  too
formidable.  They  do  not  see  how  he  can  answer  their'question- without  Ikying-him-
self  open  to  the  accusation  and  hostility  of  one <  party  or  other  in  the  state.  ■  But  our
Lord  is  neither  blinded  by  their  false  flattery  tier  staggered  by  their  ensnaring^question.
Having  no  denarius  of-  his  own,  he  asks  them  to  produce  one.  There  in  their  own
hands  is  the  image  of  Gsesar,  testifying  that  they  themselves  arc  Ggasai's  subjects.
But  he  is  not  contented  with  making  them  feel  that- they  have  answered  their  own
question.  He  adds  a  single  clause  which-takes  th«m  far  out  of  the!  i^egion'of  their  own
quibbling  question,  "and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's."  This  implies  that
there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the''blairi3s  o](  thefee  two-  different'' so vefeigis.  The
Sadducees,  if  they  bore  less  malice  against  our  Lord,  were  even  itiore  Mvctlbus.  The
difBculty  they  raised'  had  no  reality  in-  it,  befiause  a  woman'who  was  merely  handed
over,  under  the  Levitical  law,  to  her  deceased  husband's  brother  was  not  in  the  same
sense  his  wife  as  she  had  been  the  wife  of  her  fit-st  husband.  It  is  not  a  bad  instance
of  the  way  in  which  men  uncotisciously  become"  frivolous  and  ridiculous  by  harping-  on
one  objection,  and  that'&n  objection  which  by  no  means  penetrates- to  the  heart  of-the
subject.  The  fact  that  such  a 'question  could  be  put  shows  that  a  belief  in  the
resurrection  was  so  common  among  the  Jews  that  disbelief  in  it  bad  become  the  badge
or  watchword  of  a  party— a  state  of  matters  which  implies  that  in  theGld  Testament
the  material  for  settling' the  question' of  a  future  sthto  was  not  so  copious;  and  so
decisive  as  to  make  disbelief  impossible.  And  the  circumstance  that- our  Lord  (ielald
find  in  the -whole  Bible  no  text  more  directly  bearing  on  the  subject  than  the  one  he
cites  is  proof  that  the  idea  of  immortality  was  not  a  c(immon  one  in  Old  Testament
times.  The  unquestioned  dimness  of  Old  Testament  revelation  on  this -point -has  been
explained  in  many  ways.  But  the  proper  explanation  is  certainly  to  be  found  in'  the
peculiar  character  of  the  Divine  revelation  Which  the  Bible  records.  If  the^  revelation
were  a  series  of  oracles,  of  abstract  utterances,  it  would  be  .hard  to  olnderrtanld  why
the  plain  discovery  of  a  future  life  should  have  been  withheld;  but  the- ^  tire  revelation
is<  personal  and  historical.  The  foundation  of  all  religion,  the- existence  of  God,  ft^.,  is
never  given  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  as  an  abstr^bt  projibsition.  It -is  token
for  granted.  It  is  no  otherwise  with  the  light 'which  revelation  sheds  on  man's^  future
life.  It  has  come,  not  in  abstract  propasitions,  not  in  direct  oracular  utterances  from
God,  but  through  the  longings  of  hisi  people  for  contimied  life  in  him,' tiind' through- the
slow-growing  con vieticm  that  God's  love  is  teve  for  e-verraore.  The' commonest  and
probably  the  most  reliable  of  all  natural  arguftient*  for- immortality  is  that  which  is
based  on  the  injustice  and  suffering  of  various  kinds  ;*hich' men  experience  in  this
present  "world.  In  view  of 'this,  men  have  been  compelled  to  think  of  a  future  state
in  which  things  shall  'bc(  righted -and  justice  done 'and  com  pfensation  made.  But  this
is  precisely  the.  view' of  matters  which  elicitisd  the -clearest  utterances  regarding
immortality  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Old  Testament  (see  Ps.- Ixiiii.  and  JobTcix.-).
But  the  argument  used  by  our  Lord  is  of  a  finer'and  subtler  kind.  From  the  fact  of
God's  calling  himself  the  God  of  Abraham,- Isaac,- and  Jacob,  he  argues  tbatthesef  men
still  lived.  It  would  seema  dishonour  to  God  to  rememberthat  he  hadcoUnected
himself  with  Abraham,  if  he  could  not  ieep  Abraham  alive.  The  argument  involves
the  idea  that  to  be' the  God  of  any  One  implies  a  living  relationship.  One's  God  is  he
who  gives  him  life  and:blessing,'and  tp  Speak  of  being  the  God  of  a  miimmyor  of  a
handful  of  dust  is  out  of  the  question.  We  know  that  God  is  •  love.  He  loves  Vei'y
specially  those  to  whom  he  specially  reveals'  hirnself — those'  whom  he;  dails-  his  children ;
but  as  these  persons  are  without  Ceasing,  passing  out'  of  this' life,  it  fallows  that,  if  they
pass  out  of  existence  altogether,  God  must  be  subjected  to  a  conti'nual  sorrow.  Such
perishing  friendships  are  unworthy  of  <Jod'8  eteriial  ttiture.  The  answer  of  pUr  Lord
has  no  very  (positive  teaching  regarding  our  relation  to  one  another  hereafter.  It
certainly  implies  no  cessation  of  love  between  those  who  have  here- found  much  of
^beir  hafpiness  in  one  another.    No  rational  idea,  of  the  future  can  be  constructed  aA


382  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cii.  xxil  1—46.

all  without  including  the  satisfaction  of  our  best  affections  and  the  exercise  of  our
highest  powers.  No  satisfactory  idea  of  salvation  can  be  cherished  which  does  not
include  the  prospect  of  a  time  when  we  can  frame  a  life  for  ourselves  according  to  our
late  acquired  wisdom  and  our  fruitless  repentance  here.  But  this  emphatic  assertion
of  immortality  by  our  Lord  ia  made  in  connection  with  he  resurrection  of  the  body.
We  are  conscious  that  our  body  is  one  thing  and  we  ourselves  another.  Still,  the  soul
has  received  a  great  part  of  its  character  from  the  body  it  has  wurn,  so  that,  even  al'tei
separation  from  the  body,  the  soul  will  retain  the  character  the  body  has  impressed
upon  it,  and  this  again  must  determine  the  character  of  the  new  body  which  the  soul
is  to  receive.  It  is,  however,  of  very  little  moment  to  ascertain  what  kind  of  life  is
in  reserve  beyond  the  grave,  if  we  are  not  ourselves  sure  we  shall  attain  it.  Christ
puts  this  in  our  power.  His  Spirit,  received  by  us  now  as  a  Spirit  of  holiness,  will
quicken  our  mortal  bodies,  and  will  raise  us  to  be  with  him  in  the  life  to  come, — D.

Vers.  1 — 14.-2^  mvitatioTit  of  the  gospd.  The  priests  and  elders  having  left  in  a
rage  (see  Mark  xiL  12),  Jesus  continued  his  discourse,  addressing  the  people.  This
parable  brings  before  us  the  invitation  of  the  gospel,  first  to  the  Jew,  and  then  also  to
the  Gentile.    Consider —

I.  The  invitation  special  to  the  Jew.  1.  Tht  hlessingt  of  the  gospel  are  presented
vmder  the  similitude  of  a  marriage  feast.  (1)  Under  this  similitude  also  the  blessings
of  the  everlasting  covenant  are  presented  in  the  prophets  (see  Cant.  v.  1 ;  Isa.  Ixii.  5).
Marriage  is  the  highest  emblem  of  that  union  which  constitutes  heaven.  There  good-
ness and  truth  in  perfection  are  united.  Heaven  must  be  in  a  man  before  a  man  can  be
in  heaven.  (2)  The  feast  is  royal.  It  is  made  by  the  King,  viz.  of  the  heavens ;  for
the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  is  the  subject  of  the  parable.  If  a  royal  banquet  in  this
world  is  the  occasion  of  a  nation's  joy,  the  banquet  of  the  King  of  hoaveo  is  a  jcy  to
the  great  universe.  (3)  It  is  the  marriage  feast  for  the  King's  Son,  Christ  is  the
Bridegroom.  The  Church  is  the  bride.  The  season  of  the  banquet  is  the  gospel  day,
commencing  upon  this  earth  but  ending  in  the  heavens  (see  ch.  ix,  15  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  2 ;  Eph.
V.  32 ;  Kev.  xix.  7 — 9).  2.  Prophets  and  apostles  are  the  King's  messengers.  (1)  They
are  called  his  "bondservants."  Bondservice  to  God  is  the  noblest  trefdjm.  The
more  absolute  this  service,  the  more  glorious  the  freedom.  (2)  They  came  to  those  who
were  bidden.  The  Jews  were  the  people  elected  from  among  the  nations  to  be  the
people  of  the  covenant,  and  every  way  specially  the  favoured  of  the  Lord.  To  tfaem
also  the  gospel  came  in  the  first  instance.  (3)  The  old  prophets  made  the  gospel  law
to  emanate  firom  Jerusalem  (see  Isa.  ii.  3 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 34).  The  message  of  John
Baptist  and  of  the  seventy  disciples  was  to  them  that  "  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens
was  at  hand."  The  commission  to  the  apostles  after  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was,  "  Tell
them  that  are  bidden.  Behold,  I  have  made  ready  my  dinner ;  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings
are  killed,  and  ail  things  are  ready."  (4)  They  came  to  the  bidden  with  entreaty.
They  urged  the  will  of  God,  the  need  of  man,  the  richness  of  the  bounty,  the  quality
of  the  guests,  the  blessedness  inconceivable  to  follow.  3.  But  the  favoured  people
proved  themselves  unworthy.  (1)  For  they  "  made  light "  of  the  invitation.  "  Con-
siderations which  should  have  the  mightiest  power  upon  the  spirits  of  men  may  still
signify  less  and  less,  when  those  to  whom  they  come  continue  long  under  the  gospel
and  the  gospel  is  hidden  to  them,  '  If  you  cannot  speak  to  me  of  something  greater
than  heaven  and  hell,  eternal  blessedness  and  eternal  misery,  you  move  not  me ;  foi
these  things  I  have  heard  of  and  made  light  of  long  ago  * "  (Howe).  The  soft,  idle,
voluptuous  people,  who  think  only  of  quietly  enjoying  life,  conveniences,  riches,
private  pleasures,  and  public  diversions,  mal^e  light  of  the  gospel  invitation,  (2}
"  They  went  their  ways,  one  to  his  own  farm,"  equivalent  to  "immovable  goods,''  viz
deluded  by  a  false  security  j  "  another  to  his  merchandise,"  equivalent  to  "  movabl*
goods,"  viz.  lured  by  desire  of  gain.  "  His  farm,"  equivalent  to  "  what  be  has  j "  "  his
merchandise,"  equivalent  to  "  what  he  desires  to  have."  How  many  perish  by  misusing
lawful  things  I  (3)  "  And  the  rest  laid  hold  on  his  servants,  and  entreated  theu^
shamefully,  and-  killed  them."  These  are  the  openly  unjust  and  violent,  tho
outrageously  wicked,  sinners  by  profession.  (4)  Note :  Worthiness  consists  in  accept"
ing  the  gospel  invitation;  unworthiness,  in  refusing  it  (see  Acts  xiii.  46).  He  only  is
worthy  to  be  a  disciple  who  is  willing  to  lift  the  cross  (see  ch.  x.  37, 38).    4.  They  art


OH.  xxn.  1— 46.J    -JtHfi  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  383

punished  accordingly.  (1)  The  murderen  \rere  destroyed.  The  Romans  were  Gud'a
armies  eent  in  hia  wrath  to  destroy  them.  The  Assyrian  armies  were  the  rod  of  his
anger  against  Ephiaim  (see  Isa.  x.  6).  The  Medes  and  Persians  were  the  armies  of
God's  wrath  against  Babylon  (see  Isa.  xiii.  i,  6),  The  angels  of  famine,  pestilence,  and
war  are  his  armies  which  he  sent  against  Israel  by  the  Romans  (cf.  I  Kings  xxii.  19).
(2)  Their  city  was  burnt.  What  an  anticipation  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is
here  (of.  Ezek.  xvi.  41 ;  Luke  xiii.  33,  34)  1

II.  The  invitation  .general  to  the  world.  1.  The  messengers  are  tJu  same.  (1)
The  prophets  anticipated  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  (cf.  Deut.  xxxii.  21 ;  Rom.  x.  19 ;
Isa.  IxT.  1 ;  Rom.  x.  20 ;  Hos.  ii.  23 ;  Rom.  ix.  26).  (2)  The  apostles,  accordingly,
when  the  Jews  refused  their  invitation,  carried  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles  (cf.  Rom.  xi.
11, 12  ;  Eph.  iii.  8).  These  were  the  people  found  by  the  King's  messengers  in  the
"  partings  of  the  highways  "  (ver.  9).  (3)  Divine  benevolence  is  even  enlarged  by
human  perversity.  "  Where  sin  abounded  grace  doth  superabound."  2.  But  they  had
better  success.  (1)  All  sorts,  "  bad  and  good,"  were  invited,  and  all  sorts  came  in.  As
an  invitation  to  a  king's  banquet  would  astonish  a  wayfarer,  so  did  the  invitation  of  the
gospel  come  as  a  surprise  to  the  Gentiles  (see  Acts  xvii.  19,  20;  Rom.  x.  20).  (2)
The  visible  Church  is  a  mixture  of  hypocrites  and  unbelievers  in  amongst  the  genuine
saints.  It  is  the  floor  where  the  bad  and  good  wheats  are  mingled  (ch.  iii.  12).  It  is
the  field  where  the  bastard  wheat  and  true  grain  grow  together  (ch.  xiii.  26,  27).  The
net  which  collects  bad  fish.and  good  (ch.  xiii.  48).  The  hotise  in  which  the  wise  and
foolish  are  found  (ch.  xxv.  1).  ^'he/old  in  which  are  the  sheep  and  the  goats  (ch.  xxv.
33).  (3)  For  this  imperfect  state  of  things  there  is  no  present  help.  The  minister's
commission  is  to  call  all.  The  King  alone  can  infallibly  distinguish  between  the  bad
and  the  good.  3.  A  royal  inspection  will  determine  the  true.  (1)  The  King  will
behold  the  guests.  This  curvey  will  take  place  at  the  last  judgment.  God  takes
particular  notice  of  those  who  profess  his  religion  (see  Cant.  vii.  12;  Rev.  ii.  1,  2).
'Jihose  who  are  worthy  he  will  then  approve  and  welcome.  (2)  He  will  see  who  has
not  on  the  festal  garment.  The  garment  which  distinguishes  the  good  is  worn  upon
the  heart.  It  is  therefore  invisible  to  tlie-  minister,  but  visible  to  the  King.  As  the
festal  robe  constituted  meetness  for  the  feast,  so  is  the  garment  here  spoken  of  the
complete  meetness  for  heaven.  The  "  fine  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  the  saints,"  so
imputed  and  imparted ;  for  unless  imparted  as  weU  as  imputed  the  wearers  could  not
be  "  saints "  or  holy  ones.  (3)  He  will  search  the  reasons :  "  Friend,  how  earnest
thou  in  hither?  "  etc.  (ver.  12).  Why  art  thou  willing  to  receive  the  King's  bounty,
but  not  to  comply  with  the  King's  conditions  ?  Garments  are  provided.  Not  to  wear
one  is  a  mark  of  contempt  towards  the  King.  The  filthy  rags  of  self-righteousness
cannot  be  tolei  ated  in  heaven.  (4)  The  most  presumptuous  will  be  speechless  in  the
presence  of  the  King.  Into  speechlessness  must  all  objections  to  the  gospel  be
ultimately  resolved,  i.  Fearful  will  be  the  punishment  of  the  wicked.  (1)  "Bind  him
hand  and  foot."  Restraint  will  be  laid  upon  the  works  and  ways  of  sinners  in  perdi-
tion. Satan  also  will  be  bound  with  a  great  chain  in  the  bottomless  pit.  It  is
punishment  to  the  wicked  to  be  restrained  from  doing  mischief.  (2)  "  Cast  him  out
into  the  outer  darkness."  Prom  the  brilliantly  liglited  banqueting-hall.  What  a
contrast  from  the  brightness  of  heaven's  glory  to  the  darkness  of  hell's  misery  i  Joy
and  pride  converted  into  sorrow  and  shame.  (3)  "  There  shall  be  weeping  and
gnashing  of  teeth."  Useless  regrets ;  remorse ;  despair.  (4)  "  Many  are  called,  but
few  chosen."  Many  hear ;  few  believe.  Many  are  in  the  visible  Churches,  few  of
them  at  the  same  time  in  the  invisible  Church.  You  are  among  the  many  called :
are  you  also  among  the  few  chosen  ?    Exclusion  ia  for  neglect. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  15 — ^22. — The  ethics  of  the  tribute.  The  Pharisees  had  hitherto  questioned  onr
Lord  on  points  of  ecclesiastical  ethics,  and  were  invariably  worsted.  Now  they  face
round  and  assail  him  with  the  weapon  of  political  ethics.  "Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute
to  CsBsar,  or  not  ?  "    Behold  in  the  scene  before  us —

I.  The  wisdom  of  the  serpent  in  its  venom.  1.  It  i$  seen  in  the  question  pro-
posed. (1)  The  issue  is  not  whether  it  was  lawful  for  an  individual  Jew  to  pay  the
Roman  tax.  That  questibn  was  already  practically  settled.  It  was  a  maxim  com  mua
among  all  people,  and  acknowledged  among  the  Jews,  that  the  prince  who  causes  his


884  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh,  xxu.  1-46,

image  and  titles  to  be  stamped  on  the  current  coin  ia  \)y  those  who  use  it  acknow-
ledged as  the  ruler.  (2)  The  issue  was  whether  by  a  joint  eifort  of  the  nation  it
was  not  their  duty  to  God  to  throw  off  the  Roman  yoke.  It  involved  njany  considera-
.  tions,  such  as :  (a)  The  origin  of  the  Roman  power,  (6)  The  manner  in  whieh  that
power  had  been  used,  (o)  The  degree  of  injustice  which  mujst  be  sustained  before  a
nation  can  legally  throw  off  an  allegiance  to  which  it  has  submitted,  (d)  The  defini>
tion  of  the  theocracy  in  the  modified  form  in  which  it  then  existed,  (ej  Besijie?  these,
many  minor  considerations.  (3)  In  proposing  a  question  so  cora|ilicated  and  intricate
they  hoped  to  entangle  him  in  his  talk.  2.  In  the  confederation  proposing  it.  (1)
Behold  the  Pharisees  in  league  with  the  Herodians.  These  persons  were  political
enemies.  The  Pharisees  were  seditious  demagogues.  The  Herodians,  if  not  Saddij-
ceps,  as  Herod  was,  were  partisans  of  Herod,  who  owed  his  cleyation  to  the  Romans.
But  they  find  a  common  cause  against  Jesus;  nor  was  this  the  first  time  (see  Mark
iii.  6).  "Samson's  foxes  looked  several  ways,  but  met  in  one  firebrand"  (Henry).
(2)  See  them  in  consultation.  So  were  the  Scriptures  verified  (of.  Ps.  ii.  2;  Ixxxiii.
3  —8  ;  Jer.  xviii.  18 ;  xx.  10).  Contrivaijce  and  deliberation  intensify  the  malignity
of  sin  (see  Micah  ii.  1).  Wicked  wit  makes  wicked  will.  (3)  Observe  how  the
Pharisees  put  forth  "  their  disciples."  Note  :  The  wicked  have  disciples.  Disciples
would  look  more  like  learners,  less  like  tempters.  (4)  The  masters  would  be  present
to  watch  tlie  issue  .ind  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  enclose  the  Victim  in  the  serpent's
folds.  3.  In  the  flattery  in  which  it  is  conveyed.  (1)  In  the  praise  they  give  to
Christ  they  speak  the  truth.  He  was  indeed  a  Teacher  true,  and  a  true  Teacher  of  the.
way  of  God.  He  was  himself  the  Truth  and  the  Way.  He  also  was  above  all  influence
of  injustice.  He  had  no  improper  fear  of  Herod  or  of  Pilate.  He  evermore  reproved
with  equity  (see  Isa.  xi.  4).  (2)  But  they  use  the  truth  to  serve  a  bloody  purpose.
'I  he  matter  may  be  true  and  the  intention  treacherous.  They  sought  to  "ensnare
him,"  via.  to  his  destruction,  as  a  bird  in  a  net  (cf.  Mark  xii.  12,  13 ;  Luke  xx.  20).
There  are  those  who  never  do  good  but  with  the  purpose  of  promoting  evil.*  (3)
Suspect  the  man  that  praises  you  to  your  face.  "  He  who  caresses  thee  more  than  he
is  wont  has  either  deceived  thee  or  is  about  to  deceive  thee"  (Italian  proverb).  Praise
upon  the  lip,  malice  in  the  heart.  Joab  kissed  when  he  l<ilk'd  Amasa  (2  Sam,  xx,  9),
Judas  betrayed  when  he  kissed  Jesus  (ch.  xxvi.  4^).  4-  In  the  presence  in  which  it  it
urged.  (1)  It  had  to  be  answered  in  presence  of  the  people.  They  vainly  boasted
that  they  were  Abraham's  seed,  and  -never  were  in  bppdage  (see  John  yiii.  33).  Thpy
as  vainly  profresed  to  have  no  king  but  God.  If  Jesjis  replied  that  it  was  lawful  to  pay
tribute  to  Ciesar,  the  people  might  be  easily  roused  against  him.  (2)  It  had  to  be
answered  in  preiienoe  of  the  Pharisees.  They  only  wanted  the  pretext  to  stir  up  thi
people  against  him  as  the  Enemy  to  the  liberties  of  his  country.  (3)  It  had  to  ba
answered  in  presence  of  the  Herodians.  If  Jesus  took  the  side  of  the  people,  and  said
it  was  not  lawful  to  pay  tribute  to  Qassar,  then  the  Herodians  were  ready  to  inflame
Herod  against  him  in  the  interests  of  the  Romans.  This  very  indictment  was,  two
jr  three  days  later,  laid  against  him  (see  Luke  xxiii,  2).     B.ehold —

II.  The  wisdom  of  the  beepent  in  the  dovb.  1.  It  is  seen  in  his  exposure  oj
his  assailants'  hypocrisy.  (1)  They  could  not  hide  their  duplicity  from  his  all-searching
vision.  By  the  exposure  of  their  wickedness  he  proved  them  right  when  they  called
him  true.  (2)  This  exposure  was  as  politic  as  it  was  severe,  for  it  discredited  them
before  the  people.  (3)  Nothing  could  have  mortified  them  ipore ;  for  they  sought  the
]iraise  of  men  rather  than  the  praise  of  God.  He  never  gaips  who  contends  y/ith  Josus.
2.  It  is  seen  in  his  avoidance  of  their  trap.  (1)  Ho  took  the  wise  in  their  craftiness
(see  Luke  xx.  23)  when  he  made  them  recognize  the  image  and  superscription  on  the
coin.  With  what  consistency  did  the  chief  priests  afterwards  cry  out,  "We  have  no
king  but  Csesar"  (John  xix.  15)  1  (2)  "  Render  therefore  unto  Caesar  the  thipgs  th.at
are  Ctesar's ;  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's."  God  is  the  Ajithor  .of  spiritual
order,  and,  through  this,  of  civil  order  also.  Human  sagacity  sees  one  side  pf  duty;
Divine  wisdom  sees  all  sides  at  once.  (3)  Here  was  nothing  that  t]xe  enemy  coujd
take  hold  of.  The  answer  glorified  God,  and  Ciesar  could  not  object  to  it.  The
Herodians  and  Pharisees  were  rebuked,  but  so  obliquely  that  neither  cojild  take
."uivantage  of  him.  And  the  people  were  edified.  3,  It  is  seen  in  the  assignment  to
ijcemir  (f  l\i'>  own.    ^1)  It  is  generally  th^t  which  has  upon  it  Caes^'s  im«ze  »n4


c«.  itii.  i-^i]    t&fi  GOSPEL  ACfcORblNG  'to  ST.  MATTHEW.  88S

■fupefSoription.  By  Christ  kings  rfeign.  His  religion  is  no  enemy  to  civil  government
(see  Bom.  xiii.  1).  Csesar  is  to  claim  liotbing  but  what  is  "Cassar's."  tia  is  neither
to  claim,  toi-  are  we  to  render  to  him,  -what,  is  "  ftod's."  (2)  Caasar  may  claim  honour,
viz,  in  iseturh  for  the  gbveftiment  protectioii  afforded  to  life,  property,  and  liberty.
(3)  CsBsar  may  claim  obedience,  viz.  to  the  laws  instituted  for  the  restraint  of  evil-
dd«TB,  and  the  mainteitance  of  order  and  freedom.  (4)  (jsesar  may  also  claim  tribute,
vi«.  to  meei  th«  expenses  of  the  government  in  the  exercise  of  its  proper  functions.
4.  li  it  ieert  in  the  assiertiOn  of  tJie  ctdinis  of  Ood.  (1)  Generally  God  also  claims
whiteveir  has  his  imigB  and  superscription.  The  image  of  (Jod  stamped  on  the  spirit
of  man  denotes  thai  all  his  faculties  and  powers  belong  to  God,  and  should  be  used  for
his  glory.  (2)  Eminently  to  God  belongs  our  religion — our  love,  worship,  and
obfeditoee.  Csesdr  has  no  right  to  meddle  with  this.  Cassar  is  only  to  be  resisted
wheit  not  tti  do  so  Would  be  to  resist  God.  (3)  If  Cfesar  intrude  into  this  domain,  then
the  Christian  must  ^uff3r  rather  than  sin.  (4)  In  questions  of  conflict  between  the
claiihs  of  God  And  CsiAai,  the  Christian  man  has  to  be  guided  by  a  conscience  enlightened
by  grett  principles.  Hence  Christ  left  the  question  open  which  was  put  to  him,  but
enunciated  the  great  principles  by  which  every  man  may  determine  for  himself

III.  Thk  venom  of  the  Serpent  in  his  follt.  1.  And  when  they  heard  it  they
marvelled.  (1)  They  marvelled  at  his  knowledge  of  their  hearts.  (2)  They  marvelled
at  the  adroitness  with  which  He  avoided  their  arts.  (3)  They  marvelled  at  the  wisdom
of  his  dc/ctrihe.  (4)  Tbe^  marvelled  at  the  incisiveness  of  his  rebukes.  2.  But  they
lie/t  him,  and  went  their  iva^.  (1)  Their  admiration  should  have  drawn  them  to  him
With  repentance.  (2)  They  showed  no  signs  of  repentance.  Christ  is  marvellous  to
insiiy  to  Whom  lie  is  not  preciotii.  The  lessons  of  wisdom  are  lost  upon  them.  (3)
"  Tliay  went  their  way,"  not  hia,  Hii  way  was  heavenward.  Their  way  was  to  per-
dition.— -J.  A.  M.

Vert.  23 — SS.-^The  reiurrectiim  i)f  l?n  dead,  '^hen  Jesua  had  disposed  of  the
PhiOriBeei  and  Qefodians,  the  Sadducees  approached  him.  They  were  the  physicists —
the  iaaterialists— of  their  time,  who  did  not  believe  in  angels  or  spirits,  and  accounted
aa  a  thing  incredible  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Tiiey  urged  a  case  which  they
deeined  iBohcluSive  against  the  latter,  which  is  recorded  here  (vers.  23 — 28).  We  are
chiefly  concerned  With  our  Loird's  reply  (vers.  29 — 32),     Hence  we  learn —

L  That  the  human  Spirit  has  its  tbuk  life  In  union  with  God.  1.  Cove-
nant rddtionship  is  expressed  in  the  term  "God  of."  (1)  Thus  when  Jehovah  pro-
claims himself  to  be  "  the  God  of  Abraham,"  the  meaning  is  that  he  stands  in  covenant
relationship  to  that  patriarch  (see  Gen.  xvii.  7,  8).  So  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob ;  but  he
never  speaks  of  hiingelf  as  the  God  of  Lot,  of  Ishmael,  or  of  Esau.  (2)  By  the  Sinai
covenant  with  the  Hebrew  nation  he  becaihe  the  "God  of  Israel"  (see  Deut.  xxix.
10—13).  (3)  Now,  in  the  goapiei  coveiiant,  he  is  "  the  God "  of  every  true  believer
(cf.  Jer.  xixi.  31-r-34 ;  Heb.  Viii.  10).  2.  The  covenant  relationship  implies  purifica-
tion from  sin.  (1)  The  Hebrew  word  for  "  covenant "  expresses  the  idea  of  purifica-
tion. The  plan  of  &od'S  goodness  and  mercy  is. sometimes  called  his  purification;
the  terin  is  Mso  applied  to  the  sacrifices  offered  to  God,  and  Christ  himself  is  called  the
Covenant,  or  Purification  Sacrifice,  of  his  people.  (2)  The  phrase, "  make  a  covenant,"
is  literally,  "  cut  off  a  purifier,*  or  purification  saci  iSce,  in  allusion  to  the  death  of  the
Siacnflces.  So  MessiSih  was  to  be  "  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living  "  (Isa.  liii.  8).
(3)  Thfei  Sacrificial  blood  sprinkled  is  called  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the  covenant,
the  effect  of  which  was  ceremonial  purification  (see  Heb.  ix.  19,  20);  This  of  course
typified  the  purifying  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ  (see  Heb.  ix.  13 — 15).  (4)  The
Shechina'h  passing  with  Abraham  along  the  avenue  between  the  divided  pieces  of  the
SabrificBs,  whien  God  entered  into  covenant  with  that  patriarch,  set  forth  the  consent  of
the  sinner  to  be  treated  as  the  sacrifices  were  treated  should  he  violate  the  Law  of  God,
and  the  engagement  of  God  to  light  up  with  his  favour  and  friendship  the  way  of  obedi-
ence through  the  blood  of  Christ  (cf.  Gen.  xv.  10, 17 ;  Exod.  xix.  18 ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  18—20).
t.  TKi  tife  of  t%e  ((ntenant  is  more  than  existence.  (1)  the  God  of  the  pnre  is  "tha
God  'of  hM  living  "  (ver.  32).  Luke  adds,  "  For  all  liye  unto  him  "  (Luke  xx.  38),
yiz.  ftU  Standing  in  true  cioveniint  relationship  to  hiih.  The  unbelieving  Jews  existed,
but  they  did  not  "  live  "  in  Cbrist's  sense,  when  he  said,  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  mv,

MATTHEW — n.  8  «


386  THfi  GOSPEL  ACCOftt)lNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    tea- xxii.  1-4&

that  ye  might  have  life  "  (see  John  v.  39,  40).  (2)  All  destitute  of  this  covenant  life
of  purity  are  dead — "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  obnoxious  to  be  treated  as  the
sacrifices  had  been  (cf.  Eph.  ii.  12  ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  18, 19).  Those  who  despise  the  ever-
lasting covenant  are  liable  to  the  "  much  sorer  punishment "  of  being  cut  up  by  the
flames  of  hell.

II.  That  thb  life  of  the  spimt  subvivbs  the  death  of  the  body.  1.  OoePa
covenant  remaini  with  his  disembodied  saints.  (1)  Abraham  was  dead  when  God  said
to  Isaac,  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham  thy  father"  (see  Gen.  xxvi.  24).  Isaac  also  was
dead  when  God  said  to  Jacob,  "  I  am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the
God  of  Isaac"  (Gen.  xxviii.  13).  Jacob  also  was  sleeping  when  God  appeared  to
Moses,  and  said,  "  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,
and  the  God  of  Jacob"  (Exod.  iii.  6).  This  is  the  fact  recognized  in  the  argument  of
our  Lord.  (2)  But  if  God  was,  hundreds  of  years  after  the  natural  death  of  the
patriarchs,  still  in  covenant  relation  with  them,  they  must  retain  a  conscious  exiiitence
in  the  disembodied  state.  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living;  for  all
live  unto  him  "  (see  Luke  xx.  38).  This  living  unto  God  is  a  condition  of  the  happiest
consciousness  (cf.  John  iii.  36 ;  vi.  48 — 53 ;  xi.  26).  2.  The  existence  of  the  sinner  is
an  abiding  death.  (1)  "God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,"  viz.  "in  trespasses  and
sins,"  whether  in  this  world  or  in  the  disembodied  state.  The  antithesis  of  a  lif«
which  is  distinct  from  existence  is  obviously  a  death  not  involving  the  extinction  of
existence.  If  spiritual  life  survives  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  so  may  the  spiritual
death  survive  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  (2)  "  Gk)d  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead."
This  gives  no  more  encouragement  to  the  universalist  than  it  does  to  the  annihilationist.
God  is  nowhere  in  his  covenant  pledged  to  the  disembodied  sinner.  What  a  terrible
thing  to  the  spiritually  dead  is  his  indestructibility  I

III.  That  God  is  pledged  to  baisb  fbom  the  dead  the  bodies  of  hib  baints.
1.  He  is  pledged  to  raise  the  Hebrew  patriarchs.  (1)  The  argument  of  the  text  is
intended  to  prove  more  than  the  conscious  and  happy  existence  of  the  spirit  of  the
believer  after  death.  This  undoubtedly  it  does  conclude,  as  we  have  seen ;  but  it  means
more.  (2)  It  is  an  argument  also  to  prove  the  resurrection  of  the  body  (see  ver.  31).
And  the  reasoning  to  that  conclusion  was  to  the  Sadducees  unanswerable  (see  Luke  xx.
40).  (3)  Its  force  lies  in  the  matter  of  the  covenant.  It  promised  the  patriarchs
personal  inheritance  in  Canaan  (see  Gen.  xvii.  7,  8),  which,  in  this  mortal  life,  they
never  enjoyed  (see  Acts  vii.  5).  But  God  still  abides  by  his  covenant,  as  is  evident
from  his  words  to  Moses  at  the  bush.  How,  then,  can  the  promise  be  fulfilled,  unless
they  be  raised  from  the  dead  for  the  purpose?  (4)  In  this  sense  the  patriarchs  them-
selves interpreted  the  promise.  They  knew  they  should  die  without  inheriting  (see
Gen.  XV.  13 — 16).  How  could  they  understand  the  land  to  be  personally  inherited  by
them  as  "  an  everlasting  possession,"  unless  in  the  great  future  ?  That  future  inheri-
tance their  faith  firmly  seized  (see  Heb.  xi.  9 — 19).  2.  The  promise  extends  to  all
believers.  (1)  The  natural  seed  of  Abraham  as  such  are  not  the  children  of  the  promise.
Else  it  behoved  the  Arabs,  Midianites,  and  Idumasans  to  have  inherited.  Only  a  portion
of  the  seed  of  Jacob  inherited  the  land  in  any  sense.  No  one  ever  yet  inherited  the
land  according  to  the  terms  of  the  promise  as  "  an  everlasting  possession."  (2)  The
true  Seed  of  Abraham  is  Christ  (see  Gal.  iii.  16).  He  is  the  Depository  of  the  promises.
Yet  even  he  never  inherited  the  land  of  promise  in  person.  But  the  "  Scriptures  cannot
be  broken."  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead  was  a  necessity ;  for  he
must  inherit  it  for  ever.  (3)  Believers  in  Christ,  whether  lineally  descended  from
Abraham  or  not,  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  children  of  the  promise.  In  a  secondary
sense  the  term,  "  seed  of  Abraham,"  is  to  be  taken  collectively  (of.  Gal.  iii.  26 — ^29).
Believers  therefore  must  be  raised  from  the  dead  that  they  may  inherit.  (4)  Then  the
expression,  "  all  the  land  of  Canaan,"  purports  the  whole  earth  to  its  utmost  limit  (cf.
Ps.  ii.  8 ;  bcxiL  8 ;  Bom.  ir.  13 — 18 ;  Heb.  xi.  13).  The  covenant  also  extends  into
the  hoaTens. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  84 — 40. — J%«  greater  eommandments.  The  Jews  made  many  dlBtlnetions  about
the  oommandmentB  of  God,  calling  some  "  light,"  otheis  "  weighty,"  othen  "  little,"
othere  "  great."  According  to  their  estimating,  therefore,  some  commandment  must
be  "  grsateat."     Some  of  them  contended  that  the  law  of  the  sabbath  was  the  greater


et.  tilt  1—46.3    Mfi  OOSfEti  ACCOftt)lN(J  *0  SI?.  MATTflEW.         S3?

commandment,  some  the  law  of  sacrifice,  some  that  of  circumcision,  and  gome  pleaded
for  the  wearing  of  phylacteries.  They  now  referred  the  resolution  of  this  vexed  question
to  Jesus,  who  astoniihed  them  by  giving  precedence  to  love.  The  Talmud  reckons
the  commandments  at  lix  hundred  and  thirteen ;  of  which  three  hundred  and  sixty-
five  are  negative,  and  two  hundred  and  forty-eight  affirmative  j  but  our  Lord's  enume-
ration is  two,  for  that  all  the  Law  is  fulfilled  in  love  to  God  and  man.  This  is  so  in
the  nature  of  the  case.

I.  LoTE  PBBsupposES  ESTIMATION.  1.  Ood  reveah  himself  that  he  may  6e  tupremely
loved.  (1)  Opinion  must  precede  affection.  Love  resists  all  attempts  at  coercion.  It
cannot  bie  forced.  It  must  be  won.  God  binds  us  to  love  him  by  his  supreme  and
infinite  excellence.  He  is  "  the  Perfection  of  beauty,"  of  intelligence  and  truth,  of
goodness  and  love.  (2)  He  reveals  himself  in  his  manifold  and  glorious  works.  (3)
He  reveals  himself  in  his  sacred  Word.  In  the  wonders  of  his  Law.  In  the  riches  of
his  Gospel.  (4)  He  reveals  himself  in  his  wise  and  gracious  providence.  2.  Man  is
to  be  loved  as  reflecting  the  image  of  Ood.  (1)  The  God-like  win  the  love  of  the  godly.
They  are  admirable  and  amiable  as  they  reflect  the  truth  and  goodness  of  their  Maker.
(2)  The  devil-like  cannot  be  loved  with  complacency  by  the  godly.  Yet  with  pity
and  compassion  they  may  be  loved.  They  are  thus  loved  by  God,  who  still  sees  his
image,  though  dreadfully  defaced ;  he  sees  wonderful  capabUities,  though  frightfully
demoralized.

XL  Lots  idkntitieb  irssiiF  with  its  object.  1.  So  in  Uniimg  Ood  the  loiier  is
ennobled.  (1)  The  intense  love  of  a  holy  being  necessarily  implies  the  intense  love  of
holiness.  Love  to  God  is  the  vital  and  purifying  flame  of  holiness.  So  it  fulfils  the
law  of  Gk)d,  by  a  sweet  constraint  compelling  obedience  to  all  his  commandments.

(2)  The  freedom  of  this  obedience,  being  that  of  entire  choice  and  supreme  delight,
gives  the  noblest  character  to  submission,  (a)  As  it  impels  to  the  most  arduous
duties  for  the  glory  of  God.  (b)  As  it  makes  us  willing  to  submit  to  the  severest
sufferings  for  the  glory  of  God.  (3)  Love  to  God  feeds  its  own  strength  and  the
strength  of  every  virtue  by  bringing  us  into  communion  with  God  himself.  It  produces
the  full  and  entire  satisfaction  of  the  soul.  But  without  it  the  most  punctilious
obedience  is  but  a  formal  idolatry.  2.  The  second  commandm,en.t  is  "  like  unto  "  the
first.  (1)  It  is  not  equal  to  it ;  for  it  is  "  the  second."  The  claims  of  God  are  evermore
superior  to  the  claims  of  men.  Yet  how  prone  are  men  to  feel  indignation  at  a  breach
of  the  Law  in  its  second  table  rather  than  in  the  first  1  (2)  It  is,  however,  "Uke  unto
It : "  (a)  In  having  superiority  over  all  except  the  first,  (fi)  As  being  also  a  precept
of  love,  an  efflux  of  the  same  principle,  directed  to  our  neighbour.  (3)  It  n^kes  selif-
lore  the  measure  of  neighbourly  affection.  It  therefore  supposes  that  we  should  love
ourselves.  It  is  not  wrong  to  pay  respect  to  our  interests,  temporal  as  well  as  spirituaL
And  in  loving  our  neighbours  as  ourselves  we  shall  do  them  no  harm,  but  seek  to  do
them  all  the  good  we  can.

III.  Love  would  hate  its  object  worthy  of  itself.  1.  This  it  hat  in  Ood.
(1)  We  can  only  bless  God  by  acknowledging  him.  For  he  is  Love  itself,  infinitely
worthy.  (2)  We  acknowledge  him  in  worship.  By  praise.  By  meditation.  By
prayer.  (3)  We  acknowledge  him  in  service.  Obeying  his  will.  Witnessing  for  his
glory.  2.  This  it  seeks  in  our  neighiotir,  (1)  Love  makes  us  to  rejoice  in  his  happi-
ness, (o)  If  he  is  virtuous,  love  will  not  detract,  but  emulate,  (b)  If  he  is  honoured,
love  will  not  be  envious,  but  pleased,  (c)  If  he  becomes  wealthy,  lovp  will  not  covet,
but  pray  that  he  may  not  suffer  damage  by  that  which  has  proved  ruin  to  many.  (2)
Love  makes  us  to  mourn  in  his  adversity,  (a)  If  he  is  sick  and  suffering,  love  will  not
be  unconcerned,  but  will  visit  and  comfort  him.  (5)  If  he  is  disappointed,  love  will
not  exult,  but  encourage  him.  (c)  If  he  is  disgraced,  love  will  not  chuckle  and  give
currency  to  the  scandal,  but  will  help  to  deliver  him  from  the  snare  of  the  devil.  (3)
It  will  bless  him  by  prayer  to  God  for  him,  by  holy  exhortation,  and  by  kindly  Chris-
tian influence.  3.  It  will  make  sacrifices  hi  this  service.  (1)  It  will  sacrifice  ease  in
the  Interests  of  religion  and  philanthropy.  (2)  It  will  sacrifice  temporal  profit  to
glorify  God  and  to  benefit  a  fell#vv-man  possessing  a  nature  that  is  to  live  for  ever.

(3)  It  wiU  sacrifice  reputation  for  God,  with  whom  our  reputation  is  safe,  by  condes-
cending to  the  low  for  his  benefit.  (4)  It  wUl  sacrifice  life  for  God  as  the  martyrs  did
and  in  the  cause  of  humanity,  which  is  the  cause  of  God. — J.  A.  M,


388  THB  OOSPBL  ACCORDING  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    tm.  xm.  1— 4&


Vera.  41 — iB.— Wisdom's  qiiestien.  In  teaching  his  interrogators  to  love  God,  J^sji^
pcgceed*  to  .direct  them  to  the  God  they  ought  to  love.  This  question,  "  What  think
ye  of  Cluist,?  "  was  put  to  a  representative  assemblyi— Herqdians,  Sodducees^  scribes  or
Karaite!,,  and  especially  Pharisees,  beside  his  disciples  and  the  people.  By  proposing
this  ODA. question  of  moment,  Jesus  proves  the  folly' of  those  who  by  majevolent  ques-
tions irould  prove  his  wisdom.  It  showed  them  that  ignorance  of  the  prophecij9s  was
the  source  of  their  captiousness.    The  question  is  for  us.

I.  What  THINK  tb  of  thb  Sonshif  of  Chbist?   1.  Se  ii  the  "Bon. of,  David."
(1)  Tfa«  covenant  of  God  was  established  with  David.    This  purported  that'  Messiah
should  appear  in  his  line.    The  promise  of  the  saving  Seed  was  limited  to  Seth  in  the
family  of  Adam ;  then  to  Shem  in  the  family  of  Noah ;  then  to  Abraham  in  the  line
of  Sh^jm.    The  covenant  was  carried  on  from  Abraham  through  Isaac  to  Jacob,  and
from  Jacob  through  Judah  to  David  (cf.  2  Sam.  vii,  12—17;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27—37).  (2)
Theftceforwaid. i"  the  Son  of  David"  became  a  prophetic  title  pf  Messiah  (se^  iaa,}x.
7'  xi,l;  Jer>,zxiii.. 6,  6 ;  zzxiii.  16,' 16).    The  '''S6n"  of  whom  David  sings  in, his
psalms  referred  to  Solomon  only  as  the  type  of  Messiah  (see  Ps.  Ixxii.  1).  (3)  "Is.  nut
this  the  carpenter's  son ? ''    But  the  "carpenter"  was  "of  the  house  and  Jineagerof
David."    So^  was.  Mary  the  poor  virgin.    What  vicissitudes  in  families  I    How  God
makes  .grandeur  to  spring  out  of  humiliation  1    (4)  Why  are  not  the  Jevrs;  convinced
that  Messiah  must  have  appeared  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem?    For  the
national  genealogies  then  perished,  and  nobody  can  now  prove  himself  to  be  the  sou  of
David.    But  the  genealogy  of  Jesus  was  proved  at  the  enrolment  for  the  taxation  in
the  days  of  Ceesar  Augustus,  when  the  records  were  intact,  and  is  recited  in  the  Gospels.
2.  Ee  ia.the  Son  of.  God,    (1)  "Jehovah  said  unto  Adonai"    This  term  is  .properly
applied,  to  superiors,  aometimes  it  is  by  courtesy  given  to  equals,  but  never  to  inferiors.
David,  as  an  indq>endent  monarch,  acknowledges  no  superior'  but  God.    (2)  "  David  in
the, Spirit csHeA  him  Lord."    Note:  Jesus  here  credits  the. Old  Testament  writers  with
Divine  inspiration  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  2 ;  Acts  L  16  ;■  ii..30).    David  in  the  Holy  Spirit
of  prophecy  called  him  Lord. '  (3)  He  was  David's  Lord  before  he  because  lus  Son. .
What  .can, more  emphatically  mark  the  Divinity  of  Christ?   How  else  ,could  he.be
David's  Lord,  who  was  not  to  be  bom  for  ages  after  him,  and  was  certainly  to  exercise,
no  secular  dominion  over  him?    3.  Se  is  at  once  the  San  o/Bamd  and  the  Son, of  Ood.
(1)  As  the  Son  of  David,  his  humanity  was  real.  As  the  Lprd  of  David,  his;Divi^ty  is
evident.  V  Acknowledge  here  the  glorious  mystery  of  the  Inqarnation.  (2)  This  mystery  .
Jesus  more  fully  unfolded  after  his  resurrection  (see  Bev.  xxii.  16).    (3)  S&,is  Jie  quali-
fied to  be  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man.    (4)  In  his  Divine  homjuuty  Jeiiut
pledges,  our  .regeneration  and  transfiguration.

Ili :  What  thine  yb  of  his  Cubistssip?  '  As  the  Sonship  is  »  rule  of  natvris,  the.
Christship  is  a  .title  of  office.    1.  As  tJie  Christ  he  is  our  Prophet.    (1)"  Mpses  calls
universal  attention  to  him  in  this  capacity  (see  Deut.  xviii.  15, 19).     And  in  this
capacity  he  is; authenticated  (see  ch.'  xvii.  6>.    (2)  In  his  character  of  Prophet  or
Teacher,  he  silenced  the  gainsaying  of  Herodians,  Pharisees,  Karaites,  and  Sadducees.
(3).  Asi  the  great  Prophet  he  gives  us  his  perfect  law  of  liberty  with  the  inetitution.of
the  ministry  to  proclaim  it. .  He  also  gives  us  with  his  Word  his  own  Hojy  Spirit  of
illumination..   "A.  wonderful  fashion  ofteaching  he  hath."  '  2,  At  the  Christ  he  is  our.
Priest.  ■  (1)  A  Priest  not  after  the  order  of  Aaron.    For  "  our  Lord  sprang  out  of
Judah."  (see.Heb,  vii.  13, 14).    Yet  Aaron  was  his  type.    (2)  His  priesthood  Js  "after
the  order  of  Melchizedek."  So  we  learn  from  the  psalm  here  quoted  (Ps.  ex.).  His  priest-  -
hood  ie  royal. ,  It  is  made  with  an  oath.    It  is  a  priesthood  in  the  heavens.    Thie  aspen-,
sion.of  Christ  is  referred  to  in  every  instance  in  which  the  hundred  and  tepth  psalm  is  .
quoted  in  the  New  Testament.  •  Itis  an  unchangeable  and  an  everlasting  priesthood.  „
(3)  (Our  great  Priest  offers  himself  in  sacrifice  for  us.    When  Cyrus  took  the  King.pf,,
Armenia  and  his  son  Tigranes  prisoners,  withtheiir  wivesand  childrei^,  and  upon  thejjc
humble  submission  gave  thorn  their  liberties  and  their  lives,  Tigranes,  as  .they  were
returning  home,  asked  his  wife,  "  What  thinkest  thou  of  Cyrus  ?    Is  he  not  a  qoinely
and  a  proper  .man,. of  a  majestic  presence?"    "Truly,"  said  she,  "I  know  not  what
manner  of  m^ix  he  is ;  I  netrer  looked  upon  him,"  '  "  Why,"  said  he, "  where  were  thine .
eyes  all  the  while?"  -"  I  fixed  mine  eyes'  all  the  while,"  said  she,  "upon  him  [mean-
ing her  husband]  who,  in  my  hearing,  offered  to  Cyrus  to  lay  down  Ms  life  for  my


vA.  XXII.  1— 4e.j    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  S89


ranaom.'-'  3.'^  Ag  the  Chfist  he  is- our  King.  (1)  He  is  the  King  of  glory.  Sitting  on
the  right;  hind  .impHes-particitiaticin  in  th6  regal  power.  Bilt  the  Lord  of  David  is  on
thfr  r^ht  htod  of  Jehovah.  (2)  His  rule  is  spiritual.  The  ddmihioh  to  which  David
himself  is- sttbjectimplies  a  heavjBnly  JCilig  and  a  heavenly  Jtirigdoin.  (3)  Christ  subdues
his  enemies  by -the  power  of  love.  Th6se  who  comply  with:  his  terms  of  salvation  he
makes  victorious  over  sin,  death,  and  bell;  (4)  Those  wh6  refiise  the  rule  of  love  will-
be  compelled  to  feel  the  rod  of  il-on  (see  Ps.  ex.  5,  6).'

We  may  estimate  our  character  by  our  views  of  Christ.  Some  do  not  thinlc  of  him
at  all;  Some  think  too  meanly  of  him,  Some  think  too  hardly  of  him.  His  true  bride
will 'esteem  hinx."  the  fa,irest:  among  ten  thousand,  and  the  altogether  lovely,"— J.TAi-M.

Ver.  S. — Man's' ill-grounded  'wUfiAtiess.    "And  they  would  not  come."    There  is
'lothing  more  to  be  said  about  it.    They  had  no  reasons.    They  offered  no  apologies,
und  ^0  ;excuses.    Thley  were  just  wilful,  gtubborn,  stupid;  they. had  taken  np  with
eome  unreasoning  and  unreasonable  prejudice,  and  they  "would. not  come."    Dods
points-  put, that  the  "  object  of , this  parable  is  still  the  same  (as  of  the  previous  parables), ,
to  set-  in  a .Tivid,3ight  the  guilt  of  the,  Jewish  leaders  in  rejecting  Christ,  and  the.;
punishment  which  in  consequence  was  to  fall,  upon  them."    Our  Lord  had  used  a
limilar  figure  of,  a  fejist  before,  but  then  he  represented  those- who  declined  the  invita-<
tion  as  hiving, more  or  leas  reasonable  .excuses.     One  was  engaged  over  a  farm,  one
over  his  oxen,  and  one  over  his  marriage;  and  they  were  not  disposed  to. put  these,
aside  in  order  to  fulfil,  their  engagements  with  their  host.    But.  here  there  are  no
excuses,  only  sheer  wilfulness,  which, is  ready  to  run  even  into. rebellion  aod  insult  .
(see  ver.  6).

I. '.The  oppoaiTiON  of  thb  mbkblt  wileul.  Every  parent  knows  the  extreme-
difficulty  of  'traiiiin'g;a  stubborn  child.  You  cannot  reason  with  him;  you  cannot  .
persuade  him.  It  does  no,  good,  to  chastise  him.  Many  a  parent  is  at  his  wits'  end  to.
know  what  .to,  do'  with  a  wilful.childl  Aui.whatxould ,  any  one.  hope  to  do  with  those
stubborn  Jerusalem  officials,  who.ha.il  m»de  up  their  minds  that  Jesus  was  an  impostoi,
and.  so  would  he.ed,- no  evidences,  listen  .to  no  arguments,  and  yield  to  no  persuasions?
They  too  were  invited  to  the  gospel  feast.  They  loudly  professed  their  readiness  to.
respond  whenever  God  called,.-  The  call  cama;  Christ  brought  it,  and  then  up^  went
their,  backs;  "they  would  not  come."  If  jrou  trouble  them  with  an.y  importunity,  they
will  turn  .dangerous,  and  insult  the.  messengers ;  ,as.  these  officials  afterwards.; did
Stephen,  ^eter,  James,  and  Paul.  All  Christian,  workers,  understand-  the  hopelessness
of  .dealing  with,  the  stubborn  and  wilful.  No  force  seems  to  reach  them.  Labour,  is
in  vain.    Opposition  may  be  overcome.    Unintelligent  wilfulness  is  hopeless.

II;  ;Thk  tbeatmbnt  .of  the  .merely,  wilful.  ..  They  have  to  be  let  alone,  and  left
to'  suffel;,  and  to  learn  by  suffering.  It  as  a  hard,  school,  and  it  must  be  a  hard  school,
in  which  such.; persons,  have  to  learn.  Our  Lord  even  intimates  that  there  must  be
a  specially  awakening  seyerity.pf;  dealing  with  them,  because  that  stubbornness  is  not
mere' natural  disposition ;  it  js  a  product  of  aelf-conceit»-pr)de,.aud  prejudice.  It  is  sin,
and  must  be  punished.-^-B.  T.

Yiic.  5.-^— The  enticement  of  maUrial. interests.  "One-tohis  farm,  another  to  his
merchandise."  These  men,  as-we  have  seen,  were  discourteous  from  mere  wilfulness,  ,
mere  ba"d  nature ;-  but.  they,  turned  away. from  the  king's  servantsto  their  own  private
affairs,  in  order rto. make. a  show  of  reasonable  excuse..  So  while  it  is  true  that  men
often  are  absorbed  in.  their  material  concerns,, and  these  may,  explain  their  neglect  of
religion,,  it  is  even.more.frequently  true  .that..men  make  their  material  interests  excuse
theirtiad-i^heartedness,  and-are  busy  with  tempcfal  concerns  in.the.  hope  of  hiding  their
stubborn  self-willedness.  A,. maA^g.  material  .interests,  never  need  really  stand  in  the
way  of  his  religiqn;.  but. if  he  is  resolutely  set  agaiBst.religion,;he  can  easily  make  his
material  interests  into  a  stumblingTblook  in  .his  way.  A  great  deal  of  insincere  talk
is  made  .about  the  enticement..of.thing&  seen  and. temporal;,  business  and  pleasure. are
supposed  to  carry  away  men  who  would  be  pious.  The  honest  fact  is  that  men  usually
do  not  want.to.be  pious,  and.throw  themselves, into  their-  worldly  concerns  as  a  blind.

I.' MATEIWAIt.  INTEBB8T8,  REGARDED   Aft, iSENIIINK  TEMPTATIONS.    .  There- 48,   for.  all

men,  even  for  good-willed  men,  a  fascination  in  things  seen  and  temporal.    The  sense-


890  Hm  GOStfit  ACCOnDma  to  ST.  MATTHEW.    toa.  xxu.  l— 4e.

sphere  is  attractive.  In  every  man  there  is  the  natural  ambition  to  succeed,  to  rise  in
the  B&cial  scale,  and  to  win  the  comfort  and  security  of  wealth.  For  men  with  the
business  faculty,  trade  and  commerce  are  positively  attractive.  In  these  days  the
range  of  living  is  so  luxurious,  and  trade  so  competitive,  that  a  man  is  almost  com-
pelled to  put  his  whole  mind  into  his  business,  if  be  is  to  succeed.  And  every  man
has  material  claims  from  those  dependent  on  him.  But,  held  in  fair  limitations,  our
material  interests  are  not  temptations.  The  soul's  life  In  God  finds  expression  through
them.

II.  Matebial  interests  uadb  an  KxcrrsK  fob  bad-heabtednesb.  This  may  be
opened,  illustrated,  and  enforced,  so  as  to  be  very  searching.  Men  do  not  want  to  be
religious;  they  are  stubbornly  resolved  not  to  go  to  the  gospel  feast.  That  is  the  recU
reason  for  their  extreme  interest  in  their  farm  and  their  merchandise. — B.  T.

Ver.  9. — The  free  invitation  of  the  gospel.  There  is  an  immediate  reference  to  those
whom  our  Lord  addressed  in  this  parable.  He  was  speaking  to  men  who  prided  them-
selves on  being  in  the  special  favour  of  God — God's  invited  guests.  Our  Lord  was
bringing  home  to  their  hearts  the  consequences  of  the  Jewish  neglect  of  God's  last
invitation.  1.  The  Jews,  as  a  nation,  must  be  destroyed.  2.  The  Gentiles,  as
individuals,  must  be  drawn  into  the  Divine  favour.  Those  Jews  had  conceived  that
the  Divine  favour  was  held  in  strict  limitations.  It  belonged  exclusively  to  those  who
were  of  Abraham's  seed.  And  this  idea  bad  led  them  to  presume ;  and  in  their  pride
they  even  rejected  God's  Son.  They  felt  as  if  they  might  do  as  they  pleased  even
with  the  invitation  to  the  feast.  Compare  the  way  in  which  St.  Paul  found  it  neces-
sary to  turn  away  from  the  Jews,  and  give  firee  offer  of  eternal  life  to  the  Gentiles.

I.  The  gospel  is  offered  to  those  who  have  no  natcbal  olaiu  to  it.  These
folk  in  the  highways  had  no  claims  of  birth,  or  education,  or  fitness.  They  were  just
men  who  wanted  food ;  and  to  them  the  offer  of  food  was  made.  The  gospel  goes
beyond  aU  the  special  claims  and  rights  that  men  think  they  have,  and  just  deals  with
men  as  men — with  men  as  sinful  men ;  with  men  as  having  lost  by  their  sin  even
their  natural  rights  to  the  favour  of  God.  It  is  not  until  we  can  ^ve  up  all  confidence
in  our  own  merit  that  we  are  prepared  to  hear  the  gospel  message,  "Whosoever  will,
let  him  come."

II.  The  gospel  is  offeebd  to  those  who  have  no  disposition  towaed  it.  These
folk  in  the  highway,  perhaps,  had  not  even  heard  of  the  king's  marriage  feast.  If  they
had,  it  never  entered  their  heads  that  they  would  like  to  be  guests  at  it.  It  was  no
place  for  such  as  they  were.  Some  of  them  were  beggars  at  the  wayside.  All  of  them
were  in  their  workday  clothes.  A  comfortable  meal  at  home  they  would  enjoy  much
more  than  a  grand  feast  at  the  palace.  It  was  even  needful  to  use  forceful  persuasions,
and  compel  them  to  come  in.  StUl,  we  are  confronted  by  this  difficvdty — so  many  have
to  be  made  to  want  and  welcome  the  gospel ;  to  be  taught  their  need,  and  to  be  per-
suaded that  the  fulness  of  Divine  provision  is  really  opened  to  them.  The  gospel  is
offered  freely  to  whosoever  will,  but  the  work  is  committed  to  Ghrist's  servants  of
making  men  wiU  to  receive  the  gospel.    "  We  persuade  men." — ^B.  T.

Ver.  12. — Wi^ulness  spoiling  ow  blessings.  "Not  having  a  wedding  garment."
The  incident  is  a  distinctly  Eastern  one.  So  motley  a  crowd  would  be  very  out  of
place  in  a  king's  palace.  It  was  not  only  kindly  consideration  which  provided  an  all-
covering,  handsome  robe  for  guests  whose  own  clothes  were  shabby;  it  was  a  sense
of  appropriateness  whjch  required  all  the  guests  to  be  suitably  arrayed.  In  treating
this  parable  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  he  who  gave  the  feast  was  a  king,  and  so
sent  his  invitations,  and  made  his  arrangements  and  conditions,  with  an  authority
which  all  were  bound  to  respect.  As  illustration  of  this  custom,  it  may  be  mentioned
that,  "  every  guest  invited  to  the  wedding  at  the  royal  marriage  of  Si^tan  Mahmoud,
had  made  expressly  for  him,  at  the  expense  of  the  sultan,  a  wedding  garment.  No  one,
however  dignified  his  station,  was  permitted  to  enter  into  the  presence-chamber  of  that
sovereign  without  a  change  of  raiment.  This  was  formerly  the  universal  custom  in
the  East."

I.  The  reason  fob  bbinoino  ih  this  fabticulab  han.  It  is  an  unexpected
addition  to  the  parable,  and  at  first  one  does  not  see  how  its  point  of  teaching  bears  on,


eij.  jcxn.  1— 46J    THE  GOSPfiL  AOcOtlDlNG  TO  ST.  MaTTHEW.  §91

or  runs  in  harmony  with,  the  things  our  Lord  is  enforcing.  It  seems  as  i(  it  suddenly
struck  our  Lord  that  what  he  had  been  saying  was  open  to  miscoiutraotion.  "  The
perception  of  the  absolute,  unconditioned  freedom  of  entrance,  the  sense  borne  in  on
their  mind  that  they  were  the  objects  of  God's  love  and  invitation,  might  possibly  lead
them  to  overlook  the  great  moral  change  requisite  in  all  who  enter  God's  presence  and
propose  to  hold  intercourse  with  him."  It  is  true  that  salvation  ia  freely  offered,  but
a  man  must  be  in  a  certain  frame  of  mind  to  receive  it.  One  so  UDresponsive  to  the
kindness  and  authority  of  the  king  as  this  man,  who  would  not  have  the  wedding
garment,  was  clearly  unfitted  for  and  unable  to  receive  the  king*!  grace.

n.  The  beason  fob  the  behavioub  of  this  pabtiodlab  man.  Nothing  explains
his  act  but  the  uppishness  of  self-will.  He  was  not  going  to  be  ordered  about — to  be
made  to  do  what  somebody  else  wished.  If  the  king  wanted  him  at  the  feast,  he
must  take  him  just  as  he  was.  See  in  this  no  sense  of  gratitude  for  the  king's  kind-
ness ;  no  sense  of  submissive  obedience  to  the  king's  will ;  no  lowly  estimates  of  his
own  unfitness.  So  the  man  who  was  just  upon  getting  a  big  blessing  lost  it  altogether
through  his  own  stubborn  wilfulness. — B.  T.

Ver.  15. — Purposed  entanglements.  As  foolish  a  thing  as  was  ever  attempted  was
trying  to  entangle  Jesus  in  talk.  A  difficult  business  enough  if  Jesus  had  been  only  a
wise  prophet-teacher.  A  hopeless  business,  seeing  that  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God,  and
read  thoughts  and  hearts,  and  "knew  what  was  in  man."  We  are  to  imderstand  that
different  parties  agreed  to  set  several  traps  for  Jesus,  hoping  to  catch  him  in  one  or
other  of  them.  Popular  feeling  was  too  strongly  in  his  favour  for  his  enemies  to
venture  upon  anything  like  an  open  arrest.  "  All  the  previous  attempts  had  been
to  discredit  Jesus  as  «  religious  Teacher;  the  present  is  an  attempt  to  expose  him
to  the  hostility  of  the  Roman  government."  It  would  suit  the  purpose  of  the
Sanhedrin  if  they  could  make  him  say  something  disloyal,  so  that  the  Bomans  would
deal  with  him.

I.  Entanglements  eevbalino  those  who  attempted  them.  This  opens  an
interesting  character-study.  It  brings  before  us  the  shifts  to  which  men  resort  who
will  not  yield  themselves  to  arguments  and  persuasions  they  are  determined  not
to  admit.  These  men  were  resolved  not  to  accept  Christ  as  Messiah.  They  were
resolved  to  discredit  his  claims  somehow,  and  destroy  him,  if  only  they  could  get  a
chance.  They  were  untrue  to  their  better  selves,  and  so  they  had  to  be  ruled  by  their
baser  selves ;  and  thus  they  were  put  upon  all  sorts  of  mean  and  miserable  shifts  and
schemes.  Yet  they  did  not  see  how  they  were  degrading  themselves.  Honourable
men  were  self-deluded  into  acting  dishonourably.  These  men  are  shown  up.  They
were  not  really  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God:  it  was  fear  for  their  own  place  and
influence  that  made  them  so  mean  and  base.  The  upright  man  wants  no  shifts,  and
takes  no  advantage  of  his  brother.

II.  Entanglements  eevealino  htm  who  was  to  be  entangled.  Our  Lord  felt
no  sort  of  alarm  when,  with  imposing  authority,  the  deputation  from  the  Sanhedrin
made  its  demands.  Our  Lord  showed  no  fear  or  anxiety  when  the  schemers  pre-
sented their  subtle  and  malicious  question.  And  he  made  no  mistake ;  he  gave  the
entanglers  no  sort  of  opportunity.  He  was  proof  against  their  wiles.  His  simplicity
tested  their  guilefulness.     His  wisdom  saw  through  their  schemes. — B.  T.

Ver.  21. — Christ  keeping  to  his  province.  The  coin  produced  was  probably  a  silver
denarius  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Gssar,  and  it  bore  on  its  face  the  head  of  the  emperor,
and  had  an  inscription  running  round  it,  containing  his  name  and  titles.  To  under-
stand how  this  question  was  intended  to  entangle  Christ,  we  must  remember  that  the
Mosaic  injunction,  "  Thou  mayest  not  set  a  stranger  over  thee  "  (Deut.  xvii.  15),  was
made  by  the  rabbis  to  mean  that  they  must  not  pay  tribute  to  any  foreign  power.  The
Eomans  levied  a  poll-tax  on  each  individual,  and  this  tax  was  particularly  offensive
to  the  patriotic  party.  If  they  could  make  Jesus  take  part  with  the  zealots,  they
could  accuse  him  to  the  Eomans  as  a  dangerous  person  and  fomenter  of  rebellion.
The  answer  of  Jesus  is  very  variously  explained,  and  has  even  been  taken  as  a  watch-
word of  particular  religious  schools.  But  the  answer  ia  really  a  rtfusal  to  amwer ;  and
io  this  its  skilfulness  is  seen.


59^  THE  GOSPEL  AdCOKDIJSU  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.     toU-  "i*- 1—4^

I.  Ch&ist^b  ebpboach.  "Why  tempt  ye  me;  ye  hypocrites?"  This  must' hate
aniioyed' them,  and  made  thenii  fear  that'tbey'  would- do  but  little  with  him;  This
impressed  the  people,  who  were  listening,  and  made  them  feel  sure  that  he  was  more
thui  a  match  fot  the  entanglers.

IL  CHBi8'r%>E'(iUB8T.  "  Show  me  a  peiiny."  As  it  had  to  be  a  coin  that  tribute
to  Cspsar  could  be  paid  in^^nd  not  a  shekel  with  which  payments  in  sufiport  of  Ood's
temple  were  made,  it  had  to  have  the  head  of- the  reigning  0»sar  on  ib  Ohrist
evidently'  eiarnined  it  in  view  of  the  people^  who  were  aaxiously  watchinr;  >  and
he  made  his- questioners  say  distinctly,  whose  image  was  on  the  coin.  It- was 'not
Grod's  teniple ;  it  was  Gtesar.

111.  Chbist'b  reply,  "ti^sar's  is  it?  then  it  is  nothing  to  me.  I  am  the
servant  of  Gort.  I 'have  nothing,  to  say  on  such  a  matter.  It  is  not  in  my  province;
if'Ctesar'sbead  is  on  the  coin,  no  doubt  it  belongs  to  hiin;  theil  give  it  him  if  it 'is
his."'  Jesus  had  no  authority  to  urge  the  claims  of  Cassarj  he  came  to  urge  the  claims
of  God.  And  ho  "meant  to  keep"  to  tis  province.  If  they,  wanted  to  know  anything
about  the  Word  and  will  of  God,  he  was  ready  to  explain  and  teach.  But  Oasar  had
better  mind  his  own  business,  and  he  would  mind  his.  In  our  time,  earnest  effort  is
being  made  to  obliterate  the  distinction  between  the  "secular"  and  the  "sacred.'''
The  distinctidn- is  real  and  abiding.  Our  Lord  set  his  seal  upon  it.  They  ^  may  ruti>
in  hafnlony,  but  they,  run,  and  they  always  must  run,  along'  distinct  lines. — B.  T.

Yer.  23. — lienial  o/  resurrection  as  a  sign  of  menial  mood.  "  The  Sadduceea,  which
«ay  that  there  is  uo  resurrection."  It -does  not  appear  how  their  question  helped  the
entanglement '  scheme.  Possibly  the  design  w»s  to  secure  a  statement  that  conld'
be  declared  to  oppose  Moses'  Law.  'This  would  discredit  him  with  the  people ;  and:
it  might  be  tnade  the  ground  of  a  formal  condemnation  by  the  Sanhedrin,  which  the:
temple  officials  would  have  to  execute,  and  so  Christ  would  be  got  rid  of.  The  point,
before  us  now  is,  that  these  Sadducees  are  described  to  us  in  one  sentence.  One  thilng.'
suffices  to  reveal  them  to  us.  One  opinion  told  the  class  of  opinions  they  held.  You:
may  know  the  men  by  this,  "  they  say  that  there  is  no  resurrection."  And  when'
you  know  that  is  their  opinion,  you  see  at  once  the  hypocrisy  of  the  question  they
came  asking  Christ.

I.  These  '  SadditceeB'  were  cbitioal.  They  wanted  a  reason  for  everything.
They  received  nothing  theycould  not  understand.  They  failed  in  receptivity;  About
evefythiiig.  they  asked  questions.  Whatever  was  presented  to  view,-  they  persisted  in
getting  to  look  at  it  on  the  other  side.  Explain  that  the  critical  temperament  and  -faculty '
ar^  Divine  gifts  and  endowments,  but  they  are  perilous  because  they  so  easily 'become
masterful  and  absorbing,  destructive  of  some  of  the  finer  and  gentler  qualities- and
faculties.     Criticism,  like  fire,  is  a  good  servant,  but  a  bad  master.

II.  These  Sadducees  were  unspibitual.    We  should  call  them  "  materialists."
They  were  not  sensitive  to  anything  that  did  not  appeal  to  the  five  senses.     They.'
were'deficient  inlmagination.    They  were,  in  their  way,  scientific.     Angels  theyicould ■
not 'do  with,  for  they  had  no  substance.     Resurrection  theycould  not  do  with,  for  it
was  a  dreanT,  and  had,  and  could  have,  no  verification.    There  have  always  beea  such  -
mien.     We  may  be  sorry  for  them;  for  the  unseen  is  the  real,  the  Divine  is  the-
abiding,  the  spiritual  is  the  true ;  and  he  only  lives  indeed  who  can  respond  to  the
environment  of  the  spiritual,  the  Divine,  the  eternal.

lif.  These  Sadduoebb  were  conceited.    Not  in  the  common  and  familiar  ways
of  conceit.-    They,  were  intellectually,  conceited,  and  that  is  the  most  hopeless  kind  of
conceit,  and,  indeed,  the  most  offensive  kind.    The  "  superior  "  man,  who  is  always  '
wiser  than  everybody,  and  smiles  supercilious  smiles,  is  the  most  aggravating  of
mortals.— K  T.

Ver.  ZO.—Tk«  pun  humanness  of  marital  relations.  The  Sadducees  rested  their '
"  denial  of  the  resurrection  on  the  ground  that  they  found  no  mention  of  it  in  the  Law,
which  they  recognized  as  the  only  rule  of  faith."  The  mistake  they  made,  which  our'
Lord  at  once  brought  to  view,  was  this — "They  could  not  conceive  of  any  huriiaMi^'
fellowship  in  the  life  bf  the  resurrection,  except  such  as  reproduced  the  relations  -aild"
conditions  of  this  earthly  life."    Man's  material  for  thought  is  mainly  provided  by  th«


on.  xxiu.  1-46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  .ST.  MATTHEW.  393

common,  earthly,  sensual  relations  and  associatiuna ;  but  man  does  not  become  true
man  gave  as  he  rises  above  these, ^and,  by  the  help  of  theiji,. conceives  the  "unseen."
It  is  the  glory  of  man  that  he  is  able  to  create  in  imagination  what  he' has  never  seen
realised  in  fact,  tl  e  can  think  of  relations  between  beings  ip  .which  no  sexTcleroents
are  introduced.  Ho  can  imagine  a  place  where  they  neither  "  marry  nor  Are  given  in
marriage,"  aud  where  the  "  propagation  of  the  species  "  is  pot  the  dominant  ide»,. as
it  is  here.  In  the  conception  of  such  a  pUce  and  condition,  an  all-^ufficingranswer
was  given  to  the  subtle  entanglement  of  these  Sadducees.

I.  The  bade  depends  on  marital  relations.  The  law  of  sex  is  the  universal
earthly  law,  ruling  the  creatures  as  well  as  man.  Seeding  is  the  work  of  every  plant,;
starting  a  new  generation  ia  the  work  of  every  living  creature,  and  of  every  human
being.  And  .God  has  made  this  universally  to  depend  on  the  relations  of  male  and
female.  The  fact  that  man  has  made  misery  and  sin  out  of  God's  design  must  not
blind  us  to  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  that  design.

II.  Chabaoter  depends  on  the  mabital  eelatiqns.  Neither  Ban  man  be  true
luan,  nor  woman  true  woman,  apart  from  marriage.  This  may  be  more  imjiressively
seen  in  woman,  but  it  is  equally  true  of  man.  Woman  never  reaches  her  noblest
possibility  save  through  motherhood.  1.  Show  what  ilemenis  of  Character  are
developed,  and  what  are  refined,  by  the  associations  of  marriage.  2.  Show  what  mor»l
good 'for  the  race  com  cb  through  the  influence,  on  children  exerted  by  .those  whose
cliaractere  are  improved  through  the  marital  relation.

III.  REDKMrrioN  depends  on  tub  mabital  relations.  Dr.  Buslmell,  in  bis  very
striking  way,  says  the  redemption  of  the  world  must  mainly  come  about  through  the
"out-populating  of  the  Christian  stock."  There  is, a  sense  in  which  Ohristiarw  will
come  to  "  [HJSB083  the  earth."

IV.  Beburrectton-i.ikb  does  not  depend  on  marital  relations.  There  is  (D
no  raceito  propagate ;  (2)  no  character  to  be  gained  ;  (3)  no  redem.ption  to.accomplUb.
Hgtablished  righteousness  can  have  friendship  without  marriage.^ — %  H'.

Yer.  32. —  The  so-called  dead  are  alive.  "God  it  not  the  .God  of  the  dead,  but  of
the'liying."  Ilaviug  neparated  the  idea  of  marriage  from  the  conditions  of  the  after-
life, our 'Lord  took  the, opportunity  of  showing  these  (juestioners  horn,  unspiritual  they
were,  and  how  unspiritual  was  their  reading  and  rendering  of  Holy  Scripture.  TJiey
could  see  only  the  surface ;  they  could  not  diticern  meanings  and  suggestions.  When
Gtod  said  he  was  the  "  God  of  Abraham,"  something  was  involved  in  the  saying.  For
the  spiritually  minded  man  this  was  involved — Abraham  was  alive.  Abraham  was
risen  and  living.  God  was  In  actual,  present  relations  with  him.  And  what  was
true  of  Abraham  is,  for  the  .spiritual  man,  :true  .of  all  the  go-called  dead— they  are
risen,  they  do  live.  .Our  Lord  here  distinctly  afiBrms  the  continued  existence  of
the  soul,  which  ii  the  ,real  man,  after  death.  He  taught  the  "  immortality  of  the
soul"

I.  PiAXB  18  A  PHTSioAL  EVENT.  The  Boul  is  immaterial,  but  it  .comes  into  relation
with  a  material  body, '.and  through, its  senses  and  faculties  it  acts  in  a  material  sphere.
Qeath  ia.one  of  the  things  that  bear  relation  to  that  body.  It  is  the  supreme  form  of
disease,  Disease  may  destroy  a  limb  or  an  organ,  and  the  soul  may  kiep  within  the
limited  body.  But  when  disease  affects  what  we  call  vital  organs,  and  when  death
corrupts  the  body,  the  soul  must  go  away  from  it — it  is  no  'longer  usaible.  'i'he  soul,
the  man,  does  not  die;  it  is  only  liberated  :from  the  limitations  of  a  particular  envirpn-
ment,  'We  are  coming,, in  these  days,  more  and  more  Clearly  to  see  that  death  is  a
phyi^ical  affair.

tj.  Pkath  is  a  NBCE8BABT  EVENT.  Because  theconnfiction  between  soul  ana  body
is  made  for  a  dietinct  moral  purpose.  Jtis  therefore  made  for  a  limited  time ;  and  the
c  Jinncction  must  cease  when  the  issue  ie  reached.  Life  in  the  body  and  the  earth-sphere
is  the  soul's  education-time,  it  is  its  moral  probation,;  and  so  it  is  as  necessarily  limited
as  a  boy'i  school-years.  Life  on  earth  is  not  tha.BQul'*  feal  life;;  it  ia  not  its  manhood,
it  is  iti  preparation-time.  ,        ^u

III.  Death  cannot  touch  the  souls  that  men  abb.  Thii  bas  always  been  the
Chiis'tian  belief,  though  we  express  it  nowadays  in  somewhat  now  'forms.  See  how
|h*  t^^i\i  bears  on  the  question  of  the  Sadducees.     They  thought  of  humanity  u


894  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xxiu.  1S&

permanently  divided  into  sexes.    They  had  to  learn  that  loiilfl  have  no  sex,  so  their
question,  8o  far  as  it  applied  to  thtm,  wai  abauid. — B.  T.

Ver.  42, — Our  thoughts  of  Ohrisfs  Sonship.  "What  think  ye  of  Christ?  vrhose
Son  is  he  ?  "  This  is  what  may  be  called  a  Sooratic  dialogue.  Our  Lord  asks  questions,
and  leads  bis  hearers  on  until  they  find  themselves  entauoled,  and  discover  how  little
they  had  thought  about  the  things  of  which  they  bad  talked  so  glibly.  The  expression,
"  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  has  been  made  the  text  of  many  general  sermons  on  the
claims  and  PcrsoQ  of  Christ ;  and  it  has  been  variously  urged  that  our  opinions  about
Christ  decide  our  religious  standing.  We  try  to  keep  strictly  to  the  passage,  and  find
points  in  following  through  the  precise  inquiry  of  our  Lord.

I.  Whose  Son  is  Messiah?  Our  Lord  uses  the  term  "Christ,"  or  "Messiah,"  here
in  its  general  sense,  and  from  the  Pharisees'  point  of  view.  He  is  not  directly  speaking
of  himself,  or  affirming  that  he  is  Messiah.  He  speaks  to  these  Pharisees,  and  virtually
says  to  them,  "You  talk  about  Messiah,  you  expect  the  coming  Messiah,  you  are  very
learned  about  the  Messiah.  Say  then,  '  Wliose  Sou  is  he ? '"  Those  Pharisees  could
not  read  the  mind  of  Jesus  as  he  could  read  their  minds,  and  they  did  not  suspect  how
he  meant  to  puzzle  them ;  so  at  once  they  answered,  "  The  Son  of  David.  "  The
Pharisees  were  ready  at  once  with  the  traditional  answer;  but  they  had  never  asked
themselves  whether  it  conveyed  the  whole  truth,  whether  it  could  be  reconciled,  and,
if  so,  how,  with  the  language  of  predictions  that  were  confessedly  Messianic."  Show
how  fully  our  Lord  met  this  prophetic  necessity.  His  mother  was,  and  his  reputed
father  was,  "  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  David."

IL  How  CAN  Messiah  be  David's  Son  and  David's  Lobd?  This  was  so
exceedingly  easy  a  question,  that  one  wonders  how  anybody  could  have  been  baffled
by  it.  But  perhaps  these  Pharisees  were  not  baffled.  They  saw  the  answer  plainly
enough,  but  they  saw  also  what  the  answer  involved.  This  explained  it  all — ^Messiah
was  to  be  both  "  Son  of  David  "  and  "  Son  of  Ood."  But  Jesus  claimed  to  be  Messiah,
and  these  Pharisees  dare  not  let  the  people  hear  them  admit  ihat  the  "  Son  of  David  "
was  also  "Son  of  God."  Those  people  had  triumphantly  brought  Jesus  into  the
temple  as  the  "  Son  of  David ; "  and  if  the  Pharisees  had  ventured  a  reply  to  Jesus,
they  must  have  acknowledged  his  claim  to  be  "  Son  of  God."  Our  Lord  was  the
Divine-human  being — of  David  according  to  the  flesh ;  of  God  according  to  the  Spirit.
God  was  the  soul  of  his  humanity. — B.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIII.

Vers.  1 — 39. — Denunciation  of  the  icrihea
and  Pharisees,  and  lamentation  over  Jeru-
talent  which  followed  their  guidance  to  her
own  destruction.   (Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.)

Ver.  1. — Then  spake  Jesus.  Some  small
portion  of  this  discourse,  the  close  of  our
Lord's  public  teaching,  is  found  in  Mark
xii.  38 — 40  and  Jjuke  xx.  45 — 47  (c.omp.
also  Luke  xi.,  xiii.).  It  is  here  addressed  to
the  multitude,  and  to  his  disciples,  and  seems
to  have  been  designed  to  comfort  the  former
under  the  difficulty  of  having  accredited
teachers  who  were  proved  to  have  mis-
understood Scripture,  and  were  incapable  of
interpreting  it  aright.  He  willed  to  show
how  far  they  were  to  follow  these  instruc-
tors, and  where  it  wns  necessary  to  draw  a


time,  but  that  St.  Matthew  has  here  ool-
lected  into  one  body  certain  sayings  of  our
Lord  uttered  at  different  times  and  places.
It  is  far  more  natural  to  suppose  that  St.
Matthew's  statement  of  the  occasion  of  this
discourse  is  historically  true,  and  that  Christ
here  repeated  some  parts  of  the  censure  he
had  already,  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,
found  it  necessary  to  pronounce.  The  unity
of  this  utterance  in  form  and  essence,  its
logical  sequence  and  climactic  character,
prove  that  it  was  delivered  at  one  time,  and
was  intended  to  form  the  Lord's  farewell
address  to  the  wayward  people  who  would
not  come  unto  him  that  they  might  have
life.  The  discourse  may  be  divided  into
three  parts.

Vers.  2 — 12.— The  moral  character  of  the
teribe*    and    Phariseei,    and    warning    t«


line  beyond   which  they  were  not  to  be      ^"'■'*' '  a"«'i''e«-

obeyed.  Some  modern  critics  hiive  suggested  I       Ver.   2.— The  scribes   and  the  Pharisees

that  this  discoorse  was  not  spoken  at  this  I   sit  in  Hoses'  seat.    In  the  seat  of  the  great


OH.  xxin.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.


395


]ndge  and  lawgirer.  Thii  Is  stated  as  au
undoubted  fact  {iKdturay),  with  no  idea  of
blame  attached.  Literally,  lat  on  the  >eat  of
Mo$e>  from  time  immemorial.  These  (mean-
ing not  individuals,  but  the  collective  body)
are  the  authorized  expounders  and  teachers  of
the  Law ;  their  position  is  assured ;  they  are
not  to  be  displaced.  The  soiibes  were  the
party  chiefly  denoted ;  they  were  of  the  Phari-
saical sect ;  hence  the  addition,  "  and  the
Pharisees,"  by  which  is  intimated,  not  that
these  latter,  qua  Pharisees,  bad  any  teach-
ing office,  but  that  the  former  shared  their
religious  opinions.  The  Sadducecs  seem  to
have  had  no  popular  influence,  and  were
never  recognized  as  leaders.  The  Levitical
priests  never  appear  in  the  Gospels  as
teoohen  or  expositors  of  the  Mosaic  system ;
this  function  of  theirs  had  devolved  upon
scribes  and  lawyers.

Ver.  8. — All  therefore.  It  is  because  of
their  official  authority  as  appointed  teachers
and  expositors  of  the  Law  that  Christ  gives
the  following  injnnetion.  That  observe  and
do.  Many  manuscripts  and  versions  invert
the  order  of  the  verbs,  reading,  do  and
observe.  The  received  text  seems  most
logical.  Observe;  TTipeirt,  present  impera-
tive, continue  te  observeias  a  rule  of  conduot
Do;  Toiiiirarf, aorist, do  immediately,  when-
ever the  occasion  arises.  All  that  they
taught  or  commanded  out  of  the  Law,  or  in
due  accordance  therewith,  was  to  be  ob-
served and  obeyed.  The  statement  is  made
in  general  terms,  but  was  conditional  and
restricted  by  other  considerations.  It  was
only  their  official  injunctions,  derived  -im-
mediately from  Scripture|,  not  their  glosses,
evasions,  and  interpretations,  that  were  to
be  regarded  with  respect  The  Lord  had
already  taken  occasion  to  warn  against  these
errors  (see  ch.  xvL  6, 11, 12,  etc.).  As  in-
heritors of  the  authority  of  Moses,  and
■peaking  ex  eathedri,  they  were  so  far
worthy  of  respect  This  principle  laid
down,  Christ  proceeds  to  denounce  their
evil  practices.  After  their  works.  You
must  distinguish  between  their  preaching
and  their  practice;  the  latter  is  to  be
shunned  with  all  care.  The  scribes  are
never  accused  of  corrupting  the  sacred  text,
which,  indeed,  was  scrupulously  guarded,
and  kept  pure  and  unaltered  It  was  their
treatment  of  the  doctrines  thereof  that  was
censured.  Our  Lord  shows  their  evil  ex-
ample in  two  particulars— their  principle
was  "  words,  not  deeds"  (ver.  4),  aud  osten-
tation in  religion  (vers.  5—7).  They  say,
and  do  not  They  enunciated  the  Law,  they
enjoined  obedience  to  it  in  the  minutest
particulars,  and  yet  they  themselves  con-
tinually, in  the  most  important  points  (ver.
23),  infringed,  neglected,  evaded  it  St.
Paul,  himself  a  strict  Pharisee,  denounces


in  stem  language  such  inconsistent  pro-
fessors (Bom.  ii.  21—23).

Ver.  4. — Bind  heary  hardens  and  griev-
ous to  be  borne;  SvafiiixTaKTa:  importa-
bilia  (Vulgate).  The  last  epithet,  which
is  very  uncommon  (Luke  li.  46),  is  omitted
by  some  manuscripts  and  versions,  but  it  is
probably  genuine  here.  The  burdens  are
the  minute  regulations  and  prescriptions,
the  vexatious  restrictions,  the  innumerable
traditional  observances  with  which  these
teachers  had  garbled  and  defaced  the  written
Law.  We  have  noticed  some  of  these  glosses
in  the  matter  of  tlie  sabbath  and  ceremonial
purification ;  and  these  are  only  specimens
of  a  system  which  extended  to  every  rela-
tion of  life,  and  to  all  details  of  religious
practice,  binding  one  rule  to  another,  en-
forcing useless  and  absurd  minutiie,  till  the
burden  became  insupportable.  Alford  con-
siders that  not  human  traditions  and  ob-
servances are  signified  by  the  "burdens,"
but  the  severity  of  the  Law,  the  weighty
duties  inculcated  therein,  which  they  en-
force on  others,  but  do  not  observe.  It
may,  however,  well  be  doubted  whether
Christ  would  ever  have  termed  the  legi-
timate rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Law  un-
bearable burdens,  though  their  rigorous
enforcement  by  men  who  regarded  only  the
letter,  while  tliey  had  lost  the  spirit,  would
naturally  deserve  censure.  (If  the  epithet
is  not  genuine,  of  course  this  remark  docs
not  apply.)  What  Christ  denounced  was
not  the  Law  itself,  however  severe  aud
grievous  to  human  nature,  or  even  im-
memorial tradition,  but  the  false  inferences
and  deductions  therefrom,  leading  to  in-
junctions insupportable  and  impracticable.
Will  not  move  them  vrlth  one  of  their
fingers;  with  their  finger.  This  does  not
imply  (and  it  would  not  be  true)  that  the
rabbis  themselves  were  all  hypocrites,  and
broke  or  evaded  the  Law  with  impunity.
We  know  that  they  scrupulously  attended
to  all  outward  observances.  Whnt  is  meant
is  that  tliey  take  no  tronble  to  lighten
(kip^o-oi,  "to  move  away"),  to  make  these
burdens  easier  by  explanation  or  relaxation,
or  to  proportion  them  to  the  strength  of  the
disciple.  They  impose  them  witli  all  their
crushing  weight  and  severity  upon  others,
and  uncompromisingly  demand  obedience  to
these  unscriptural  regulations,  putting  "a
yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples,  wliioh
neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to
bear "  (Acts  XV.  10;  Gal.  v.  1),  Contrast
with  this  the  Christian's  service :  "  My  yoke
is  easy,"  says  Christ,  "  and  my  burden  is
Ught"(ch.  xi.  33).

Ver,  5. — For  to  be  seen  of  men.  The
second  bad  principle  in  their  religion  was
ostentation  and  vanity.  Acts  done  pro-
fessedly in  the  honour  of  God  were  animated


399


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxm.  1— 3ft,


by  Belf-geeking  and  ambition.  They  Dever
penetrated  beyond  exteinalism.  See  this
Bpirit  repioTed  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount
(ch.  vL  l,'2,etd.).  "They  loved  the  glory
of  men  more  than  the  glory  of  God  "  ( jolin
xii.  43).  Christ  then  .gives  proofs  of  this
spirit  of  ostentation  in  religion  and  in  private
life.  FhylaoterieB ;  <pu\aKTijpia:  literally,
preservative! ;  equivalent  to  "  amulets ;  "  the
translation  6f  the  Hebrew  word  tephillin,
"  prayer-fillets!"  These  were  either  strips
of  parchment  or  small  cubes  covered  with
leather,  on  or  in  which  were  wjitten  four
seotioni  of  the  Law,  viz.  Bxod.  xiii.  1— i-lO ;
11— 16;  Deut.  Ti.  4—9;  xi.  13—21.  They
were  worn  fastened  either  to  the  forehead,
or  inside  the  left  arm,  so  as  to'  be  near  the
heart.  Their  use  arose  &om  a  literal  and
superstitious  interpretation  of  Exod.  xiii.  9;
Deut,  Ti,'8 ;  xi.  18.  Their  dimensions  were
defined  by  rabbinical  rules,  biit  the  extra
pious  formalists  of  the  day  set  these  at
naught,  and  increased  the'  breadth  of  the
strips  or  of  the'  bands  by  which  they  were
fastened,  in  order  to  draw  attention'  to  their
religiousness  and  their  strict  attention  to
the  least  observances  6f' the 'Law.  These
phylacteries  are  still  in  use  among  the
Jews,  Thus  in  a  '  Class-Book  for  'Jewish
Youth '  we  read,  "  Every  boy,'  three  months
before  he  attains  the  age  of  thirteen,  com-
mences to  make  nse  of  the  tephillin,  v^hich
must  be  worn^t  least  during  the  time  of  the
morning  prayers.  The  ordinance  of  the
tephillin  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  covenant
existing '  between  the  Almighty  and  our-
selves, that  we '  may  continually  boar  in
mind '  the  miracles  God  wrought  for  our
forefathers."  Enlarge  the  borders  of  their
garments ;  t&  Kpdffireda  ruv  Ifiariuif  auruf,
the  fringes  of  their  outer  garmentB,  The  best .
manuscripts  have  merely  their/ringeM.  So  the
■Vulgate,  magnifieanifimhriat.  These  fringes
or  tassels  (litith,  ziiijoth)  were  fastened  to
the  comersofthegarments,  in  accordance  with
Numb.  XV.38 — 4 1,  arid  were  composed  of  white
and  blue  threads.  They  were  intended  to  re- ,
mind  the  wearers  of  the  commandments  of,
the  Lord,  and  were  regarded  as  peculiarly
sacred  (see  6h.  ix.  20).  Christ  condemns
the  ostentations  enlargement  of  these!  fringes
as  a  badge  of  extraordinary  piety  and
obedience.  'We  quote  again  from  the  Jewish
'  Olass-Book : '  "  Every  male  of  the  Jewish
nation  mu6t  wear  a  garment  [not  usually
an  nnder-garment]  made  with  four  comers,
having  fringes  fixed  at  each  corner.  These
fringes  are  called  ttetiis,  or,  memorial  [
fringes.  In  the  synagogue,  during  the  morn-
ing prayers,  a  scatf  with  fringes  attached
to  it  is  worn,  which  is  called  lollece,  '  acati
or  veil.'  These  memorutl  fringes  typically
point  out  the  six  hundrecl  and  thirteen
precepts   ooutltiiied  in  the  volume  of  the


sacred  Law.  They  are  also  intended  iofu-
mind  us  of  tliogoodness  of  the  Almighty  in
having  delivered  our  forefathers  from  the
slavery  in  Egypt."

Ver.6. — ^The  appermost  rooms ;  riiv  wpmro-
KKiatav :  primoi  reeubiiui ;  chief  place  (Like
xiv.  7).  The  custom  of  reclining  on  cushions
set  in  horseshoe  fashion  at  three  sides  of  the
table  was  now  prevalent,  the  old  custom  of
squatting  round  a  low-  table,  as  at  present
practised  in  the  E!ist,-Iiaving  been  leag
abandoned.  The  place  of  honour  is  said  t<i
have  been  at  the  upper  end  of  the  right  side,
the,  president  beiog  placed,  not  in  the  centre
of  1;hat  end  of  the  table  which  faced' the
opening,  but  at  the  side.  Th€  most  honoured
guest  would  be  at  his  right  hand  (but  see
on  ch.  xxvi.  23).  There  wa:j  often  -much
manoeuvring  to  obtain  this  pi^t,  and  many
petty  squabbles  about  precedunoe  arose  on
every  festal  occasion  (see  Luke  xiv.  1,  7,
etc,).  The  chief  seats  in  the  synagognei.
The  usual  arrangement  of  the  synagogue  ig
given  by  Dr,  Edersheim  ('  Life  and  Times
of  Jesus,'  i„  pp.  434,  etc).  '  It  was  built  of
stone,  with  an  entrance  generally  on  the
south,  and  so  arranged  that  the  worshippers
might  direct  their.prayers  towards  Jeru-
salem. In  the  centre  was  placed  the  lectern
of  the  reader ;  the  women's  gallery  was  at
the  north  end,  "The  inside  plan  is  generally
that  of  two  double  colonnades,  which  seem
to  have  formed  the'  body  of  the  synagogue,
the  aisles  east  and  west  being  probably
used  as  passages.  At  the  soutlt  end,  facing
north, '  is  a  movaUe  airk,  containing  the
sacred  rolls  of  the  Law  and  the  prophete.
Bight  before  the  ark,  and  facing  the  people,
are  the  seats  of  honour,  for  the  rulers  of  the
synagoguoand&e  honourable."  These  were
the  places  for  which  the  Pharisees  con-
tended, thinking  more  of  gaining  these,
wliere  they  could  sitenthrone'd  in  the  sight  of
the  roiigrugation,  than  of  the  Divine  wOTsliip
which  nominally  tbej  came  to  offer  (comp.
Jas.  ii.2,3).

■Ver.  7. — Greetings  in  tie  markets.  They
loved  to  be  denoted  as  superiors  by  respect-
ful salutations  in  public  places.  'To ''be
called  Eahbi,  Ra^bi;  "Hy 'Master^'  (com-
pare the  French  'Monnieur,  used  not  only  vooa-
tiv^ly,  but  absolutely) ;  the  term  addressed
by  scholars  to  their  teacher,  and  repeated
for  ostentation's  sake,  of  course  implying
superiority  in  those  thus  called.  Christ
himself  was  thus  addressed  by  those  who
desired  to  denote  his  authority  and  pre-
eminence (oh.  xxii.'16,^4,  36;  comp.  John i,
88).  These  greetings  and  salutations  were
'  enjoined  on  scholars  and  inferiors,  under  pain
'  of  ecclesia^jtical  censure  and  loss  of  salvation.

Ver.  8.— Be  not  ye  called  Sabbi.  After
stating  the  customs  of  the  Phurisce8,'.Christ
proceeds  (vers.  8— ^12)' to  give  his  own  d^


OH.  nm.  1—39.]     THE  OOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


897


oipleH  •  leamn  In  hDmility.  The  pronoun
it  emphatic,  "But  ye,  be  not  ye  called."
They  are  not  to  M  eager  for  luoh  di«-
tinctlona,  indioatiTe  of  spiritual  snperioiity.
The  prohibition  mutt  be  understood  in  the
spirit  and  not  In  the  letter  (oomp.  1  Oor.
d.  1;  1  Tim.  i.  3>  Our  Lord  does  not
forbid  respect  for  teachers  or  different
grades  in  bit  Ohurch  (see  1  Cor.  xii.  28 ;
Sph.  ir.  11 — 13) ;  tliat  wLiich  he  censures  it
the  inordinate  grasping  at  such  personal
distinctions,  the  greedy  ambition  which
loves  the  empty  title,  and  takes  any  means
to  obtain  it.  One  is  your  Master,  even
Christ.  The  received  text  gives  tTs  yip
iarty  viuii>  i  KaBiiyrtTijS,  i  Xpirris.  Many
good  mannsoripts  read  ^iSd<rita\os,  Teacher
(so  Bevised  Version)  instead  of  Ka(7)77)T^5,
Leader,  and  omit  6  Xpiaris.  Both  these
variations  seem  reasonable  and  warranted.
"Leader"  has  probably  been  introduced
from  ver.  10,  where  it  oocurs  naturally ;  it  is
oat  of  place  here,  where,  for  the  take  of
ooncinnity,  "  Teacher  "  is  required  in  both
parts  of  the  sentence.  And  it  is  nnlikely
that  Jesus  should  here  expreiily  mention
himself.  He  is  speaking  now  of  their
heavenly  Father;  to  himself  he  refers  in
ver.  10.  In  support  of  the  allusion  to  the
Father,  Beugel  cites  oh.  xvi  17 ;  John  vL
45;  Acts  X.  28,  etc.  The  Vulgate  has,
Unui  eit  enim  Jlagiiter  tater;  and  yet
Bomaii  Catholic  eommentatort  interpret  the
olaute  of  Christ,  in  spite  of  the  purposed
indefiniteness  of  the  expression.  Jesus
points  to  the  inspiration  of  the  Father  or
the  Holy  Spirit  as  that  which  teaches  his
disciples.  They  were  to  follow  no  earthly
rabbi,  but  the  heavenly  Teacher.  All  ye
•re  brethren.  And  therefore,  so  far,  equal.
They  were  disciples  of  our  Lord,  and  to
them  appertained  equality  and  fraternity.

Ver.  0. — Tout  father.  This  was  the  title
^ven  to  eminent  teachers  and  founders  of
schools,  to  whom  the  people  were  taught  to
look  up  lather  than  to  God.  It  was  also
addressed  to  prophets  (2  Kings  ii.  12 ;  vi.
21),  In  ver.  8  Christ  said, "  be  not  called ; "
here  he  nses  the  active,  "  call  not,"  as  if  he
would  intimate  that  his  foUowert  must  not
give  this  honoured  title  to  any  doctor  out
of  complaisance,  or  flattery,  or  aifectation.
Upon  the  earth.  In  contradistinction  to
heaven,  where  our  true  Father  dwells.  They
were  to  follow  no  earthly  school.  They  had
natural  fathers  and  spiritual  fathers,  but
the  authority  of  all  comes  from  God;  it  is
delegated,  not  essential ;  and  good  teachers
would  make  men  look  to  God,  and  not  to
themselves,  at  the  source  of  power  and  truth.

Ver.  10.— Neither  be  ye  called  mastert;
Kair)rriTal ;  leader*,  guides.  This  is  just  what
the  Pharisees  elaimed  to  be  (see  ver.  16
and  Bom  ii.  19,  20).    Out  U  your  master


(Ka9»)yi)T^j,  Leader),  even  [the']  Christ.  Her*
jesut  announces  himself,  not  only  as  their
Teacher,  but  as  the  Messiah,  their  Bnler  and
Guide.  He  is  censuring  that  sectarian
spirit  which  began  in  the  primitive  Chnroh,
when  one  said, "  I  am  of  Paul ;  another,  I  of
Apollos,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  i.  12),  and  has  con-
tinued to  this  day  in  the  division  of  the  one
body  into  innnmerable  sects  and  parties,
ranged  under  various  leaders,  and  generally
bearing  their  founder's  name,  "  What  then
is  ApoUot?  and  what  it  Paul?  Ministers
through  whom  ye  believed;  and  each  as
the  Lord  gave  to  him"  (1  Cor.  iii.  5).  How
muurnful  to  think  that  Christ's  great  prayer
for  unity  (John  xvii.)  is  still  unfulfilled
frustrated  or  delayed  by  man's  self-will  I

Ver.  11. — Bnt  he  that  is  greatest . . .  yooi
servant;  iiiKovos:  minister  (see  ch.  xx.
26,  27).  It  was  there  said  to  the  apostles
alone;  here  it  is  spoken  more  publicly  to
emphasize  the  contrast  between  Christian
humility  and  Pharisaical  pride  and  vanity.

Ver.  12. — Whotever  shall  exalt  thimielf
ihall  be  abased  ^raireivuS^trfTat,  sTiaU  be
humbled);  and  he  that  shall  humble  (ravft-
vdffti)  himself  thaU  be  exalted.  It  it  not
clear  why  the  rendering  of  the  verb  is  not
uniform  in  this  verse.  The  antithesis  cer-
tainly requires  it.  The  gnome,  so  often
repeated  (see  references),  seems  to  b«,  as  ii
has  been  called,  "  an  axiom  in  the  kingdom
of  God."  It  is  indeed  a  universal  law  in
God's  dealings  with  men,  Olshausen  quotes
a  Baying  I  of  Eillel  to  th*  same  purport,
"My  humility  is  my  exaltation,  and  my
exaltation  is  my  humility."  The  first
clause  was  prophetic  of  the  speedy  over-
throw of  the  haughty  Pharisees ;  the  second
is  grandly  illustrated  in  the  example  of
Christ,  who  humbled  himself  to  the  death
of  the  cross,  and  is  now  highly  exalted;
who  "  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,
endured  the  cross,  despising  shame,  'and
hath  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the
tlirone  of  God "  (Heb.  xii.  2).  St.  Peter
draws  the  lesson,  "Humble  yourselves
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  he  may
exalt  you  in  due  time  "  (1  Pet  v.  5,  6).

Vers.  18 — 32. — Eight  woes  pronounced  on
the  Pharisees  for  their  eonduet  and  teaching.
(Comp.  Luke  xi  42—52.)

Ver.  18. — Borne  authorities  transpose
vers.  13  and  14 — a  variation  attributabla
to  the  circumstance  that  the  commencing
clauses  are  the  same.  As  Christ  inaugurated
his  public  teaching  by  pronouncing  eight
benedictions  in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,
so  here  he  closes  his  ministry  by  impre-
cating or  prophesying  eight  woes  on  the
perverse  and  unbelieving  Pharisees.  In
Lange't  commentary  there  it  proposed  a
scheme  of   antithesis  bet  n  sen   the   benu-


398


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxm.  1— 3a


dictions  and  the  woes ;  but  it  is  not  very
successful,  being  often  forced  and  unnatural ;
and  it  is  better  to  regard  the  contrast  in  a
general  view,  and  not  to  attempt  to  press  it
in  particulars.  Jesus  hers  pours  forth  his
righteous  anger  on  those  whose  ubstlnate
Infidelity  was  about  to  bring  ruin  on  the
Jewish  city  and  nation.  Woe  unto  yon!  (oh.
xt  21).  These  terrible  "woe»"  are  not
only  evoked  by  Indignation,  and  pronounced
as  a  solemn  judgment,  they  are  also  ex-
pressive of  the  profoundest  pity,  and  are
prophetic  of  the  future.  They  have,  indeed,
a  twofold  reference — tliey  refer  first  to
temporal  judgments  and  visitations,  now
ready  to  fall ;  and  secondly  to  the  retribu-
tion in  the  eternal  world.  That  the  meek
and  lowly  Jeeus  should  utter  such  awful  de-
nunciations shows  how  greatly  he  was  moved,
how  he  left  nothing  untried  to  turn  these
hard  hearts  to  introspection  and  repentance.
Scribes  and  Pharisees  (see  on  ver.  2),  hypo-
crites (eh.  vi.  2).  Christ  uses  this  word  seven
times  in  these  denunciations.  It  is  applied
to  the  Pharisees  as  deceiving  themselves
and  others,  under  the  mask  of  godliness
hiding  polluted  hearts,  persuading  them-
selves that  formal  externalism  was  real
piety  and  devotion,  and  practically  teaching
this  fatal  delusion.  Te  ibut  up  the  kingdom
of  heaven  against  men;  e/nrpoaBev  ruv
ivSpiiiraiii :  before  meiij  ante  homines  (Vul-
gate. This  is  the  ^r<t  woe — against  perverse
obstructivenesi.  They  prevent  men  from
accepting  Christ,  and  so  entering  God's
kingdom,  by  their  false  interpretation  of
Scripture,  by  not  allowing  that  it  testified
of  Christ,  and  by  making  the  path  impass-
able for  the  poor  and  ignorant,  And  this
is  done  "in  the  face  of  men,"  when  they
are,  as  it  were,  thronging  round  and  wishing
to  enter.  "  Ye  hare  taken  away  the  key
of  knowledge,"  he  says,  in  another  place
(Luke  xi.  52).  Keithsr  snffer  ye  them  that
are  entering  to  go  in.  The  kingdom  of
heaven  is  here  metaphorically  regarded  as
a  banqueting-hall,  where  are  celebrated  the
espousals  of  Christ  and  his  Church.  The
Pharisees  watched  the  access  thereto.  They
stood  at  the  door  to  bar  all  entrance.  If
any  showed  signs  of  yielding  to  honest  cou-
Tlction,  they  sternly  forbade  them  to  pro-
ceed ;  they  repelled  them  with  violence,  as
by  excommunication  (John  ix.  22,  84),  or
by  calumniating  the  Teacher  (oh.  ix.  34,
etc.).  There  was  many  a  time  when  the
people  were  ready  to  acknowledge  Christ
and  to  follow  hira  as  Messiah.  A  word
from  their  authorized  leaders  would  have
turned  the  scale  in  his  favour;  but  that
word  was  never  spoken.  The  weight  of
authority  was  always  placed  on  the  opposite
side,  and  naught  but  prejudice,  animosity,
and  Blander  befell  the  cause  of  Jesus.


Ver.  14. — Second  woe — against  rapacity
and  hypocrisy.  There  is  some  donbt  abr^nt
the  genuineness  of  this  verse,  and  our  Be-
TLsers  have  expunged  it  from  their  text,
relegating  it  to  the  margin.  It  is  omitted
by  N,  B,  D,  L,  Z,  some  c(  pies  of  the  Vulgate
and  some  versions;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is
found  in  B,  F,  G,  H,  K,  M,  and  other
later  uncials,  and  in  the  received  Vulgate
and  Syriao  Versions.  Critics  reject  it  as  a
supposed  interpolation  from  Murk  xii.  40;
Luke  XX.  47.  At  any  rate,  whether  spoken
now  or  at  another  time,  it  is  undoubtedly
an  utterance  of  Christ,  and  to  be  received
with  all  reverence.  Ye  devour  widows'
hoases.  Women  who  have  lost  their  natural
protector  become  their  prey.  To  these  they
attach  themselves,  winning  them  over  by
flattery  and  fraud,  and  persuading  them  to
assist  them  with  their  substance  to  the  ruin
of  their  fortunes.  God  had  always  do-
fended  the  cause  of  widows,  and  had  urged
his  people  to  deal  gently  and  mercifully
with  them  (see  Dent.  z.  18;  xxvii.  19;  Pa.
Ixviii.  6;  Isa.  i.  17;  Luke  xviii.  3—7).
This  woe  is  followed  in  St.  Luke  by  the
episode  of  the  widow's  mite  (Luke  xx.  47 ;
xxi.  1—4).  And  for  a  pretence  make  long
prayer;  or,  and  that,  making  long  prayen
for  a  pretence.  They  put  on  an  appearance
of  extraordinary  devotion,  that  they  might
more  easily  secure  the  favour  of  the  widows ;
or  else  they  exacted  large  sums  of  money,
engaging  to  offer  continual  prayers  for  the
donors  (compare  St.  Paul's  words  in  2
Tim.  iii.  6).  Thus  these  hypocrites  made
a  gain  of  godliness  at  the  expense  of  the
most  helpless  members  of  the  community.
Greater  (irepxffcrdTepov,  more  abundant)  dam-
nation. No  condemnation  in  this  world  or
the  next  can  be  more  justly  awarded  than
to  him  who  adds  hypocrisy  to  covetousness,
and  makes  religion  a  cloke  fo;  cruel  rapacity.
The  comparative  may  refer  to  "  the  length-
ened hypocritical  prayers  which  went
before  "  (Lange).

Ver.  15. — i%ird  woe — against  evil  prose-
lytizing. Ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  m»ka
one  proselyte.  The  word  irpoa-^XuTos  is
used  in  the  Septuagint  to  signify  "a
stranger"  or  "sojourner"  (Exod.  xii.  48,
49,  etc.),  and  at  this  time  was  applied  to  a
convert  to  Judaism  (Acts  ii.  10;  vi.  5),
whether  circumcised,  "  a  proselyte  of
righteousness ; "  or  unoircumoised,  "  a  prose-
lyte of  the  gate."  To  compost  tea  and  land
is  a  proverbial  expression,  denoting  the
employment  of  every  means,  the  exercise  of
the  utmost  effort.  One  might  have  thought
that,  in  its  proud  isolation  and  exclusiveness,
Judaisrt  would  not  have  exposed  itself  to
this  reproach.  But  what  says  Joiephus?
In  more  than  one  passage  of  his  histories  he
testifies  to  the  zealous  propagation  of  the


OH.  ixm.  1—39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,


899


Jewish  religion,  and  in  some  cases  the
enforcement  of  oiroumolsion  on  vanquished
enemies  (see  '  Ant.,'  xviii.  3,  5 ;  xx.  2.  4 ;
'Bell.  Jud..'  li.  17.  10;  'Vita,'  §  23).
Taoitns  ('Hist.,*  v.  5)  gives  a  most  un-
favourable account  of  the  numerous  oon-
vorts  ■which  Hebrews  made  throughout  the
Eoman  provinces ;  and  St.  Augustine  ('  De
Civit.,'  vi.  11)  quotes  Seneca  saying,  "  Cum
interim  usque  eo  sceleratisBlmss  gentis
consuetude  oonvaluit,  ut  per  omnea  jam
terras  recepta  sit,  vioti  victoribus  leges
dederunt"  (Edersheim).  For  similar  testi-
mony, we  may  refer  to  Horace,  '  Sat.,'  i.  4.
142, 143 ;  and  Juvenal,  '  Sat.,'  vi.  541,  etc.
But  it  was  not  proselytizing  In  itself  that
the  Lord  censured.  As  possessing  reve-
lation and  the  only  true  religion  in  the
world,  the  Jews  might  well  have  deemed
it  their  business  to  enlighten  the  gross
darkness  of  heathenism,  and  to  endeavour
to  slied  abroad  the  pure  light  which  was
confided  to  their  care  to  tend  and  cherish.
That  they  were  not  expressly  commanded
to  do  this,  and  that  little  blessing  attended
their  efforts  in  this  direction,  was  dependent
upon  the  transitory  and  imperfect  character
of  the  old  covenant,  and  the  many  evils
which  would  be  consequent  upon  association
with  alien  peoples.  In  mating  converts,  the
Pharisees  sought  rather  to  secure  outward
eonformity  than  inward  piety,  change  of
external  religion  tlian  change  of  heart.
There  was  do  love  of  souls,  no  burning  zeal
for  the  honour  of  God,  in  their  proselytism.
They  were  prompted  only  by  selfish  and
base  motives — vain-glory,  party  spirit,  oo-
TetousnesB ;  and  if  they  converted  men  to
their  own  opinions,  with  their  false  tenets,
gross  exter;ialism,  and  practical  immorality,
they  had  far  better  have  left  them  in  their
irresponsible  ignorance.  When  he  is  made ;
when  lie  is  become  a  proselyte.  Twofold
more  the  child  of  hell ;  a  son  of  Ctehenna  ;  1  e.
worthy  of  hell  fire.  So  we  have  2  Sam.
xii.  5,  "  a  son  of  death ; "  John  xvii.  12,  "  the
son  of  perdition"  (comp.  2  Thess.  ii.  3).
The  converts  became  doubly  the  children  of
hell  because,  seeing  the  Iniquities  of  their
teachers,  they  learned  an  evil  lesson  from
them, "  engrafted  the  vices  of  the  Jews  on
the  vices  of  the  heathen,"  distrusted  all
goodness,  discarded  their  old  religion  and
disbelieved  the  new,  making  utter  ship-
wreck of  their  moral  life.  "Ita  natura
comparati  sumus,"  says  an  old  commentator,
"  ut  vitia  potius  quam  virtutes  imitemur,
•t  in  rebus  malis  a  discipulis  magistri  facile
snperentur."

Ver.  16. — Fourth  woe  —  against  evasive
distinctioDR  in  oaths.  Te  blind  guides.
They  were  by  profession  leaders  and  guides,
and  yet  by  their  literalism  and  extemalism
they  lost  the  true  significance  of  the  Scrip-


tures which  they  taught,  and  the  ritual  of
which  they  were  the  exponents.  The  Lord
repeats  the  epithet  "blind  "  (vers.  17, 19,  24),
Whosoever  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it  is
nothing.  Our  Lord  seems  to  refer  more
especially  to  oaths  connected  with  vows,  of
which  he  had  already  spoken  (oh.  xv.  5,  6).
The  arbitrary  distinction  betwf  en  oaths  was
indeed  an  instance  of  moral  blindness.  An
oath  by  the  temple  was  not  binding;  it
might  be  broken  or  evaded  with  impunity.
By  the  gold  of  the  temple— f.  a.  by  the  sacred
treasure  and  ornaments  therein — he  is  a
debtor  (oiJ)e£\Ei);  he  is  bound  by  his  oath.
The  casuistry  employed  by  the  JewM  in  this
matter  was  well  known,  and  had  become
proverbial  among  the  heathen.  P.M.  quotes
Martial,  xi.  94 —

"  Ecce  negas,  jurasque  mihi  per  templa  Ton-

antis,
'  Kou  credo :  jura,  verpe,  per  Anchial'um.' "

"  Anchialum  "  is  equivalent  to  am  chat  aloh,
"  as  God  liveth,"  the  Jew  (verpus,  "  circum-
cised ")  being  bound  by  no  oath  but  one  that
contained  some  letters  of  the  Divine  name
or  some  attribute  of  God.

Ver.  17. — Ye  fools.  Jesus  adds  to  "blind"
the  epithet  "fools,"  which  implies  not  only
the  irrationality  and  absurdity  of  their
practice,  but  also  its  moral  delinquency,
the  fool  in  sapiential  language  being  the
sinner.  The  temple  that  sanotlfieth  the
gold.  Our  Lord  shows  the  absurdity  of  this
sophistical  distinction.  It  was  because  the
temple  was  the  place  of  God's  presence
that  what  was  therein  was  consecrated.
The  gold  was  nothing  without  the  temple ;
the  temple,  the  originally  holy,  is  superior
to  the  gold,  the  derivatively  holy,  and  an
oath  that  calls  the  temple  to  witness  is  surely
obligatory,

Ver.  18.— By  the  altar.  The  great  altnr
of  burnt  offerings,  according  to  the  Mosaic
ritual,  was  consecrated  and  dedicated  with
most  remarkable  solemnities,  as  the  centre
of  sacrificial  worship  (see  Exod.  xxix.  36,
etc. ;  XXX.  28,  29;  Numb.  vii.  10,  etc.).  The
gift  that  is  upon  it.  The  victim,  wliich,  as
being  offered  by  themselves,  was  counted
more  worthy  than  the  altar  of  God  which
sanctified  the  gift.  This  is,  indeed,  an  in-
stance of  sight  blinded  by  self-righteousness.
He  is  gnilty ;  o(j>€l\et :  he  is  a  debtor,  as  ver.
16.  Others  see  here  the  principle  that  the
validity  of  oaths  was  differentiated  by  the
nearness  to  the  Person  of  God  of  the  things
by  which  they  were  taken.  This,  too,
opened  up  large  opportunities  of  evasion.

Ver.  19. — Our  Lord  repeats  the  unan-
swerable argument  of  ver.  17,  That  sancti-
fleth  the  ^t.  Exod.  xxix.  37.  "It  shaU
be  an  altar  most  holy ;  whatsoever  toDohetli


400  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxm.  1— 39.


the  altar  Bhall  b«  holj  "  (oomp.  Ezek.  zU.
22).    The  offering  i«  one  with  the  altar.

Ver.  20. — Sweareth  by  It,  etc.  One  can
■ee  what  an  inTeteiate  evil  our  Lord  was
denonnoing,  when  be  taket  snoh  paini  to
point  out  iti  abinrditieB,  which  seem  to  na  '
■elf-evidenl  The  oath  by  the  altar  in-
Tolvea  the  notioo  of  the  victim  as  well  ai
the  altar ;  one  cannot  be  separated  from  the
other ;  and,  of  course,  implies  him  to  whom
the  offering  is  made.

Ver.  21. — By  blm  that  dwelltth  therein.
In  fact,  it  comeatotliis:  to  swear  by  temple
or  altar  is  to  swear  by  God — an  oath  most
solemn,  which  may  not  be  eraded.  "  That
dwelleth"  ii  in  some  mannscriptg  the  aorist
participle,  Karouefiiravrt,  implying  that  Gk)d
once  for  all  took  up  his  abode  in  the  temple,
and  filled  it  with  his  ineffable  preeenoe  (see
1  Kings  viii.  13 ;  Ps.  oxxxii.  14).  From  such
passages  we  luam  that  Qod  sanctifies  things
and  places  to  be  devoted  to  his  service,  and
to  be  accounted  by  men  holy  and  separated
from  all  common  uses.  The  Authorized
Version  translates  the  received  text,  itaToi-
KovvTi,  which  has  good  authority,  the  past
participle  being,  perhaps,  a  correction  by
some  scribe  who  thonght  that  the  day  of
Judaism  was  past  when  Christ  spoke.

Ver.  22.— By  heaven.  The  Talmudists
affirm  that  an  oath  "by  heaven"  or  "by
eai'th"  was  not  binding,  on  the  ground,
probably,  that  these  were  mere  creatures.
Christ  again  dissipates  such  sophistries.
To  swear  by  the  creature  is  virtually  to
swear  by  the  Creator.  A  brute,  inanimate
thing  cannot  be  witness  to  an  oath ;  he
alone  can  be  appealed  to  who  owns  all.
Thus  we  "  kiss  the  book,"  calling  Qod  to  wit-
ness our  words.  Christ  had  already  given
a  lesson  to  his  followers  on  this  snbiect  in
the  sermon  on  the  mount  (ch.  v.  84 — 87).
He  inculcates  true  reverence,  that  fear  and
awe  of  God's  dignity  and  God's  presence
which  constrains  a  man  to  avoid  all  pro-
faneness  end  carelessness  in  regard  to  things
that  are  concerned  with  God.

Vers.  23, 24. — Fifth  woe — against  scrupu-
losity in  trifles  and  neglect  of  weighty  duties
(Luke  li,  42).  To  pay  tithe  of  (ivoSfKa-
rovTf,  ye  tithe)  mint  and  anise  and  onmmin.
Practically,  the  law  of  tithe  was  enforced
only  in  the  case  of  the  produce  mentioned
in  Dent.  xiv.  23 — corn,  wine,  and  oil — ^but
the  Pharisees,  in  their  overstrained  scrupu-
losity, applied  the  law  of  Lev.  xxvii.  80
("all  the  tithe  of  the  land,  whether  of  the
seed  of  the  land  or  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree,
is  the  Lord's")  to  the  smallest  pot-herbs,
even  to  their  leaves  and  stalks.  "Mint"
(lltiotriioy).  Of  this  well-known  plant
several  species  grow  in  Palestine;  it  was
one  of  the  ingiedients  of  the  sauce  of  bitter
herbs  eaten  at  the  Paschal  feast  (Exod.  xii.


8X  and  was  hnng  np  In  the  synagogue  for
its  fragrance.    "  Anise  "  (HvriOw)  is  known
to  us  as  "dill,"  and  is   mnch   nsed   in
medicine  and  for  seasoning.    "Oammin"
(^xi/iipov)  (Isa.  xxviii.  25,  27),  an  ambel-
liferons  plant,  with  seeds  something  like
caraways,  and  nsed,  like  Ihom,  as  a  oondi-
ment   and   medicine.    Htv*   omitted   th*
weightier  matters  of  the  Law.    The  Phari-
sees were  very  far  from  treating  important
duties  with  the  same  sompalosity  which  they
observed  in  little  matters.    Christ  particu-
larizes  these  weighty  duties :  Judgment,
(and)  meroy,  and  faith.    Three  are  named,
in  contrast  to  the  three  petty  observances
mentioned  above.    Christ  seems  torefer  to
the  words  of  Micah  vi.  8,  "What  doth  the
Ijord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and
to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with
thy  God  ?  "  (see  also  Hos.  xii.  6 ;  Zech.  vii.
9,  10).    Worthless  are    all  ontward  obser-
vances when  the  moral  preoepts  are  neg-
lected.    "Judgment"  (rtiv  Kplair)  means
acting  equitably  to  one's  neighbour,  hurting
nobody  by  word  or  deed ;  as  in  Jer.  v.  1  a
man  is  sought  "  that  exerciseth  justics."
Such  impartiality  is  specially  enjoined  in
the  Law  (Dent.  xvi.  19,  etc).    "Mercy,"
loving-kindness  in  oonduct,  often   tanght
in  the  Pentateuch,  as  in  the  case  of  the
widow,  the  stranger,  and  the  debtor,  and  very
different  from  the  feeling  of  those  who  "  de-
vour widows'  houses."    "  Faith  "  may  mean
fidelity  to  promises:  "He  that  sweareth  unto
his  neighbour  and  disappointeth  him  not,
though  it  were  to  his  own  hindrance  "  (Ps.
XV.  4);  but  it  is  more  probably  taken  as
that  belief  in  God  without  which  it  is  not
possible  to  please  him,  and  which  should
underlie    and  influence    all   moral   action
(Heb.  xi.  6).    These  (rain-a)  ...  the  other
iiKtiya).     "These    last"    are    judgment,
mercy,  and  faith ;  these  it  was  your  duty  to
have  done.  "  The  other"  refers  to  the  tithing
mentioned  above.    Christ  does  not  censure
this  attention  to  minutira.    He  would  teach
conformity  to  regulations  made  by  compe-
tent authority,  or  oousoientiously  felt  to  be
binding,  even  though  not  distinctly  enjoined
in  Scripture  (see  vers.  2,  3);  his  blame  is
reserved  for  that   expenditure  of  zeal  on
trifles  which  stood  in  the  place  of,  or  left
no  strength  for,  higher  duties.    It  was  a
very  elastic  conscience  which  tithed  a  pot-
herb and  neglected  judgment.    Strain  at  a
gnat;  Siv\i(iivTtt  rhr  Kiiymra.   "  At "  is  sup-
posed to  be  b  misprint  for  "out."    Thus
Bevised  Version,  and  early  English  versions,
which   itraln   out  the   gnat;    Vulgate,  ««-
aolantet  culieem.    Alford  thinks  the  present
reading  was  an  intentional  alteration,  mean-
ing "  strain  (out  the  wine)  at  (the  ooourrenoe
of)  a  gnat" — whioh  seems  more  ingenious
than  probable.     If  "at"  be  retained,  it


OH.  xim.  1—89.]    THB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         401


mait  be  taken  MsxpiefBiTe  of  the  faitldioiu-
ne«(  wbioh  had  to  make  a  itrong  effort  to
overcome  iti  diatute  at  thii  little  insect.
The  wine,  before  drinking,  wag  carefnlly
■trained  through  linen  («ee  Amoi  yi.  6,
"  strained  wine,"  Beptuagint)  to  avoid
the  aooidental  violation  of  Lev.  zi.  20,
23,  eto.;  zvii.  10 — 14,  by  awallowing  an
unclean  inieot.  The  practice,  which  wai
in  lome  sense  a  religions  act,  is  found
among  the  Bnddhiita  in  Hindostan  and
Ceylon,  either  to  avoid  pollution  or  to  ob-
viate the  danger  of  taking  life,  which  their
code  forbids.  A  (th»)  oameL  The  gnat  and
the  oamel,  which  were  alike  unclean,  stand
at  the  extremities  of  the  scale  of  compara-
tive sise.  Our  Lord  uses  a  proverbial  ex-
pression to  denote  the  InoonEiistenoy  which
would  avoid  the  smallest  ceremonial  defile-
ment, bnt  would  take  no  aooonot  of  the
graveit  moral  pollution.

Ver.  25. — The  $itth  tnot — agamst  merely
external  purification  (Mark  vii,  i;  Luke  xi.
SB).  Te  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup
and  of  the  platter.  Thus  the  Lord  typi-
cally denotes  the  Pharisees'  external  oeie-
monialism,  their  legal  parity.  They  looked,
so  to  speak,  to  the  cleanliness  of  the  outside
of  the  cup  thatoontained  their  drink,  and  the
platter  that  held  their  food.  Buch  cleansioj^
would,  of  eouree,haTe  no  effect  on  the  drink  or
meat  itself.  They  are  full  of  (y4^iavr^y  i^,  ara
fvli  from)  eztortioa  and  excess  (uKpairfu).
for  this  last  word  the  manuscripts  offer
many  variations,  arising,  probably,  from  its
unoommoness.  It  seems,  however,  to  be
genuine.  But  we  find  it  altered  into  "un-
righteousnesa,"  "impurity,"  Vulgate,  im-
nimditia,  "intemperance,"  " oovetousness,"
"wickedness."  The  vessels  are  oonceived
as  filled  with  contents  acquired  by  violence
and  used  without  self-control.

Ver.  26.  — Thou  blind  Pharisee.  The
address  is  in  the  singular  number,  to  pve
vividness  and  personal  effect,  and  the  epi-
thet accentuates  the  absurdity  oensnred.
Cleanse  first  that  which  is  within.  They
must  learn  to  reverse  their  practice,  if
you  wanted  to  have  your  food  pure,  yon
would  dens  the  inside  of  your  vessel  more
carefully  than  the  ontside.  The  external
purity  should  proceed  from  and  be  a  token
of  the  internal.  So  in  the  case  of  the  moral
agent,  the  ceremonial  purity  is  a  mockery
and  hypocrisy  unless  it  do  accompanied  by
holiness  of  the  heart.  That  the  outside  of
them  may  bs  (7c'i^Tai,  may  heeome)  clean
also.  However  fair  to  see,  the  man  is  not
pare  unless  his  soul  is  elean ;  he  cannot  be
called  pure  while  the  higher  pait  of  his
being  is  soiled  and  foul  with  sin.  And
inward  aalntUnesB  cannot  be  hidden;  it
shines  forth  in  the  conntenance ;  it  is  known
by  speech  and  action;  it  sheds  sunshine

IIAXTHBW — ^D.


wherever  it  goee.  "  Keep  thy  lieart  with
all  diligeaoe ;  for  o«t  of  It  are  the  Issues  of
Ufe"(Prov.  iv.28).

Vers.  27,  28.— &«mM  wm— against  an-
other form  of  the  same  hypooruy  (Lnke
zi.  44).  WUted  (fMKoyiaficVsis)  sepnlehres.
Once  a  year,  about  the.  fifteenth  ef  the
month  Adar,  the  Jews  vsed  to  whitewash
the  tombs  and  the  places  where  corpses  were
buried,  partly  eut  of  respect  for  the  dead,
but  chiefly  in  order  to  moke  them  eonspion-
ous,  and  thus  to  obviate  the  risk  of  persons
incautiously  contracting  ceremonial  defile-
ment by  touching  or  walking  ever  them
(Numb.  xix.  16).  To  such  sepnlehres  our
Lord  compares  uese  Pharisees,  because  their
outwardly  fair  show  concealed  rottenness
within  (oomp.  Acts  xxiii.  S).  Indeed,  it
might  be  said  that  their  seeming  excep-
tional purity  was  a  warning  of  internal  cor-
ruption, a  sign-poet  to  point  to  hidden
defilement.  Obtrusive  religiousness,  em-
phatic scrupulosity,  are  marks  of  pride  and
self-righteousness,  utterly  alien  from  real
devotion  and  holiuess.

Vers.  73— Z%.— Eighth  tto»— against  hypo-
erltioal  hononr  paid  to  departed  werthies
(Luke  xi.  47).

Ver.  29.— Te  bnlld  the  tombs  of  the  jro-
phets,  and  garnish  the  sepulchres  of  the
righteous ;  or,  adorn  the  monumentt  »/  tlie
jHit.  In  the  last  wee  Ciirist  had  spoken  of
sepulchres ;  he  speaks  of  them  here  again,
giving  an  unexpected  view  of  the  seeming
honours  paid  te  departed  saints.  The
sumptuous  mausoleums  and  tombs  found
e.g.  rouod  Jerusalem,  and  bearing  the  names
01  eelebrated  men  (such  as  Zeohariah,  Ab-
salom, Jehoshaphat),  sufficiently  attest  the
practice  of  the  Jews  in  this  matter.  But
the  Phariseea'  motives  in  acting  thus  were
not  pure;  they  were  not  iimueaoed  by
respect  for  the  prophets  er  repeatanoe  for
national  siMs,  bat  by  pride,  hypocrisy,  and
self-su£Beiency.  The  present  was  a  great
age  for  buil(jung;  witness  Herod's  magni-
ficent andertakbigs;  and  probably  many
gorgeous  tombs  in  honoiu  of  anelsnt  worthies
were  bow  ersoted  er  renovated.

Ver.  80.— AiU  say.  They  boasted  that
they  were  better  than  their  fathers;  they
disavowed  their  crimes,  and  eadeavenred,  by
honouring  the  prophets'  graves,  to  deliver
themselves  from  the  |nllt  ef  those  who
persecuted  them.  Tair  show,  with  no
reality  I  They  brofessed  to  venerate  the
dead,  but  would  ael  receive  the  living;
they  reverenced  Abraham  and  Moses,  but
were  about  to  murder  the  Christ  to  whom
patriarch  and  prophet  bore  witness.  Com-
mentators quote  the  old  adage,  herein  ex-
empliiied,  "Sit  licet  divus,  dummodo  non
vivus."    The  only  practical  way  of  deliver-

2d


402         THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDINO  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [obu  xxni.  1— 8».


ing  themselves  from  the  gnllt  of  their  fore-
fathers was  by  hearkening  to  those  who
now  preached  the  gospel  of  lalvatlon — the
very  last  thing  which  they  were  purposed
to  do.

Ver.  SI. — Te  he  witneaiei  unto  yonr-
selves.  By  busying  yoittselves  about  adorn-
ing the  tombs  of  the  prophets  slain  by  your
ancestors,  you  ihow  your  descent  and  the
spirit  which  animates  you.  Ye  are  the
children ;  ye  an  $oni.  They  were  true  sons
of  their  fathers,  inheriting  their  murderous
instincts,  following  their  steps.  Like  father,
like  son.  They  inherited  knd  put  in  practice
the  same  false  principles  which  led  their
ancestors  astray.

V.er.  32.— rill  ye  up  then;  utal  lutls  rXii-
i>&ira-Tt !  d.0  ye  alto  (as  well  as  they)  fll  up.
An  imperative,  expressive  of  Divine  irony,
conttuning  virtually  a  prophecy.  Ck>mplete
your  evil  work,  finish  that  which  your
fathers  began  (comp,  John  liii,  27).  The
measure.  There  is  a  certain  limit  to  ini-
quity; when  this  is  reached,  punishment
falls.  The  metaphor  is  derived  from  a  full
cup,  which  a  single  drop  more  will  make
overflow.  This  added  drop  would  be  the
dsath  of  Christ  and  the  persecution  of  his
followers.  Then  vengeance  must  follow
(comp.  Gen.  iv.  16;  1  Thess.  ii.l6)

Vers.  83 — 89. — Declaration  of  (he  lentenee
on  theie  Phariteei  and  their  generation.

Ver.  83. — Te  serpents,  ye  generation  of
▼ipers ;  ytyyiinaTa  ix'^"''"  '•  offspring  of
9iper$.  Our  Lord  repeats  the  Baptist's
denunciation  (ch.  iii.  7).  They  were  of
devilish  nature,  inherited  from  their  very
birth  the  disposition  and  character  of  Satan.
So  Christ  said  on  another  occasion,  "  Ye  are
of  your  father  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of
your  father  it  is  your  will  to  do.  He  was  a
murderer  from  the  beginning,  and  stood  not
in  the  truth  '  (John  viii.  44).  How  can  ye
escape  t  Tiin  fiyriTc ;  the  deliberative  con-
junctiva, Eow  thall  ye  eicapet  Quo  modo
fugietii  f  (Vulgate).  There  is  no  emphasis
on  "  can ''  in  the  Authorized  Version.  What
hope  is  there  now  of  your  repentance  ?  Can
anything  soften  the  hardness  of  your  hearts  ?
The  Baptist  had  spoken  more  hopefully,
"Who  liath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the
wrath  to  come  ?  "  But  now  the  day  of  grace
is  past;  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is
committed ;  there  remaineth  only  the  fearful
looking  for  of  judgment.  The  damnation  of
hell ;  literally,  the  judgment  of  Gehenna  ;
jndicio  QehennK  (Vulgate) ;  i.e.  the  sentence
that  condemns  to  eternal  death  (ch.  t.  22).
The  phrase  is  common  in  the  rabbinical
writings  (see  Lightfoot).  "Before  sinning,
we  ought  to  fear  lest  it  be  the  filling  up ;
after  sinning,  we  should  trust  in  a  truly
Christian  hope  that  it  is  not,  and  repent.


This  Is  the  only  mmna  to  escape  the  Aimna-
tion  of  hell ;  but  how  rare  is  this  grace  after
a  Pharisaical  life  1 "  (Quesnel).  Hypocrisy
is  a  bar  to  repentance.

Ver. 34. — ^Wherefore;  SArtSr:  Because
ye  are  resolved  on  imitating  your  forefathers'
iniquities,  you  will  also  reject  the  messengers
that  are  sent  to  you,  and  shall  suffer  right-
eons  eondemnatlon.  I  send  (iyii  iitoa-rfK-
Ant)  unto  yon.  The  sending  had  already
begun.  In  the  parallel  passage  of  St.
Luke  (xi.  49)  we  read,  "Therefore  also
said  the  wisdom  of  God,  I  will  send."  Christ
is  the  Wisdom  of  God,  and  by  his  own
autliority  gives  mission  to  his  messengers.
"  As  the  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I
yon  "  (John  xx.  21),  he  sa^s  to  his  apostles ;
and  to  such  he  is  referring  in  the  words
which  follow.  Prophets.  The  apostles
were  of  like  character,  inspiration,  and  in-
fluence as  the  prophets  under  the  old
dispensation,  and  succeeded  in  their  place
as  exponents  of  God's  will  and  heralds  of
the  covenant.  Wise  men.  Men  full  of  the
Holy  Ghost  and  heavenly  wisdom.  Scribes.
Kot  in  the  then  Jewish  sense,  but  instructors
in  the  new  law  of  life,  the  law  of  Christ's
religion  (ch.  xiii.  52).  All  the  means  of
teaching  and  edification  employed  aforetime
were  abundantly  and  more  effectually  sup-
plied under  the  gospel.  St.  Luke  has,
"  prophets  and  apostles."  Kill;  as  Stephen
(Acts  vii.  69),  James  (Acts  xii.  2).  Crucify ;
as  Peter  (John  ixi.  18,  19;  2  Pet.  i  14);
Simeon  (Eusebius,  'Hist.  Eccl.,'  iii.  32);
and  probably  Andrew.  Sooorga  (see  Acts
v.  40 ;  xxii.  19 ;  xxvi.  11 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  24, 25).
Persecuted  (see  Acts  xiii.  60 ;  xiv.  5,  6, 19,
20;  xxvi.  11;  and  compare  Christ's  pre-
diction, ch.  X.  17,  18).  The  passage  in  the
Second  (Fourth)  Book  of  Esdras  i.  82,
which  is  strikingly  parallel  to  our  Lord's
denunciation,  may  possibly  be  a  Christian
Interpolation,  "I  sent  unto  you  my  ser-
vants the  prophets,  whom  ye  have  taken
and  slain,  and  torn  their  bodies  in  pieces,
whose  blood  I  will  require  of  your  hands,
saith  the  Lord."

Ver.  35. — That  upon  you  may  come  (iiras
l\eji).  This  phrase  does  not  express  a  simple
consequence,  neither  can  it  mean  "  in  such
a  way  that " — explanations  which  have  been
given  by  some  commentators  to  avoid  a
seeming  difficulty  in  the  linal  sense ;  but  it
is  to  be  translated,  as  usually,  in  order  that,
ut  veniat.  God,  foreseeing  the  issues  of
their  evil  heart,  puts  in  their  way  occasions
which  will  aid  his  vengeance  and  accelerate
tlie  time  of  their  punishment.  He  lets  them
work  out  their  own  destruction  by  com-
mitting an  unpardonable  sin.  He  does  not
force  them  into  this  course  of  conduct ;  they
can  resist  the  opportunity  if  they  will ;  but
he  knows  they  will  not  do  so,  and  the  visi-


OH.  Txm.  1— S9.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


408


tation  beoomei  judgment.  To  have  a  man'i
blood  upon  one's  head  is  to  be  held  gniltj
of  the  orime  of  murder,  and  to  be  liable  to
make  the  required  atonement  for  it.  So  in
their  blind  fury,  taking  the  punishment  on
themselves,  the  Jews  a  little  later  cried,
"His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children  I "
(ch.  zxyii.  25).  Bightaou  blood.  So  in  the
Old  Testament  we  often  find  such  expres-
sions as  "  innocent  blood  "  (2  King*  zxi.  16 ;
xxiv.  4 ;  Jer.  xxvi.  15) ;  "  blood  of  the  just "
(Lam.  iv.  13) ;  oomp.  Bev.  ri.  10  and  xviii.
24,  where  it  is  written  that  in  Babylon  "  was
found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and
of  all  them  that  were  slain  upon  the  earth."
Bighteons  Abel.  The  first  of  the  murdered,
the  prototype  of  the  death  of  Christ  and  of
all  good  men  who  hare  died  for  truth,
religion,  and  justice  (Gen.  iv.  8;  1  John
iii.  12).  The  catalogue  of  such  is  long  and
terrible.  Our  Lord  assigns  a  period  to  its
dimensions,  commencing  with  the  first  death
mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and  ending  with
the  murder  of  Zacharias  son  of  Barachias,
whom  ye  slew  between  the  temple  (raO
yaov,  Oie  tuTtctuary)  and  the  altar.  Our
Lord  is  speaking  of  a  past  event  well  known
to  his  hearers ;  but  who  this  Zacharias  was
is  much  disputed.  Origen  mentions  a
tradition,  otheiwise  entirely  uusupportod,
that  Zaohariah,  the  father  of  John  the
Baptist,  was  the  son  of  Barachiah,  and  was
murdered  in  the  temple.  But  the  stoTy
looks  as  if  it  was  made  to  relieve  the
difBculty  of  identification;  neither,  as  far
as  we  know,  was  he  a  prophet.  Zechariah,
the  minor  prophet,  was  the  son  of  Bere-
chiah;  but  we  read  nothing  of  his  being
slain  in  the  temple  or  elsewhere.  It  is  true
that  Josephus  ('Bell.  Jud.,'  iv.  5.  4)  tells
how  a  "  Zacharias,  son  of  Baruch,"  an
honourable  man,  was  slain  by  the  zealots
in  the  temple.  But  this  murder  took  place
A.D.  68,  and  our  Lord  oould  not  number  it
among  past  crimes,  or  epeak  of  it  as  an
event  familiar  to  those  who  heard  him.
The  only  other  prophet  of  this  name  in  the
Bible  is  one  mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xxiv.
20—22,  as  stoned  by  the  people  at  the  com-
mand of  Joash,  in  the  court  of  the  house  of
the  Lord.  "And  when  he  died,"  it  is
added,  "he  said.  The  Lord  look  upon  it,
and  require  it"  This  makes  his  case  cor-
respond to  that  of  Abel,  the  voice  of  whose
blood  cried  unto  God  from  the  ground.  He
is  also  the  last  prophet  whose  death  is
recorded  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  the
guilt  of  whose  murder,  the  Jews  say,  was
not  purged  till  the  temple  was  turned
under  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  seems  to  be  a
kind  of  proverbial  saying  which  the  Lord
here  uses,  equivalent  to  "from  the  first
murdered  saint  to  the  last,"  taking;  the
arrangement  of  the  Hebrew  canon  of  Scrip-


ture, and  regarding  the  Books  of  Chronicles
as  the  conclusion  of  Jewish  history.  This
(though  it  would  exclude  the  murder  of
other  prophets,  e.g.  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  etc.)
would  all  be  plain  enough  and  quite  appro-
priate to  the  context  were  it  not  that  the
Zechariah  thus  referred  to  was  the  son  of
Jehoiada,  not  of  Barachias,  But  there  are
two  solutions  of  this  difficulty  suggested;
and,  allowing  either  of  these,  we  may  con-
fidently assert  that  the  above-named  pro-
phet is  the  personage  intended.  (1)  The
words,  "  son  of  Barachias  "  may  be  an  early
interpolation,  introduced  by  a  copyist  who
was  thinking  of  the  minor  prophet.  They
are  omitted  by  the  first  corrector  of  the
Sinaitio  Manuscript,  are  not  found  in  the
parallel  passage  of  St.  Luke  (xl  SI),  and
Jerome  remarks  that  in  the  'Gospel  of  tlie
Kazarenes '  was  read  "  son  of  Joiada."  (2)
There  may  have  been  family  reasons,  un-
known to  us,  why  Zechariah  was  thus
designated  (see  the  commentators  on  our
Lord's  genealogy  in  St.  Luke  iii.,  especially
on  ver.  23,  "son  of  Heli,"  ver.  27,  "son  of
SalathieV'  and  ver.  36,  "  son  of  Cainan ").
Or  Jehoiada  may  have  had  two  names,  as
■o  many  Jews  had.  Indeed,  the  two  appel-
lations are  not  altogether  dissimilar  in
meaning,  Jehoiada  signifying  "Jehovah
knowetE,"  and  Barachiah,  "  Jehovah
blesseth."  Or  again,  Barachiah  may  have
been  the  father  of  Zechariah,  and  Jehoiada
the  more  famous  grandfather.  It  has  been
suggested  (by  Morisou,  in  loo.)  that  one  of
the  monuments  recently  erected  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem  wns  dedicated
to  Zacharias.  Such  a  one  still  bears  his
name.  Hence  Christ's  allusion  is  very
natural  after  his  statement  in  ver.  29.  The
scene  of  the  murder  was  the  open  space  in
the  priests'  court,  between  the  holy  place  and
the  great  altar  uf  sacrifice.  The  sanctity  of
this  spot  made  the  crime  abnormally  atro-
cious.

Ver.  36. — All  these  things.  All  the  crimes
committed  by  their  forefathers  shall  be  visited
upon  this  generation  by  the  destruetion  of
the  Jewish  city  and  polity,  which  took
place  within  forty  years  from  this  time.
The  blood  of  the  past  was  required  from  the
Jews  of  the  present  time,  because  they  afid
their  evil  ancestors  were  of  one  family,  and
were  to  be  dealt  with  as  a  whole.  In  spite
of  the  teaching  of  history  and  example,  in
spite  of  the  warnings  of  Christ  and  his
apostles,  they  were  bent  on  repeating  the
acts  of  their  forefathers,  and  that  in  an
aggravated  form  and  against  increased  light
and  knowledge.  The  punishment  here
announced  is  the  temporal  award.  Christ
here  says  nothing  of  the  final  judgment.

Ver.  37. — 0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem!  Pa-
thetic iteration  I      As  be   approached   the


104


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxm.  1— 89.


city  o>  another  oeoMioB  Ohriflt  hiA  used
the  Bame  wordi  (Lnk*  ziiL  SI,  85) ;  he  re-
peats them  now  u  he  tskoi  his  final  fare-
well. He  ipeaka  vrith  Dirine  tenderness,
yet  with  poignant  aorrow,  knowing  that  thla
last  appeal  will  be  in  Tain.  It  hai  been
remarked  that,  whereas  8t  Matthew  eli»-
where  names  the  capital  citjr,  the  theooratie
centre,  Hieroaolyma,  which  is  the  Greek
equiTalent,  ho  here  calls  it  Hierousalem,
wliioh  is  Hebrew,  as  though,  while  record-
ing the  words  used  by  Jesus,  he  desired  to
reproduce  the  actual  sound  of  the  Sariour's
affecting  address.  £iUest . . .  stonest.  Snoh
is  thy  wont,  thy  eril  practice.  So  Christ
says  elsewhere,  "It  cannot  be  that  a  prophet
perish  out  of  Jerusalem "  (Luke  ziii.  83).
"  Stonest "  was  particularly  appropriate  after
tho  reference  to  Zechariah  (2  Onron.  ixiy.
20).  lent  unto  thee.  The  recelTed  Greek  is,
lent  unto  it  or  hsr  (wphs  a&n;!'),  ihoagh  some
manuscripts  and  the  Vulgate  giTfl  "  thee."
But  the  oliange  of  persons  is  not  unoommoa.
Alford  quotes  Lidce  L  45;  xiil  84;  Hot.
xTiii.  24.  How  often  I  Borne  would  confine
Clirist's  allusion  to  his  own  mission  in
Judaa,  and  the  efforts  made  by  him  to  win
diseiples;  but  it  surely  applies  to  all  the
doings  andTisitations  of  God  towards  Israel
during  the  whole  course  of  their  history,
which  showed  his  gracious  desire  that  all
should  be  sared,  if  they  only  had  willed  with
li  im.  He  hereby  asserts  himself  as  one  with
the  God  ef  the  Old  Testament.  Christ's
ministry  in  Jerusalem  and  Judaa  is  men-
tioned by  St.  John.  Gathered  .  .  .  wings.
A  tender  similitude,  which  is  found  in  the
Old  Testament  and  In  classic  authors.  It
implies  lore,  care,  and  protection.  Thus
the  psalaiist  prays,  "Hide  me  under  the
shadow  of  thy  wings ; "  » la  the  shadow  of
tliy  wings  will  I  take  refuge,  until  these
calamities  be  oTerpast "  (Ps.  ivii.  8 ;  Irii.  1) ;
comp.  Dent,  ixxii.  11;  Isa.  xiit  5,  eto.
So  Euripides,  'Hero.  Fur.,'  72—
■'  The  children  whom  I  eherish  'neath  my

wings.
As  a    bud   cowering  o'er   her  youthful

brood."

The  metaphor  is  peculiarly  appropriate  at
the  time,  when,  as  Lange  puts  it,  the  Soman
eagles  were  hoTering  near,  and  there  was  no
hope  of  safety  but  under  the  Lord's  wings.
&nd  yo  wemd  not    Unmored  by  warning


and  ohastlsement,  impenetrable  to  long-
snfferlng  lore,  nngrateful  for  aieroies,  the
Jews  repulsed  all  efforts  for  their  amend-
ment, and  blindly  pursued  th*  course  of
ruin.  It  was  always  in  their  power  to  turn
if  they  willed,  but  they  wilfnlly  rMisted
grace,  and  must  suffer  aoeordingly  (eomp.
Isa.  xxz.  15).

Yer.  88.— Toar  horns*.  The  tempi*  or
Jerusalem,  no  longer  Ood'i  habitation.
This  betokens  not  only  Chrisf*  solemn
departure  from  the  sacred  precincts,  but  the
witlidrawal  of  God's  Spirit  from  the  Jewish
Church  and  nation.  TTnto  you.  Hencefor-
ward ye  shall  have  it  all  to  yourselves ;  my
Father  and  I  forsake  it ;  we  JTi^B  it  up
altogether  to  you.  Sesolat*.  The  word  U
omitted  by  some  few  uncials,  but  retained  by
K,  0,  D,  etc.,  most  cursives,  the  Vulgate,  etc.
The  protecting  wing  is  withdrawn,  the
Divine  presence  removed,  and  the  house  is
indeed  deserted  (tprinas);  (comp.  Fa.  lix.
85;  Jer.  lii.  7).

Ver.  89.— T*  shall  not  s«e  m*  kenoeforth.
Christ  explains  the  denunciation  just  given.
In  a  few  days  he  will  be  separated  from
them  by  death  and  burial ;  and,  though  he
appeared  to  certain  chosen  witnesses  aftef
his  resurrection,  he  was  seen  no  more  by  the
people  (Acts  x.  41);  their  house  was  de-
serted. Some  tak*  the  word  "  see  "  in  the
sense  of  know,  recognize ;  but  it  seems  rather
weak  to  say,  "  Te  shall  not  know  me  till  ye
acknowledge  me  m  Messiah,"  as  the  know-
ing and  acknowledging  are  practically
identical  or  simultaneous.  Till  ye  shall  say.
Blessed  Is  he  that  oometh  in  the  name  of  the
Lord!  The  words  which  had  greeted  hi*
triumphal  entry  a  few  days  before  (ch.  xxL
9).  The  clause,  "  till  ye  shall  say,"  does  not
shut  the  door  of  hope  for  ever;  it  looks
forward  to  a  happier  prospect.  Th*  time
intended  is  that  when  Israel  shall  repent
of  its  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  and  in
bitter  contrition  look  on  him  whom  it
pierced,  owning  and  receiving  Jesus  with
glad  "Hosaunahal"  Then  shall  they  behold
him  coming  in  power  and  glory,  and  shall
regain  their  old  position  as  beloved  of  God
(see  Hos.  iii.  4,  S ;  Zeoh.  zil.  10>  Then
"all  Israel  shall  be  saved"  (Bom.  xi.  26).
Thus  this  terrible  chapter,  so  dark  and
menacing,  closes  with  a  glow  of  hope  and
a  promise,  indefluit*  but  certain,  of  final
restoration.


H0MILBTI08.

Vers.  1—12. — 77m  icHbm  and  Phariteet.  I.  Thxu  OBiJUcnvB.  1.  Jlmr  fosition.
"  They  idt  In  Moses'  seat."  The  icribes  were  the  recognized  teachers  of  the  Law.  The
Pharisee*  exercised  the  greatest  Influence  in  the  coanefi  and  among  the  nanon  at
large.    Moses  sat  to  Judge  the  people  (Exod.  xviii.  13) ;  now  the  scribe*  taught  and


OH.  xxm.  1— 89.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  405

expounded  the  Law.  Therefora  the  Lord  enjoined  obedience  to  their  precepts.  But
we  must  mark  the  word  « therefore"  They  were  to  be  obeyed  because  they  sat  in
Mosei'  aeat — as  the  successors,  ia  some  tense,  to  hU  authority,  as  the  expounders  ol
hi*  Law.  Bo  far  they  were  to  be  obeyed;  but  not,  the  Lord  himself  elsewhere
cautions  us,  In  their  misinterpretations,  in  their  oontrirances  for  eysding  the  plain
meaning  of  the  Law,  in  their.many  quibbles  and  their  endless  diatinctiona.  We  see
here  that  the  Lord  bids  us  obey  constituted  authorities  in  all  things  lawfuL  Those
who  are  set  orer  us  may  not  idways  be  orthodox  in  their  opinions ;  their  characters
may  not  always  command  our  respect ;  but  the  rery  fact  that  they  are  set  OTer  us
makes  it  our  duty  to  treat  them  with  respect  and  to  obey  their  directions,  whenever
such  obedience  is  not  inconsistent  with  our  duty  to  God.  Submission  to  oar  superiors,
aron  if  they  are  imworthy  of  their  position,  is  an  exercise  of  humility,  and  agreeable
to  the  will  of  God ;  for  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  Ckid :  whosoerer  there-
fore resisted  the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God."  We  observe  that  the  Lord
does  not  here  condemn  the  priests.  They  do  not  seem,  as  a  hody,  to  Iiare  taken  a
prominent  place  in  the  opposition  to  his  teaching.  The  chief  priests,  who  were
Sadducees,  did  so.  But  we  are  told,  early  in  the  history  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles^
that  "  a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient  to  the  faith."  "  The  priests'  lips
should  keep  knowledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  Law  at  his  mouth."  But  in  our
Lord's  time  a  separation  had  been  made  between  the  da  ties  of  the  teacher  and  the
priest.  The  scribes  taught  the  people ;  the  priests  ministered  in  the  temple.  The
scribes,  puffed  up  with  their  minute  knowledge  of  the  letter  of  the  Law,  were  intensely
antagonktie  to  the  holy  Teacher  who  brought  out  its  spiritual  meaning.  The  priests,
excepting  always  their  Sadducean  leaders,  do  not  seem  to  bare  been  so  hostile.  They
were  occupied  with  their  temple  ministrations ;  they  were,  as  a  body,  net  recognized
as  public  teachers,  and  were  probably  not  so  influential  as  the  scribes,  not  brought  so
prominently  before  the  eyes  of  the  people.  The  Lord  came  to  fulfil  the  Law.  He
attended  the  great  festivals;  he  bade  the  leper  whom  he  healed  to  show  himself  to  the
priest,  and  offer  the  gift  which  Moses  commanded.  He  did  not  interfere  with  the
ministrations  of  the  priests,  nor  does  he  here  censure  their  life  and  conduct.  The  chief
priests  were  hostile  to  him,  probably  because  he  exercised  authority  in  the  temple
which  they  regarded  as  their  own  domain,  and  diminished  thdr  revenues  by  expelling
the  traffickers  from  the  sacred  precincts.  The  scribes  opposed  the  Lord,  so  md  the
chief  priests ;  in  both  cases  from  selfish  motives.  Let  us  beware  of  selfishness,  and
fight  against  it.  It  poisons  the  very  life  of  the  soul;  it  sets  men  against  the  Lord;
it  leads  them  to  say  in  their  hearts,  "  Not  thy  will,  but  mine  be  done."  2.  Thtvr
conduct,  (1)  "  They  say,  and  do  not,"  the  Lord  said.  They  made  the  Law  a  heavy
burden,  a  yoke  which  men  were  not  able  to  bear,  by  their  practice  of  "making  a  fence
round  the  Law."  Such  were  their  rigid  and  wearisome  regulations  about  the
observance  of  the  sabbath,  and  the  minute  rules  concerning  the  washing  of  vessels
mentioned  by  St.  Mark  (vii.  4).  But  they  themselves  would  not  help  to  move
that  burden  with  one  of  their  fingers.  The  teacher  who  lives  a  holy,  self-denying  life
helps  men  by  his  example  to  bear  the  burden  which  he  lays  upon  them.  His  conduct
proves  the  reality  of  his  convictions ;  it  shows  the  strength  of  the  motives  which  he
enforces,  the  power  of  that  grace  which  he  preaches.  Preaching,  without  practice,  as
in  the  case  of  the  scribes,  has  little  sanctifying  influence,  cannot  much  help  meu  to
deny  themselves  and  lead  a  godly  life. .  A  life  of  real  self-demal  is  the  most  con-
vincing  sermon.  (2)  All  their  works  they  did  "  for  to  be  seen  of  men."  They  did  not
care  for  that  inward  purity  of  heart  which  does  not  win  human  praise.  They  strove-
to  eatch  the  eyes  of  men  by  the  outward  show  of  devotion.  They  delighted  in
phylacteries  larger  than  usual,  in  borders  and  fi-inges  more  conspicuous  than  those
commonly  worn.  There  was  no  harm  in  wearing  the  phylactery  or  the  fringe ;  the
one  was  certainly  ordered  by  the  Law,  probably  aJso  the  other.  The  harm  lay  in  the
desire  to  attract  attention,  in  the  craving  for  display,  in  the  tendency  to  exalt  these
outward  things  above  inner  spiritual  religion.  (3)  They  coveted  pre-eminence ;  they
eagerly  desired  the  chief  places  at  feast  or  at  synagogue ;  they  liked  to  hear  themselves
called  "  Babbi,  Babbi."  Their  religion  was  outside  show ;  they  had  no  real  love  for
God,  no  desire  for  spiritual  holiness.
IL  Tu  ooxTSAjiT.    1.  The  ditoiplei  of  Christ  must  net  setk  for  titl«$  nf  hwaawr.


40«  THE  OOSFEL  AOOOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  zzm.  l^-Sft

"Be  not  ye  called  BabU,"  the  Lord  said.  There  Is  one  Temcher,  one  Fsther,  on*
Master.  The  Lord's  people  muit  not  seek  for  distinctions,  for  preeminence ;  they
are  all  brethren.  We  are  not  to  take  the  words  literally.  To  do  so  would  be  to
follow  the  Pharisees.  They  were  slaves  of  the  letter ;  the  Lord's  lessons  are  spirltuaL
St.  Peter  speaks  of  Mark  as  his  son ;  bo  does  St.  Paul  of  Timothy  and  Titns ;  h«
describes  himself  as  the  spiritual  father  of  his  Corinthian  converts  (1  Cor.  It.  16).
St.  John  addresses  some  to  whom  he  writes  as  "  fathers "  (1  John  iL  13),  In  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (xiii.  7, 17)  we  are  bidden  to  obey  them  that  hare  the  rule
over  us,  where  the  Greek  verb  is  that  from  which  the  word  rendered  "  master "  in
ver.  10  is  derired.  But  Christian  men  are  not  to  seek  after  these  and  suoh-liks  titles ;
they  are  not  to  set  store  by  them.  If  they  oome  to  us  in  the  course  of  Gh>d's  prori-
dence,  we  may  accept  them.  To  reject  them  might  be  no  true  humility,  but  only
the  affectation  of  it.  The  difficult  lesson  is  to  be  hamble  in  heart,  in  lowliness  of
mind  to  esteem  others  better  than  ourselyes.  2,  They  miut  be  truly  humble.  The
greatest,  the  most  adyanced  Christians,  will  readily  consent  to  be  last  of  all  and  serrants
of  all ;  for  every  advance  in  holiness  brings  us  nearer  to  him  who  took  upon  him  the
form  of  a  serrant,  and  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister.  It  Is  a  first
principle  in  Christ's  reli^on  that  "  whosoerer  shall  exalt  himself  shall  be  abased,  and
be  that  shall  humble  himself  shall  be  exalted."  The  Lord  uses  these  words  again  and
again  (Luke  xir.  11 ;  xriiL  14).  His  apostles  echo  them  (Jas.  ir.  6 ;  1  Pet.  t.  6).
The  Lord  Jesus  had  taught  the  blessedness  of  humility  in  the  first  of  the  Beatitudes.
He  illustrated  his  lesson  m  his  own  holy  character,  in  the  meekness  and  lowliness  of
his  life.  But  the  lesson  Is  yery  high  and  difficult,  hard  for  human  nature  to  learn.
Therefore  it  is  enforced  constantly  in  Holy  Scriptiue,  that  this  frequent  repetition  may
help  us  to  feel  Its  deep  importance,  and  nrge  us  to  cultivate  that  precious  grace  of
lowliness  without  which  we  can  make  no  real  progress  in  the  narrow  way  that  leadeth
onto  life.  The  Pharisees  exalted  themselves.  They  loved  sounding  titles,  high  place,
the  praise  of  men.  The  Christian  must  learn  of  Christ  to  abase  himself.  Self-exalta-
tion leads  to  spiritual  ruin ;  for  "  Ood  resisteth  the  proud."
LxBSONB.    1.  Obey  in  all  things  lawful  those  who  are  set  over  you,  not  only  the

food  and  gentle,  but  also  the  froward.     2.  Better  to  do  and  say  not,  than,  like  the
'harisees,  to  say  and  do  not.    8.  Flee  from  the  love  of  display ;  it  poisons  the  life  of
the  soul.    4.  Ftay  earnestly  for  constant  growth  in  homility.

Vers.  13 — 31. — Condemnation  of  their  hypocrisy.  The  bioht  woes.  1,  ThtfirtL
The  reiterated  "  Woe  unto  you ! "  is  an  expression  of  holy  indignation.  Christ,  the
righteous  Judge,  denounces  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees.  He  knew  the  hardness,
the  impenitence  of  their  hearts,  and  in  his  awful  justice  he  pronounces  their  condemna-
tion. Yet  those  very  woes  are  also  utterances  of  holy  sorrow.  The  word  is  thrice
rendered  "  alas  I "  in  Bev.  xviii.  (see  also  ch.  xxiv.  19).  The  Lord  grieves  over  the
sinners  (see  ver.  37)  while  he  condemns  them.  The  woe  must  oome  upon  the  impeni-
tent; the  Lord  knew  it  in  his  Divine  foreknowledge;  he  foretells  it  now.  His  words
are  stem,  very  terrible ;  but  it  is  the  sternness  of  boly  love.  He  cared  for  the  souls  of
those  scribes  and  Pharisees ;  he  had  wept  over  them  as  he  drew  near  to  the  city  two
days  before;  he  closes  this  awful  denunciation  of  the  Divine  wrath  with  the  most
touching  outburst  of  grief.  He  spoke  in  tones  ef  warning,  if  so  be  that  even  now
these  hard-hearted  men  might  learn  to  know  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  might  repent
and  be  saved.  "  Woe  nnto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  t "  The  awful  words
come  again  and  again,  like  the  refrain  of  a  dirge  of  intense  sadness.  It  was  this  hypo-
crisy that  was  killing  their  souls.  GkNl  requireth  truth  in  the  inward  parts;  he
eearcheth  the  hearts;  he  knoweth  all  things;  he  is  the  God  of  truth;  he  hateth  false-
hood. These  men  were  acting  a  part ;  their  whole  life  was  a  He ;  they  cared  only  for
the  appearance  of  piety ;  they  had  no  wish  to  be  really  holy.  They  said  their  prayers ;
they  did  not  wish  to  have  the  things  for  which  they  prayed ;  they  did  not  even  try  to
live  as  they  prayed.  They  read  their  Bibles ;  they  pretended  to  honour  them  and  to
believe  in  them ;  they  had  no  real  faith  ;  they  made  no  attempt  at  all  to  regulate  their
lives  according  to  God's  Holy  Word.  Nothing  is  mors  hateful  In  Ohxi's  sight  than
hypocrisy;  It  is  unbelief;  the  hypocrite  does  not  really  believe  in  God's  omniscience,
that  he  readeth  the  hearts  of  men.    Hypocrisy  is  an  acted  lie,  tad  U  is  tha  devil  who


m.XBJLl-i^.']    THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  407

ii  th*  father  of  lief.  God  loreth  truth.  These  hjpocrites,  the  Lord  laid,  shut  up  the
kingdom  of  hearen  against  men.  The  kingdom  of  hearen  was  the  Christian  Church
which  the  Lord  had  come  to  estahltsh  upon  earth.  There  were  multitudes  willing  to
listen  to  the  gospel  of  th«  kingdom,  ready  to  enter  in.  But  the  Pharisees  closed  the
way ;  they  brought  »11  .their  great  influence  to  bear  upon  the  work  of  obstruction.
They  wotUd  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  themselves ;  they  were  Uke  the  guests  first
bidden  in  the  parable  of  the  marriage  supper.  And  they  hindered  them  that  were
•ntering  in,  who  were  on  the  point  of  becoming  Christ's  disciples.  When  the  people
were  amued  at  his  mighty  works,  and  said, "  Is  not  this  the  Son  of  David  ?  "  the  Phari-
sees interfered  with  their  envious  and  malicious  suggestions,  and  dared  to  attribute  the
miracles  of  the  blessed  Saviour  to  the  agency  of  Satan.  They  agreed  that  if  any  man
did  confess  that  he  was  the  Christ,  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue.  So  they
shut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men.  They  set  themselves  in  direct  opposition
to  the  gracious  will  of  God,  to  the  Saviour's  work  of  love,  opposing  him  now,  as  after-
wards they  opposed  his  apostles — "forbidding  us,"  says  St.  Paul  (1  Thess.  ii  16),
"to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  might  be  saved,  to  fill  up  their  sins  alway :  for
the  wrath  ii  come  upon  them  to  the  uttermost."  Upon  those  who  fight  against
God,  who  hinder  the  work  of  his  servants,  who  try  to  check  the  progress  of  the
gospel,  the  woe  must  come,  the  heavy  wrath  of  God  must  surely  fall  upon  them.
2.  The  lecond  woe.  Ver.  14  has  apparently  been  inserted  here  from  Mark  xii.  40  and
Luke  zx.  47,  where  it  is  certainly  genuine.  The  scribes  were  like  those  false  teachers
described  by  St.  Paul  in  2  Tim.  iii,  6.  They  made  a  profit  of  their  reputation  for
knowledge  and  sanctity,  imposing  upon  weak  women.  They  were  not  what  the
Lord  bade  his  apostles  to  be,  fishers  of  men's  souls,  but  tliey  fished  for  their  money.
They  made  long  prayers,  but  their  prayers  were  mere  acting;  they  were  addressed  in
reality  not  to  God,  but  to  men,  to  those  widows  and  others  whose  favour  they  sought
for  filthy  lucre's  sake.  Therefore,  the  Lord  said,  they  should  receive  greater  con-
demnation. They  were  not  only  hypocrites;  they  were  covetous,  dishonest.  The
condemnation  of  the  hypocrite  would  fall  upon  them,  and  the  condemnation  of  the
thief.  The  aftectation  of  piety  for  the  sake  of  selfish  gain  is  awful  guilt  in  the  sight  of
the  all-holy  Lord.  We  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,
but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  That  tremendous  ransom  ought  to  give  depth,
reality,  loal,  to  our  religion.  It  is  grievous  sin  to  substitute  earthly  motives  for  that
one  oiiy  Christian  motive,  grateful  love  for  our  Redeemer.  3.  The  third  woe.  The
Pharisees  w«re  not  without  tea\ ;  they  had  zeal  enouch ;  they  were  fanatics ;  they
would  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  a  single  proselyte.  But  their  zeal  was  party
seal.  Party  .spirit  had  taken  the  place  of  religion  in  their  hearts ;  they  would  work
hard  for  their  party ;  they  would  not  deny  themselves  to  please  God.  Their  missionary
zeal,  such  as  it  was,  brought  no  glory  to  Almighty  God,  saved  no  souls.  The
proselyte,  once  made,  became  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  his  teachers,  more
bigoted,  more  devoted  to  party,  narrower  and  more  exclusive,  prouder  of  the  privileges  of
Judaism  than  even  those  who  had  been  bom  Jews.  They  should  have  been  chililren
of  the  kingdom ;  alas  !  they  were  children  of  hell ;  for  there  is  no  place  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven  tor  hypocrites,  but  only  for  the  true  worshippers,  who  wor.ship  God  in  spirit
and  in  truth.  The  devil  is  the  father  of  lies  ;  those  whose  worship  is  a  lie  must  have
their  place  with  him.  4.  The  fourth  woe.  They  were  blind  guides,  fools  and  blind.
They  professed  to  be  teachers ;  they  despised  the  untaught.  "  This  people,"  they  said,
"  who  knoweth  not  the  Law  are  cursed  "  (John  vii.  49).  But  they  were  ignorant  them-
selves ;  they  did  not  understand  the  very  ritual  which  they  prized  so  highly.  Their
teaching  was  full  of  puerile  and  false  distinctions.  An  oath  by  the  temple,  they  said,
was  not  binding,  neither  an  oath  by  the  altar ;  but  he  was  a  debtor  who  swore  by  the
gold  of  the  temple  or  by  the  gift  that  lay  upon  the  altar.  They  who  taught  such
untruth,  such  folly,  were  fools  and  blind  indeed.  They  did  not  understand  the  order  of
consecration ;  the  gold  was  sacred  only  because  it  belonged  to  the  temple,  which  was
the  house  of  God ;  the  gift  was  sacred  only  because  it  was  offered  upon  the  altar,  which
was  the  table  of  the  Lord.  The  gold  derived  its  sacredness  from  the  temple,  the  gift
from  the  altar.  The  Lord  recognizes  the  reverence  which  is  due  to  consecrated  things
and  places.  We  may  find  Gwi  everywhere ;  we  may  worship  him  everywhere,  not
only  at  Jerusalem  or  on  Mount  Gerizim;    but  in  the  present  limitations  and   eon-


408         THB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xnn.  1—89

iitions  of  our  human  nature  it  ii  neoouary  for  u«  that  Bpecial  plaou  ihould  b*  dedi-
cated to  hia  service,  and  associated  in  our  thought*  with  his  preeenc*  and  his  worship
The  sacredness  of  things  or  places  U  derived  entirely  from  that  association  with  God'i
presence  and  service.  Then  to  swear  by  them— by  the  altar,  or  by  the  tempi*,  or  hj
heaven  his  dwelling-place,  is  to  swear  by  him  whose  presence  alone  ^veth  consecra-
tion even  to  the  heaveDa.  Every  oath  is  in  reality  an  appeal  to  God ;  the  omiadon  of
his  name  does  not  avoid  the  awt'ulness  of  reference  to  him.  Then  the  Lord's  disciples
may  not  swear,  eave  under  those  solemn  circumstances  when  an  oath  is  required  by
the  magistrate  and  sanctioned  by  Holy  Scripture.  No  evasions,  no  pitiful  distinctions,
like  those  of  the  scribes,  no  substitution  of  less  sacred  words,  can  make  the  ordinary
use  of  oaths  lawful,  or  even  harmless.  6.  The  fifth  woe.  Their  religion  consisted  ia
small  outward  observances ;  it  had  no  inner  truth ;  they  affected  s  scrupulous  eonscien-
tiouBuess  in  things  infinitely  little,  while  they  omitted  the  weightier  mattera  of  the
Law.  Scrupulous  exactness  in  the  payment  of  tithes  and  in  Levitical  purification*  were
the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  Pharisaic  fraternity.  It  was  well  enough  to
pay  the  insignificant  tithe  on  common  garden  herbs ;  but  ostentations  carefulness  about
this  and  such-like  trifles,  combined  with  carelessness  about  the  great  inner  realities  of
personal  religion,  showed  the  hollow  hypocrisy  of  their  Uvea.  They  would  strain  out
the  gnat,  the  small  ritual  offence,  and  swallow  the  camel,  the  huge  uncleahness  of  soul-
defiling  sin.  Judgment,  mercy,  and  faith  were  the  weightier  mattera  of  the  Law,
unspeakably  more  itnportant  than  the  details  of  outward  ordinances.  To  do  justly,  and
to  leid  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  God,  were,  the  prophets  said,  better  than
thousands  of  burnt  offerings.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  enforces  the  teaching  of  the  Law
and  of  the  prophets.  Obedience  in  small  things  is  right ;  obedience  in  great  things  is
necessary  for  salvation.  The  exactest  ritual  and  the  strictest  orthodoxy  are  of  no
value  without  justice  and  mercy  and  faith.  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful :  for  they  shall
obtain  mercy."  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ."  This  is  the  precious  fruit— the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  without  this,  the
husk,  the  rind,  are  worthless.  6.  The  iixth  wee.  The  Pharisees  were  especially
scrupulous  in  avoiding  all  occasion  of  Levitical  defilement ;  they  heeded  not  the
uncleanness  of  their  hearts.  It  profits  little  to  cleanse  the  outside  of  a  cup  or  platter,  if
the  inside  is  filthy  and  pollutes  the  food.  A  fair  outside  may  hide  the  evil  heart  from
the  sight  of  men,  but  the  eye  of  God  sees  through ;  to  that  all-seeing  eye  the  wicked
soul  lies  open  in  awful  clearness.  The  Pharisees  were  blindi  Be  our  prayer,  "  Lord,
that  I  may  receive  my  sight."  We  want  to  see  the  condition  of  our  souls,  to  know
the  whole  truth,  the  whole  sad  wretched  trutli.  Then  we  shall  begin  with  that  which
most  needs  cleansing — the  inside,  the  inner  life  of  thought  and  feeling  and  motive.  God
desireth  truth  there.  "  Purge  me  with  'hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean :  wash  me,  and  I
shall  be  whiter  than  snow."  If  that  is  clean,  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,
the  outward  life  will  bo  clean  also.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart."  But  the  outward
show  of  purity  without  the  inner  truth  is  vain,  worthless,  contemptible.  7.  The  leventh
woe.  They  were  like  the  sepulchres  around  Jerusalem,  which,  according  to  Jewish
custom,  had  been  whitened  a  month  ago,  and  still  looked  bright  and  clean  in  the  sun-
light; within  they  were  full  of  all  uncleanness;  their  very  whiteness  was  a  warning,
that  men  might  avoid  defilement.  So  was  it  with  the  Pharisees ;  they  made  a  great
show  of  religion  ;  but  that  outward  show,  like  the  whiteness  of  the  sepulchres,  spoke
of  inward  corruption.  The  true  man  is  humble  in  heart ;  he  knows  his  own  short-
comings ;  he  makes  no  display  of  religion ;  he  walks  humbly  with  his  God,  Much
talk,  much  show,  is  an  evil  sign ;  it  is  often  an  index  of  an  undean,  unconverted  heart.
8.  The  eighth  woe.  TheybuUt  and  garnished  the  tombs  of  the  prophets  and  the  righteous.
The  Lord  may  possibly  have  pointed  to  some  of  the  conspicuous  sepulchres  Which  lay
before  him  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  They  condemned  their  fathers  crimes ;  but  they
owned  that  they  were  the  children  of  them  which  killed  the  prophets.  And,  the  Lord
said,  they  were  like  their  fathers,  they  had  inherited  their  fathers'  spirit.  They  would
have  slain  the  prophets,  had  they  lived  in  their  time,  as  now  they  were  about  to  slay
the  Christ  of  God.  They  honoured  the  prophets  in  the  distance;  they  would  have
hated  them  in  the  present.  Stier  quotes  a  striking  passage  from  the  Berlenberger
Bibel :  "  Ask  in  Moses'  times, '  Who  are  the  good  people  ? '  They  will  be  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob ;  but  not  Moses, — he  should  be  stoned.    Ask  in  Samuel's  times, '  Who


OH.  xxin.  1— 89.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINO  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.         409

are  the  good  people?'  They  will  be  Motes  and  Jodiaa,  bat  not  Samuel.  Aik  In  the
time*  of  Cbrist,  and  they  will  be  all  the  former  propheti  with  Samuel,  but  not  Christ
and  Ml  apoitlea."  May  the  Lord  lare  lu  from  this  ipirlt  of  unworthy  jealousy,  and
teaeh  us  to  honour  goodness,  not  only  in  the  remote  distance,  which  is  easy,  but  in
immediate  proximity  to  us,  which  is  sometimes,  alaa  for  our  miserable  selfishness  I
very  hard  indeed.    "  Charity  enTieth  not : "  follow  after  charity.

LissONB.  1.  Christ  is  an  awful  Judge,  as  well  as  a  most  loring  Saviour.  Take  we
heed  unto  ourselves.  2.  His  wrath  must  fall  on  those  who  oppose  his  blessed  work.
Let  us  help  it  with  all  our  might,  8.  Christ  hates  hypocrisy.  Seek  above  all  things  to
be  rcaL  4.  Party  spirit  is  a  poor  substitute  for  true  religion.  Seek  to  save  souls.
6.  Is  your  outward  life  blameless  ?  It  is  well.  But  it  is  a  small  thing  in  comparison
with  Uie  infinite  preciousness  of  purity  of  heart.

Vers.  82 — 39. — Prophecy  of  their  fuiture.  L  Tmcn  ooirmruixoi  m  thb  bihs  of
THXn  FATH«B8.  1.  Prediction  of  their  treatTnmt  of  Chri»f»  diteiplet.  They  would
fill  up  the  measure  of  their  fathers ;  the  Lord  knew  it  in  his  Divine  foreknowledge.
They  were  still  what  John  the  Baptist  had  once  called  tbem— serpents,  "  a  generation
of  vipers."  How  were  such  as  they  to  escape  from  the  condemnation  of  Gehenna?
For  hypocrisy  hardens  the  heart.  The  state  of  the  hypocrite  is  hopeless,  perhaps,
beyond  that  of  most  other  sinners;  self-satisfied  as  he  is,  he  will  not  repent  and
come  to  Christ.  "Wherefore,"  the  Lord  said,  "I  send  unto  you  prophets."  Mark
the  majestic  "I  send;"  it  asserts  his  authority,  his  equality  in  the  truth  of  his
Divine  nature  with  God  the  Father.  Mark  the  solemn  "  wherefore ; "  it  contains  a
depth  of  inscrutable  meaning — ^meaning  full  of  mercy  on  the  one  side,  full  of  awful
mystery  on  the  other.  He  would  send  his  messengers  unto  them.  Then  even  now
he  cared  for  their  souls,  even  now  he  sought  to  save  them.  But  he  knew  in  his  Divine
omniscience  how  they  would  treat  his  servants ;  they  would  persecute  them,  and
scourge  them  in  their  synagogues;  some  they  would  kill  and  crucify.  The  mission
of  the  apostles  would  increase  the  guilt  of  the  Jews;  the  good  tidings  of  salvation
would  be  to  them,  not  life,  but  death.  The  Divine  foreknowledge  it  not  inconsistent
with  human  free-wilL  The  Pharisees  had  the  power  to  choose  or  to  reject  the  Saviour.
He  would  not  have  mocked  them  with  the  offer  of  an  unattainable  salvation,  an
inaccessible  heaven.  Yet  he  knew  that  they  would  reject  him,  for  he  was  God,  infinite
in  knowledge  as  in  all  other  Divine  attributes.  That  knowledge  did  not  destroy  their
free  agency ;  it  did  not  remove  their  guilt.  Here  is  one  of  those  deep  mysteries  which
human  thought  cannot  penetrate ;  hereafter  it  shall  be  revealed.  2.  I%t  eonaegtunce
to  themteivts.  On  them  would  come  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  earth.  It
must  be  BO ;  for  they  had  inherited  the  guilt  of  their  ancestors,  and  that  accumulated
inheritance  of  evil  had  hardened  their  hearts  into  very  stone.  It  must  be  so ;  for  it
was  in  the  course  of  God's  awful  justice.  As  he  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh,  who
first  hardened  hit  own  heart;  so  now  he  sent  his  messengers  to  the  hardened  Pharisees,
that  upon  them  might  come  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  earth.  It  is  the
ordinance  of  Gk)d,  the  law  of  that  human  nature  which  is  his  work,  that  wilful  sin
wilfully  persevered  in  should  lead  on  to  guilt  deeper  yet.  It  would  be  so  in  the  case
of  these  hard-hearted  Jews.  Their  obstinate  unbelief  would  soon  lead  to  a  crime
greater  than  any  which  the  world,  wicked  as  it  was,  had  seen  from  the  very  beginning.
That  awful  crime  would  fill  up  the  measure  of  the  long  catalogue  of  deeds  of  blood.
It  would  all  fall  upon  that  generation,  from  the  first  murder  that  ever  was  to  the  last
recorded  in  the  Hebrew  canon ;  for  all  the  accumulated  blood-guiltiness  of  mankind
would  be  summed  up  in  the  tremendous  guilt  of  those  who  were  so  toon  about  to  cry,
" His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children!"  "Verily  I  say  unto  you.  All  these  thingt
must  come  upon  this  generation."  We  feel  it  must  be  to.  We  hear  the  dread  sentence,
and  we  bow  in  silent  awe  before  the  judgment  of  God.  And  yet  we  know  and  feel
that  Christ  cared  even  for  those  hard-hearted  sinners,  and  would  have  saved  them  in
his  tender  pity.    But,  alas  I  they  would  not  come  to  him,  that  they  might  have  life.

II.  Th«  lament  ovbb  Jbeubalim.  1.  The  Lerft  love.  The  stern  language  of
most  awful  condemnation  changes.  We  hear  the  tenderest  accents  of  Divine  pity,  the
gad  wailing  of  disappointed  love.  The  Lord  had  wept  over  Jerusalem.  Now  again
his  sacred  heart  yearns  vrith  mighty  oompassion  for  the  city  which  he  loved  to  well.


410  THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHKW,    [m.  ma.  1—89.

He  sorrows  oyer  the  whole  city,  not  only  for  the  serihes  and  PharlscM  whose  hypocrisy
he  had  denounced ;  his  glance  takes  in  the  whole  population,  the  poor  and  ignorant
as  well  as  the  rich  and  learned ;  the  deceived  as  well  as  the  deceirers.  His  glance
takes  in  all  times,  not  only  the  present  rejection  of  his  grace,  the  awful  guilt  that  was
close  at  hand ;  but  also  their  past  offences,  their  past  refusals  of  his  offered  mercies.
Again  and  again  he  had  wishra  to  gather  them  together  into  his  little  flock,  into  hit
holy  Ohurch;  again  and  again  during  his  ministry  npon  earth,  again  and  again
before  his  incarnation,  when  he  sent  his  warnings  from  heaven,  he  would  have
gathered  them  together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings.  A
most  touching  simile,  expressive  of  yearning  affection,  of  tender  solicitude,  expressive
too  of  the  Lord's  power  and  knowledge,  wide-reaching  in  its  range,  all-embracing  in
its  individual  tenderness.  Jerusalem,  with  its  great  population,  was  as  a  brood  of
chickens  in  his  sight ;  he  knew  all,  he  cared  for  all ;  he  would  have  sheltered  all  under
his  wings.  But  alas  I  they  would  not.  He  wished  to  gather  them  together;  they  did
not  wish  to  be  gathered  under  the  shelter  of  the  Saviour's  love.  The  Lord  clearly
asserts  the  great  mystery  of  man's  free-will.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved;
but  he  doth  not  force  the  will  of  man.  He  would  draw  us  to  himself  by  the  con-
■training  attraction  of  love.  He  does  not  use  his  almighty  power  to  compel  our
obedience.  Enforced  obedience  is  without  value ;  enforced  love  U  not  love  j  the  very
phrase  is  a  contradiction  in  terms,  for  love  is  essentially  free  and  spontaneous.  He
calls  us,  he  invites  us ;  he  warns,  he  threatens,  he  chastens ;  he  manifests  his  love,
that  the  sight  of  that  great  love  may  kindle  the  flame  of  love  in  our  unloving  hearts;
he  came  down  from  heaven  lor  us  men  and  for  our  salvation ;  he,  the  eternal  Son  of
God,  became  a  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  gi'ief ;  he  gave  himself  to  die  in
the  mysterious  depth  of  his  exceeding  great  love;  he  declares  his  love  by  the
unanswerable  eloquence  of  the  cross.  But  he  leaves  us  free.  Man  was  made  in  the
image  of  God.  The  human  will  is  a  sacred  thing ;  it  must  not  be  forced,  or  moral
distinctions  are  lost,  and  love  is  annihilated  and  holiness  is  impossible.  We  know  it
is  so,  though  we  cannot  solve  the  perplexing  mystery.  Let  us  try  to  yield  up  our
will  to  him ;  to  pray  the  deep  holy  prayer  which  he  prayed  in  his  agony,  "  Father,  not
my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  2.  The  consequence  of  the  rejection  o/  Afs  lov«.  "  Your
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."  The  Lord  is  about  to  depart  from  the  temple.  It  is
no  longer  what  it  had  been — the  house  of  God.  He  calls  It  "your  hous*.  It  had
been  long  without  the  ark,  without  the  Shechinah;  now  it  would  be  without  the
presence  of  Christ,  without  the  favour  of  God.  It  was  left  desolate — left  to  them ;  for
Gk)d  was  leaving  the  temple,  the  city,  the  nation.  Tacitus  and  Josephus  tell  us  that,
before  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  the  awful  voice  of  departing  Deity  was  heard,  "  Let  us
depart  hence."  Christ  was  leaving  the  temple  now.  "  Te  shall  not  see  me  henceforth,"
be  said, "  till  ye  shall  say,  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  They
would  see  him,  indeed,  once  again  in  his  sufferings  on  the  cross.  They  would  see,  and
yet  not  see,  for  their  eyes  were  holden.  Yet  these  last  words  were  words  of  mercy
and  hope.  He  looked  on  through  the  ages,  through  the  long  period  of  Israel's
unbelief  and  banishment,  to  the  great  restoration  that  is  to  come,  when  they  shall  look
on  him  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  mourn  for  him ;  "  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  "
(Rom.  xi.  26).

Lessons.  1.  As  a  man  lives,  so,  as  a  rule,  he  will  die.  "  Remember  thy  Creator
in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  2.  Sin  leads  on  to  sin,  guilt  to  yet  deeper  guilt.  Take
heed  betimes.  3.  The  Lord  weeps  over  the  hard-hearted.  "  There  is  joy  in  heaven
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  May  he  soften  our  hearts  and  give  us  true  repentance  I

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Ver.  4. — Needless  hwdeni.  The  faults  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  not  confined
to  their  own  private  lives.  Not  only  were  they  formal  and  unreal  themselves,  and
blameworthy  on  that  account ;  they  were  harsh  and  tyrannical  in  their  treatment  of
the  people.  They  showed  their  sanctity  in  constructing  an  artificial  standard  of  holi-
ness for  other  persons  to  follow.  This  is  a  not  uncommon  fault  of  professional  religionists,
and  it  leads  to  the  imposition  of  needless  burdeni  of  many  forma.


OH.  xxin.  1— 89.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  411

I.  Trb  obiatiok  of  heedlxbb  bubdekb.  1.  Their  eharacttr.  These  burdens  are
of  various  kinds.  (1)  Vexatious  obserrances.  Bites  of  religion  have  been  multiplied
and  elaborated,  until,  ceasing  to  serve  their  true  end  as  instruments  of  devotion,  they
have  checked  the  worship  they  could  not  sustain.  (2)  Difficult  doctrines.  Notions
which  were  not  involved  in  the  scriptural  revelation  have  been  added  by  speculation
and  handed  down  by  tradition,  and  belief  in  them  insisted  on  as  essential  to  salvation.
(3)  Fancied  duties.  An  unwholesome  casuistry,  which  neglected  the  weightier  matters
of  the  Law,  has  been  busy  in  multiplying  the  petty  details  of  correct  conduct.  2.  2%eir
origin.  These'  needless  burdens  were  not  iinposed  by  God.  He  is  reasonable  and
merdful.  We  must  look  lower  for  their  origin.  (1)  Prom  men.  Without  any  Diid&e
authority,  though  insolently  claiming  that  authority,  men  have  assumed  to  bind  need-
less burdens  on  their  fellows.  (2)  'hi  hypocrisy.  The  authors  of  the  burdens  would
not  so  much  as  move  them  with  their  finger.  Inwardly  lax,  they  were  externally
rigorous.    Hypocrites  lack  the  grace  of  Christian  charity.

IL  The  bemoval  of  needless  bubdens.  This  is  one  of  Christ's  happy  works.  1,
The  grmmds  of  the  removal  of  them,  (1)  Their  needlessness.  Christ  is  practical.  He
is  too  real  to  tolerate  artificialities  in  religion.  (2)  Their  oppression.  The  sympathy
of  Christ  was  called  forth,  and  his  indignation  was  roused  as  he  saw  simple  folks
tyrannised  over  by  hypocrites.  (3)  Their  hindrance  of  necessary  duty.  Jesus  did  not
desire  to  see  a  lax  style  of  living.  He  himself  brought  high  claims  and  made  great
demands— once  bidding  a  rich  young  maa  renounce  the  whole  of  his  wealth  (Mark
X.  21).  Needless  burdens  would  distract  the  attention  and  absorb  the  energy  of
people  to  the  neglect  of  important  duties.  While  they  are  given  up  to  the  pursuit  of
little,  insignificant,  useless  performances,  they  forget  and  omit  great  and  weighty
obligations.  2.  The  method  of  their  removal.  (1)  On  the  authority  of  Christ.  He
has  a  right  to  direct  our  conduct.  Let  us  go  to  him  and  not  to  man  for  our  "  Christian
Directory."  (2)  By  the  exposure  of  the  character  of  the  needless  burdens.  The  timid
conscience  is  often  scrupulous,  just  in  proportion  to  the  smallness  of  the  fancied  duties
with  which  it  troubles  itself.  What  it  wants  is  a  clear  perception  of  the  needlessness
of  its  supposed  obligations.  Cluist  was  daring  in  breaking  bands  which  never  should
have  been  bound.  He  who  receives  the  Spirit  of  Christ  receives  the  Spirit  of  liberty.
(3)  With  the  revelation  of  true  duty.  We  are  called  to  leave  the  slavery  of  law  and
of  casuistry,  that  we  may  have  power  to  accept  the  great  obligations  of  Christian
service ;  and  the  realization  of  these  obligations  is  a  means  of  attaining  the  desired
liberty.  They  who  have  taken  Christ's  yoke  caimot  allow  themselves  to  be  encumbered
with  the  Pharisees'  burdens.— W.  V.  A.

Vers.  8 — 10. — Christian  equality.  Our  Lord  does  not  wish  to  see  the  distinctions  of
Judaism,  which  had  become  so  odious  in  his  day,  repeated  in  Christianity.  He  does
not  desire  the  dogmatism  of  the  rabbis  to  be  copied  by  the  Christian  teachers,  or  the
authority  of  the  rulers  to  be  transferred  to  the  Christian  pastors.  He  does  not  want
his  people  to  think  that  they  can  best  show  their  humility  by  losing  their  self-respect
and  cringing  before  ecclesiastical  superiors.  In  opposition  to  all  such  tendencies,  ha
enunciates  his  principles  of  Christian  equality.

I.  The  katube  or  Chbibtiait  equalitt.  Christianity  is  essentially  demecratio.
Jesus  Christ  was  a  Man  of  the  people,  the  greatest  Tribune  of  the  people  the  world  has
ever  seen.  He  took  the  side  of  the  oppressed  against  their  oppressors,  that  of  the
"  dim  multitude,"  not  that  of  the  privileged  few.  His  aim  in  this  matter  was  to  bring
about  a  condition  of  brotherhood.  There  is  a  measure  of  inequality  which  no  arrange-
ments of  men  can  set  aside.  One  man  is  not  always  as  good  as  another.  People  differ
enormously  In  character,  in  ability,  in  energy.  Therefore  alwolute  equality  is  impos-
sible. It  is  impossible  according  to  the  constitution  of  nature,  and  it  is  doubly  impos-
slbla  in  face  of  the  great  variation  of  human  conduct.  But  there  ia  an  equality  to  be
striven  for.  The  equality  of  Christian  brotherhood  is  to  be  observed  among  Christians.
Christ's  words  do  not  directly  apply  to  the  larger  society  of  mankind.  Tliis  equality
should  involve  an  equivalent  in  religious  privileges  which  are  meant  to  be  freely  offered
to  alL    It  should  discourage  any  artificial  distinctions.

IL  Tkb  OBOITNDS  OF  Chbibtiah  E4UALITT.  1.  Hm  Fatherhood  «f  Ood.  We  have
one  Father  ia  heaven,  and  undue  daferanoe  to  men  in  reli^u  obscures  the  honour  due


412         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  lira.  1—89.

to  Ood.  2.  The  Lordihip  of  Christ,  Thii  is  th«  ipecifically  Christian  prluciple,
while  the  former  one  is  a  general  religious  principle.  The  Ohuroh  is  not  a  republic ;
it  ii  a  kingdom  with  Ohrist  as  its  Headl  Chriatiani  are  bound  to  see  that  thej  put  no
one  in  the  place  of  Christ.  He  baa  direct  dealings  with  each  of  his  people.  He  wants
no  grand  vizier,  no  local  satrap,  no  intermediate  lord.  He  is  the  Master  of  each  Indi-
vidual Christian,  and  every  one  can  go  to  him  personally  for  instructions.

IIL  Th«  tiol^ttoh  of  Chbistiak  equautt.  Th«  words  of  Christ  ar«  ominous
of  coming  dangers.  They  have  a  profound  significance  in  the  light  of  subsequent
events.  It  is  wonderful  that  their  plain  mea^g  should  have  been  so  egregionsly
disregarded  as  to  permit  of  the  construction  of  a  monstrous  ecclesiastical  hierarchy  in
one  direction  and  the  creation  of  a  system  of  dogmatic  orthodoxy  in  another.  For-
getting Christ  and  the  privilege  of  closest  relationship  with  him,  Christian  people  have
bowed  their  necks  to  the  tyranny  of  various  ecclesiastical  masters  and  theological
fathers.  Order  requires  the  appointment  of  officers  in  the  Church,  and  truth  demands
respect  for  knowledge  and  for  the  capacity  to  teach.  But  it  is  a  mistake,  a  wrong  to
Q-od  and  Christ,  to  show  such  deference  to  human  authorities  as  shall  be  false  to  Christian
Uberty.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  13. — The  woe  of  the  hypocrites,  A  most  important  part  of  the  work  of  Christ
was  to  expose  the  utterly  false  aud  worthless  character  of  the  venerated  religious  leaders
of  bis  day.  It  was  a  thankless  task,  one  that  brought  odium  on  the  head  of  its  Author.
A  weaker  man  would  have  shrunk  from  it,  and  a  less  sensitive  man  might  have  enjoyed
the  humiliation  it  inflicted  on  his  enemies.  But  Jesus  was  neither  cowardly  nor
censorious.  Therefore  he  rebuked  the  venerated  religionists,  and  yet  we  know  the
necessity  of  doing  so  must  have  been  most  repulsive  to  him.

I.  Thb  ohabaotib  o»  th»  httoobitbs.  1.  Speciously  rdigiout.  There  was  an
appearance  of  sanctity  in  the  Pharisees  and  a  pretence  of  orthodoxy  in  the  scribes  that
won  for  both  a  reputation  of  religious  superiority.  The  world  has  never  been  without
persons  of  brilliant  external  appearances  in  religion,  and  these  persons  have  always  had
"  their  reward  "  (ch.  vi.  2).  2.  Inwardly /dl$e.  Our  Lord  saw  that  the  religion  was
unreal,  that  it  was  only  worn  as  a  garment  for  show.  This  is  the  characteristic  of  the
hypocrite.  He  is  more  than  a  pretender ;  he  is  consciously  false  to  his  pretences ;  he
is  a  living  lie.  3.  Acting  a  part.  The  hypocrite  is  an  actor.  He  dresses  his  cha-
racter and  poses  so  as  to  win  the  admiration  of  other  people.  His  very  course  in  life
is  planned  and  carried  out  with  a  theatrical  intention.  This  intention  is  the  explana-
tion of  the  glaring  contradiction  between  the  mask  and  the  real  countenance.

II.  The  wiokbdnebs  of  the  htpocritm.  This  is  twofold.  1.  The  hindrance  oj
others.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  prevented  simpler  people  from  entering  the  kingdom
of  heaven.  This  they  did  partly  by  confusing  their  minds  with  false  notions,  and
partly  by  discouraging  their  efforts  in  setting  before  them  vexatious  precepts  and
needless,  impossible  requirements.  It  is  a  mark  of  hypocrisy  to  represent  religion  as
a  very  dlfBcult  attainment,  and  to  lay  claim  to  superior  sanctity  by  the  easy  method
of  setting  up  a  high,  or  rather  a  false  and  unattainable,  standard  for  other  people.  2.
Their  own  failure.  These  hypocrites  behaved  like  the  dog  in  the  manger.  Their
harshness  to  other  people  did  not  help  their  own  cause.  No  one  enters  the  kingdom
of  heaven  by  keeping  other  people  out  of  it.  Religious  selQshness  is  doomed  to
disappointment.

UI.  The  doou  of  the  HTPOonrnst.  1.  Its  e!xpo$ure.  For  a  time  these  people  live
in  honour,  and  their  skilful  arts  of  deception  seem  to  secure  them  against  any  discovery
of  their  hollow  and  unreal  characters.  But  this  calm  security  cannot  last  long.  Even
if  it  is  maintained  till  the  end  of  the  present  life,  it  must  vanish  like  smoke  in  the
great  apocalypse  of  the  future  judgment.  God  knows  all  from  the  beginning,  and  if
he  does  not  at  once  reveal  the  wicked  falsehood,  it  cannot  be  because  this  ever  imposes
upon  him.  In  his  own  time  he  will  unveil  it.  2.  Its  punishment.  God  hates  lies,
and  he  is  angry  against  those  who  put  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of  children  and
humble  persons  (ch.  xviii.  6, 7).  The  hypocrites  who  are  guilty  of  both  of  these  faults
are  doubly  culpable  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.    Their  condemnation  is  just.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  24. — Th«  gnat  wid  the  oamd.    It  was  oharaoteriatio  of  the  scribes  aud  Pharisees


OH.  xnn.  1— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  419

to  strain  out  the  gnat  and  yet  to  iwallow  the  camel.  They  would  be  very  oarefnl  in
aToidlng  minute  formal  improprietiet,  while  they  committed  great  sini  without
oompnnction.

L  llax  KviL  HABIT.  Thit  is  seen  in  many  forms  to-day.  1.  In  moroA  conduct.
People  are  found  to  be  yery  sorupulous  about  points  of  politeness,  and  very  negligent
of  real  kindness.  They  will  not  offend  an  acquaintance  with  a  harsh  phrase,  and  yet
they  will  ruin  him  if  they  can  outwit  him  in  a  business  transaction.  There  are  persons
of  strict  Puritanism,  who  forbid  even  innocent  forms  of  amusement  for  their  children,
and  yet  who  are  self-indulgent,  ill-tempered,  uncharitable,  and  covetous.  Such  people
swallow  many  a  huge  camel,  while  sedulonsly  straining  the  gnats  out  of  their  chil-
dren's enp  of  pleasure.  2.  /•»  rtUgUmt  «btervance*.  The  greatest  care  is  taken  for
the  correct  observance  of  ritual,  while  the  spirit  of  devotion  is  neglected;  a  rigid
standard  of  orthodoxy  is  insisted  on,  but  living  faith  is  neglected ;  a  punctual  per-
formance of  Church  ordinances  is  accompanied  by  a  totsd  disregard  for  the  will  of  God
and  the  obligations  of  obedience.

IL  Thi  boubor  or  this  habit.  1.  Eypoerity,  This  was  the  source  in  the  case
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  as  our  Lord  himself  indicated.  It  is  easier  to  attend  to
minutias  of  conduct  than  to  be  right  in  the  greiat  fundamental  principles ;  to  rectify
these  a  resolution,  a  regeneration  of  character,  is  required ;  but  to  set  the  superficial
details  in  a  certain  state  of  decency  and  order  involves  no  such  serious  change.
Moreover,  the  little  superficial  points  are  obvions  to  all  people,  and,  like  Chinese
puzzles,  challenge  admiration  on  account  of  their  very  minuteness.  2,  Small-minded-
nets.  in  some  cases  there  may  be  no  conscious  hypocrisy.  But  a  littleness  of  think-
ing and  acting  has  dwarfed  the  whole  area  of  observation.  The  small  soul  is  able  to
see  the  gnat,  biit  it  cannot  even  perceive  the  existence  of  the  camel.  It  is  so  busy
with  the  fussy  trivialities  on  which  it  prides  itself,  that  it  has  no  power  left  to  attend
to  weightier  matters.

III.  Thb  oubi  or  THS  habit.  1,  Bif  A»  rwHaiion  of  itt  exUtenee.  When  the
foolish  thing  la  done  in  all  simplicity  and  good  faith,  it  only  needs  to  be  seen  to  be
rejected.  When  it  is  the  fruit  of  sheer  hypocrisy,  the  exposure  of  it  will,  of  course,
make  it  clear  that  the  performance  will  no  longer  win  the  plaudits  of  the  crowd ;  and
then,  as  there  will  be  no  motive  to  continue  in  it,  the  actor  will  lay  his  part  aside.
But  this  does  not  imply  a  real  cure.  For  that  we  must  go  further,  2.  By  the  gift  of
a  larger  !(^«.  We  are  all  of  us  more  or  less  cramped  by  our  own  pettiness,  and  just
in  proportion  as  we  are  self-centred  and  self-contained  shall  we  give  attention  to  small
things.  We  want  to  be  lifted  out  of  ourselves,  we  need  the  awakening  of  our  higher
spiritual  powers.  It  is  the  object  of  Christ  to  effect  this  grand  change.  When  he
takes  possession  of  the  soul  he  sets  all  things  in  their  true  light.  Then  we  can  strive
for  great  objects,  fight  great  sins,  win  great  victories,  and  forget  the  gnats  in  the
magnitude  ef  the  camels. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  29. — Building  th*  tombs  tf  ih*  prophet*.  In  the  rather  vulgar  architectural
restoration  which  went  on  during  the  days  of  the  Herods,  it  might  often  be  seen  that
old,  venerated,  but  ruinous  tombs  were  being  rebuilt  and  decorated  afresh.  The  process
was  significant  of  behaviour  which  is  often  repeated  in  other  places  and  in  other  ages.

I,  Good  hen,  ilii  tbbated  DimiNa  theib  litetiiu;,  abk  HONOxmsD  atteb  theib
DEATH.  The  world  venerates  its  own  martyrs.  In  course  of  time,  it  comes  to  lavish
extravagant  honours  on  the  men  whom  it  treated  as  the  very  scum  of  the  earth  during
their  lifetime.  Most  conspicuous  has  this  been  in  the  case  of  Jesus  Christ  himself —
despised,  rejected,  insulted,  crucified  while  on  earth,  yet  now  at  least  respected,  even
by  those  who  have  not  learnt  to  love  him.  Ko  doubt  this  admits  of  explanation.
There  are  characters  which  men  do  not  quickly  understand  or  appreciate.  A  life  is
not  complete  until  it  is  finished,  and  the  whole  meaning  of  it  cannot  be  read  until  we
can  see  it  as  a  whole.  A  great  man  is  in  advance  of  his  age,  and  only  the  later  age,
which  has  been  in  some  measure  educated  up  to  him  by  the  veiy  influence  «f  his  life
and  teaching,  is  in  a  position  to  comprehend  him.  But  while  all  this  ia  natural,  it  ia
not  the  less  unfortunate.  What  is  the  iise  of  honours  heaped  on  the  grave  of  the  silent
dead?  The  laurels  we  pile  on  their  tombs  cannot  bring  joy  to  those  who  are  bo  Iwger
with  us.    There  is  a  grim  irony  in  the  common  custom  of  waiting  for  their  death


414         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxra.  1—39.

before  recognizing  the  merits  of  the  best  men.  The  applaugo  that  bursts  out  so
rapturously  after  they  have  left  the  stage  is  of  no  comfort  to  them  now.  It  would
hare  been  better  to  have  shown  them  more  kindness  during  their  lifetime.  In  homelier
regions  much  heartbreaking  might  be  spared,  and  many  bitter  regrets  avoided,  if  we
would  take  care  to  show  the  affection  and  forbearance  for  our  dear  ones  in  their  life-
time which  we  shall  vainly  yearn  to  render  them  when  it  is  too  late.

II,  Thbt  who  honour  thk  dbad  mat  be  uNQBNEBotrs  TO  THB  MviN(j.  The
Jews  venerated  their  ancient  prophets,  and  yet  they  persecuted  contemporary  prophets.
The  very  qualities  which  made  the  great  dead  so  glorious  in  their  eyes  were  seen  in
John  the  Baptist  and  Jesus,  only  to  be  treated  with  contempt  or  even  with  anger,
la  the  Christian  Church  it  has  been  the  fashion  to  look  back  with  semi-adoration  on
"  the  Fathers ;  "  but  possibly  men  as  good  and  great  have  been  living  in  our  own  day.
Descendants  of  the  Puritans,  who  were  the  champions  of  freedom  a  century  or  two  ago,
have  been  most  repressive  towards  those  who  have  inherited  the  liberty-loving  spirit  ol
the  Puritans.  But  in  commemorating  the  deeds  of  Christian  heroism  of  the  past,  we
condemn  ourselves  if  we  will  not  give  every  encouragement  to  the  true  heroes  of  the
present.  Now  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that"  the  prophets  were  unpopular  in  their
day;  that  they  protested  against  prevalent  beliefs  and  fashionable  practices;  that  they
denounced  the  sins  of  social  and  religious  leaders.  The  disposition  to  honour  such
men  should  justify  itself  by  allowing  a  larger  liberty  to  the  advanced  thinkers  and  the
earnest  reformers  of  our  own  times. — W.  F.  A,

Ver.  87. — The  lament  over  Jermalem.  These  are  among  the  most  touching  words
ever  uttered  by  our  Lord.  They  reveal  his  strong  patriotism,  his  deep  human  affec-
tion, the  greatness  of  the  salvation  he  brought,  and  at  the  same  time  the  frustration  of
the  hopes  which  these  things  naturally  raise,  owing  to  the  stubborn  self-will  of  the
Jews.    Here  is  a  lesson  for  all  time.

I.  Thb  GuiLTy  ciTT.  1.  No  citywai  more  privileged.  Jerusalem  was  the  favoured
city  of  a  favoured  land.  David,  the  great  singer,  celebrated  her  praises ;  David,  the
great  king,  raised  her  fortunes.  But  better  than  royal  fame  was  her  religious  glory.
Great  prophets,  such  as  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah,  taught  in  her  streets.  More  than  once
signal  Divine  providences  helped  her  in  direst  necessity.  Here  was  the  temple  of  the
Divine  Presence.  Finally  the  city  was  honoured  by  the  coming  of  Christ.  2.  No  city
was  mare  tinfid.  When  account  is  taken  of  her  privileges,  Jerusalem  excels  in  guilt
as  she  excels  in  favour.  The  most  favoured  people  prove  to  be  the  most  ungrateful
and  rebellious.  She  murders  her  best  friends.  She  crowns  her  guilt  by  delivering
her  Christ  up  to  death.

II.  Thb  pitying  Savioitb.  Jesus  is  grieved  and  loth  to  think  of  the  doom  of  the
wicked  city.  1.  It  was  his  oum  city.  Not  his  native  city,  but  the  capital  of  his  land,
and  the  royal  city,  to  which  he  came  as  King  (ch.  xxi.  4,  6).  Jesus  was  a  patriot.
2.  /(  was  the  city  of  Qod,  Its  ruin  was  like  the  ruin  of  God's  own  daughter.
They  who  have  once  known  God  touch  the  heart  of  Christ  with  peculiar  compassion
when  they  lose  their  happy  privilege.  3.  It  was  a  doomed  city.  Already  with  pro-
phetic eye  Jesus  saw  the  Boman  legions  compassing  it  about.  It  lay  as  the  prey
ready  for  the  eagle.     The  heart  of  Jesus  grieves  over  the  sinner's  doom.

ni.  Thb  wondkbful  salvation.  By  a  homely  and  yet  most  touching  illustration
Jesus  tells  what  be  has  longed  to  do  for  the  city  in  its  peril.  1.  He  comes  to  save.
This  is  his  great  mission,  and  his  salvation  begins  with  "  the  house  of  Israel "  (ch.  xv.
24).  2.  He  is  able  to  save.  Jesus  speaks  with  the  utmost  confidence.  He  can  save
a  whole  city ;  nay,  we  know  he  can  save  a  whole  world.  No  doubt,  if  Jerusalem  had
accepted  Christ  and  his  teaching,  the  mad  revolt  which  called  down  the  vengeance  oi
Bomo  would  have  been  prevented.  But  in  his  deeper  work,  as  our  Lord  has  redeemed
many  of  the  worst  profligates,  he  has  shown  himself  able  to  save  all  men.  3.  He  offers
to  save.  The  pathos  of  this  wonderful  utterance  of  Jesus  lies  in  his  own  heartfelt
desire  and  its  disappointment.  With  long-suffering  patience  he  repeats  his  often>
rejected  offer.    Be  stands  at  the  door,  and  knocks.

IV.  The  final  doom.  The  house  is  to  be  left  desolate  at  last.  1.  There  is  on
end  to  the  opportunity  for  escape.  This  has  lasted  long.  Many  were  the  occasions
when  Jesus  would  have  welcomeid  the  people  of  Jerusalem,  and  have  extended  to  them


OH.  xxm.  1— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         418

Ms  earing  grace.  But  at  last  the  end  baa  come.  The  day  of  grace  must  be  followed
by  the  day  of  judgment.  2.  Even  Ohrhtt  detire  to  save  may  be  frustrated.  It  is  not
enough  to  know  that  he  Teams  to  save.  Men  may  be  lost  now,  as  Jerusalem  was  lost.
3.  Obstinate  rejection  cf  Christ  will  lead  to  ruin.  Man's  will  may  thus  frustrate
Christ's  desire.  Note !  It  was  not  for  stoning  the  prophets,  but  for  rejecting  Christ's
salration,  that  Jerusalem  was  ultimately  doomed.  Christ  can  save  from  the  worst
sin ;  but  none  can  be  sared  who  wilfully  reject  him. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  2 — 33. — Phariteei  and  Sadduceet.  The  Pharisees  first  appear  under  this  name
in  Jewish  history  about  the  year  b.o.  160.  There  had  been  Separatists,  or  Puritans,  as
far  back  as  the  Captivity,  but  it  was  after  the  return  to  Palestine  that  events  gave  an
impulse  to  the  Separatist  idea  so  strong  as  to  consolidate  what  might  otherwise  have
remained  a  tendency.  The  Jews  had  learned  the  value  of  commerce,  and  it  was  found
impossible,  in  dealing  with  foreign  merchants,  to  observe  the  minute  regulations  pre-
scribed by  the  more  zealous.  The  minority,  who  even  pretended  to  this,  were  obliged
to  become  Separatists,  not  only  from  the  Gentiles,  but  from  their  own  less  scrupulous
coreligionists.  Hence  their  frequent  connection  with  the  scribes.  There  had  always
been  scribes  in  Israel,  men  who  could  draw  state  or  legal  documents.  But  after  the
influence  of  Ezra  bad  stimnlated,  if  it  had  not  created,  a  desire  to  know  the  Law,
synagogues  were  to  be  found  in  every  town.  And  a  synagogue  implied  a  copy  of  the
Law  and  a  person  who  could  read  it.  The  scribes  therefore  necessarily  became  a  pro-
fession, with  just  such  a  curriculum  for  pupils  and  candidates  as  distinguish  professions
among  ourselves.  It  was  inevitable  that  they  should  acquire  great  influence  among
tiie  people.  For  in  their  best  days  they  were  the  guardians  of  the  Law,  and  strove
unceasingly  to  make  it  supreme  over  every  act  of  every  person.  Not  only  did  the
scribe  discharge  all  the  functions  of  a  modem  lawyer,  but  be  was  appealed  to  in  all
circumstances  where  the  application  of  the  law  might  seem  obscure.  They  were  both
the  makers  of  the  law  and  its  administrators,  and  they  did  not  scruple,  sitting  apart
from  active  life,  to  enforce  on  men  engaged  in  it  all  the  wire-drawn  and  fantastic  dis-
tinctions which  their  minds,  imbecile  with  attention  to  the  letter  of  the  Law  and  with
unpractical  pedantry,  could  contrive.  It  was  this  inconsiderate  exercise  of  their
authority  which  provoked  our  Lord's  rebuke.  But  burdensome  as  was  the  teaching  of
the  scribiBS,  two  causes  operated  to  make  them  the  most  popular  members  of  the  com-
munity. 1.  To  them  was  committed  the  key  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  they  had
power  to  bind  and  loose — they  alone  could  give  a  man  assurance  that  he  had  actually
attained  to  the  righteousness  required  by  the  Law.  2.  The  people  were  at  one  with
them  in  their  grand  aim  to  give  the  Law  absolute  sway  over  the  life  of  every  Jew.
The  Pharisees  who  did  live  as  the  scribes  enjoined,  were  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  the
true  Israel,  the  pattern  Jews.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees,  then,  though  not  identical,
were  closely  related,  so  closely  that  our  Lord  subjects  them  to  one  common  rebuke.
The  Zealots,  who  repudiated  any  king  but  Jehovah,  and  refused  to  pay  tribute  to  Cassar,
were  the  natural  result  of  Pharisaic  teaching.  And  indeed  the  Pharisees  did  them-
selves refuse  to  swear  allegiance  to  Herod.  They  may  be  looked  on,  therefore,  as  the
national  party.  Their  influence  was  not  solely  and  throughout  evil,  for  to  them  and  to
the  scribes  was  due  the  knowledge  of  the  Law  to  whioh  our  Lord  so  often  appealed.
But  the  grave  defects  of  their  teaching,  and  its  ruinous  influences  on  the  religious
character,  are  so  distinctly  enounced  in  the  Gospels  that  they  need  not  be  dwelt  on.
The  origin  of  the  Sadducees  explains  their  position  in  the  state.  It  is  generally  agreed
that  they  take  their  name  from  Zadok,  who  was  elevated  to  the  high  priesthood  by
Solomon.  It  was  the  same  line  which  inherited  the  oSice  after  the  Exile,  and  through
all  the  changes  in  the  Hebrew  state  the  high  priests  maintained  great  influence,  and  in
our  Lord's  time  we  find  them  still  sitting  as  presidents  in  the  highest  court,  the  San-
hedrin.  Still,  also,  there  were  grouped  round  them  the  Sadducees  1  It  was  to  this
party  that  men  of  wealth,  men  in  ofBce,  and  men  of  pure  priestly  descent,  attached
themselves,  although  many  of  the  priests  leant  more  to  the  Pharisees.  They  lived  in
luxury,  and  their  moralit<y  was  not  high.  At  the  same  time,  whether  from  envy  of  the
popularity  of  the  Pharisees,  or  from  common  sense,  they  resisted  the  Pharisaic
additions  to  the  Law.  Thus  they  refused  to  accept  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,
not  being  able  to  find  it  la  the  Books  of  Moses.     They  are  rarely  mentioned  in  the


tit  THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDma  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxra.  1— 89,

GoBpels,  becauia  thej  were  mostly  In  Jerusalem,  and  their  ideas  had  found  no  accept-
ance with  the  people.  From  the  leaven  of  Piariiahm,  or  idtra-legalUm,  three  mil'
chlevoua  reiulti  follow.  1.  The  minute  regulations  which  are  extended  to  the  whole  ot
life  lear*  no  room  for  conscience  to  exercise  itself,  and  accordingly  it  pines  and  dies.
2.  Minute  obserrances  obtain  a  magnified  importance.  3.  The  bar*  performance  of  the
duty  enjoined  is  reckoned  ererythiug,  while  the  state  of  heart  it  overlooked.  We  shall
escape  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisee  if  we  learn  to  pay  more  attention  to  the  heart  than  to
the  conduct ;  if  we  have  so  true  a  delight  in  pleasing  the  Lord  that  we  do  not  consider
what  men  think  of  us.  The  leaven  of  the  Sadducees  is  perhaps  even  more  certainly
fatal  to  true  religion.  The  Pharisee  has  sincerity,  though  it  is  quite  superficial ;  he
has  Eeal,  though  misdirected ;  but  the  Sadducee  has  neither.  He  is  all  for  this  world,
and,  save  to  forward  him  in  it,  religion  is  an  encumbranoe.  His  heart  is  not  gladdened
with  any  loving  thoughts  of  God,  nor  his  spirit  refreshed  by  fellowship  with  the
unseen  world.  If  we  escape  these  influences  we  shall  do  what  few  have  done.  For  all
men  are  under  the  temptation  either  to  make  too  much  of  the  observances  of  religion
or  to  make  them  a  mere  form.  Worldliness  deadens  a  man's  spirit  to  spiritual  impres-
sions, and  gradually  saps  his  faith  till  he  ceases  to  believe  in  anything  but  the  palpable
world  with  which  he  has  now  to  do.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisee
prevails  to  the  extent  of  making  ns  fear  God  more  than  we  love  him,  and  do  by
constraint  what  we  ought  to  do  because  we  delight  in  It,  we  are  in  a*  unwholesome  a
state  as  the  Sadducee  we  reprobate. — D.

Vers.  1 — 12. — Ethia  of  authority.  After  Jesus  had  pnt  the  Jewish  sectaries  to
silence,  he  addressed  his  disciples  and  the  people,  who  had  witnessed  his  encounters,
as  to  how  they  should  deport  themselves  in  respect  to  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.

L  Beoulab  ▲hthobitt  beoitld  bb  besfected.   1,  Jewish  magittratet  were  to  i«  obeyed.

(1)  "  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat."  Moses  is  figuratively  represented
as  then  stiU  sitting  to  deliver  his  oracles  (cf.  Acts  xv.  21).  Note  here  the  lessons  of
posthumous  influence.  (2)  The  Law  of  Moses  was  the  municipal  law  of  the  state.
The  scribes  and  Pharisees,  being  members  of  the  Sanhedrin  and  inferior  councils,  "  sat
in  Moses'  seat,"  vis.  as  magistrates.  As  expounders  of  the  municipal  law,  they  did
not  travel  out  of  their  depth,  and  were  therein  sufBciently  learned  to  g^ve  them  weight
and  reputation.  (3)  Evil  men  oceupy  good  places.  The  seat  of  Moses  must  not  be
overturned  because  its  occupants  dishonour  it.  It  must  rather  be  upheld  to  make  them
ashamed.  2.  Pagan  rvlert  are  to  b*  obeyed.  (1)  Any  regular  government  is  better
than  none.    The  tyranny  of  a  monarch  is  more  tolerable  than  the  anarchy  of  a  mob.

(2)  Christ  submitted  to  the  rule  of  Cwsar,  and  to  that  of  the  inferior  Soman  magistrates.
This  he  did  purely  for  our  example.  (3)  His  inspired  apostles  encouraged  obedience  to
existing  authorities  as  being  "  ordained  of  God."  They  were  therefore  to  be  held  in
reverence.  They  were  to  be  supported.  Taxes  were  to  be  paid  to  them.  Prayer  was
to  be  made  for  them.

II.  Thb  exempli  or  kvil  bulsbs  inrsT  bb  avoided.  L  jU  inamiUtent  teaehtn.
(1)  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  did  not  fill  the  chair  of  Moses  as  theologians  with  the
sanction  of  Christ.  On  the  contrary,  he  showed  that  they  made  void  the  Law  by  their
traditions.  He  warned  his  followers  to  beware  of  their  doctrine  (see  ch.  ivi.  6).  (2)  They
might  be  obeyed  in  what  they  read  from  the  Law  and  the  prophets.  The  "  there-
fore "  limits  the  application  of  the  "  all  things  whatsoever  "  to  precepts  of  inspiration  as
distinct  from  the  traditions  of  the  elders.  We  may  not  reject  sound  teaching  because
of  the  unworthiness  of  the  teacher.  (3)  Yet  must  we  be  suspicious  of  the  teaching  of
the  wicked.  People  must  be  warned  of  wolves  and  dogs  and  deceitful  workers  (cf.
Acts  XI.  29,  30  J  Phil.  iiL  2 ;  2  Cor.  li.  13).  2.  Ai  incoruistent  worker*.  (1)  "  They
say,  and  do  not."  The  study  of  the  hypocrite  is  to  seem  religious  in  the  sight  of  men,
rather  than  to  be  religious  in  the  sight  of  God.  (2)  They  would  aggravate  the  burden
of  the  Law,  which  was  sufficient  in  itself  (see  Acts  xv.  10),  by  the  addition  of  traditional
imposts.  (3)  The  burden  they  imposed  upon  the  people  they  would  not  touch  with
•  finger  themselves.  They  were  the  priests  who  fasted  upon  wine  and  sweetmeats,
while  they  forced  the  people  to  fast  upon  bread  and  water  1  (4)  How  different  the
example  of  Christ,  who  took  upon  himself  our  heaviest  burden,  to  make  all  easy  for  his
people  I    3.  A*  tmamplet  of  pride  and  osttntation.    (1)  The  scribes  and  Pharisees


*;",iiiiif;


OH.xxin.1— 39.]    THE  OOBPEIi  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  417

literally  interpreted  Exod.  xiii.  16  and  Dent.  tL  8,  aad  wore  mtoUs  of  paper  or  parch-
ment with  ttixta  of  Scripture  written  on  them,  bound  round  their  wrists  and  ibreneads.
The  fringes  on  their  garments,  which  Gk>d  enjoined  vpoa  the  Israelites  to  remind  them
of  doing  all  the  commandments  (see  Kumb.  xr.  88),  tkey  wore  broader  and  kni^er
than  other  men.  They  paraded  their  piety  "at  feasta,"  and  "in  synagogues*  md
"  in  markets,"  where  they  might  be  seen.  (2)  la  all  this  ostentation  there  was  anper-
stition.  They  looked  upon  their  phylacteriea  as  preserratiTas  in  the  senaw  Ol  awvletg.
(3)  Such  aspirants  must  be  jealousy  watched.  "  Mark  and  Luke  hare  selected  from
our  Lord's  discourses,  handed  down  in  full  in  Matthew,  the  sins  of  pride,  ararlca,  and
hypocrisy,  as  those  most  suited  to  ahow  w^  they  should  '  beware  of  the  scribes ' "
(Harmer).

IIL  Chbist  mttst  bk  exalted  etbbmobs.  1.  By  refuting  tht  arrogance  of  hit  enmtiet.
(1)  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  would  set  aside  the  claims  of  Christ.  They  affected  to  be
called  '•  Rabbi,"  ••  Father,"  "  Master,"  in  an  unwarrantable  sense.  The  Talmud  raetenda
that  "  King  Jehoshaphat  used  to  salute  the  wise  men  with  the  titles.  Father,  Father ;
Rabbi,  Rabbi ;  Master,  Master  I "  This  claim  purported  that,  as  the  "  wise  men,'  they
should  be  implicitly  believed  in  what  they  affirmed,  without  asking  any  further  quection.
It  purported,  moreover,  that  they  should  be  implicitly  obeyed  in  what  they  enjdned
without  seeking  further  authority.  (2)  But  here  they  must  be  resisted.  The  Christian
has  but  one  infallible  Teacher.  Bo  has  he  but  one  absolute  Father — the  heavenly.  So
has  he  but  one  supreme  Master — Christ.  None  but  Christ  haa  ever  fully  illustrated  his
doctrine  in  his  life.  2.  By  ctdtivating  true  'humility.  (1)  In  this  is  Christian  great-
nesa.  Love  is  greatness.  The  heart  is  at  once  the  most  important  and  most  laborious
organ ;  the  serrant,  yet  the  ruler  of  all.  Self-lore  is  purined  and  dignified  by  being
subordinated  to  the  lore  of  Gk)d  and  our  neighbour.  (2)  The  Christian  wUl  not  exalt
himself.  He  must  not  covet  the  titles  affected  by  the  scribes,  nut  must  he  aicnme  the
authority  and  dominion  implied  in  these  names.  When  self-love  is  exalted,  self  itself
becomes  abased.  (3)  The  Christian  will  not  unduly  exalt  his  fellow.  "  Ali  ye  are
brethren."  Ministers  are  to  each  other  brethren.  They  are  brethren  to  the  people.
Christ  himself  is  the  "  Firstborn  among  many  brethren"  (Bom.  viii.  29).  What  an
example  to  his  disciples!  (4)  The  Christian  loses  himself  in  exalting  (^rist.  "Call
no  man,"  etc.,  i.t.  ascribe  infallibility  to  none  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  6,  6).  The  whole  passage
(vers.  3 — 7),  like  ch.  xx.  25,  may  Justly  be  regarded  as  a  prophecy  and  wamlag  to  the
Christian  Church.  "  Among  Christians  there  is  none  to  sit  m  Christ's  seat"  (Alford).
It  was  George  Herbert's  habit,  when  he  mentioned  the  name  of  Christ,  to  add,  "  my
Master."  3.  Christ  toiU  mbatt  the  proud,  mnd  exalt  the  humble.  (1)  "  Whosoever
shall  exalt  himself  shall  be  humbled."  "All  the  world  cannot  exalt  a  proud  man,
because  God  will  pull  him  down  "  (Anon.).  (2)  "  Whosoever  shall  humble  himself
Khali  be  exalted."  Ko  sentence  of  our  Lord's  is  so  often  repeated.  It  occur*  in  the
evangelists,  with  little  variation,  at  least  ten  times.  Pride  bi  as  natural  to  man  as  it
is  hateful  to  God.  (3)  "  Honour  is  like  the  shadow,  that  fleas  from  those  who  pursue
it,  ijut  follows  those  who  flee  from  it "  (Henry).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1^—16.— The  credit  of  ih4  Church.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  unity  throughout
the  ages.  It  is  more  proper  to  speak  of  the  Christian  dispensation  of  the  Qiuroh  than
of  the  Christian  Church  as  opposed  to  the  Jewish.  This  unity  exists,  not  wily  through
the  ages,  but  also  throughout  the  universe.  While  its  head-quarters  aw  ia  heaven,
there  has  ever  been  a  visible  representation  upon  the  earth.  This  ia  aometlmes  called
"  the  Church ; "  in  the  Gospela  it  is  distinguished  aa  "  the  kingdom  of  heav^"  In
this  sense  we  now  speak  of  it    Note,  then —

I.  That  the  CmmcH  u  raouButn  bt  ths  iktbdsiom  o»  htpoobitb.  1.  They
enter  it  for  tdfiih  tndt.  Q.)  What  care  the  hypocritea  for  Qod'a  gleryf  They  are
simply  stage-players  in  religion.  (2)  They  affect  the  glory  of  human  applauae.  l^ey
transfer  to  themselves  what  should  be  given  to  God.  (3)  By  pretending  to  extraor-
dinary piety,  they  insinuate  themselves  into  the  confidence  o/  unprotected  and  unsus-
pecting persons,  to  rob  them  of  their  property  (cf.  2  Tim.  iii,  9  j  Titus  1. 11).  The
extreme  of  avarice  is  to  devour  the  house  of  the  widow,  who  should  be  specially  spared
(cf.  Exod.  xxii.  22,  23;  ProT.  xv.  25;  Isa.  x.  1,  2).  "While  they  seemed  to  soar
heavenward  upon  the  wings  of  prayer,  their  eye,  like  the  kite's,  was  all  the  while  upon

MATTHEW — ^11.  2  X


418  THE  GOSPEL  A(X)ORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxm.  1—39.

their  prey  on  the  earth,  some  widow's  house  "  (Henry).  (4)  Some  think  it  probable
that  the  scribes  and  Pharisee!  sold  their  •'  long  prayers,"  as  the  Romish  priests  sell
their  Masses.  Through  sympathy  for  their  deceased  husbands,  widows  might  fall  easy
victims  to  the  avarice  of  those  who  "  make  merchandise  of  souls."  2.  In  it  they  are
obstructive  to  good.  (1)  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  would  not  enter  the  kingdom  them-
selves. They  did  not  use  "  the  key  of  knowledge  "  to  see  what  Scripture  said  about
Messiah,  (a)  In  Jacob's  departing  sceptre  of  Judah.  (6)  In  Moses'  Prophet,  (c)
In  Daniel's  weeks.  They  shut  their  eyes.  (2)  They  hindered  those  who  were  entering.
The  people  were  on  the  point  of  entering  into  the  privileges  of  the  new  dispensation
preached  by  John  Baptist  »nd  Jesus,  but  were  hindered  by  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,
(a)  They  were  hindered  by  their  example  (see  John  vii.  48).  (6)  By  their  doctrine,  in
cavilling  against  Christ  (see  ch,  xiL  24 ;  John  ix.  16).  (c)  By  their  authority,  in  the
threat  of  excommunication  (see  John  ix.  22).  (i)  Therefore  only  the  violent  could  force
an  entrance  into  the  kingdom  (see  ch.  xi.  12 ;  Luke  xvi.  16).  3.  Tliey  promoted  evU.
(1)  They  were  infernally  zealous.  They  spared  no  pains  to  make  proselytes,  not,  how-
ever, with  a  view  to  benefit  them,  but  for  sectarian  ostentation.  For  the  scribes  and
Pharisees  made  proselytes  to  the  schools  of  particular  rabbins.  (2)  Their  victims
they  made  even  more  the  song  of  hell  than  themselves.  Note :  (o)  Hypocrisy  is
itself  the  offspring  of  hell,  for  it  originates  with  the  "  father  of  lies."  (6)  "  Two-
fold more."  The  Hellenist  Jews,  who  were  mostly  proselytes,  were  the  bitterest
enemies  of  the  apostles  (see  Acts  xiii.  45;  xiv.  2,  19;  xvii.  6;  xviii.  6).  Truth
falsified  is  worse  than  simple  falsity.  Half-truths  are  the  most  vicious  lies,  (c)  The
proselytes  were  trained  by  the  Pharisees  in  wicked  sophistry,  which  palliated  vice
and  substituted  ceremony  for  piety.  They  were  also  taught  to  practise  evil  with  les*
remorse  and  greater  subtlety  than  they  had  been  accustomed  to  in  their  formei
condition.

II.  That  it  is  ckfaiblt  ohaboed  with  their  viobs.  1.  Unbelie/  seekt  to  f eaten
their  scandal  upon  it.  (1)  Sons  of  Belial  are  never  weary  of  denouncing  the  hypocrisy
of  the  Church.  If  they  can  find  any  rascality  in  a  professor  of  religion,  they  cry
exultingly,  "There's  your  Christianity  I "  (2)  They  delight  in  favourably  contrasting
themselves  with  the  hypocrites  of  the  Church.  What  is  more  common  than  for  sons
of  Belial  to  say,  "I  don't  profess  to  be  religious,  but  I  am  better  than  many  of  youi
Christians"?  2.  But  this  u  manifestly  unfair.  (1)  Christ  does  not  recognize
hypocrites  as  Christiana.  On  the  contrary,  he  repudiates  them  with  the  strongest
abhorrence.  (2)  They  are  only  tolerated  in  the  Church  because  of  the  difficulty  of
finding  them  out.  For  want  of  infallible  judgment,  the  tares  have  to  grow  with  the
wheat  until  the  harvest.  (3)  Hypocrites  are  not  Christians.  The  "  hypocrisy  of  the
Church  "  is  a  misnomer.  There  is  a  clear  distinction  between  the  true  members  of
the  Church  and  those  hypocrites  who  intrude  into  its  visible  corporation.  In  all
fairness  this  should  be  recognized.  (4)  Instead  of  contrasting  themselves  with
hypocrites,  let  them  compare  themselves  with  Christ,  and  see  then  where  they  stand
in  the  judgment.  (5)  Let  them  compare  themselves  with  the  Christ-like.  These  are
the  only  true  Christians,  the  only  true  Church-members — ^members  approved  by  its
laws,  and  permanently  belonging  to  its  corporation.    Hypocrites  are  neither.

IIL  God  will  vindioatb  thb  obedit  or  ku  Cbuboh.    1.  By  separating  the
hypocriteifrom  it.    (1)  They  fairly  belong  to  the  world.    Their  spirit  is  of  the  world.

(2)  Their  connection  with  the  Church  is  unnatural.    It  is  like  themselves,  a  deception.

(3)  Their  connection  with  the  Church  is  transient.  Like  the  tares  among  the  wheat,
the  bad  fish  among  the  good  in  the  net,  the  goats  among  the  sheep,  in  the  final
judgment.  2.  By  dooming  thtm  to  perdition.  (1)  Hypocrites  will  be  found  with
worldling!  in  the  damnation  of  helL  Let  the  sons  of  Belial,  then,  contrast  themselves
with  their  own  if  they  will.  They  will  scarcely  call  the  hypocrites  Christians  in
damnation.  (2)  The  greater  damnation.  Note :  (a)  There  are  degrees  of  damnatioB.
(b)  Pretences  of  religon  will  aggravate  the  torments  of  the  lost,  (c)  The  gospel  curse*
are  the  sorer  (cf.  Heb.  x.  29).  Who  em  entreat  for  him  against  whom  the  great
Intercessor  pleads  ?  A  "  woe  "  from  Chriit  has  no  remedy.  No  such  wrath  as  that  of
the  Lamb  1  "  Hrt»  woes  are  made  to  look  very  dreadful  (Key.  riil.  13 — Ii.  12) ;  but
here  are  tigit  woes,  in  opposition  to  the  eight  Beatitudes  (Ilatt.  t.  4) "  (Henry).
3.  By  ttbiMng  their  accnmpUcei.    The  open  sinner  is  an  accomplice  with  the  very


OH.xxin.l— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  419

hypocrite  he  affects  to  scorn,  in  rejecting  and  crucifying  the  Just  One.    All  sinners
will  have  "their  portion  with  the  hypocrites"  (see  oh.  xxiv.  61). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  16 — 22. — Swearing.  Prom  the  doingM  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  the  Lord
passes  to  their  teaching ;  and  he  commeoces  with  their  refinement  in  respect  to  oaths.
There  is  no  reference  here  to  judicial  swearing,  or  deposing  upon  oath  before  a
magistrate  in  the  interests  of  public  justice.  The  whole  argument  goes  to  show  that
the  swearing  here  referred  to  ia  the  voluntary  and  gratuitous.

I.  Swearing  obiginates  nc  falsehood.  1.  Simple  assertion  is  the  sufficient  land  of
a  true  man.  (1)  By  volunteering  raorej  a  man  reflects  upon  his  own  honour.  He  that
will  not  trifle  with  his  word  has  no  need  to  swear.  (2)  By  requiring  more,  he  reflects
upon  the  character  of  his  neighbour.  (3)  An  oath  is  no  increased  guarantee  for  truth.
He  that  can  trifle  with  his  word  will  trifle  with  an  oath.  2.  More  than  affirmation  it
from,  an  evil  sotirce.  (1)  It  comes  from  the  spirit  of  falsehood.  This  is  the  spirit  of
the  devil.  He  is  the  father  of  lies.  (2)  The  spirit  of  falsehood  will  make  lies  as  black
as  possible  by  calling  in  sacred  things  to  witness  them.

II.  It  tends  to  equivooatioit.  1.  Th*  Pharisees  invented  evasive  distinctions,
(1)  "An  oath  for  confirmation  is  the  end  of  all  strife,"  because  it  is  an  appeal  to  God
as  witness  to  the  truth.  (2)  But  the  Pharisees  made  it  "  nothing,"  i.e.  the  oath  has
no  force,  or  may  be  violated  with  impunity,  to  swear  by  the  temple,  provided  the  gold
of  the  temple  was  left  out  of  the  question.  So  they  made  it  "  nothing"  to  swear  by
the  altar,  provided  the  gift  upon  the  altar  was  excepted.  Thus  their  swearing  tended
to  lying.  2.  These  distinctions  were  false  in  fact.  (1)  They  inverted  the  order  of
importance.  They  preferred  the  gifts  to  the  altar,  and  the  gold  to  the  temple.  They
preferred  their  own  righteousness  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  in  holding  their  gifts  to
be  of  greater  consequence  than  God's  appointment.  (2)  The  altar  which  sanctifies  the
gift  ii  greater  than  the  gift ;  so  for  the  same  reason  is  the  temple  greater  than  the  gold.
Nete :  Gold  that  touches  the  altar  is  more  than  gold,  for  it  is  consecrated  to  the  Divine
service.  Things  are  great  in  proportion  to  their  sacredness.  Therefore  seek  first  the
kingdom  of  God,  (^  The  value  of  material  things  is  determined  by  their  uses.  A
fortune  coming  to  a  sot  is  but  a  death-warrant  to  him.    3.  They  are  demoralising.

(1)  The  object  of  attaching  superior  sanctity  to  the  gifts  of  the  altar  and  gold  of  the
temple  treasury  was  to  heighten  the  idea  of  meritoriousness   in  presenting  them,

(2)  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  also  probably   derived   pecuniary .  advantage  from
those  gifts.

III.  It  INJTTBE8  BBVBBENOS.  1.  It  is  a  breach  of  the  commandments.  (1)  It  otfendg
against  the  first  and  second.  An  oath  is  an  appeal  to  God;  to  make  this  appeal  to  a
creature  is  to  put  that  creature  in  his  place  (see  Deut.  vi.  13).  To  swear  by  anything
lower  than  God  is  to  set  aside  the  Author  of  truth  and  faith  in  favour  of  a  creature.

i2)  It  offends  against  the  third.  It  vulgarizes  the  most  sacred  thingi.  Too  much
amiliarity  with  them  brings  them  intocontempt.  This  is  an  offence  which  God  will
not  lightly  pass  over  (see  Exod.  xx.  7).  2.  It  is  a  violation  of  the  gospel  law.  (1)
Our  Lord  i*  most  emphatic  in  his  inhibition  of  swearing  (see  ch.  v.  33 — 37).  (2)
Swearing  is  now,  therefore,  no  longer  a  thing  sacred,  but,  on  the  contrary,  most  profane,

IV.  It  DK0IIVX8  AND  XNSNABEs.  1.  The  guides  are  blind.  (1)  It  is  bad  when  the
leaders  of  the  people  cause  them  to  err  (see  Isa.  ix,  16 ;  Ivi.  10).  It  is  bad  for  the
people.  When  the  conscience,  by  casnistry,  is  made  the  ally  of  vice,  the  condition  of
the  dupe  is  hopeless.  (2)  If  it  is  bad  for  the  people,  it  is  worse  for  the  guides.  Their
blindness  is  worse  than  ignorance.  It  is  the  blindness  of  a  wilful,  perverting
casuistry.  (3)  However  keen-sighted  a  man  may  be  about  his  temporal  interests,  he
is  blind  indeea  if  he  be  unable  to  discern  what  concerns  his  eternal  welfare.  2.  But
Ood  is  not  deceived.  (1)  He  will  be  no  party  to  the  fictitious  distinctions  of  men  by
which  they  would  fain  release  themselves  from  the  obligation  of  their  oath&,  He
holds  the  swearer  by  the  temple  to  swear  by  the  God  of  the  temple.  (2)  "By  him
that  dwelleth,"  perhaps  dwelt,  m  allusion  to  the  Shechinah,  which  was  the  chief  glory
of  the  temple  once,  but  was  then  wanting  in  the  second  temple.  Taken  in  i\ie  present,
the  temple  with  the  Bheohlnah  was  the  body  of  Christ  (see  John  ii.  21),  This  is  th«
greatest  and  most  durable  of  temples — the  "  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  th*
aMvans."    Not*  t  Bvery  Ohiiatian  is  a  living  temple ;  so  common  things  are  sanotifitd


420  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxiii.  1—39.

to  him  (c£  1  Oor.  t11.  1* ;  Titus  i.  16).  (3)  "  By  all  things  thereon."  The  eubstitu-
tion  of  this  phrase  here  for  the  gold  suggests  a  reference  to  the  laored  fire,  and  to  the
ministration  of  the  priests.  Appurtenances  pass  with  the  prineipal  (cf.  Pi.  xxtL  6 ;
xliii.  4).  (4)  All  forms  of  oaths  are  by  Qod  reduced  to  the  tme  intent  of  an  oath.  A
man  should  never  take  advantage  of  his  own  fault.  God  will  be  Us  own  witness,  and
will  make  the  swearer  answerable  for  hia  oaths. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  23, 34. — Monitrous  triJUng.    Our  Lord  prooeedi  to  proaoniiM  upon  the  hypo-
crite the  woe  of  his  other  evils.    Note —
L  Thi  Law  has  its  "wxiqhtigb  xattejib."     1.  Theu  are  Ui  mortH  precepts.

(1)  "Judgment."    This  implies:  (a)  Justice  in  principle,    (h)  Jostloe  in  practice.

(2)  "Mercy."  This  must  harmonize  with  justice.  The  goepcl  ^oriovuly  brings  out
this  harmony.  (3)  **  Faith."  This  implies :  (a)  Faith  in  the  sense  of  cried,  or  truth
in  belief.  A  tme  creed  is  of  great  importance,  (b)  Faith  in  the  sense  of  sincerity,  in
opposition  to  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees.  Those  called  hypocrites  »to  otherwise
'escribed  as  unbelievers  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  61 ;  Luke  xiL  46;  1  Tim.  ir.  2,  8).  (c)  Faith
in  the  sense  of  fidelity  or  faithfulness,  viz,  to  Otod.  first,  then  also  to  man  (c£  Micah  vi.
8 ;  Luke  xi.  42).  (4)  There  must  be  the  judgment  of  intelligence  in  the  understand-
ing ;  the  mercy  of  love  in  the  heart ;  the  works  of  faith  or  truth  in  the  life.'  2.  Its
aremoniei  art /or  the  takt  of  its  moral$.  (1)  Distinction  in  animals,  clean  and  andean,
was  to  show  the  differences  between  good  and  bad  men.  (2)  Distinction  in  meats  was
to  teach  discrimination  in  fellowships.  (3)  Laws  respecting  the  treatment  of  creatures
wag  to  show  how  men  should  be  treated.  "  Doth  God  take  care  for  oxen  ?  "  (cf.  Deut.
xxT.  4 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  9 ;  1  Tim.  v.  18).  They  that  are  taught  in  the  Word,  and  do  not
communicate  to  them  that  teach  them — loving  a  cheap  gospel — come  short  of  the
Pharisee,  who  tithed  pot  herbs.  (4)  Purifications  which  terminated  in  the  flesh  taught
the  meed  of  the  "  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God."

n.  Thx  htfocbttx  cmiBTS  God's  obdkb.  1.  E*  it  punctUiout  to  trifltt.  (1)
He  is  scrupulous  to  the  tithing  of  mint,  diU,  rue,  cummin  (see  Lev.  xxvii.  30).  'J'he
Talmud  says,  "  The  tithing  of  com  is  from  the  Law ;  the  tithing  of  herbs  is  from  the
rabbins."  He  will  "  strain  out  the  gnat."  The  stricter  Jews  were  extremely  particu-
lar in  straining  their  liquors  before  drinking,  lest  they  should  inadvertently  swallow
sgme  unclean  insect,  and  so  be  defiled.  The  wine-gnat  is  easily  caught  in  a  strainer.
(2)  Scrupulousness  in  the  abstract  is  not  blameworthy.  "  These  things  ought  ye  to
have  done."  Eminent  virtue  may  display  itself  in  the  smallest  matters  (see  Mark  xiL
42).  The  morality  is  imperfect  that  neglects  detail.  2.  St  miitet  important  thingt.  (1)
The  scrupulous  Pharisee,  in  his  minute  attention  to  the  letter,  missed  the  spirit  of  the
Law,  which  was  of  far  greater  importance.  The  gnat  and  the  camel  are  both  unclean,
though  of  very  different  magnitude.  The  Pharisee  was  scrupulous  over  the  ceremonial,
unscrupulous  as  to  the  moral — the  greater.  He  unblushingly  practised  the  greatest
iniquities.  The  Law  is  fulfilled  more  in  the  spirit  than  in  the  letter.  The  gospel  is
the  spirit  of  the  Law.  (2)  We  strain  ont  the  gnat  and  swallow  the  camel  when  we
are  scrupulous  about  trifling  errors  and  unscrupulous  about  great  evils.  The  Pharisee
is  like  the  customer  that  U  punctual  in  paying  small  debts  that  he  may  get  deeper
into  the  tradesman's  books  and  defraud  Mm  ot  a  greater  sum.  They  swallowed  the
camel  when  they  gave  Judas  the  price  of  innocent  blood ;  they  strained  out  the  gnat
when  they  scrupled  to  put  the  money  in  the  treasury  (ch.  xxvi.  6).  (3)  Things  should
be  taken  in  God's  order,  which  is  the  order  of  their  importance.  The  things  of  God
come  before  those  of  men  (see  ch.  xvi.  23).  Those  only  who  attend  to  the  "  weightier
matters"  are  qualified  to  judge  as  to  the  lighter  ones.  The  formal  may  exclude  the
essential,  but  the  essential  does  not  exclude  the  formal  There  may  be  piety  witiiout
religion ;  there  caimot  be  religion  without  piety  .^ — J.  A.  M.

Ters.  36 — ^28. — Tatai  bUndnett,  Our  Lord  continues  to  denounce  woes  against
hypocrites,  both  for  what  they  do  and  for  what  they  art.  The  relation  between  doing
and  being  is  constant.    These  things  are  written  for  our  learning.

I.  Th*  htpoobitx  is  woxruLLT  auiLTT.  1.  Ee  is  guUly  of  htart-wiekedneis.  (1)
Under  the  utmost  ceremonial  strictness,  like  the  garnished  tomb  enclosing  "dead  men's
bones  tod  all  uncleanness,"  is  concealM  ths  greatest  moral  Ikxity ,    Thos —


OH.  xxiii.  1— 39.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  421

*  Natnre,  like  •  iManteoni  wall.
Doth  oft  olo*s  in  pollution."

(SIutkeapenM.)

(2)  As  an  adorned  tomb  is  but  the  garniture  of  death  and  corruption,  bo  is  the  external
sanctity  of  the  Pharisee  in  disgusting  oontrast  to  his  inward  turpitude.  (3)  The  meat
and  drink  in  the  platter  and  cup,  externally  so  scrupulously  cleansed,  are  the  nourish-
ment and  refreshment  of  the  hypocrite.  His  luxuries  are  procured  by  means  nefarious
and  corrupt  (see  ver.  14).  The  hypocrite  is  selfish  to  cruelty.  (4)  The  nourishment
and  refreshment  of  the  Pharisee  is,  in  the  estimation  of  Christ,  filth  and  poison.
Luxury  punishes  fraud,  feeding  disease  with  fruits  of  injustice.  The  disease  and  death
thus  nourished  are  moral  more  than  physical.  2.  Be  is  gmlty  of  deceiving  others,  (1)
The  cleansed  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  and  the  whiting  on  the  sepulchre,  are
intended  to  be  seen ;  and  so  is  the  piety  of  the  hypocrite.  The  purpose  is  to  divert
attention  from  the  filth  and  rottenness  within.  (2)  The  success  is  often  too  well
Assured.  Man  surveys  surfaces.  His  vision  does  not  search  substances.  To  do  this
requires  experiment  which  he  is  too  lazy  to  institute.  (3)  Hence  the  professed  belief
in  human  nature,  (o)  Unconverted  men  must  be  hypocrites  to  be  endured.  Society
would  be  intolerable  but  for  its  veneer.  (6)  The  children  of  nature  are  readily  deceived
in  a  world  of  hypocrites.  Their  pride  and  self-conceit  leads  them  to  credit  themselves
with  virtues;  and  the  Pharisee  deceives  them,  (c)  But  that  religious  persons  should
"  believe  in  human  nature "  only  shows  how  successfully  the  hypocrite  may  even
"  deceive  the  very  elect."  (d)  The  believers  in  human  nature  are  liable  to  trust  in  it
instead  of  Christ  for  their  salvation,  and  perish  in  their  delusion^  3.  He  it  guilty  of
insviting  God.  (1)  He  ignores  God.  While  he  strives  after  the  praise  of  men,  he
leaves  God  out  of  the  account.  Is  God  to  be  treated  as  nobody  with  impunity  1  (2)
He  degrades  God.  Affecting  the  praise  of  men  rather  than  the  praise  of  God,  he  treats
the  Creator  as  inferior  to  his  creatures.  Will  this  insolence  be  endured  for  ever  ?  (3)
As  the  whitening  of  the  sepulchre  was  intended  to  warn  passengers  to  avoid  its  defiling
contact,  so  should  the  sham  piety  of  the  Pharisee  warn  honest  men  away  from  the
sphere  of  his  moral  infection  (see  Luke  xi.  44).  (4)  Let  the  sinner  be  alarmed  at  the
formidableness  of  the  impending  woe.     Let  him  repent,  amend,  a.nd  sue  for  mercy.

II.  The  HTPOOBITK  IB  OBiMiNALliT  BLIND.  1.  Godreqvdres  truth  in  the  heart.  (1)  He
^s  himself  essentially  holy.  This  means  that  his  nature  must  repel  from  him  every-
thing that  is  unholy.  God  must  needs  wage  eternal  war  against  sin.  (2)  But  his
grace  has  made  possible  his  reconciliation  to  the  sinner,  (a)  In  the  provision  of  the
atonement.  (6)  In  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  (c)  Through  faith  the  righteousness
of  the  Law  may  not  only  become  "imputed  to  us,  but  also  "  fulfilled  in  us."  (3)  The
life  wiU  be  holy  when  the  heart  is  clean.  "  The  heart  may  be  a  temple  of  God  or  a
grave ;  a  heaven  or  a  hell "  (Stier).  The  cleansing  of  the  inside  affects  the  outside  but
not  contrariwise.  "  Cleanse  j?rs<  the  inside  of  the  cup  and  of  the  platter,  that  the  outside
thereof  may  become  clean  also."  (4)  There  is  a  cleansing  that  is  external  even  after
the  heart  it  clean.  This  our  Lord  evinced  when  he  washed  the  feet  of  his  disciples.
2.  The  hypocrite  imposes  ijupon  himself.  (1)  He  is  criminally  blind  to  the  folly  that
avoids  those  scandalous  sins  which  would  spoil  his  reputation  with  men,  while  he
allows  tlie  heart-wickedness  which  renders  him  odious  to  God  (see  Ps.  v.  9).  Jesus
saw  the  filth  within  the  cup  and  platter,  and  the  rottenness  within  the  sepulchre.  (2)
He  is  criminally  blind  to  the  fact  that  in  imposing  upon  his  fellows  he  does  not  impose
upon  his  Maker.  The  same  Jesus  who  showed  the  Pharisee  the  extortion  and  excesses
of  the  heart  will  show  these  things  to  him  again  in  the  day  of  woe.  (3)  The  hypo-
crite is  criminally  blind  to  the  fact  that  the  Ufe  is  cleansed  in  the  heart.  Those  only
are  externally  clean  who  are  inwardly  pure.  Christ  views  the  profession  in  relation  to
the  state  of  the  heart.  In  this  light  he  will  judge  the  works  of  men  at  the  last  great
day. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  29 — 39. — Judgmmt  and  mercy.  We  come  now  to  the  eighth  and  last  of  thia
series  of  woes  denounced  by  Christ  against  the  wicked,  which  stands  in  striking
contrast  to  the  eighth  and  last  of  the  Beatitudes  (cf.  ch.  v.  10 — 12).    Note —

I.  Thai  instead  or  tbb  tathbbs  ooxb  vr  tub  chilsbkn  or  ths  wicked.    1.  The


422  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,      [on.  xxiii.  1—39.

fathers  of  the  wicked,  -were  the  persecutors  of  tlm  good,.  (1)  The  older  Pharisees  were
guilty  of  the  blood  of  the  more  ancient  prophets.  Rulers,civil  and  ecclesiastical  alike,
were  persecutors.  Note  :  (as)  Rulers  are  generally  what  the  people  will  have  them.
"  Like  people,  like  priest "  (cfi  Isa.  xxiv.  2 ;  Jer.  v.  30,  31 ;  Hos.  iv.  9).  (*)  So  contrari-
wise, people  are  demoralized  by  their  rulers.  (2)  Thej  slew  the  righteous  because
of  their  righteousness.  So  it  was  in  the  case  of  Able  (cf.  1  John  iii.  12).  And  for
having  reproved  the  iniquity  of  the  people ,  Zechariah  was  slain  by  order  of  King  Joash
(see  2  Chron.  xxiv.  20,  21).  2.  The  children  of  wickedness  confess  while  tliey  denounce
tlmr  fathers.  (1)  By  building  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  garnishing  the  sepul-
chres of  the  righteous,  the  Pharisees  disavowed  the  deeds  of  their  fathers  who  had
persecuted  them.  But  this  was  precisely  what  their  fathers  did  with  the  tombs  of  th  e  ■
prophets  whom  the  grandfathers  had  slain.  Note  :  It  is  a  sign  of  a  hypocrite  to
profess  veneration  for  all  good  men  excepting  those  among  whom  he  lives.  (2)  The
cases  of  Abel  and  Zechariah  are  cited  as  belonging  to  a  series  destined  to  be  continued.
By  sending  his  prophets  and  scribes,  apostles  and  evangelists  (cf.  ch.  xiii,  52;  Luke
xi.  49),  Jesus  gave  these  hypocrites  tlie  opportunity  to  prove  themselves  by  the  very
deeds  they  professed  to  abhor,  the  children  of  their  wicked  fathers.  Accordingly,
as  he  predicted,  they  "  killed  "  the  two  Jameses ;  "  crucified  "  Andrew  and  Peter ;
"  stoned  "  Stephen  and  Paul ;  "  scourged  "  Peter,  John,  and  Paul ;  and  others  they
' '  persecuted  from  city  to'  city  "  (see  Acts  viii.  1 ;  ix.  2).  Being  the  "  offspring  of
vipers,"  they  were  "  serpents,"  and,  together  with  their  fathers,  the  brood  of  the
original  serpent  (cf .  ch.  iii.  7  ;  xii.  34 ;  John  viii.  44).  Note  :  The  same  providence  of
God  is  an opportunityforaman  to  prove  himself  a  hero  or  a  rascal.  (3)  "  Yebuild,"
etc.  Note:  Hypocrites  incur  guiltinmatters  not  wrong  in  themselves  Building  the
sepulchres  of  the  righteous  is  a  cheap  aif  ectation  of  righteousness.  The  dead  Pharisee
was  buying  his  dead*when  he  honoured  the  dead»messenger  and  dishonoured  the
living  message.

II.  That  thb  sins  or  ages  mat  be  visited  upon  a  single  genebation.  1,
Judgement  is  provoked  by  presistent  impenitence.  (1)  There  is  a  measure  of  iniquity
which  provokes  judgment.  As  when  the  "fourth"  transgression  is  added  to  the  third
(see  Amos i.  3,  etc.).  (2)  Wickedness  may  be  so  encouraged  as  to  render  repentance
and  reformation  utterly  hopeless  (see  Jer.  xiii.  23).  (3)  Judgment  is  deferred  until
the  measure  of  iniquity  which  provokes  it  is  full  (see  Gen.  xv.  16).  (4)  The  measure
is  full  when  that  point  is  reached  beyond  which  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  character
of  a  wise  and  righteous  government,  though  founded  inmercy,  to  extend  impunity.
(5)  He  who  commits  any  sin  is  partaker  with  all  who  have  committed  the  same.
So  the  inquity  of  the  fathers  is  visited  upon  their  children.  2.  Its  severity  follows
in  tlie  wake  of  mercy.  (1)  The  hen  clucking  her  chickens  under  her  wing  when  the
hawk  is  overhead  is  a  fine  figure  to  set  forth  the  merciful  protection  which  Jesus
would  extend  to  Jerusalem  against  the  Roman  eagle,  did  her  children  but  know  the
day  of  their  visitation  (cf.Ps.  xci.4;Mal.iv-2).  (2)  That  sinners  are  not  gathered  to
Christ  is  owing  wholly  to  their  wickedness  (cf.  Ps.lxxxi.  11,12).  "Pill  ye  up,"  etc.,
is  a  word  of  permission,  not  a  command;  as  if  he  had  said,  "  I  contend  witli  you  no
longer:  I  leave  you  to  yourselves."  (3)  "The  tears  of  Jesus  are  the  last  issues  of
defeated  love,  and  tell  sinners,  '  Thou  hast  despised  my  blood  that  would  have  saved
thee ;  thou  shall  yet  have  my  tears  that  do  only  lament  thee  lost' "  (Howe).  (4)
Punishment  equal  to  the  accumulated  woes  brought  upon  men  for  resisting  the  truth
and  persecutingits  preachers  in  all  past  ages,  came.upon  this  generation  for  putting  to
death  One  infinitely  grater  than  all  the  prophets.

III.  That  a  Cheistless  house  is  a  woeful  desolation,  1.  8o  it  proved  in  the
day  sof  tlie  fathers.  (1)  The  blood  of  Zechariah,  like  that  of  Abel,  criedf  or  vengeance.
The  last  words  of  Zechariah  were,  "The  Lord  see,  and  require  it"  (cf.  Gen.  iv.  10;  2
Chron.  xxiv.  22).  (2)  Vengeance  came  when"  the  host  of  Syria  came  to  Judahand
Jerusalem,  and  destroyed  all  the  princes  of  the  people  from  among  the  people."  A
people  deprived  of  princely  rulers — princely  in  the  moral  sense — is  in  a  sorry  case.  (3)
But  the  temple  was  not  desolated  by  the  Babylonians  until  after  the  sins  of  the  people
had  provoked  God  to  take  away  the  glory  of  his  own  blessed  presence.  2.  So  it  proved
in  the  days  of  their  children.  (1)  As  the  blood  of  Jehoiada  returned  upon  the  head
of  his  murderers  in  the  Babylonian  invasion,  so  did  that  of  Jesus  return  upon  their


OH.  xun,  1— «9.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  423

children  in  the  Roman  invasion.  (2)  As  the  Babylonians  did  not  demolish  the  first
temple  until  after  the  Shechinah  had  abandoned  it,  so  neither  did  th«  Romans  destroy
the  second  temple  until  after  Jeius  had  left  it.  (8)  It  ii  remarkable  that,  in  leaving
the  temple,  he  followed  the  course  indicated  by  the  Shechinah  (Ezek.  x.).  It  stood  first
upon  the  threshold.  So  did  Jesus  when  he  uttered  his  pathetic  lamentation.  Then  it
removed  to  the  east  of  the  city  to  the  Mount  of  Olivei.  So  did  Jeius.  From  the  Mount
of  Olives  it  ascended  into  heaven.  After  the  ascension  of  Jesua  came  the  abomination
of  desolation  spoken  of  by  the  Prophet  DanieL  (4)  "  Your  house."  So  the  temple  is
now  termed — not  "  God's  house  "  any  longer  (of.  Exod.  xxxiL  7,  where  God  says  to
Moses,  "  Thy  people  ").  "  Is  left  unto  you  " — to  the  Jews  especially — "  desolate,"  since
they  can  no  longer  seek  salvation  there.  (5)  The  Jews  still  carry  the  curse  of  Cain
the  murderer  of  Abel — the  "  mark  "  of  the  "  fugitive  and  vagabond."  3.  The  children  of
wicktdnett  are  not  exclusively  Jewish.  (1)  For  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus  shed
by  the  pagan  Romans  desolation  was  poured  upon  Daniel's  "  desolator  "  (see  Dan.  ix.
27).  The  barbarians  were  the  instruments  of  retribution.  (2)  The  mystical  Babylon
revived  in  the  papacy  is  reserved  for  retribution  for  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  which  is
found  in  her  (see  Rev.  vi.  11 ;  xvii.  6 ;  xviii.  24 ;  xix.  20),  (3)  Individual  ofiendera
are  reserved  to  the  judgment  of  the  last  day.  "  So  terrible  is  God's  judgment  that
when  he  punishes  a  sinaer  he  seems  to  punish  aU  tin  in  him  "  (Quesnel).

IV.  That  ths  LONG-suyrBEiNO  o*  Chbist  is  saltation.  1.  The  Jews  will  yet
se«  Christ  in  his  glory.  (1)  This  they  have  clamoured  for.  (2)  The  contrast  to  his
first  coming  iu  humiliation  will  be  great.  2.  They  will  all  acknowledge  him  then.  (1)
Formerly  the  babes  perfected  praise  when  the  rulers  refused  it  (see  ch.  xxi.  9).
(2)  The  rulers  then  will  cry,  "Hosannal"  The  words,  "Blessed  is  hel"  are  a  con-
fession of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  (see  Rom.  xi.  26,  27).  (3)  If  they  do  not  say,
"Blessed  is  hel"  in  penitence  then,  they  will  say  it  by  constraint  in  perdition. —
J.  A.M.

Ver.  3. —  jf%e  tin  of  inconsistency.  "  For  they  say,  and  do  not."  To  ouj  Lord  the
supreme  offence  was  contradiction  between  saying  and  doing,  appearance  and  fact,
outside  and  inside,  show  and  reality.  A  man  who  is  himself  consciously  sincere  is
always  keen  to  detect,  quick  to  revolt  against,  insincerity  in  others.  But  if  incon-
sistency is  mischievous  in  any  man,  it  is  doubly  mischievous  in  religious  teachers,  and
in  persons  occupying  prominent  positions  of  influence.  Probably  the  reference  of  our
Lord  to  "  scribes  and  Pharisees  "  is  intended  to  limit  his  denunciation  to  particular
classes  of  Pharisees — those  who  were  learned  in  the  Law,  and  professed  to  teach  the
Law.  It  really  means  "those  Pharisees  who  were  also  scribes."  And  when  Jesus
adds  the  word  "hypocrites,"  he  really  limits  his  denunciation  to  such  as  were
hypocrites.

I.  iNCONSiSTBlfOT  IS  THE  PEEIL  OF  oiTioiALS.  Whatever  is  done  regularly  as  a
duty  is  in  danger  of  being  done  perfunctorily.  The  heart  may  go  with  the  act  at
first,  but  the  constancy  and  the  outwardness  soon  involve  the  failing  of  heart-interest,
and  presently  the  heart  is  occupied  with  one  thing  and  the  hands  with  another ;  and
even  the  desire  for  harmony  between  the  interests  of  heart  and  hand  can  easily  be  lost.
This  is  the  common  peril  of  all  oflicials — priests,  clergy,  statesmen,  teachers,  secretaries ;
and  the  peril  is  never  so  great  as  in  cases  of  religion.  Cases  of  open  inconsistency  may
happily  he  infrequent  in  the  Christian  ministry,  but  the  fear  of  inconsistency  should
always  be  present  to  the  mind  of  those  who  hold  office,  and  make  them  watchful  and
zealous  concerning  their  own  integrity.  A  teacher  never  has  his  true  power  unless
heart  and  hand  go  well  together.

II.  Inoonsibtenoy  is  the  peril  of  disciples.  Our  Lord  was  anxious  concerning
the  influence  of  the  model  teachers  of  his  day  on  the  men  who  were  to  teach  his  truth
after  he  ascended.  So  his  words  are  intended  to  be  a  solemn  warning  to  them.  What
scribes  said  was  more  worthy  and  more  important  than  what  they  did.  What  our
Lord's  disciples  were  and  did  was  always  much  more  important  than  what  they  said.
To  do  Christ's  work  in  the  world,  our  words  must  always  precisely  utter  our  hearts.
But  show  the  danger  of  over-stating  religious  feeling  and  experience,  and  so  weakening
onr  force  by  the  suggestion  of  inconsistency.

IIL  Ikconsistency  is  the  peril  of  THE  PEOPLE.    For  if  they  see  It  in  their  teachers,


424  THB  OOSPKL  AOOOSDmO  TO  ST.  MJITTHSW.    [w.  xxbl  1— Sft

they  readily  take  up  the  idea  that  It  to  •ermissible  1b  themMlrw,  aai  n  Okrlit'a  truth
is  diihonoiured  and  kia  awrioa  miaooaoaiTad. — B.  T.

Ter.  6. — l%ejiiietnat(<m  0/  Auma*  praUe.  "  All  their  worki  they  do  for  to  'W  w«d
of  men."  It  i<  right  for  vm  to  desire  acceptance  and  favour  witk  our  fellow-men.  The
desire  isc  kumau  praise  it  a  proper  incentive  and  iugpiration,  which  no  moraliit  can
afford  to  under-estimate.  But  in  relation  to  it,  we  must  apply  the  ever-worldng  law  of
Christian  moderation.  The  love  of  praise  very  readily  become*  an  absorbing  mania,
and,  like  all  manias,  it  implies  mental  and  moral  deterioration.  ▲  man  may  oome  to
live  for  praise,  and  nake  a  life-aim  of  getting  his  fellows'  admiration.  If  he  does,  ho
will  drift  ever  downward,  until  he  even  tries  to  get  praise  for  the  cut  of  his  garments,
the  grace  of  hit  bow,  and  the  politeness  of  hia  speech.  He  will  even  be  pleased  when
ignorant  street  people  gape  at  his  phylacteries  and  the  wide  borders  of  mi  garments ;
and  everywhere  he  wiU  be  asserting  himself,  and  puihing  into  the  chief  places ;  making
himself  disagreeable  by  trying  to  make  himself  admirable.

I.  HnxAN  PBAUB  AS  ix  IKSFIBATIOH.  It  IS  not  the  highest  and  beat  inspiration.
It  is  only  an  inspiration.  The  loyal-hearted  and  high-toned  man  seeks  Divine  accept-
ance. "  Study  to  show  thyself  approved  unto  God."  But  men  can  help  others  by
kindly  approvals.  And  the  hope  of  gaining  approval  does  worthily  influence  grown
iticn  as  well  as  young  children.  Show  (1)  t^t  the  praise  of  men  may  translate  God's
approval  to  us ;  (2)  that  we  need  never  be  puffed  up,  if  we  take  men's  praise  to  God,
and  thank  him  for  letting  us  have  the  cheer  of  it ;  (3)  that  we  need  not  make  the
desire  for  men's  praise  shape  our  conduct  and  relations.  We  can  do  right  because  It  is
right,  and  accept  men's  praise  if  it  comes.  It  is  always  well  to  remember  that  God
approves  the  quality  of  a  thing,  but  men  are  usually  caught  by  the  apf«aranc«  of
things.  There  is  never  any  reason  why  a  good  thing  should  not  also  be  a  good-
looking  thing.

II.  HmiAN  FBAIBE  AS  A  BKABi.  In  tho  case  of  these  scribes  we  see  that  it  made
them  tutrue  to  themselves.  They  soon  found  out  what  men  stared  at  and  admired,
and  then  set  themselves  to  provide  it,  heedless  as  to  whether  it  expressed  their  real
selves  or  not.  Human  praise  cultivates  vanity,  a  meaner  vice  than  pride.  Vanity
differs  from  pride  partly  in  this — the  proud  man  generally  has  something  to  be  proud
about;  the  vain  man  is  vain  concerning  just  himself,  and  wants  yJat^er^,  yearns  for  it,
lives  on  it,  will  demean  himself  if  only  he  can  get  it,  feeds  his  vanity  on  praise,  and
never  minds  though  the  praise  is  worti^ess  in  its  insincerity. — ^B.  T.

Ter.  8. — Tht  equality  of  helieveri.  "  And  all  ye  are  brethren."  The  kindliness  and
mutual  helpfulness  of  brotherhood  are  not  prominent  in  our  Lord's  mind  at  this  time.
He  was  rather  thinking  of  the  equality  of  the  brothers  in  one  family.  All  are  sons.
No  one  of  them  is  any  more  than  a  son.  No  one  of  them  has  any  rights  over  his
brother.  The  variety  of  gifts,  talents,  and  dispositions  in  no  way  affects  the  equal
rights  of  the  brotherhood.  All  who  push  themselves  into  chief  places,  bid  for  special
greetings,  or  claim  to  be  masters — if  they  presume  to  call  themselves  Christ's  disciples
— sin  against  the  equality  of  the  Christian  brotherhood.

I.  ThB  equality   of   THB  BBOTHERHOOD    IS    BABBS    ON    TJU    00HM05    S0N8HIP.      If

our  standing  in  Christ  depended  on  the  Divine  recognition  of  peculiarities  in  us ;  or
if  we  gained  it  upon  superior  merit  or  upon  special  endeavour,  there  might  be  orders
and  gradations  in  the  Christian  discipleship.  But  brothers  are  just  born  into  families ;
they  are  brothers  because  they  are  sons,  aod  for  no  other  reason;  the  bond  uniting
them  is  the  common  family  life.  So  we  are  born  of  God;  made  sons  apart  from  all
effort  of  our  own ;  quickened  with  a  Divine  life  whose  operations  we  cannot  control.
And  we  are  all  quickened  and  saved  and  made  sons  in  just  the  same  way.  Bich  or
poor,  there  is  for  all  the  one  "  laver  of  regeneration."  Ws  are  brothers  because  we  are
sons ;  and  as  we  are  nothing  but  sons,  so  we  are  nothing  but  brothers.

n.  Th«  equalitt  or  the  bbothebhood  admits  of  vabxetikb  is  abilitt.  The
diversity  of  character  and  of  gifts  io  a  family  is  the  subject  of  constant  remark.  It  is
a  commonplace.  But  noble  natures  never  make  such  diversity  a  reason  for  claiming
superiority.  The  most  talented  members  are  olten  the  most  brotherly.  The  family
bond  is  not  affected  by  personal  peculiarities.    There  are  diversities  of  gifts  in  God's


OK,  xiHi.  1— 39,]    THB  GOSPEL  A(X!0RDmO  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  426

redeemed  family.  We  always  go  wiong  when,  on  account  of  lome  gift,  we  asaert
ounelvei  and  break  the  brotkerhood.

HI.  TBI    IQUIJUTT  or    THB    BBOTHEBHOOD    IB    BtXS    TS    HDTUAL    IIBVIOX.      It    is

not  that  Bome  one  member  is  serred  by  the  rest,  but  that  each  it  ready  to  aerre  the
other.  Each  holds  his  gift  at  the  command  of  the  otiier.  True,  a  brother's  gift  may
put  him  in  some  ofSco ;  but  he  is  there  to  serve,  not  to  rule.  This  idea  is  preserved,
in  idea  at  least,  in  every  section  of  Ohrist's  Ohuroh.  Tiie  highest  ofSces  are  never
tther  than  brotherly  places  of  service.    Our  ministers  are  our  brethren. — B.  T.

Ver.  11.— OreatntM/lfuUng  eapreuion  in  trvU*,  This  setting  of  trutk  was  repeated
by  our  Lord  again  and  again,  and  variously  illustrated  by  parable  and  by  example
(as  in  our  Lord's  washing  the  disciples'  feet).  Ho  must  nave  been  much  impressed
by  the  unreadiness  to  serve  which  distinguished  the  prominent  religionists  of  his  days.
The  Pharisee  class  was  always  scheming  to  get — to  get  wealth,  to  get  praise,  to  get
credit  He  never  saw  them  giving,  or  trying  to  do  anything  for  anybody.  They  were
always  standing  on  their  dignity.  They  loved  "salutations  in  the  market-places,"
everybody  paying  special  deference  to  these  learned  and  holy  men.  Even  the  little
buys  pulling  off  their  turbans,  and  bowing  low  as  the  great  man  passed.  It  was  in
the  mind  of  Ohrist  to  set  a  complete  contrast  to  all  this  before  the  people ;  and  he
would  have  his  disciples  continue  his  example.  But  it  should  be  dearly  shown  that
our  Lord's  example  was  in  no  sense  put  on ;  it  was  the  naturtd  and  proper  expression
of  his  principles  and  spirit.

L   A  UkS  U  Df  KO  SEKBB  GKEAT  WHO  THIHES  OHIEFLT  ABOUT  HntSEIiT.      This  is

what  Christ  teaches.  This  is  not  what  the  world  teaches.  If  a  man  is  to  "get  on,"  the
world  says  he  must  take  care  of  "  number  one."  Ohrist  says  he  may  get  on  that  way,
but  he  will  never  get  up.  The  inspiration  is  low  which  a  man  gives  himself.  The
old-world  idea  of  greatness  was  summed  up  in  the  ideas  of  position  and  achievement.
In  connection  with  our  text,  set  out  before  you  a  self-centred  Pharisee,  and  say  whether
that  man  U,  in  any  sense  at  all,  gr«at.  What  can  you  admire  in  him  P  ISo  doubt  he
thinks  himself  great ;  but  is  he  ?  Evidently  Christ  has  raised  our  standard  of  Judg-
ment, and  we  find  we  only  despise  the  man  whose  life  circles  round  himself.

IL   A   HAV  18  OBKAT  WHO  THINKS  OHIEFLT   ABOUT  WHAT   HB   CAN  DO   rOB  0THU8.

Christ  has  recovered  "  ministry,"  and  ennobled  it  for  ever.  Recovered  It,  because  :  1,
it  was  God's  primal  idea  for  the  human  race.  When  he  made  man  male  and  female,
he  established  the  law  of  mutual  service.  When  he  made  parents  and  children,  he
glorified  the  law  of  mutual  service,  and  lifted  motherhood  into  the  first  human  place.
When  he  permitted  sickness,  trouble,  and  poverty  in  his  world,  he  called  for  a  brother-
hood of  sympathizing  service,  2.  It  was  man  s  mischief-making  to  interfere  with
God's  dignity  of  service.  This  man  did  when,  in  his  wilfulness,  he  organized  society,
built  cities,  made  ofBces,  and  set  one  man  alx)ve  another.  Then  everybody  soon  began
to  think  what  advantage  he  could  get  over  his  brother,  instead  of  what  he  could  do  to
serve  him. — B.  T.

Yer.  13. — Th»  too*  cf  th$  hypoortte.  The  word  "  woe  "  is  repeated  again  and  again
in  this  chapter,  and  yet  the  reader  of  it  fails  to  realize  what  the  woe  denounced  precisely
was.  The  suggestive  word  is  left  by  Christ,  It  is  enough  to  tell  these  men  that  they
are  surely  heaping  up  woe  for  themselves  in  the  latter  day.  Some  hint  of  the  coming
woe  may  be  given  in  the  closing  verses  of  the  chapter,  which  indicate  a  time  of  sorest
humiliation,  of  hopeless  ruin.  Jewish  literature  gives  quite  as  bad  •  picture  of  them
as  Jesus  did.  "  Fear  not  true  Pharisees,  but  greatly  fear  painted  Pharisees,"  said  a
Jewish  ruler  to  his  wife,  when  he  was  dying.  "  The  supreme  tribunalj"  said  another,
"  will  duly  punish  hypocrites  who  wrap  their  talliths  around  them  to  appear — ^what
they  are  not — true  Pharisees."

I.  What  thinos  wxbs  HEAPnta  up  wob  fob  thesb  hyfocbitks.  Our  Lord  marks
several  things  in  which  their  hypocrisy  was  especially  manifest.  1.  Their  professing
to  be  spiritual  teachers,  yet  keeping  the  people  from  receiving  spiritual  truth  (ver.
13),  2.  They  joined  devout  prayers  for  desolate  widows  with  a  grasping  covetouKiess
that  seized  the  widows'  property  and  ruined  them.  3,  They  made  proselytes,  so  to  say,
to  righteousness,  but  compelled  them  to  be  as  bitter,  base,  and  uncharitable  as  them-


426  THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xira.  1—89.

selyes.  4.  They  made  foolish  distinctions,  which  they  took  care  did  not  hinder
themselves.  6.  They  appeared  to  be  most  delicately  Bcrupulous,  bat  in  their  conduct
they  allowed  the  grossest  and  most  abominable  licence.  6.  They  were  supremely
anxious  about  the  look  of  things;  they  were  wickedly  indifferent  about  the  real
condition  of  things.  7.  They  wanted  men  to  admire  them  in  public,  but  they  dare
not  let  any  one  see  their  private  lives.  It  is  easy  enough  to  see  that,  for  such  men,  a
revealing  day  must  come,  and,  when  it  came,  it  would  prove  humiliation  and  woe  indeed.
It  is  woe  for  such  men  to  be  found  out.  It  was  a  beginning  of  woe  for  Jesus  thus  to
show  them  up  before  the  people,  and  make  them  objects  of  scorn  and  detestation.

IL  What  FBB80N8  gtriTEBED  WOE  BGOAXJSB  OF  THE  HTPOOBITB.  For  the  religious  hypo-
crite is  a  woe-maker.  And  this  point  may  be  opened  out  with  some  fteshness.  Every
religiously  insincere  man :  1.  Makes  woe  for  himself.  He  has  no  enemy  like  himself^
2.  He  makes  woe  for  the  religious  community  to  which  he  belong!.  He  prays  against
their  prayers ;  he  brings  disgrace  on  them  when  he  is  found  out,  3.  He  makes  woe  for
society,  which  learns,  by  his  failure,  the  misery  of  mutual  mistrust.  4.  He  even  brings
dishonour  on  the  name  and  cause  of  God. — B.  T.

Ver.  15. — The  peril  <^  making  proseHytes,  The  term  "proselytes"  Is  used,  and
not  "converts"  or  "disciples."  It  is  employed  when  the  idea  to  be  conveyed  is
"persuasion"  to  accept  some  particular  opinion  or  hobby,  or  to  join  some  particular
system  or  party.  "Conversion  suggests  an  inward  change  and  renewal ;  "proselyting"
suggests  outward  association  with  a  party.  "  Ckinversion  "  is  full  of  hope ;  "  prose-
lyting "  is  full  of  peril.  The  word  was  used  by  the  Jews  for  persons  who  had  been
heathen,  but  had  accepted  Judaism,  and  they  distinguished  between  (1)  proselytes  of
the  gate,  who  received  the  teachings  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  not  the  ceremonial  Law ;
and  (2)  proselytes  of  righteousness,  who  conformed  to  the  whole  Law.  Omx  modern
term  "pervert"  conveys  something  of  the  idea  our  Lord  attached  to  "  proselyte."  Dean
Plumptre  gives  an  historical  reference,  which  skilfully  brings  out  the  point  of  our  Lord's
reproof.  "  The  zeal  of  the  earlier  Pharisees  had  shown  itself  in  a  propagandism  which
reminds  us  rather  of  the  spread  of  the  religion  of  Mahomet  than  of  that  of  Christ.
John  Hyrcahus,  the  last  of  the  Maccabean  priest-rulers,  had  offered  the  Idumajans  the
alternative  of  death,  exile,  or  circumcision.  When  the  government  of  Borne  rendered
such  measures  impossible,  they  resorted  to  all  the  arts  of  persuasion,  and  exulted  when
they  succeeded  in  enrolling  a  heathen  convert  as  a  member  of  their  party.  But  the
proselytes  thus  made  were  too  often  a  scandal  and  proverb  of  reproach.  There  was  no
real  conversion,  and  those  who  were  most  active  in  the  work  of  proselytizing  were  for
the  most  part  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  The  vices  of  the  Jew  were  engrafted  on  the
vices  of  the  heathen.  The  ties  of  duty  and  natural  affection  were  ruthlessly  snapped
asunder.  The  popular  Jewish  feeling  about  them  was  like  that  of  the  popular  Christian
feeling  about  a  converted  Jew."

I.  The  pebil  of  makino  peosblttbs  fob  those  who  make  them.  Open  such
points  as  these :  1.  A  man  must  exaggerate  sectarian  differences  before  he  can  try  to
win  proselytes  to  an  opinion.  2.  A  man  must  make  more  of  the  outward  form  than
the  inward  spirit.  3.  A  man  Is  only  too  likely  to  use  bad  means  in  gaining  such  an
end.  4.  A  man  who  makes  proselytes  honours  himself  rather  than  God.  5.  And
such  a  man  is  only  too  likely  to  be  deceived  in  the  result  he  attains.

II.  The  pebil  op  makino  pbosblttes  fob  those  who  abe  made.  Open  these
points :  1.  Men  may  be  overpressed  to  accept  opinions  on  which  they  have  really
formed  no  judgment.  2.  Perverts  notoriously  exaggerate  the  formalitiet  of  the  new
creed  they  adopt,  and  become  bitterest  partisans. — B.  T.

Ver.  24. — The  scruples  of  the  formalist.  "  Strain  at  a  gnat,  and  swallow  a  camel."
The  proverbial  character  of  this  sentence  is  manifest,  but  the  precise  form  is  disputed.
Trench  thinks  "straining  out  a  gnat"  is  better;  and  he  suggests  reference  to  the
scrupulous  anxiety  shown  in  drinking  water.  A  traveller  in  North  Africa  reports
that  a  Moorish  soldier  who  accompanied  him,  when  he  drank,  always  unfolded  the  end
of  his  turban,  and  placed  it  over  the  mouth  of  his  bota,  drinking  through  the  muslin,
to  stratn  out  the  gnats,  whose  larvse  swarm  in  the  water  of  that  country.  The
"  camel "  is  only  used  in  the  proverb  as  the  representative  of  something  big.    The


OH.  xxm.  1—39,]    THE  GOSPEL  ACXJORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  427

Hindoo  proverbial  Baying  ii,  "  Swallpwing  an  elephant,  and  being  choked  with  a  flea."
Reference  must  be  kept  to  the  class  of  persons  that  may  be  regarded  as  represented  by
hypocritical  Pharisees.

I.  He  vrao  fbebebves  the  bpibit  oak  adapt  the  fobms.  No  man  may  say
that  the  forms  of  religion  are  imimportant.  They  have  their  place,  and  only  need  to
be  kept  in  their  right  place.  But  life  comes  before  expression  of  life;  and  spirit  comes
before  form.  Being  "  born  from  above "  is  more  important  than  any  religious  rite,
even  the  most  sacred.  Only  the  man  who  has  the  spt'n't  can  bear  right  relations  to
the  forms.  H«  will  use  them.  He  will  not  be  mastered  by  them.  He  understands
that  forms  were  made  for  him,  and  he  waa  not  made  for  the  forms.  They  must,  there-
fore, be  adjusted  to  him  and  to  his  needs.  To  him  all  forms  are  servants.  Authority
in  the  forms  of  religion  may  be  voluntarily  recognized ;  but  a  man's  own  qniokened
life  ii  the  supreme  authority  to  him.

n.  Hb  who  undttlt  ebtimates  the  fobu  will  soon  be  enslaved  bt  tee  fobm.
The  student  of  human  nature,  who  considers  the  sense-conditions  under  which  we  are
set,  will  argue  that  it  must  always  be  so.  He  who  observes  Christian  life,  or  skilfully
reads  personal  experience,  will  declare  that  it  is  to.  Once  let  religious  forma  and
ceremonies  control  conduct,  break  bounds  of  the  restraint  of  soul-life,  and  they  will
run  as  does  loosened  fire  j  they  will  overlay  the  spiritual  feeling ;  they  will  absorb
all  the  powers ;  and  become  supreme  interests ;  and  when  the  spirit  is  thus  overlaid,
the  result  too  often  follows  which  we  see  in  these  Pharisees— exaggerated  scruples
about  exact  and  minute  forms  going  along  with  a  demoralizing  indifference  to  moral
purity B.T.

Ver.  28. — Appearance  and  reaHty.  "  Te  also  outwardly  appear  rlghteoui  unto  men,
but  within  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniquity."  This  is  the  revelation,  not  of  a
mere  observer  of  men,  but  of  a  Divine  Heart-searcher,  a  Divine  Thought-reader.

L  Man  judges  bt  the  odtwabd  afpeabanoe,  and  hakes  mistakes.  When
Samuel  saw  the  handsome  eldest  son  of  Jesie,  he  said,  "  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is
before  him."  But  he  was  reproved.  "  The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth ;  for  man
looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart"  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7).
1,  Man  can  only  judge  hy  the  help  of  appearances,  because  he  cannot  read  the  heart.
3.  Man  is  disposed  to  judge  of  religion  by  appearances,  beoause  he  is  daily  judging
everything  in  this  way.  3.  Man  is  always  liable  to  make  mistakes,  because  appear-
ances often  accidentally,  and  more  often  intentionally,  fail  to  present  realities.  The
peril  of  trusting  to  appearances  may  be  illustrated  by  the  way  in  which  goods  are
dressed  up  to  attract  sale.  The  same  thing  is  found  in  religious  spheres.  Credit  is
gained  by  the  show  of  piety ;  and  the  hypocrite  is  ever  over-anxious  about  his  ex-
ternal observances.  Our  Lord's  figure  of  the  cup  is  common  to  every  age ;  his  figure
of  the  "  whited  sepulchres  "  belongs  to  the  East.  Sepulchres  were  whited  so  that
Jews  might  not  unconsciously  walk  over  them,  seeing  that  this  involved  ceremonial
defilement.  The  outsides  of  burial-places  were  wliitewashed  once  a  year.  It  is  not
enough  to  see  a  man's  devoutness  at  church.  See  him  at  home.  See  him  in  busi-
ness.    See  him  in  private  prayer.    See  him  as  God  sees  him.

II.  God  judges  bt  thb  inwaed  ebalitt,  and  makes  no  mistake.  He  looks
inside  the  cup.  He  knows  what  is  inside  the  sepulchre.  He  reads  the  secret  life  of
the  fastidiously  devout  Pharisees.  He  finds  David  right-hearted,  and  chooses  him
rather  than  his  handsome  brother.  St.  Paul  intimates  that  the  Christian  man  should
be  so  absolutely  sincere  and  true,  that  he  could  readily  stand  out  in  the  sunshine,
and  let  it  look  him  through  and  through,  and  round  and  round.  See  how  the  good
man  comes  altogether  to  prefer  the  Divine  appraisement,  and  to  say  "  Search  me
O  God,  and  know  my  heart."  Impress  that  when  the  man  is  heart-right  with  God,
he  is  properly  anxious  about  his  appearance  before  men.  He  wants  that  to  tell,  as
fully  as  possible,  the  truth  of  his  inner  life.— R.  T.


Ver.  33.— Holy  denunciations.  Revised  Version,  "  Y»  sarpents,  ye  offspring  of
vipers,  how  shall  ye  escape  the  judgment  of  hell  ?"  margin,  ' '  Gehenna. "  It  is  neither
right  nor  wise  to  attempt  any  mitigations  or  modifications  of  this  intensely  severe
sentence.    Let  the  words  stand  precisely  as  we  find  them ;  and  let  the  sentence  be


428  THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xnn.  1— 39.

the  stemest,  Beverest,  intensest  sentence  that  ever  passed  the  Divine  lips  of  our  blessed
Lord.  Capable  of  being  misunderstood  and  misrepresented,  they  are  capable  also  of
most  rational  and  most  reasonable  explanation.  All  we  have  to  do  is  to  inquire
whether  the  persons  referred  to,  and  the  circumstances  under  which  th«  words  were
uttered,  would  justify  a  noble-minded  mau  in  speaking  so  intensely.  If  they  would,
then  Jesus  is  justified.

I.    ThEBB    D]gNnN0Il.TI0N8,    KEAS    IN    THE    LIGHI    OF    THE     FEBSONB     BBKOTrNOXA,

Explain  that  they  would  have  been  unsuitable  for  the  Pharisees  as  a  class.  Thay
would  have  been  over-intense  if  applied  to  the  formalist  and  hypocritical  sections  of
the  Pharisee  class.  But  they  are  strictly  appropriate  to  those  few  men  who,  for
months  past,  had  been  resisting  every  witaess  that  favoured  Christ's  claim ;  had  been
plotting,  dodging,  scheming,  to  destroy  Christ ;  had  come  fawning  upon  him,  with
malice,  hatred,  and  all  uncharitableness  in  their  hearts.  Defeated  in  argument,  they
would  not  admit  defeat.  Humiliated  by  our  Lord's  answers,  they  were  still  bent  on
effecting  their  shameless  purpose.  What  did  such  men  deserve  ?  What  was  left  to
be  done  with  them  ?  They  had  to  be  shown  up,  as  men  are  shown  np  when  withering
denunciations  are  heaped  upon  them,  under  which  they  cower,  conscience-smitten.
Jesus  was  doing  the  best  thing  possible  for  those  wretched  meo,  by  these  holy
denunciations,  the  mere  form  of  wliich  must  be  judged  by  Eastern,  not  Western,
models.

IL  These  DENTrH0Li.Ti9NS,  bead  ih  the  lioet  ot  the  Pebson  denounoins.  Those
who  so  readily  accuse  Christ  of  over-severity  would  be  the  very  first  and  loudest  in
accusing  him  of  moral  weakness,  inability  to  recognize  or  respond  to  sin,  if  such
instances  of  severity  had  not  been  recorded.  The  true  man,  the  Divine  man,  feels
adequately  in  response  to  every  situation ;  and  we  may  unhesitatingly  affirm  that  this
was  a  time  to  be  sublimely  indignant,  and  that  burning  words  of  wrath— "terrible  as
these — were  the  fitting  thing  for  the  occasion. — R.  T.

Ver.  37. — Loit  opporttmities  lecome  judgmvnU.  One  writer  observes  that  converts
to  Judaism  were  said  to  come  "  under  the  wings  of  the  Shechinah."  This  familiar
metaphor  may  have  suggested  to  our  Lord's  mind  the  figure  of  the  hen  and  her  brood.
"  Many  times  by  his  prophets  Oiirist  called  the  children  of  Jerusalem  to  himself — ^the
true  Shechinah — ^througb  whom  the  glory  of  the  latter  house  was  greater  than  that  of
the  former."  Whedon  well  says,  **  The  beautiful  tenderness  of  this  verse  shows  that
the  warnings  of  the  previous  verses  are  the  language,  not  of  human  anger,  but  of
terrible  Divine  justice."  It  is  quite  probable  that  our  Lord's  visits  to  Jerusalem,  and
his  prolonged  labours  in  that  City,  are  not  fully  detailed  in  the  Gospels.  He  may  refer
to  his  own  eflforts  to  win  the  people  to  full  allegiance  to  Jehovah,  as  represented  in  his
own  mission.  Jerusalem  had  its  opportunities.  They  were  multiplied  until  it  seemed
almost  overweighted  with  privilege.  Those  opportunities  had  been  neglected  and
despised  again  and  again,  and  now  they  wore  growing  into  heavy,  overwhelming
judgments.  ttt  ^  i_

I.  OUB    OPPOBTnOTTIBS   ABE   PB0VI8I0NS  OF  THE    DlVlNK    MBBOY.      Ws  Say  of  thoSe

who  try  us  beyond  endurance,  "  Well,  we  will  give  him  one  more  chanpe."  And  we
think  this  a  great  sign  of  our  pitifulness  and  mercy.  Then  what  was  God's  mercy  in
patiently  bearing  with  his  wayward  people,  and  renewing  their  chance,  their  oppor-
tunity, age  after  age  ?  Trace  the  opportunities  by  following  the  line  of  prophets,
special  Divine  messengers,  up  to  the  mission  of  John,  and  then  of  the  Lord  Jesus.
The  figure  of  the  text  is  a  specially  tender  one,  viewed  in  the  light  of  Eastern  associa-
tions. Birds  of  prey  abound,  and  chickens  are  in  momentary  danger,  and  hens  have
to  be  keenly  watchful.  But  what  can  a  hen  do,  if  her  chickens  are  wilful,  and  will  not
respond  to  her  call  ?

II.  On»   OrPOBTDNITIBS   DESPISED    MUST    TtJBN    INTO    DiVINE    JDDOHKNTS.       God's

dealings  with  us  must  have  issues.  We  cannot  play  with  them  as  we  like.  If  God
acts  in  mercy,  he  does  not  forego  his  claim.  But  it  may  be  also  shown  that  the  treat-
ment of  our  opportunities  becomes  a  revelation  of  our  character  ;  and  it  reveals  bad
thin<'8.  God's  judgments  really  come  on  character,  and  on  acts  only  because  they
reveal  character.  Jerusalem  sinners  thoroughly  needed  and  deserved  their  judg-
ment.—B.  T.


OH.  XMT.  1— 51.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ


I.  MASTHffiW.


429


EXPOSinOIT.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

Vera.  1 — SI. — Pbopheot  ot  th«  DESTKro-
«toti  ov  Jebcsaiuem,  and  of  tub  Turns  or
TBI  Kbd.  (Mark  ziii.  1 — 87 ;  Lnke  xxi.  5
—86.)

There  is  no  reason  (o  tUnlc,  with
Olshauien,  that  Si  MattbeT  or  his  editor
has  considerably  amplified  the  original  die-
conr»e  of  our  Lord  by  introducing  detail!
and  ezpressioni  ftom  other  qnarten.  Th*
discourse,  as  vre  now  have  it  (oh.  zxir.  and
XXT.),  forma  a  distinct  whole,  divided  into
certain  portions  closely  related  to  each  other,
and  It  would  hare  been  nnnatnral  in  St.
Matthew,  and  opposed  to  hia  aimple  and
Teracions  style,  to  have  put  word*  into  our
Lord's  month  at  this  moment,  which  were
not  actually  uttered  by  him  on  this  lolemn
occasion.

Vera.  1 — 3. — Oecofsion  »/  the  discount.
'Mark  xiii.  1 — 4 ;  Lnke  xxi.  5 — ^7.)

Ver.  1. — From  the  temple;  Revised
Version,  went  out  from  the  temple,  and  wa»
going  on  hii  tcay  liitopeitro).  So  the  beat
Biai\uacript8  and  veraiona.  It  was  while  he
was  proceeding  on  the  route  to  Bethany
tliat  tte  disciples  interrupted  him  with  their
remarks  about  the  temple.  Ho  had  now
tnken  hia  final  leave  of  the  hallowed  conrta ;
the  prophecy  of  the  desolation  of  the  house
was  beginning  to  be  fulfilled  (see  on  ch.  xiiii.
38).  His  disciplea  oame  to  him.  They  wera
disquieted  by  Christ's  words  recorded  at  the
end  of  the  last  chapter,  which  spoke  of  a
terrible  retribution  about  to  fall,  of  the
desolation  of  the  temple,  of  Ohrist'a  own
departure  for  a  time.  St.  Mark  (xiii.  3)
tells  us  that  Peter,  James,  John,  and  Andrew
asked  him  privately  when  these  things
should  be,  and  what  signs  should  forewarn
of  their  approach,  as  in  ver.  3.  St.  Matthew
records  here  that  hia  disciples  came  to  him
for  to  show  (eiriSerfai,  to  ditplay)  him  the
buildings  of  the  temple  Qepov,  the  whole
sacred  enclosure).  They  had  gathered  from
his  words  that  destruction 'awaited  thia
edifice,  but  as  they  gazed  upon  it  thoy
could  scarcely  bring  themaelvca  to  believe
in  its  coming  overthrow.  So  as  they  gained
some  commanding  point  of  view,  (hey  drew
Chriat's  attention  toitsbeauty,magniliccuce,
and  unequalled  solidity,  desiring  him  to
explain  Jfurther  the  mode  and  time  of  the
catastrophe.  It  was  popularly  said,  "He
who  never  saw  the  temple  of  Herod  has
never  seen  a  fine  building."


Yer.  2.— And  7esai  lald.  The  beat  manu-
loripta  and  the  Revised  Version  give.  But
ha  amwered  and  laid.  See  ye  not  all  these
thing!  1  Vnlgate,  Videtit  hmo  omnia  1  Our
Lord,  in  tarn,  calls  attention  to  the  glorious
atmctnre  in  order  to  five  added  emphasis
to  hia  weighty  dennaoiation.  Kot  be  left
here  one  stone  npon  aaetkei.  Thia  prophecy
was  moat  literally  fulfilled.  Recent  ex-
ploiationa  have  shows  that  not  a  atone  of
Herod'a  temple  remaiu  in  litu.  The  orders
of  Titna,  given  with  regret,  for  the  total
demolition  of  the  w&lla  of  temple  and  city,
were  carried  out  with  omel  exacineas,  so
that,  a<  Josephua  teatifloa  ('  Boll.  Jnd.,'  vii.
1.  I),  paaaera-by  would  not  have  anpposed
that  the  place  had  ever  been  inhabited.
When  the  apostate  Jnlian,  in  the  fourth
ChriatiaB  century,  endeavoured  to  cast  a
alur  upon  prophecy  by  rebnilding  the  city
and  temple,  hia  deaign  proved  to  bo  an
ignominious  failure,  and  the  aacred  ahrine
baa  continued  to  thia  day  a  monument  of
Divine  vengeance.

Yer.  S. — ^As  ha  sat  npon  the  Uount  of
Olives.  On  hia  way  to  Bethany  towards
the  cloae  of  thia  day,  he  reated  for  a  while
and  Communed  with  the  disciples,  uttering
the  wonderful  eschatological  discourse  which
follows  in  thia  and  the  next  chapter.  It  is
noted  that  the  aiege  of  Jerusalem  by  the
Romans  began  on  the  very  spot  where  thia.
prophecy  of  ita  deatruotion  woa  delivered,
strategical  reasous  compelling  them  to  make
their  attack  from  thia  quarter.  "  A  sudden
turn  in  the  roaii,"  writes  Dr.  Edersheim
(ii.  431),  "  and  the  sacred  building  was  once
more  in  full  view.  Just  then  the  western
auu  waa  pouring  hia  golden  beams  on  tops
of  marbfe  oloiaters  and  on  the  terraced
conrta,  and  glittering  on  the  golden  spikes
on  tho  roof  of  the  holy  place.  In  the  setting,
even  more  than  in  the  rising  aun,  must  the
vast  proportions,  the  symmetry,  and  the
aparkling  sheen  of  thia  mass  of  snowy
marble  and  gold  have  stood  out  gloriously.
And  across  the  black  valley,  and  up  the
slopes  of  Olivet,  lay  the  dark  shadows  of
those  gigantic  walls  built  of  maasive  atones,
some  of  them  nearly  twenty-four  feet  long.
Even  the  rabbis,  despite  their  hatred  of
Herod,  grow  enthusiastic,  and  dream  that
the  very  temple  walls  would  have  been
covered  witli  gold  had  not  the  variegated
marble,  resembling  the  waves  of  the  sea,
seemed  more  beauteous.  It  was  probably,
as  they  [tho  disciples]  now  gazed  on  all  this
grandeur  and  strength,  that  they  broke
the  silence  imposed  on  them  by  gloomy
thoughts  of  the  near  desolatenesa  of  that
house  which  the  Lord  predieted."  Privately


430  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxiv.  1-51.


Such  qneBtions  were  not  to  be  asked  openly
in  the  hearing  of  any  who  might  have  fol-
lowed him  from  the  city.  There  wag  nothing
more  resented  by  the  average  Jew  than  any
intimation  of  the  destruotion  of  the  temple.
It  was  one  of  the  charges  agaiust  Stephen
that  he  had  said  tliat  Jesus  would  destroy
the  temple  (Acts  vi.  14).    When,  therefore,
some  of  the  apostles  wished  for  more  definite
information  on  this  subject,  they  took  care
to  make  their  inquiry  in  private.  Their  ques-
tions were  twofold — they  desired  to  know
tlie  time  of  the  events,  and  the  signs  which
should    precede  Christ's  coming  and  the
end  of  the  world.    When  shall  these  things
be?    "These  things"  refer  to  the  destruc-
tion of  the  temple,  and  the  course  of  events
which,   as    they   conceive,  are   dependent
thereupon  (comp.  oh.  xziii.  36).    To  their
minds,  this  catastrophe  could  only  occur
contiimporaneously  with  the  coming  of  Christ
in  glory  and  the  end  of  the  world.    They
saw  in  it  a  great  revolution  which  should
asher  in  the  final  consummation.   But  when
should  this  come  to  pass? — in  their  own
day,  or  after  many  ages  ?  in  the  lifetime
of  this  generation,  or  at  some  far-distant
period  ?    It  was  not  mere  wanton  curiosity
to  know  the  future  which  prompted  the
question,  but  rather  a  reverent  desire  to
prepare   for   these   great    events,  of  the
certainty   of  which  they  were  now  fully
assured.     So  the  next  question  shows  no
doubt  concerning  the  facts,  and  asks,  not
the  mode  of  the  accomplishment,  but  only
what  anticipatory  warning  and  indication
were  to  be  given.    Sign  of  thy  coming  (ttjj
rrjs  trapotiaias),  and  of  the  end  of  the  world
(avvreXelas  rov  aiSiyos).    They   look  upon
those  two  events  as  synchronous,  or  very
closely    connected.      The    word   parousia,
which  in  classical  Greek  means  "  presence,"
or  "  arrival,"  is  used  in  the  New  Testament
specially  for  the  second  advent  of  Christ  to
set  up  his  eternal  kingdom  in  full  power
and  glory  (see  in  this  chapter  vers.  27,  37,
39 ;  and  comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  23 ;  1  Thess.  ii.
19;  iii.  13,  etc.).     Eeferring  to  the  same
event,  we  find  in  some  places  the   term
"  epiphany  "  nsed  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  2  Tim.
iv  1),  and  in  others  "ie\e\ation"(iiroici\v^it,
1  Cor.  i.  7;  2  Thess.  i.  7):  but  the  three
expressions  denote  simply  the  open  estab-
lishment of  Messiah's  kingdom,  indefinitely
as  to  time  and  manner.    The  phrase  trans-
lated "  the  end  of  the  world  "  means  literally
the  contummation  of  the  age  (of.  ch.  xiii.  89  ;
Heb.  ix.  26);  consummationii  smculi  (Vul-
gate) ;  <.«.  the  closa  of  this  present  «eon,  in
contradistinction  from  the  future  toon,  or  the
world  to  come.    ThU  is  "the  last  time,"
« the  last  days,"  spoken  of  elsewhere  (see
1  Pet.  i.  5;  IJohn  ii.  18;  and  comp.  Isa.
ii.  9  •  Micah  ir.  1>


Vers.  4 — 41. — The  firtt  portion  oj  the  great
propheoy.

Ver.  4. — Tesng  answered  and  said.    Th«
succeeding  prophecy  has  much  exercised  th»
ininds  of  commentators  from  the  earliest
times  unto  the  present.    It  is,  indeed,  full
of  mysteries,  dark   sayings,   profundities,
which  our  minds  cannot  fathom.    Many  of
these  are  and  must  be    inherent   in  the
subject;    but  some  difBoulties  have  been
created  by  the  imperfect  views  taken  by
those  who  have  applied  themselves  to  ex-
plain the  Lord's  utterances.     It  is  seen  by
all  that  we  have  here  predictions  concern-
ing the  fate  of  Jerusalem,  concerning  the
parousia  of  Christ,  and  concerning  the  last
times;  it  is  the  attempt  to  assign  to  these
events  separately  ceitain  definite  portions
of  the  address  that  has  led  to  confusion  and
perplexity.      Over-refinement    and    over-
wisdom  have  marred  the  exposition  of  many
critics.    They  have  limited  to  one  event
that  which  was  spoken  of  more  than  that
one ;  confining  their  view  to  one  point,  they
have  excluded  other  points   which    were
equally  in  the  mind  of  the  Bevealer.   It  has
been  usual  to  divide  the  prophecy  in  this
chapter  into  two  sections,  of  which  the  first,
extending  to  the  twenty-ninth  verse,  is  sup-
posed  to  relate  to  the  fate  of  Jerusalem
itself;  the  second,  comprising  the  rest  of  the
chapter,  to  the  parousia  and  the  coming  to
judgment.  But  such  definite  partition  will
not  stand  investigation,  and  .can  be  main-
tained only  by  doing  violence  to  language
or   ignoring   more   natural   explanations.
The  prophecy  announces  analogous  events,
the  description  of  which  has  more  than  one
application,  and  often  passes  from  one  to
another  with  nothing  to  closely  mark  the
transition.    The  combination  of  facts  thus
woven    together   cannot   be  coarsely  un-
ravelled.   The  same  words,  the  same  ex-
pressions, are  nsed  to  denote  the  arrival  or
fulfilment  of  distinct  occurrences.    To  limit
these  to  one  event  only  is  to  set  bounds  to
the  Omniscient.    So  it  seems  to  be  not  only
most  expedient,  but  most  reverent,  to  look
on  our  Lord's  eschatological  address  as  one
whole,  of  which  the  several  parts  are  in  full
harmony  and  sequence  (if  we  were  only  able
to  understand  them),  and  to  acknowledge
that  insuperable  difiBoulties  in  the  interpre-
tation do  exist  and  are  meant  to  exist.   The
Lord  had  to  prepare  his  followers  for  the
overthrow  of  their  city,  and  the  dangers  to
life  and  faith  which  would  accompany  that
judgment.    He  desired  also  to  raise  in  them
a  constant  expectation  of  his  advent,  so  that
Christians  then  and  thenceforward  might
ever  live  in  hope  and  watch  for  a  great  future.
Herein  will  be  found  the  key  to  the  per-
plexities of  the  address ;  not  that  even  this


OH.  xxiT,  1— 61.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


481


nnlootn  all  the  mysteries,  but  it  opens  the
drift  of  these  wonderful  utterances,  and
enables  us  to  see  light  amid  the  gloom.
This  will  appear  more  fully  as  we  examine
the  details.  Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive
you ;  »Aac'^(ri7 :  lead  you  astray  (so  ver.  5).
Jesus  does  not  answer  the  disoiplcs'  ques-
tion as  to  the  time  when  "  these  things"
shall  occur;  that  is  purposely  left  uncertain.
He  proceeds  to  warn  them  against  the
dangers  which  would  beset  them  in  the
coming  orisii.  He  withdraws  them  from
the  Bpeoulative  to  the  practical  (see  vers.
23—25).

Ver.  5. — Here  begins  what  has  been  called
the  first  strophe  of  the  oracle  (vers.  5 — 14),
which  indicates  certain  prognostics  common
to  the  close  bf  the  Jewish  theocracy  and  to
the  end  of  the  world.  Uany  shall  come  in
my  Hame  {M  rif  Mnari nov),restmg  on  my
Name,  grounding  their  pretensions  thereon.
Baying,  I  am  Christ  (the  Christ).  They
who  really  desired  to  follow  Christ  should
be  tried  by  the  temptation  to  see  in  other
persons  the  Messiah.  The  warning  could
scarcely  have  been  needed  by  the  apostles
themselves;  it  must  have  been  meant
primarily  for  their  converts  and  the  early
Christians.  And  though  we  have  no  account
in  apostolic  Church  history  of  any  such  pre-
tenders, yet  in  the  age  succeeding  our  Lord's
death  we  read  of  many  impostors  who
asserted  themselves  to  be  inspired  prophets,
if  not  the  Messiah,  and  led  astray  many
oreduloui  persons  (see  Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xx.
5.  1 ;  8.  6,  etc).  There  were  doubtless  many
false  Messiahs  whose  names  are  little  known,
and  critics  have  enumerated  twenty-nine
such.  The  pretensions  of  these  persons  were
not  generally  admitted,  and  their  adherents
were  commonly  few  and  uninfluential.  Our
Lord  probably  did  not  allude  to  these  in  his
monition.  But  we  may  observe  that  the
warning  may  include  such  deceivers  as
Simon  Magus  and  those  many  false  teachers
who  Texed  the  early  Church,  and,  without
assnmmg  the  name  of  Christ,  did  Satan's
work  by  undermining  the  faith,  St.  John
■peaks  of  there  beinf?  "  many  antichrists  "
in  his  day  (1  John  ii.  18),  and  St.  Paul  had
oocB«ion  to  warn  his  oouverts  against
"  heretical  seducers  "  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  13 ;  2
Thess.  ii. ;  1  Tim.  vi.  3,  etc.).  Since  then
the  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled  in  the
heretics  who,  professing  to  come  in  the
Name  of  Christ  and  to  ennnciate  his  doctrine,
or,  like  Mohammed,  to  assnme  bis  place,
have  tanght  lies.  These  shall  abound  in
the  latter  days,  and  shall  be  a  sign  of  the
approaching  end.

Ver.  6. — ^Te  shall  hear  (;u(\X^(reTtiKo^tii').
Ye  are  about,  ye  are  destined,  to  hear.
"Fatunim  oomplicatnm,  audtturi  tritit,"
(Bensal).     He  addresses  the   apoitles  aa


representatives  of  the  whole  body  of  be-
lievers. Wars  and  mmoors  of  wars;  i.e.
wars  near  at  hand,  and  distant  wars  of
which  the  rumour  only  reaches  you,  but
which  threaten  to  approach  and  menace
your  peace  (of.  Jer.  iT.  19).  The  peace
which  reigned  at  Christ's  birth  was  rudely
shattered  after  his  death,  though  the  wars
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  were  of
no  great  importance.  We  hear  of  an  in-
tended expedition  against  Aretas  (Josephus,
'  Ant.,'  xviii.  5.  3),  of  one  of  Caligula  against
the  Jews  (ibid.,  xviii.  8.  2),  both  of  which
however,  came  to  nothing.  Then  there  were
certain  ■nsurrections  in  the  reigns  of
Claudius  (ibid.,  xx.  5.  3)  and  Nero  (ibid.,
XX,  8.  6 — 10).  The  Boman  empire  was  dis-
turbed ;  four  emperors — ^Nero,  Galba,  Otho,
and  VitelliuB — died  by  violence  within  a
short  space  of  time ;  the  restless  Farthians
were  a  continual  source  of  trouble.  But
these  and  such-like  occurrences  do  little
to  exhaust  the  meaning  of  Christ's  pre-
diction. He  is  looking  forward  to  a  distant
future,  and  sees  with  prophetio  eye  the
state  of  warfare  which  has  prevailed  from
the  disruption  of  the  Boman  empire,  and
which  shall  continue  unto  the  end.  See
that  ye  be  not  troubled;  rather,  lee,  be  ye
not  troubled.  Look  on  it  all,  and  yet  be
not  affrighted.  All  these  things  (Travra)
must  come  to  pass.  All  that  I  announce
is  sure  to  occur,  not  from  any  absolute
necessity,  but  because  of  men's  passions  and
perversenesB,  which  will  bring  it  to  pass
(see  on  ch.  xviii.  7 ;  and  Jas.  iv.  1).  The  end
is  not  yet.  These  signs  might  lead  men  to
think  that  the  final  consummation  was  close
at  hand.  Our  Lord  warns  against  such  a
conclusion.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  "  the  end  "
as  occurring  in  Christ's  second  advent  (1
Cor.  XV.  24).

Ver.  7. — ITation  shall  rise  against  nation,
etc.  This  part  of  the  prediction  is  in-
applicable to  the  era  preceding  the  ruin
of  Jerusalem,  the  disturbances  that  occurred
then  (_e.g.  at  Alexandria,  Seleucia,  J  amnia,
and  other  localities  mentioned  by  Josephus,
•Ant,' xviii.  9.  8,  9;  'BelL  Jud.,'  ii.  17.  10;
18.  1—8;  iv.  3.  2;  and  by  Philo,  'Legat.
ad  Caium,'  §  30)  could  hardly  have  been
indicated  in  such  grand  terms.  More  to
the  purpose  is  the  sketch  of  the  period
given  by  Tacitus,  at  the  opening  of  his
history,  though  it  embraces  also  details
belonging  to  a  somewhat  later  age:  <*I
enter  upon  a  work  fertile  in  vioissitndes,
stained  with  the  blood  of  battles,  embroiled
with  dissensions,  horrible  even  in  the
intervals  of  peace.  Four  princes  slain  br
the  sword;  three  oivil  wars,  more  with
foreign  enemies,  and  sometimes  both  wi
once;  prosperity  in  the  Bast,  disasters  in
the  West }  lUyrionm  dlstorbed ;  the  Gauls


m  THB  OOKfEL  A/X/^MHO  •»  Wt,  MATTBZW.    f^tm.^^X


tmAy  to  tmoU',  BrtMa  or/nqiMiivl,  m4
«l^ln  h«t;  H<tn/i«ti*riji  »u4  H>i«TlJku  «r/n>
•jHring  «K»liurt  lu ;  th«  Da«l«n«  renawned
for   d^feaU    |(lTen    Md    nutelnedi    tb«
PartliUnt   slmott  •nrnted  to  arm*  by  •
counterfeit    Nero.     Itoljr    ataioted    with
calsmitiet  anbeard  of,  or  reoarring  only
after  •  long  Intorral ;  citlei  oTerwhelmcd
or  iwallowed   np  in  tlie  fertile  region  of
Campania ;  Borne  itiolf  laid  waste  by  fire,
the  most  anolent  templet  destrojrea,  the
very  eapitol  bnmed  by  iti  own  citizens,"
eto.  (•Bitt.,'  L  2).    But  the  Lord's  worde
•oem   to    refer    to    times  when   Bome's
dominion  had  oeased,  and  nation  warred
against  nation,  ••  in  later  and  modem  days
in  Europe,  Asia,  and  parts  of  Africa.    So
again  the  prediction  must  be  extended  far
beyond  erenta  in  the  Jewish  cycle.  Tamines.
Besides  the  famine  mentioned  in  Acts  zi.
28,  there  were  others  in  Jerusalem  and
Jnd«a  (Josephns,  'AntV  iii>  15.  3;  zs.
a.  6 :  4. 9 :  'BeU.  Jud,'  tL  8.  8).   Suetonius
COland.,*  18)  speaks  of  "assidnas  sterili-
tates ; "  and  Tadtns  (•  Ann.,*  xii.  43)  records
as  happening  at  the  same  period,  "frngnm
egestas,  et  orta  ex  eo  fames."    And  pesti-
Isnees;  as  consequent  on  famine.    Hence
the  Greek  paronomasia,  Xifiol  koI   \aitet,
in  om  text    Cut  many  editors  expunge
Xi/jot,  oonsiciering  it,  with  some  reason,  to
hare  been   introduced  from  the  paiollel
passage  in  St.  Luke,  where  it  is  certunly
genuine.    Of  pestilences  we  have  notice  in
Josephns  ('  BolL  Jud.,'  n.  6. 1),  in  Tacitus
(•Ann.,*  riT.  16),  and  Suetonius  ('Nero,'  39),
where  we  read  that  at  Borne  in  a  single
autumn  thirty  thousand  persons  perished.
Wordsworth  .refera  to  Tertullian  (« Apol.,
XX  ),  who  sees  in  these  predictions  infalhblo
proof  of  the  inspiration  of  Scripture.  "Hence
it  is  that  we  come  to  be  so  certain  of  many
things   not  yet  come   to   pass,  from    the
experience    wo    haTO  of   those  that  aro;
because    those    were    presignifled    by  tlie
some  Spirit  with  these  which  we  see  ful-
filling erery  day"  (Reeve).    Earthquakes.
CJommentRtors  relate  the  occurrence  of  such
commotions  at  Borne,  in  Crete,  Laodicea,


Zinaras. '  Ann..'  xl.  10).  Nosgen  takes  the
term  "earthquakes"  in  a  metaphorical  sense
as  equivalent  to  Tapavar,  and  implying
mental  perturbations:  but  it  seems  inoon-
CTUOUS  te  admit  a  metaphysical  prognostica-
tion in  the  midst  of  a  notice  of  a  series  of
material  phenomena.  In  divers  places;
^aTriZr.  per  loca  (Vulgate).  Some
render  the  worlds,  "in  all  places,'  «6.«,.
to«,  as  in  Luke  ii.  41,  "'f  ^-os,  "  every
,eM"    But  it  is  better  to  take  the  preposi-


tlM  <HstifbatlT«ly,  ojplMS  Vf  |Ism,"  like

V«r.  •.— Beriaaiiig  •(  torromi  itlntv,
Idbour^ngt,  (twximnfs.  The  metaphor
often  occurs  (see  Isa.  zxvt.  17:  3«t.  ziit
21 ;  Hos.  xiii.  18,  eta.).  These  great  aTenta
are  called  "labonr-pangs"  beoanse  tiiey
usher  in  the  new  creation,  "the  regenera-
tion" spoken  of  ia  ek.  zix.  28  (see  note
thete>  8L  Pan!  wtitea  (Boat.  viiL  22),
"The  whole  creation  gicanelh  and  travaOeth
in  pain  together  nntil  now."  The  tribnla-
tions  and  calamities  which  preoeded  and
accompanied  the  orerthrow  of  the  Jewish
polity  are  a  sign  and  warning  of  the  great
and  universal  woes  which  shall  herald  the
day  of  Judgment.  Jewish  writings  qieak
of  "the  sorrows  of  Messiali,''  distresses,
wars,  famine,  dissension,  eta,  which  shonld
herald  his  advent,  and  Christ  may  have
nsed  the  popular  opinion,  true  as  far  as  it
went,  as  a  vehicle  for  conveying  the  forthor
truth,  that  the  coming  age  would  be  pro-
dnoed  amid  terrible  agonies  of  men,  peoples,
and  nature.

Ver.  9.— The  Lord  passes  to  the  fkto  of
his   followers,  or  the  oorporeto   Chnrch.
Then.    St.  Hark  does  not  note  the  time;
St.  Luke  writes,  "  before  all  these  things."
Hence  we  gather  that  the  calamities  now
announced  will  precede^  accompany,  and
follow  those  before  mentioned.   That  which
befell  the  aposfles  and  early  beUevers  is  an
emblem  of  what  Christianity  vrill  undergo
at  the  hands  of  an  antagomstlo  world.    St
John,  in  the  Bevelation,  has  shadowed  forth
these  things  as  doomed  to  fall  upon  the
Church  in  the  latter  days.     Bhall  thsy
deliver  yon  np  to  be  affiiiited  (eomp.  ch.  x.
17,  18).    Christ  is  speaking,  not  only  of
the  apostles,  but  of  disciples  generally.
They  shall  deliver  yon  over  to  the  autho-
rities, civil  and  religious,  to  be  punished.
The  Book  of  the  Acts  contains  numerous
examples  of  such  afflictions  (see  Acts  iv.
3;  viit  1;   xii.  4;  xiii.  50;  xiv.  19,  etc.),
Kill.     As  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  59),  James
the  brother  of  John  (Acts  xii  2),  Peter
and  Paul  (Eusebius,  '  Hist.  Eool.,'  ii.  25),
and   many   others.     Hated   of   all   [the]
nations  (Acts  xxviii.  22,  "As  concerning
this  sect,  it  is  known  to  us  that  everywhere
it  is  spoken  against ").    Tacitus  speaks  of
those   "quos  per   flagitia   invisos  vulgus
Christianos  appellabat"  ('Ann.,'  xv.  44).
The  Romans  seem  to  have  placed  Jews  and
Christians  in  the  same  category,  and  to
have  bestowed  on  the  latter  the  hatred  felt
for  the  former.    But  the  Lord's  words  poini
to  some  feeling  more  universal  and  perma-
nent than  this  temporary  animosity,  even
to  the  hatred  which  occasioned  the  death  of
martyrs  in  all  ages,  the  warfare  between


OH.  xxTf.  1— BL]    THB*  GOSPEL  AOCX)RDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHKW.


433


good  knd  •tO,  folth  kod  nnbelief,  which
■h«ll  oontinna  and  inoreue  In  rinilenoe
onto  the  end  (John  XT.  20 ;  xvi.  2).

Ter.  10.— Shall  many  be  offended.  The
peneoationi  directed  sgainit  the  disciples
la  fenenl  ihall  in  many  caiee  reeult  in
orercoming  their  staadfastneH  and  sapping
their  lUth.  Bhall  betray  one  another.  To
carry  faronr  with  enemies  and  to  leonre
their  own  safety  in  tronblom  times,  Chris-
tiana were  fonnd  to  infonn  against  friends,
and  to  deliver  them  ap  to  the  elvil  antho-
ritiea.  Taoitns  notes  instaneea  of  this
degrading  oowardice.  "Firat  thoae  were
aeiaed  who  eonfeseed  that  they  were  Chris-
tians; and  then  on  their  information  a  vast
muUitnda  was  eonTloted"  ('Ann.,'  xr.  44).
Shall  hate  one  another.  Dissensions  in
religion  cans*  the  most  bitter  hatred,  the
Tery  opposite  of  that  lore  whieh  is  the
essence  of  Ohtistianity  (John  it.  17).
Where  one  of  a  pagan  family  embraced
Christianity,  the  oonvert  waa  regarded  as
an  ontcast,  and  oat  adrift  from  the  nearest
doiaeatio  ties.  The  same  treatment  obtains
even  now  in  India.  The  reference  in  the
test  chiefly  eoncems  oontentions  among
professing  Christians;  we  see  snch  effects
eTery  day;  tbey  appear  In  every  page  of
eeolesiastioal  history ;  they  have  stained
the  annala  of  our  own  and  every  nation.

Ver.  1 1.— Talse  prophets  (ver.  24).  These
were  not  necessarily  prediotori  or  sooth-
sayers, hut  teachers  having,  as  tbey  said,
a  message  from  Ood.  Suoh  pretenders
have  arisen  in  every  great  crisis;  but  the
Jews  a  few  years  later  were  deceived  eon-
tinually  by  fanatics  or  impostors,  who  pre-
fetsed  to  bo  inspired,  and  promised  tho
infatnated  people  deliveranoe,  urging  them
to  resist  the  Boinans,  in  expeiistatian  of  the
eoming  of  Messiah  to  lead  them  to  immediate
victory  (oomp.  Josophua,  'Bell.  Jad.,'  vi.
6.  2).  The  designation  "  false  prophets "
applies  alao  to  those  heretical  teacheis  who
vexed  tlie  peace  of  the  early  Church,  and
of  whom  Bt  John  expressly  speaks,  "Many
false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  tlie  world  "
(1  John  iv.  1).  These  were  Jndaixing  and
Gnostie  teachers,  who  tried  to  mar  the  good
work  of  the  apostles  (see  Acts  xx.  30;
Bom.  xvl.  17,  18 ;  2  Cor.  xl  13 ;  OaL  i.
7— fl;  Col  11.  18—23,  etc.).  Throughout
the  Cliristian  ages  beiesiarchs  have  always
raised  their  evil  voices,  and  the  history  of
the  Church  ij  very  much  oomposecf  of
aooouuts  of  snob  teachers,  and  of  tho  efforts
made  to  suppress  them  and  to  oorrect  their
pernicious  dootrinea.

Tar.  12. — Beoaase  iniquity  shall  abound
(irKntuftTJriu,  U  multiplied).  The  word
rendered  "iniquity"  is  itve/ila,  "lawlesBnoes,"
general  immorality  and  licence.  Impatience
of  rule  and  discipline,  connivance  at  and

MATTHEW — II.


imitation  of  heathen  practices,  reacted  upon
the  faith  of  Ijelievers,  undermined  steadfast
adherence  to  principle.  OThen  was  the
power  of  "that  wicked  one"  (i  ivoiios,
2  Tbess.  ii.  8)  exercised  and  seen  in  the
lapte  of  the  unstable.  Tha  love  of  many
(rwr  roW&y,  tht  many,  tho  majority)  shall
wax  eold.  "  Love  "  (iyoirjj)  here  is  used  in  its
general  and  comprehensive  sense,  as  having
Ood  as  its  chief  object  and  man  in  subordi-
nation thereto.  The  troubles  and  persecu-
tions that  shall  beset  believers,  the  spirit  of
worldlineis  and  self-seeking  that  a  timid
faith  encourages,  will  issue  in  loosening
dependence  upon  Ood  and  trust  in  his
providential  care;  and  internal  dissensions
will  destroy  that  brotherly  love  which
ought  to  be  eharacteristio  of  Christians.
Of  tiiia  lack  of  energetic  love  tha  Lord
speaks  in  his  warnings  to  the  Church  of
Laodicea  (Bev.  UL  16),  "  Because  thou  art
lukewarm,  and  neither  eold  nor  hot,  I  will
spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth."

Ver.  13. — He  that  shall  endn.iu  .....o  the
end,  tha  same  shall  be  saved  (eh.  x.  22).
Hera  is  a  note  of  oonsolation  amid  the
refrain  of  woe.  Patience  and  perseverance
shall  bs  crowned  at  the  last  "  The  end"
means  primarily  the  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem, and  the  salvation  promised  is  safety
in  that  day  of  peril.  It  is  believed  tliat  no
Christians  perished  in  the  siege  or  after  it
(see  ver.  16).  But  reXot,  being  here  used
without  the  article  (differently  from  vers.
6  and  14),  must  not  be  restricted  to  one
allusion,  but  must  be  taken  more  generally,
as  indeed  a  universal  axiom,  equivalent  to
"  finally,"  as  long  as  endurance  is  needed.
And  the  salvation  must  refer  to  the  soul's
sentence  at  the  last  day,  not  to  any  mere
safety  of  body  and  life.  What  the  maxim
says  is  this;  patient  continuance  in  well-
doing, resignation  under  persecutions  and
afflictions,  holding  fast  the  one  faith  even
though  it  lead  to  the  martj'r's  death, — this
shall  win  the  crown  of  eternal  blessedness.
The  Christian  must  not  be  led  attray  by
false  teachers,  nor  offended  by  the  prevalence
of  scandals,  nor  let  his  love  be  chilled,  if  be
would  gain  the  reward,  share  in  Messiah's
glory,  and  save  his  soul.

Ver.  14. — This  gospel  of  the  kingdom.
The  good  news  of  the  coming  of  Messiah's
kingdom — what  we  call  in  short,  "the
gospel " — "  tliat  God  was  in  Christ  recon-
ciling the  world  nnto  himself"  (2  Cor.  v.
19).  Ho  calls  it  "this"  (oh.  xxvi.  18),
because  it  is  that  which  he  preached,  which
it  was  the  object  of  bis  incarnation  to  set
forth.  In  all  the  world  (ly  2A])  t^  oi'mv/tcFp,
in  all  the  inhabited  earth).  Before  the
taking  of  Jerusalem,  the  gospel  bad  been
carried  into  all  partsof  the  thenknown  world,
We  have  very  uncertain  information  about

2r


«i  THE  OOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oil  txit.  1— »t


the  Isbonn  of  most  of  the  apostlei,  but  if
we  may  judge  of  their  extent  from  what
we  know  of  St.  PanVe,  we  should  say  that
Tery  few  quarters  of  the  Eoman  world  were
left  unvisited.  "Their  sound  went  out
into  all  the  earth,  and  their  worda  unto  the
endf  of  the  inhabited  world"  (Bom.  x.  18).
St.  Paul  testiflei  that  the  gospel  wai
preached  to  every  kingdom  under  heaven
(Col.  i.  6,  23).  He  himself  carried  it  to
Arabia,  Syria,  Aaia  Minor,  Oreece,  lUyricum,
Rome,  Spain  (see  Born.  xv.  19,  24,  28 ;  Gal.
L  17;  Phil.  L  13,  etc.).  A  witness  unto  all
[tM  nations.  That  both  Jews  and  OoDtiles
might  have  the  opportnnity  of  receiving  or
rejecting  Christ.  The  witness  should  be
for  or  against  them  according  to  the  use
made  of  this  opportunity.  If  the  gospel
thus  delivered  contained  this  utterance  of
our  Lord's,  the  fulfilment  of  the  predictions
would  lead  to  belief  in  him,  and  could
fail  to  win  acceptance  only  by  reason  of
invincible  prejudice  or  wilful  perversity.
Shortly,  the  truth  is  that  the  gospel  wUl
be  everywhere  offered,  but  not  everywhere
received.  And  then,  when  all  these  signs,
especially  the  one  last  named,  shall  have
appeared,  shall  the  end  come,  primarily  of
Jerusalem,  secondarily  of  this  world  or  this
age.  Nothing  is  eaid  of  the  effect  of
missionary  efforts  in  early  days  or  in
time  to  come.  We  know  that  there  was  no
national  oonTersion  in  the  primitive  era,
however  common  individual  conversion
may  have  been.  Bo  in  the  present  age  we
are  no^  to  expect  more  than  that  Christian
missions  shall  reach  the  uttermost  parts  of
the  earth,  and  that  all  nations  shall  have
the  offer  of  salvation,  before  the  final
appearance  of  Christ.  The  success  of
those  efforts  at  universal  evangelization  is
a  mournful  problem.  "When  the  Son  of
man  cometh,  shall  he  find  the  faith  upon
the  earth?"  (Luke  xviii.  8).

Ver.  15. — In  this  second  strain  of  the
prophecy  contained  in  vers.  15—22,  our
Lord  confines  himself  almost  entirely  to
tlie  fate  of  Jerusalem.  Therefore.  The
illative  particle  carries  us  back  to  the  signs
given  in  the  previous  section  (vers.  5—1*)-
By  saying  when  ye  shall  see,  he  implies
that  some  of  his  hearers  shall  behold  this
mysterious  sign,  and  have  the  opportunity
of  profiting  by  the  knowledge  thereof.  The
abomination  of  desolation  (rh  ps^\vyiia  rrjs
iptiliAirtas),  The  term  is  from  the  Septua-
gint  Version  (with  which  Theodotion's
agrees)  of  Dan.  xii.  11 ;  in  Dan.  ix.  27  we  find
fiii\\iypM  rav  ipn/iditrtuy,  where  the  Hubrew
gives,  "Upon  the  wing  [or,  'pinnacle']
of  abominations  shall  come  the  dosolater.'^
Also  in  Dan.  xi.  81  we  have  the  simple
$S(\vyna.  What  is  meant  by  the  term  in
onr  text  Is  a  matter  of  unsettled  dispute.


The  prophecy  in  Dan.  xi.  31    has   been
generally  referred  to  the  doings  of  Antiochus
Epiphanes  (see  1  Mace.  i.  SI),  and  the  pre-
sent is  considered  to  relate  to  something  ana-
logons.    "  Abomination  "  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment is  generally  connected  with  idolatry
or  sacrilege;  "  of  desolation  "  is  equivalent
to  "  that  causes  desolation."    Among  the
many  explanations  of  this  passage  which
have  been  offered,  two  only  se  m  worthy
of  consideration.   (1)  The  desolating  abomi-
nation is  referred  to  the    Roman  armies
encamped  around  Jemsalem  (Lnke  xxL  SO),
of  which  the  symbol  was  the  legionaries'
eagles,  regarded   with   reverence   by   the
soldiers.    But  in  opposition  to  this  view  it
may  he  said,  if  the  holy  place,  without  the
article,  signifies  the  Holy  Land,  then  the
presence  of  the  Latin  forces  would  b«  no
new  sign  to  the  Jewish  people,  as  they  had
been  familiar  with  such  a  sight  for  many
years.    If  the  temple  itself  is  meant,  it  is
plain  that  it  would  be  too  late  to  fly  from
that  doomed  city  when  the  Roman  eagles
were  already  in  the  hallowed  courts.    (8)
The  alternative  interpretation,  which  has
seemed  to  many  more  probable,  explains  it
of  the  sanguinary  deeds  of  the  Zealots,  who,
after  the  war  had  been  carried  on  for  some
years,  seized  the  temple,  put  a  stop  to  the
daily  sacrifice,  deluged  the  sacred  courts
with  blood,  and  were  guilty  of  most  hideons
crimes  and  excesses,  which,  as  Josephus
testifies,  were  the  Immediate  cause  of  the
city's   ruin    (see    Josephus,    'Bell.   Jud.,'
iv.3.7,  etc.:  5.  1,8;  6.  8;  v.  9.4;  vi.2;
and  Wordsworth's  note  on  this  ver.  IS).
The  presence  and  aots  of  these  rufSans  were
to  be  the  signal  for  the    escape  of  the
Christians.    I  must  confess  that  neither  of
these  explanations  satisfies  me.   The  primal
fulfilment  of  Daniel's  prophecy  is  fonnd  in
the  erection  of  the  statue  of  Jupiter  in  the
temple  by  the  order  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,
and  the  pollution  of  the  altar  by  the  sacrifice
of  swine  thereon.    Our  Lord  would  seem
to  refer    to    something    analogous  which
should  give  the  Christians   a  signal   for
escape  before  the  complete  investiture  of
the  city.  The  deeds  of  Zealots  and  assassins,
however    atrocious,    could    not  with    any
propriety   be  described    as    "  abomination
that  maketh  desolate  standing  in  the  holy
place."    The  term,  according  to  scriptural
analogy,  must  refer  to  some  sacrilege  and
pollution  connected  with  idolatry,  of  which
certainly  the  Zealots  were  not  guilty.    The
Fathers,  recognizing  this,  have   seen    the
fulfilment  in  the  erection  of  images  of  the
Boman  emperors  in  the  temple  or  its  pre-
cincts.   But  we  have  no  account  of  any  such
act    preceding   the   final    siege.     Pilate's
attempted  introduction  of  the  Roman  ensigns
wsis  defeated  by  the  threatening  attitnde  of


oa.  xxiT.  1— 51.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  43l>


the  people  (Josephnt,  'Ant.,'  xyiii.  3.  1),
and  the  actual  setting  up  of  theee  ensigns
in  the  sanctuaiy,  and  the  erection  of  the
statue  of  Titus,  were,  rohsequent  to  the
capture  of  the  city  and  temple  ('  Bell.  Jud.,'
Ti.  6, 1).  Our  Lord  is  plainly  referring  to
something  that  transpired  before  the  con-
olnsion  of  the  siege,  otherwise  ^re  might
recognize  an  allusion  to  the  insurrection
of  Bar-coohebas,  which  ended  in  the  de-
struction of  the  partially  rebuilt  city,  the
abolition  of  its  old  name,  the  erection  of  a
temple  to  Jupiter  on  the  site  of  the  holy
place,  and  the  placing  of  a  statue  of  the
emperor  upon  the  altar,  A.D.  135.  What
the  "abomination"  was  cannot  now  be
accurately  determined,  though  its  character
may  be  divined  from  what  has  been  said,
and  it  was  probabljr  some  anticipation  of
the  antichrist  who  u  to  appear  before  the
final  consummation,  who  "  exalteth  himself
above  all  that  is  called  Ood,  or  that  is
worshipped;  so  that  he  as  Ood  sitteth  in
the  temple  of  God,  showing  himaelf  that  he
is  God  "  (S  Thess.  ii.  4,  8).  Spoken  of  by
Daniel  the  prophet,  in  three  pasiagei  (ix.
27 ;  zi.  31 ;  xil.  IIX  all  obsoure  and  diffloult,
and  not  necessarily  referring  to  the  same
events.  Christ  takes  it  for  granted  that
his  auditors  understand  the  allusion.  Stand
[ttanding]  in  the  holy  plaos.  Those  who
take  "the  abomination"  to  be  the  Boman
army,  explain  this  clause  to  mean  "  posted
pn  the  holy  soil."  But  nfioj  Hytos,  with  or
without  the  article,  is  never  used  but  in
refereuoe  to  the  temple  and  its  adjuncts
(oomp.  Acts  Ti.  13;  xxi.  28;  and  in  the
Septuagint,  Lev.  x.  13;  laa.  Ix.  13;  2  Maoc.
viii.  17,  etc.).  Whatever  the  sign  may  be,
it  is  to  be  seen  within  the  temple.  (Whoso
readeth,  let  him  tudentand.)  There  are
three  ways  of  regarding  tliis  parenthetical
clanse.  (1)  Alford  takes  it  aa  "  an  eoolesi-
aatical  note,  which,  .like  the  doxology  in
oh.  Ti.  IS,  has  found  its  way  into  the  text."
This  is  a  mere  conjecture  which  has  nothing
to  support  it.  (2)  Others  consider  it  to  be
a  remark  of  St.  Matthew,  intended  to  call
special  attention  to  the  warning;  but  such
an  observation  is  entirely  without  precedent
in  the  synoptic  Gospels,  and  it  is  found  also
in  the  parallel  passage  of  St.  Hark.  It  is
scarcely  probable  that  both  these  evangelists
would  have  given  the  identical  caution,  if
it  arose  from  their  owa  motion  in  respect
of  those  who  should  read  their  words  before
the  siege.  (3)  It  seems  more  natural  to
take  the  clause  as  uttered  by  Christ  him-
self with  a  silent  reference  to  the  words  of
the  angel  to  Daniel,  "  Know  therefore  and
understand"  (Dan.  ix.  25;  oomp.  zii  10).
The  Lord  would  point  emphatically  to  the
prophecy  of  Daniel,  and  his  own  interpreta-
tion thereof  (3  Tim.  it  7>    He  seems  also


to  imply  that  the  application  is  not  at  once
obvious,  and  needs  spiritual  insight  to
discern  _  it.  (How,  in  the  face  of  this
declaration  of  the  Son  of  God,  any  belierer
can  deny  Daniel's  claim  to  be  a  prophet
and  the  utterer  of  authentic  predictions,  ia
a  curious  case  of  mental  obfusoation  or
invincible  prejudice.)

Ver.  16.— Then;  i.«.  when  they  shall  see
"the  abomination  of  desolation,"  etc.  Them
which  be  in  Judsea.  Not  only  in  Jernsalem,
but  in  its  vicinity,  as  most  exposed  to
danger  from  the  invading  army.  Flee  into
{M,  over)  the  mountains.  The  Christians
seem  to  have  taken  this  advice  when  the
city  was  attacked  by  Oestius  Gallus,  about
A.D.  66,  some  three  or  more  years  before
the  siege  under  Vespasian.  Gallus  had
appeared  before  the  walls,  and  apparently
had  every  hope  of  taking  the  city,  when,
for  some  reason  not  certainly  known  (either
owing  to  a  supposed  defeat,  or  ignorance
of  his  own  success,  or  the  advice  of  his
generals),  he  suddenly  withdrew  his  forces
(Josephus,  'Bell.  Jud.,'  ii.  19.  6,  7).  The
Christians,  bearing  Christ's  warning  in
mind,  and  having,  as  we  may  conjecture,
seen  the  predicted  sign,  took  the  opportunity
of  flight  from  the  doomed  city,  and  made
their  escape  to  Pella,  a  town  of  Decapolis,
south-east  of  Bethshean,  and  the  ruins  of
which  are  known  now  by  the  name  of
FahU.  Kusebius  probably  refers  to  this
migration  ('Hist.  £k»!l.,'  iii.  5),  narrating
that,  owing  to  a  certain  revelation  given
to  holy  men  among  them,  the  whole  body
of  the  Church,  before  the  war,  removed
•cross  the  Jordan  to  Fella,  and  dwelt  there
in  safety  during  those  troublous  times.  We
probably,  however,  do  not  know  the  exact
time  of  the  flight,  as  we  are  ignorant  of
what  was  the  warning  of  imminent  danger
which  rendered  this  hurried  proceeding
necessary.

Yer.  17. — ^Housetop.  This  was  flat,  and
nsed  as  a  place  of  rest,  meditation,  and
familiar  concourse  (ch.  x.  27).  Come  down
.  ■  •  honss.  The  roof  was  accessible  by
two  staircases,  one  external  leading  £rom
the  street  or  the  country,  the  other  mounting
from  the  apartments.  The  householder
was  not  to  descend  by  this  latter  to  carry
off  anything  from  his  chambers  within,  but
to  escape  at  once  by  the  outer  staircase
(oomp.  Luke  t.  19).  The  flight  was  to  be
precipitate,  like  that  of  Lot  from  Sodom
(of^  Luke  xvii.  32).  The  warning  was
necessary,  as,  when  the  Zealots  and  assassins
had  the  upper  hand,  they  allowed  no  one
to  leave  the  city.  The  warning,  however,
applied  to  dwellers  in  any  part  of  Judaa.

Ver.  18.— In  the  field.  People  in  the
open  country  would  be  in  at  great  danger
as  those  in  the  city,  the   hostile   troops


4*6  'ma  008F1L  4CiOOSmNa  TO  m.  HATTH5W.    [be.  hit.  1—61.


donbtlew  being  diipenad  on  all  lides,
plundering,  burning,  »nd  lUying.  Betnm
back.  He  who  wa«  w»rking  in  the  fleldi
only  partially  ckd  wm  not  to  go  to  hl«
house  to  fetch  the  reit  of  hii  garmentf,  but
to  make  good  his  flight  Jiut  aa  he  wai.  He
would  naturally  lay  aside  hU  heavy  bomoui
while  engaged  in  work,  but  all  congidera-
tioni  of  propriety  and  ocanfort  were  to  be
put  Slide  at  the  preient  emergency.  The
warning  was  to  oe  regarded  eqiully  by
thoge  in  doon  or  out  of  doon,  at  home  or
abroad.

Ver.  19.— "Woe  nnte  them  that  are  with
child !  The  Lord,  while  he  oonnieli  flight,
ha»  a  word  of  compasiion  for  thog«  poor
mothera  who  are  forced  to  hare  recourse
thereto.  The  ciroumitancei  mentioned
would  impede  flight  and  greatly  increase
danger  and  distreas.  The  sufferings  of
mothers  and  children  in  the  siege  are
narrated  by  the  historian,  and  even  each
horrors  as  are  indicated  in  Dent.  xxTiii,
53 — 56  were  not  unknown  (see  Joiephns,
'Bell,  Jud,,'  T.  10.  8;  n.  $.  4;  Eusebius,
'Hist,  Eccl.,'iil.6,7).

Ver.  20. — Fray  ye  that,  etc.  {irpinix^ffte
Xva).  He  bids  them  pray  to  and  worstap
God,  in  order  that  he  may  gire  them  a
faTonrable  time  for  flight.  The  clause
introduced  with  the  flnal  particle  does  not
directly  denote  the  subject  of  the  petition,
as  our  version  gives  the  impression,  but
rather  tlie  aim  of  the  petitioners  (Morison),
Not  in  the  winter.  Uo  spake  of  personal
hindnmces  in  tlie  last  verso;  here  he
speaks  of  external  circumstanooa  over  which
man  has  no  control,  except  by  prayer.  The
weather  in  winter,  whioU  means  the  rainy
season,  might  render  the  roads  impassable,
and  would,  of  course,  prevent  any  liopo  of
obtaining  food  by  the  wayside  from  corn-
field or  fruit  tree.  The  sabbath  day,
which  precluded  any  work  or  the  use  of
beast  or  burden,  and  restricted  a  journey
to  something  less  than  a  mile.  We  must
remember  that  until  tlie  final  catastrophe
the  CbristiauB  observed  sucli  Mosaic  re-
strictions (see  Eiod.  xvl,  ?9;  Acts  I  12).
A  flight  for  such  a  short  distance  would
have  been  of  no  avail  under  the  imperious
circumstances  which  rendered  escape  ad-
visable.

Ver.  21. —  For  thsn.  Jesus  gives  the
reason  why  this  precipitate  flight  (vers.  IG —
20)  was  rendered  necessary  at  the  moment
spoken  ofin  ver.  15.  Great  tribulation.  The
miseries  snflered  in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem
were  stupondoui.  To  the  skilful  and  fierce
attacks  ff  the  Komons  from  without  wore
added  from  within  diie  famine  and  pesti-
lence, dissensions,  violence,  and  continual
Lloodshed  and  murder.  Josephns  estimates
tlie  number  of  those  who  fell  in  the  siege  and


oaptnre  of  JemsaleiB  at  1,000,000^  th*  oaual
ppulation  being  largely  inoreaaad  bjr  the
influx  of  pilgrims  attending  the  Feast  of  the
Passover,  and  by  thonsands  of  fugitives  who
bad  flocked  in  from  the  country  (Josephus,
'  BeU.  Jud.,'  vi.  9.  8).  He  adds  that  97,000
were  carried  away  captive  during  and  after
the  war.  Bnoh  as  was  not  .  .  .  nor  ever  shall
be  (Dan.  xii.  1).  This  is  not  mere  hyperbole,
bat  sober  fact.  Josephus  ('Bell.  Jud.,'
Procem.  4)  himself  bears  similar  testimony :
"Of  all  the  cities  nndor  the  dominion  of
Rome,  ours  was  onoe  the  most  happy,  and
afterwards  the  most  ntterly  miserable.  For
the  misfortunes  of  all  the  nations  npon  earth
that  have  ever  happened,  if  they  are  com-
pared with  the  calamities  to  which  the  Jews
were  exposed,  will,  in  my  opinion,  fall  far
short."  Chrysostom  sums  up  the  matter
thos :  "  Whence  came  tliere  thus  upon  them
wrath  from  Ood  intolerable,  and  more  sore
than  all  that  had  befallen  aforetime,  not  in
Judaia  only,  but  in  any  part  of  tbe  world?
Is  it  not  quite  clear  that  it  was  for  the  deed
of  the  cross  and  for  this  rejection?  Hark,
I  pray  thee,  the  exceeding  greatness  of  the
ills,  when  not  only  compared  with  the  time
before,  they  appear  more  grievous,  but  also
with  all  the  time  to  come.  For  not  in  all
the  world,  neither  in  all  time  that  is  past,
and  that  is  to  come,  shall  any  one  be  able
to  say  such  ills  have  been.  And  very  natur-
ally !  for  neither  had  any  man  perpetrated,
not  of  these  that  evr  have  been,  nor  those
to  come  hereafter,  a  deed  so  wicked  and
horrible  "('Horn.,'  inloe.).  The"affliction"
spoken  of  refers  not  only  to  bodily  sufferings,
but  to  that  anguish  of  mind  occasioned  by
acute  apprehension  and  expectation  of
danger,  such  as  was  felt  in  the  days  before
the  Flood,  and  at  the  time  of  the  opprouion
of  Antioohus  Epiphanea.

Ver.  22.— Xzoept  those  days  ihonld  be
shortened  ^4KaKoP<i9niray,  had  bien  $\ort-
tned).  In  the  midst  of  wrath  Ood  thinks  on
mercy.  He  providentially  ordained  that
tiie  days  of  vengeance  should  not  be  in-
definitely prolonged:  the  siege  was  practi-
cally of  short  duration,  the  country  was  not
wholly  overrun  and  desolated  (oomp.  2
Kings  xiii.  23).  The  natural  causes  that
combined  to  produce  this  shortening  of  the
siege  have  been  reoountod  by  commentators.
These  wore — the  divided  oounsolsof  the  Jews
tliomselvee,  tlie  voluntary  surrender  of  parts
of  tho  fortifications,  the  fierce  factions  in  tlie
city,  the  destruction  of  magazines  of  pro-
visions by  calamitous  fire,  the  suddenness  of
the  arrival  of  Titus,  and  the  fact  that  the
walls  bad  never  boon  strengthened  as  Herod
Agitppa  had  intonded.  There  shonld  ne
flesh  he  saved ;  <.#.  the  whole  Jewish  nation
would  have  been  annihilated.  For  the
elect's  sake.    At  the  intercesaion  of  the


CH.  XXIV.  1—15.  J  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.    MATTHEW.


437


escaped  Christians,  who  offered  up  unceas-
ing prayer  for  their  brethren  and  country-
men, God  lessened  the  duration  of  the  ca-
lamities. "  The  supplication  of  a  righteous
man  availeth  much  in  its  working  "  (Jas.
V.  16).  Ten  righteous  would  have  saved
Sodom ;  Lot's  intercession  did  preserve
Zoar  (comp.Isa.  vi.  13;  Jer.v.  1;  Acts,  xxvii.
24),  Some,  not  so  suitably,  explain  "the
elect"  to  be  those  Jews  who  should  here-
after turn  to  the  Lord  ;  or  the  elect  seed,
"  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sake  "  (Rom.  xi.
28).  We  may  well  believe  tha,t  the  local
tribulations.such  as  are  intimated  by  Daniel
and  Cliriat,  and  their  limitation  in  time,are
a  picture  of  what  shall  happen  in  the  last
days,  the  intermediate  fulfilment  being  tlie
prdlude  of  the  final  accomplishment.

Ver.  23.— And  then.  The  tliird  section  of
the  prophecy,  contained  in  vers.  23 — 35,
passes  from  the  fortunes  of  Jerusalem  to  the
end  of  the  world.  To  the  Lord's  hearers
was  conveyed  the  truth  that  the  signs  and
events  now  indicated  were  to  be  subsequent
to  the  destruction  of  the  city.  No  further
note  of  chronology  was  given.  The  uncer-
tainty of  the  future  caused  a  state  of  con-
stant expectation  and  hope.  And  this  is  the
feeling  which  we  Christians  are  intended  to
embrace  and  cultivate.  ' '  The  word  'then'
relates  not  to  the  connection  in  the  order
of  time  with  the  thingsjustmentioned,  .  .  .
not  meaning  what  should  follow  straight-
way after  these  things,  but  what  should  be
in  the  time  when  these  things  were  to  be
done  of  which  he  was  about  to  speak  "
(St.Chrysostom,  'Horn.,'  inloc).  Lo,hereis
Christ  I  This  refers  to  something  different
from  the  announcement  in  ver.  5.  Some
analogous  deceptions  doubtless  occurred  at
the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  but  the  Lord  is  pre-
dicting the  remote  events  of  the  latter  days,
of  which  previous  occurrences  were  types
and  anticipations.  Believe  it  not.  When
Christ  does  come  the  second  time,  there
shall  be  no  doubt  or  ignorance  of  his  ap-
pearance (see  ver.  27,  and  compare  the
warning  in  Deut.  xiii.  1 — 3).

Ver .24. — False  Christs.  He  shows  the  na-
ture of  the  dangers  to  which  believers  will
be  subject.  He  does  not  confine  his  view  to
Jewish  history;  he  foretells  the  appearance
of  pretenders  who  shall  assume  the  part  of
Christ,  and  blasphemously  assert  that  they
are  Messiah.  False  prophets.  Without  as-
suming the  name  of  Christ.many  impostors
shall  be  found  who, professing  to  be  inspired
or  lawful  teachers,  shall  lead  hearers  into
false  doctrine,  or  claim  to  possess  a  new  re-
velation, or  something  additional  and  sup-
plemental to  the  eternal  gospel.  Such  was
Mohammed  ;  such  were  the-  founders  of
Buddhism, Mormonism, and  other  so-called
religions,  who  based  their  views  on  special
revelation  given  from  heaven  for  the  pur-


pose of  improving  the  existing  faith  or  in-
troducing a  new  one.  Shall  show  (Sajaouo-i,
shall  give,  as  Acts  ii.l9)  great  signs  and  won-
ders. Two  usual  terms  for  miracles,  the
former  regarding  rather  the  evidence  afford-
ed by  them,  the  latter  the  element  of  the
marvellous  inherent  in  them  (comp.  John
iv.48;  Actsii.22;  vii.36,etc.).  Thatsuchmen
did  work  actual  miracles,  or  what  were
regarded  as  such,  cannot  be  reasonably
doubted.  Satan  was  on  their  side, and.as  far
as  he  was  permitted, confirmed  their  teach-
ing by  supernatural  assistance.  St.  Paul
testifies  that  such  should  be  the  action  of
the  antichrist,  "whose  coming  is  after  the
working  of  Satan,  with  all  power  and  signs
and  lying  wonders"  (2  Thess.  ii.  9;  comp.
Eev.xiii. 13,14).  Many  ofthese  wonders  may
have  been  effectuated  by  natural  forces  un-
known to  the  maj  ority  of  men,and  therefore
considered  as  superhuman;  others  may
have  been  derived  from  the  spiritual  world,
but  necessarily  from  that  realm  thereof
which  is  under  the  control  of  evil  demons.
Whatever  may  have  been  their  source,they
were  displayed  in  support  of  lies  and  errors,
and  had  a  certain  success.  Insomuch  that  if
it  were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  ("o-re  jrAa.
i-^o-ai,  el  SvvaTov)  the  Very  {i^td^even)  elect.  The
Authorized  Version  seems  to  make  our
Lord  imply  that  such  seduction  was  abso-
lutely impossible.  The  translation  ought  to
run,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  so  as  to  lead
astray,  if possible,even  the  elect,  signifying  the
difiSculty.not  the  impossibility,  of  drawing
them  away  from  the  truth.  "Theeleot"  are
Christians,  true  followers  of  Jesus,  and
members  of  his  Church.  These  may  fall
from  the  faith,  for  they  are  not  yet  finally
safe.and  on  that  chance  Satan  builds;  but  as
long  as  they  rest  on  Christ,  looking  to  him
for  guidance  and  protection, trying  the  spir-
its by  the  Word  of  God  and  by  the  truths
which  they  have  learned  in  creed  and  wor-
ship, they  stand  firm  against  the  strongest
temptations.

Ver.  25. — I  have  told  you  before  (see
John  xvi.  1 — 4).  The  warning  was  needed
in  the  first  age ;  it  will  be  needed  in  the
last.  The  prediction  was  known  before  the
ruin  of  Jerusalem,  and  doubtless  preserved
many  from  falling  victims  to  the  seducers
at  that  period  ;  it  must  be  used  now  and
till  the  end  to  preserve  Christians  from  the
errors  of  infidelity,  false  philosophy,  ag-
nosticism. That  such  attacks  on  their
faith  shall  be  made  is  a  proof  of  Christ's
omniscience;  that  he  gives  here  and  in  the
next  verses  premonitions  of  danger,  with
counsel  how  to  avoid  it,  is  evidence  of  his
love  and  care  for  his  elect.

Ver.  26.— Therefore  if  (iavo^v,  if  ■there-
fore) .  The  Lord  proceeds  to  make  the  matter
more  plain  by  entering  into  details  which


488         THE  GOStEL  AOCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    [OB.


t-m.


the  "here"  and  "there"  of  ver.  23  had  not
■nfficiently  denoted.  He  (Christ)  ii  in  the
desert.  If  there  wai  •  partial  fulfilment  of
this  \raming  at  the  siege  of  Jenualem,  when
some  impostnis  tried  to  persuade  the  people
that  Messiah  was  in  the  wilderness,  pre-
paring to  march  to  their  relief,  it  is  to  haTS
its  chief  accomplishment  just  before  the
final  consummation.  Oo  not  forth.  Bo  not
deluded  into  following  any  local  deoeiTer.
The  definite  place  of  appearance  proves  its
falsity  (see  rer.  27).  The  secret  chambers ;
Ml  pen*tralibu$  (Vulgate).  When  Christ
comes  the  second  time,  he  will  not  eome  as
at  Bethlehem,  in  secret,  in  a  corner.  If  any
pretender  should  be  announced  under  such
conditions,  they  were  to  put  no  belief  in
him.  These  were  simple  tests  which  all
eould  apply.  To  limit  the  Lord's  appearance
to  particular  persons  or  to  a  particular
place,  was  to  incur  fatal  error.

Ver.  27. — As  the  lightning  ,  .  .  east .  .  .
west.  That  is,  shines  ^m  one  end  of  hearen
to  the  other.  St.  Chiysostom's  comment  oz-
plaiDB  the  simUitnde:  "How,  then,  shineth
the  lightning?  It  needs  not  one  to  talk  of
it,  it  needs  not  a  herald,  but  even  to  them
in  chambers  it  shows  itself  in  an  instant  of
time  throughout  the  whole  world.  Bo  shall
that  coming  be,  showing  itself  at  once
everywhere  by  reason  of  the  shining  forth
of  his  glory."  We  are  told,  "every  eye
shall  see  him."  His  advent  shall  be  sudden,
nniversal,  unmistakable;  in  a  moment  he
shall  be  present,  visible  in  all  his  power  and
glory.  From  the  language  of  this  verse
probably  has  been  derived  the  orientation
of  churches,  and  the  mode  adopted  of  de-
positing the  bodies  of  deceased  Christians,
so  that  they  may  at  the  resurrection  face
the  Lord  when  he  comes  from  the  east.

Var.  28. — ^For.  The  particle  seems  to  b«
spurious,  and  is  omitted  by  late  editors.
Christ  applies  a  proverbial  saying  In  con-
firmation of  the  certainty  and  universality
of  his  appearance.  He  bad  used  the  same
■nder  other  circumstances  (Luke  xvii.
87);  end  analogous  expressions  are  found
in  Job  xxxiz.  30 ;  Hos.  viii.  1 ;  Hab.  i.  8,
etc.  Wheresoever  the  carcase  (irTw/io)  is,
there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together.
Eagles  (4«T»1)  do  not  live  on  carrion,  so
that  here  probably  vultures  are  meant.  The
Hebrew  word  neiher,  translated  "  eagle  "
in  our  version,  often  signitieB  "  the  vulture,"
as  in  Mioah  i.  16.  Tliis  bird's  keenness
of  sight  is  almost  incredible ;  it  will  discern
a  prey  at  an  enormous  distance,  and  its
movements  being  watched  by  others,  all
eager  to  secure  food,  a  carcase  is  very
quickly  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of  these
rapacious  birds,  flocking  from  all  quarters.
What  our  Lord  meant  by  this  proverb  has
•ccasioned  great  disputation.     If   Christ


were   referring   primarily   and  eblefly  ie
Jerusalem,  it   would  b«  easy  to   explain
"the   carcase"    to   be    tha   eormpt  city,
"  the  eagles  "  the  ministers  of  God's  ven-
geance, especially  the  Boman  armies,  whose
standards  bore  the  image  of  this  bird  of
prey.    Or  if  it  were  a  mere  general  truth,
and  to  be  taken  entirely  in  a  sjoritual  sense,
the  gnome  would  imp^y  that  moral  oor-
ruption  calls  for  heavenly  chastisement.
But  neither  of  these  interpretations  would
satisfy  the  context,  which  speaks  of  Christ's
second  advent.     Heace  many  regard  the
sentenee  as  altogether  parallel  to  the  pre-
ceding verse,  expressing  in  metaphor  that
which  was  there  set  forth  in  more  diraot
terms,  viz.  that  all  men  shall  assemble  to
the  place  where  Christ  shall  stmimon  them
to  be  judged,  as  vultures  congregate  round
a  carcase.     la  this   case   the   aaroasa  is
Christ,  the  eagles  or  vultures  are  the  men
to  be  judged.    This  exposition  has  satisfied
oommentators  of  reputation,  but  it  has  its
weak  points.    0ns  fails  to  see  tha  propriety
of   deseribing  men    coming   to  the  great
assise  as  vultures  gathering  to  devour  a
dead  body,  or  how  in  this  case  the  body  earn
be  Christ  or  the  place  of  his  appearance.
More  probable  is  the  interi)retation  which
regards  the  carcase  as  anticbristor  the  world-
power,  and  the  eagles  as  the  saints  and
angels  who  shall  attend  Christ  when  he
comes   in  judgment   (Bev.  xix.    17,  18).
Others  expound  the  clause  entirely  in  a
mystiaal  sense.    The  carcase  is  Christ,  or
the  body  of  Christ;    the  eagles  are  the
saints,  or  true  Christians;  these,  whatever
happens,  will,  with  keen  spiritual  sight,
always  be  able  to  discern  Christ  and  his
body,  and  to  flock  thereto.    He  call*  him-
self irrSiia,  because  he  saves  us  by  his  death,
and  feeds  us  by  his  body,  in  his  Chureh,
Word,  and  sacraments  (see  Wordsworth,  «'■
loo.).    Such  is  the  interpretation  of  many  of
the  Fathers,  and  it  has  many  analogies  in
other  places  of  Scripture.    Far  be  it  fross
us  to  restrict  the  sphere  of  Divine  prediction,
or  to  assert  that  any  legitimate  reference
which  we  may  discover  was  not  in  the
Lord's  mind   when  he  spake  the  words.
But  it  is  more  simple  to  regard  the  pro-
verbial saying  in  itself,  without  looking  for
abstruse  or  mystical  meanings.  As  a  carcase,
fall  where  it  may,  is  immediately  obserred
by    the    vultures    and    attracts    them,  so
Christ's  coming  shall  at  once  be  discerned
by  all  men  and  draw  them  into  it.

Ver.  2). — Immediately  (tiSivt  S),  6u(
immediately)  after  the  tribulation  of  those
days.  The  particle  must  not  be  disregarded,
as  it  implies  a  a'vution  with  respect  to  the
parousia.  The  Lord  proceeds  to  announce
some  details  of  the  final  advent.  Taking
the  tribulation  to  be  the  single  fact  of  the


OH.  xxir.  1—81.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  489


ruin  of  Jeruialem,  with  iU  accompanying;
horrors,  eome  hare  explained  the  Lord's
word  "immediately  after"  by  the  fore-
shortening process  of  prophecy,  which  makes
the  distant  future  seem  close  to  the  obtruding
present,  or  by  the  consideration  that  in
God's  View  time  does  not  exist :  "  One  day
is  with  the  Lord  aa  a  thousand  years,  and  a
thousand  years  as  one  day  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  8).
But  the  truth  is,  the  tribulation  (ver.  21)
only.begau  with  the  fall  of  Jerusalem ;  that
was  its  first  and  partial  fulfilment ;  and,  aa
Bt.  Luke  implies  (xxi.  23,  24),  it  has  been
going  on  ever  since,  and  is  not  yet  finished.
The  punishment  of  the  Jews  is  still  pro-
ceeding, Jerusalem  is  still  trodden  down
by  the  Gentiles,  wrath  etill  lies  upon  the
people,  they  are  still  dispersed  over  the
world,  and  have  been  and  are  more  or  less
persecuted  in  many  countries.  This  state
of  things  is  to  continue  "  till  the  times  of
the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled ; "  it  is,  then,
"immediately  after"  this  that  the  signs
announced  by  the  Lord  shall  be  seen.  He
is,  as  we  said  aboi  e  (see  on  ver.  4),  pur-
posely indefinite,  that  the  Church  may  learn
to  wait  and  watch  for  the  return  of  the
Saviour  and  Judge.  This  state  of  expecta-
tation  is  to  be  its  normal  condition.  It  had
its  efiiact  on  the  primitive  Church  before  the
Jewish  catastrophe.  St.  Peter  (Acts  iii.
19—21)  tells  of  the  times  of  refreshing,  when
Jesus  shall  come,  as  possibly  close  at  hand ;
Bt.  Paul  more  than  once  speaks  in  the  same
strain  (1  Cor.  i.  7 ;  Phil.  L  6,  etc.),  though
he  warns  his  converts  not  to  omit  ordinary
duties  in  immediate  expectation  of  the  end
(2Thes8.  ii.  2);  St  James  (t.9)  tells  of  the
Judge  standing  before  the  door.  And  since
then  often  has  this  belief  cropped  up  at
various  stages  of  the  world's  history,  showing
that  Christ's  warning  has  sunk  deep  into
Christian  hearts,  and  produced  the  temper
nf  mind  wliich  he  purposed  to  raise.  Shall
the  sun  be  darkened,  etc.  There  is  no  valid
reason  why  the  physical  phenomena  men-
tioned in  this  Terse  are  not  to  be  taken
literally,  even  if  we  see  also  in  tliem  a
spiritual  significance.  It  is  only  reasonable
to  expect  that  the  end  of  this  world  sliould
be  accompanied  by  stupendous  changes  in
the  realm  of  nature.  The  sun  was  miracu-
lously darkened  when  Jesus  hung  on  the
cross.  What  wonder  if  similar  catastrophes
signal  his  coming  to  judgment?  The
apostle's  words  point  to  a  literal  fulfilment
(2  Pet.  iii.  10, 12).  Our  Lord's  prediction
echoes  announcementa  often  found  in  the
Old  Testament,  which  are  not  always  to  be
considered  metaphorical  (see  Isa.  xiii.  10 ;
Ezok.  xxxii.  7 ;  Joel  ii.  30,  31 ;  iii.  15, 16;
Amos  viii.  9).  Anticipations  of  some  of
these  terrible  latter-day  signs  occurred  at
Jerusalem,  according  ,to  Josephus  ('  BelL


Jnd.,'  t1.  5.8,4).  Darkened . .  .  notgivelight.
This  is  in  accordance  with  Hebrew  paral-
lelism. The  next  clause  is  constructed  in
the  same  way.  Fall  from  heaven.  The  Lord
may  be  speaking  of  the  apparent  effect  of
these  convulsions  of  nature,  in  accordance
with  popular  ideas,  as  we  talk  of  the  sun
rising  and  setting;  or  he  may  thus  term
the  obscuration  or  extiiiction  of  the  light  of
the  stars.  The  powers  of  the  hesTens  mean
probably  the  heavenly  bodies  independent
of  the  solar  aystem,  called  elsewhere  "  the
host  of  heaven  "  (Deut.  iv.  19,  etc.) ;  or  the
phrase  may  signify  (though  the  parallelism
would  not  l>e  so  perfect)  the  forces  and  laws
which  control  these  bodies.  An  interruption
in  the  action  of  these  powers  would  occasion
the  moat  awful  catastrophes  (see  Hag.  iii.
6,  which  makes  a  similar  announcement).
We  must  notice  the  spiritual  application  of
this  prediction,  as  it  has  obtained  a  wide
acceptance.  The  words  are  sometimes  taken
in  a  bad  sense.  The  sun  is  Satan,  or  Lucifer,
who  fell  as  lightning  from  heaven  (Luke  x.
18);  "the  powers  of  the  heavens"  are  the
hosts  of  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,
"  thespii'itual  wickednesses  in  high  places;"
the  stars  are  all  that  exalt  themselves,  who
shall  bo  consumed  and  vanish  at  the  bright-
ness of  the  cross.  But  more  generally  the
luminaries  are  explained  in  a  good  sense.
The  sun  is  Christ  or  his  truth,  which  shall
be  obscured  in  the  last  days ;  the  moon  is
the  Church,  darkened  by  heresy  and  un-
belief, and  borrowing  no  light  from  its  sun ;
the  stars  are  they  who  once  were  foremost
in  the  faith,  but  now  shall  fall  from  their
steadfastness,  or  be  unable  to  diffusa  light,
owing  to  the  gross  darkness  and  mistiness
of  those  evil  days.

Yer.  30. — And  then;  (.«.  after  the  great
physical  changes  mentioned  in  the  last
verse.  The  sign  of  tha  Son  of  man.  This
has  been  differently  interpreted  (1)  as  the
appearance  of  Christ  himself  in  the  clouds
of  heaven  (ch.  xxvi.  64 ;  Dan.  vii.  13, 14),
when  the  glory  and  majesty  of  his  advent
will  prove  that  he  is  Savionr  and  Judge.
But  this  explanation  seems  to  confuse  the
sign  and  that  which  it  represents,  the  token
of  Messiah  and  Messiah  himself  who  cometh
afterward.  And  the  definite  article,  "tA«
sign,"  seems  to  imply  something  already
well  known  to  denote  him,  whereas  his
appearance  could  not  be  known  beforehand.
(2)  A  star,  which  shall  herald  his  second
coming,  as  a  star  announced  his  birth.  This,
which  is  Olshausen's  suggestion,  is  entirely
arbitrary,  and  has  nothing  to  support  it,
especially  as  the  meaning  of  the  star  would
not  be  directly  intelligible  to  all  men.  (3)
Meyer  and  De  Wette  suppose  a  bright  light,
or  a  kind  of  Shechinah.  This,  which  doubt<
less  wiU  be  manifested,  was  indeed  a  token


440         THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxiv.  1— 61.


of  the  preeence  of  God,  but  could  not  be
reoognhed  at  once  m  tbe  (ign  of  the  Son  of
man.  (4)  We  oome  to  what  baa  been  the
almost  TiniverBol  interpretation  of  the
Father!  and  early  commentator*,  who  saw
in  the  lign  the  orou  of  Ohrist,  which  is
indeed  the  eniign  and  atandard  of  the
goBpel.  Nothing,  eauallr  with  this,  can  cha-
racterize the  Son  of.man,  tlie  emblem  of  hia
humiliation  and  bii  triumph.  Then.  When
they  behold  thii  sign  in  the  iky,  and  know
nnmiBtakably  that  Chriit  in  parson  is
about  to  appear.  Ihall  all  the  tribes  of  the
earth  moam  (xidf'oyrai,  ihall  beat  the  breait).
Not  alone  the  Jews,  looking  on  him  whom
they  pierced,  shall  bewail  their  blindness
and  impenitenoe  (Zeoh.  ziL  10 — 14;  Isa.
liii.),  but  all  the  nations,  the  races  and
peoples  who  have  rejected  him  whom  they
ought  to  have  received.  The  orois  shows
that  he  died  for  them,  though  they  profited
not  by  his  saorifioe  (oomp.  Itev.  i  7 ;  vi  15 —
17).  They  shall  sse  (f^evrai,  an  echo  of
the  preceding  x^ifiarrai).  The  sign  ia
followed  by  the  adrent  of  Christ  In  person.
Coming  in  the  olouds  of  beaTen.  Some  have
taken  "  clouds  "  to  mean  angels,  comparing
ch.  xvi.  27;  but  there  is  no  noed  for  con-
sidering the  term  here  to  be  metaphorical.
The  accompaniments  of  the  thoophanies  are
always  tlius  announced  (see  Ps.  zviii.  10 —
12 ;  Isa.  xix.  1 ;  Dan.  rii.  13,  etc ;  ch.
xxvi.  64).  Ho  thus  claims  to  be  the  God
of  whom  these  words  are  continually  used,
and  lie  leaves  bis  hcarcra  to  gather  that  he
will  come  visibly,  not  spiritually  to  indi-
vidual souls  or  Churched,  but  manifestly  to
the  whole  of  mankind,  whether  quick  or
risen.  With  power,  lu  his  full  omnipotence.
Cum  virtute  multa  (Vulgate).  The  expression
must  not  be  taken  as  denoting  the  attendant
angels ;  they  are  named  in  the  next  verse.
It  denotes  that  he  who  on  earth  met  with
naught  but  pain  and  liuioiliation  should  be
displayed  to  the  same  earth  with  that
splendour  and  majesty  which  essentially
belonged  to  him.

Yer.  31. — His  angels.  As  the  cxeontors  of
his  will,  to  bring  before  his  throne  all  who
liRve  to  be  judged.  They  have  the  same
office  in  the  paiable  of  the  tares  and  tlie
wheat  (ch.  xiii.  41).  With  a  great  sound
of  a  trumpet  (/xer^  trdKitiyyos  ^avjjs  fieyd\7js,
whicli  may  alao  mean,  aith  a  trumpet  of
great  lound).  Sumo  manusoripts,  with  the
Vulgate,  road, "  with  a  trumpet  and  a  great
voice;"  others,  "with  a  great  trumpet,"
omitting  "voice."  All,  however,  agree  in
asserting  the  employment  of  the  trumpet  on
tills  momentous  occasion  (comp.  ]  Cor.  xv.
S2;  1  Theas.  ir.  16).  The  term  may  be
metaphorical  for  a  voico  exceeding  loud
(comp.  Eev.  i.  10;  iv.  1);  but  it  is  more
probably  to  be  taken  in  the  obvious  aonse.


with  a  reference  to  its  use  among  the  Jews
in  calling  the  assembly  and  giving  the
alarm.  Of  course,  the  occurrence  is  super*
natural.  It  is,  indeed,  ai  great  a  miracle
for  a  sound  to  be  heard  simultaneously  in
both  hemispheres  as  it  is  for  Christ  to  be
seen  at  the  same  moment  by  all  dwellers  on
the  globe.  This  is  a.  matter  to  be  believed,
not  explained.  Shall  gather  together  his
elect.  The  angels  will  infallibly  select  these
from  the  mass  of  men,  either  by  spiritual
insight  or  Divine  direction.  The  elect  are
not  Israelites  alone,  but  true  believers  of
all  nations  (see  ver.  14  and  John  xvii.  20,
21).  These  are  first  collected,  and  then  the
reprobate  are  summoned,  according  to  oh.
XXV.  41.  Prom  the  four  winds.  The  four
cardinal  points,  i.e.  from  every  quarter  of
the  earth.  Four  is  the  number  of  the  world
or  the  nnivei-ae.  Trom  one  and  .  .  .  the
othei;  literally ,/ram  the  *ndi  of  the  heaveni
unto  their  endi,  as  Dent.  iv.  82^a  parallel
to  the  preceding  clause,  From  horizon  to
horiion,  though  this  expression,  taken  lite-
lally,  is  not  extensive  enough.

Ver.  32. — Learn  a  parabli  (tV  Tapx^oX^v)
of  (aril)  the  fig  tree ;  better, /rom  thMfig  tree
Uarn  itt  parable.  Learn  ye  tbe  lesaou
which  this  tree  can  teach  you:  though,
indeed,  it  might  teach  other  lessons  than
the  one  which  Christ  would  enforce.  Whea
his  (iti)  braneh  is  yet  tsnder  «Si;  .  .  .
ytnt^ai  arraXis,  U  note  become  tender).  This
refers  to  the  new  shoots  of  unripened  wood.
Futteth  forth  leaves  (ra  ^iWa,  iti  Uavee).
Oopyists  and  editors  vary  between  ix^uff,
■ubj.  aor.  passive,  and  ixipip,  active.  The
Vulgate  has  the  passive,  et  folia  naia.
Summer  is  nigh.  The  fruit  of  the  fig  tree
appears  before  ^o  Icavoa,  aa  we  learned  in
the  story  of  the  withered  fig  tree  (ch,  xxi.
19),  which  the  Lord  may  have  had  in  mind
when  he  gave  this  illustration.  Did  he
intend  to  symbolize  the  revival  of  the  life
of  the  withered  Jewish  race  in  the  time  ot
the  end  7

Ver.  33.— So  likevi)*  ye  (elrm  xal  i/tiTs,
•0  a2<o  ye,  emphatio).  As  surely  as  buds
and  leaves  prove  the  coming  of  summer,  so
ye,  who  have  been  taught,  may  gather  from
the  fulfilment  of  the  eigns  mentioned  (vers,
15—  22,  etc.)  the  approach  of  the  end.  Know
that  it  is  near  (Jin  iyyis  iartr).  The
subject  is  not  expressed,  but  It  must  be  the
Son  of  man  (ver.  30),  so  that  the  rendering
ought  to  be,  he  it  near.  Many,  however,
take  tho  understood  nominative  to  be  the
judgment,  or  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  the
occurrences  last  spoken  of.  At  the  doors ;  as
Jaa.  V.  9,  on  the  very  threahold,  and  there-
fore about  to  enter.

Ver.  84.— This  generation.  Our  Lord's
assertion  has  given  rise  to  sceptical  obser-
vations, aa   if  his   prophecy    bad   failed.


OH.  xxiT.  1— 51.]    THE  aOSPBL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


441


Alford  hasendeaTonred  toremoTe  objootiong
by  taking  yevei  BB  eqniralent  to  yiras,  a
rnoe  or  fnmily  of  people,  and  referring  It  to
the  continned  existence  of  the  JeTri.  He
cites  Jer.  viii.  8  (Septaagint) ;  ch.  xii.  45 ;
xvii.  17;  xxiii,  86,  etc.,  in  confirmation  of  tfaii
lignifioation.  Hit  examplei,  bowtver,  are
not  unasBailable,  though  inch  nae  ii  certainly
olaBsioal ;  bnt  at  the  same  time,  it  ii  nn-
likelj  that  Christ  shonld  thni  indefinitely
postpone  a  period  of  inflnita  Importance  to
his  hearers.  But  there  ii  no  necessity  for
assuming  any  nnnanal  meaning  in  the  term
"this  generation."  Its  plain  and  obTious
reference  is  to  the  oontempornriei  of  the
speaker,  or  those  who  shall  lire  some  thirty
or  forty  years  longer ;  this  period  would  bring
them  to  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  And  remem-
bering that  Christ  has  drawn  no  definite  line
between  this  crisis  and  the  final  oonsumma-
tion,  we  are  jnatifled  in  regarding  all  these
things  as  meaning,  primarily,  the  signs  pre-
ceding or  accompanying  the  downfall  of  the
city.  In  a  secondary  sense,  "this  gene-
ration "  may  mean  the  spiritual  Israel,  the
generation  of  them  thai  seek  the  Lord
(Ps.  xxiT.  6).  "All  these  things  shall
surely  come  to  pass,"  says  Chrysostom,
"and  the  generation  of  the  faithful  shall
remain,  cut  off  by  none  of  the  things  that
have  been  mentioned.  For  both  Jerusalem
shall  perish,  and  the  more  part  of  the  Jews
shall  be  destroyed,  bnt  orer  this  generation
shall  nothing  prevail — not  famine,  not  pesti-
lence, not  earthquake,  not  the  tumults  of
wars,  not  false  Christs,  not  folse  prophets,
not  deceiTers,  not  traitors,  not  those  that
cause  to  ofiend,  nor  the  false  brethren,  nor
any  other  such-like  temptations  wliateyer."
Some  critics  have  combined  the  tliree  mean-
ings of  "generation  "  given  above,  and  have
seen  in  Christ's  worJs  a  threefold  reference,
first,  to  the  contemporary  people ;  secondly,
to  the  Jewish  nation  j  thirdly,  to  the  Chris-
tian believers  or  dispensation.  According
to  Lange,  "this  generation"  means  the
generation  of  those  who  know  and  discern
these  signs.

Ver.  35.— Christ  adds  a  solemn  assurance
that  his  words  have  in  them  a  vitality  and
endurance  which  the  mightiest  works  of
nature  do  not  poesoBS.  The  facts  and  truths
embodied  in  his  words  are  sure  and  stead-
fast, and  what  he  has  promised  or  predicted
shall  inevitably  be  fulfilled.  This  verse  is
omitted  by  N,  but  it  is  most  probably
genuine,  as  it  undoubtedly  has  its  place  in
the  other  two  synoptists  (oomp.  1  Pet.  1.
24,  25).

Yer.  86. — The  apostles  had  asked  (ver.
3),  "  When  shall  these  things  be  ?  "  Christ
Iocs  not  now  exprensly  answer  this  qnea-
lion ;  he  puts  forth  strongly  the  uncertainty
IB  the  knowledge  of  these  great  events,  and


how  this  ignorance  is  disciplinary.  Of  that
day  (ds  die  ilia,  Yulgate)  and  booi,  viz.
when  Christ  shall  appear  in  judgment.  The
expression  plainly  implies  that  a  definite
day  and  moment  are  fixed  for  this  groat
appearing,  but  known  only  to  God.  Enow-
eth  no  man,  no,  not  (ouSi,  not  even)  the
angels  of  heaven.  A  kind  of  climax.  Man
is  naturally  excluded  from  the  knowledge ;
but  even  to  tlie  angels  it  has  not  been
revealed.  A  further  climax  is  added  in  St.
Mark,  and  from  that  Gospel  has  been  intro-
duced by  some  very  good  manuscripts  into
this  place,  tieithtr  the  Son  (the  Bevised
Yersion  admits  the  clause).  The  words  have
given  occasion  to  some  erroneous  statements.
It  is  said  by  Arians  and  semi-Arians,  and
modem  disputants  who  have  followed  in
their  steps,  that  the  Son  cannot  be  equal  to
the  Father,  if  he  knows  not  what  the  Father
knows.  Alford  says  boldly,  "This  matter
was  bidden  fi'om  him."  But  when  we  con-
sider such  passages  as  "  I  and  my  Father
are  one;"  "I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the
Father  in  me  "  (John  x.  30 ;  liv.  11,  etc.),
we  cannot  believe  that  the  time  of  the  great
consummation  was  unknown  to  him.  What
is  meant,  then,  by  this  assertion  ?  How  is  it
true?  Doubtless  it  is  to  be  explained  (if
capable  of  explanation)  by  the  hypostatic
union  of  two  natures  in  the  Person  of  Christ,
whereby  the  properties  of  the  two  natures
are  interchangeably  predicated.  From
danger  of  error  on  this  mysterious  subject
we  are  preserved  by  the  precise  terms  of  the
Athanasian  Creed,  according  to  which  we
a£Srm  that  Christ  is  "  equal  to  the  Father,
as  touching  his  Godhead ;  and  inferior  to  the
Father,  as  touching  his  manhood . . .  one  al-
together ;  not  by  confusion  of  substance,  but
by  unity  of  Person,"  etc.  If,  then,  Christ
asserts  that  he  is  ignorant  of  anything,  it
must  be  that  in  his  human  nature  he  hath
willed  not  to  know  that  which  in  his  Divine
nature  he  was  cognizant  of.  This  is  a  part
of  that  voluntary  self-surrender  and  self-
limitation  of  which  the  apostle  speaks  when
he  says  that  Christ  "emptied  himself"
(Phil.  ii.  7).  He  condescended  to  assume
al/  the  conditions  of  humanity,  even  willing
to  share  the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge
in  some  particulars.  How  the  two  natures
thus  interworked  we  know  not,  and  need
not  conjecture;  nor  can  we  always  divine
why  prominence  at  one  time  is  given  to  the
Divine,  at  another  to  the  human.  It  is
enough  for  us  to  know  that,  for  reasons  which
seemed  good  unto  him,  he  imposed  restriction
on  his  omniscience  in  this  matter,  and,  to
enhance  the  mysteriousnees  and  awfulness
of  the  great  day,  announced  to  his  disciples
his  ignorance  of  the  precise  moment  of  its
occurrence.  This  is  a  safer  exposition  than
to  say,  with  some,  that  Christ  knew  not  die


442


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xht.  1— 61.


day  BO  M  to  reveal  it  to  na,  that  it  was  no
part  of  his  misBion  from  the  Father  to  divulge
it  to  men,  and  therefore  that  he  could  truly
say  he  knew  it  not.  This  eeems  rather  an
evasion  than  an  explanation  of  the  difficulty.
Bat  my  Father  only.  The  best  manuscript*
have  "  the  Father."  "  But "  is  « fih,  except.
So  Christ  said  to  bis  inquiring  apostles, "  It
is  not  for  yon  to  know  the  times  or  the
seasons,  which  the  Father  bath  put  in  bis
own  power  "  (Acts  i.  7).  These  words  do  not
exclude  the  Bon's  participation  in  the  know-
ledge, though  he  willed  that  it  should  not
extend  to  his  human  nature.  With  this  and
Bucb-like  texts  in  riew,  how  fatile,  pre-
sumptnous,  and  indeed  profane,  it  is  to
attempt  to  settle  the  exact  date  and  honr
when  the  present  age  shall  end  I

Ver.  37. — As  the  days  of  Noe  were.  In
citing  this  example,  the  Lord  has  special
reference  to  the  fact  that  the- warning  then
given  was  not  heeded  (Gen.  vi  3).  If,  as
seems  probable,  the  antediluvians  had  more
tlian  a  century's  warning  of  the  coming
flood,  it  can  hardly  be  only  the  suddenness
of  the  calamity  to  which  Christ  would  point
(1  Pet.  iii.  20).  He  has  used  the  illustra-
tion elsewhere  (Luke  xvii  26,  27),  where
also  the  destrnction  of  Sodom  is  adduced
as  a  type  of  the  last  day.  So  shall  also.
The  parousia  of  Christ  shall  fall  on  a  world
incredulous  and  heedless.

Ver.  38. — ^They  were  eating,  etc.  The
Lord  describes  the  reckless  way  in  which
men  went  on  their  usual  course,  pursued
their  pleasures  and  avocations,  with  the
doom  banging  over  tliem,  in  spite  of  the
warning  given.  The  word  for  "  eating "
(rpdiyovres)  implies  the  idea  of  gnawing  food
greedily  like  an  animal,  hence  eating  glut-
tonously. They  had  leivrned  to  drink  to
excess  long  before  Lot's  time  (Gen.  ix.  20,
21).  The  periphrastic  form  of  expression,
ijcaf  rp^otms  ■  .  .  trtvovrtSt  denotes  not  a
single  act,  but  habitude.  Until  the  day.
Though  they  had  watched  Noah  building
the  ark,  and  heard  him  preach  righteousness
for  many  a  year,  they  took  no  heed.  It
must  be  observed  that  Christ  here  confirms
the  historical  accuracy  of  this  episode  in
Genesis.

Ver.  39. — Knew  not.  They  wouhl  not
comprehend  the  signs  of  the  coming  judg-
ment, or,  at  any  rate,  refused  to  profit  by
them,  preferring  their  own  carnal  pleasures
to  the  care  of  their  souls  and  the  amend-
ment of  their  lives.  The  Lord  assures  us
that  similar  recklessness  and  unbelief  will
be  found  at  his  coming.  Doubtless  anguish
and  fear  will  fill  many  hearts,  but  the  gene-
ral fouling  will  bo  incredulity,  and  a  false
security  which  refuses  to  take  warning.
Sadler  compares  it  to  Belshazzar's  fea^t  at
the  very  moment  of  danger,  and  the  Athe-


nians' Insensibility  at  the  time  of  the  great
plague,  when  the  people  seemed  to  be  exem-
plifying the  maxim,  "Let  ns  eat  and  drink,
for  to-morrow  we  die  "  (Isa.  xxii.  13).  '*  For
like  as  when  the  ark  was  making,  they
believed  not;  but  while  it  was  set  in  the
midst  of  them,  proclaiming  beforehand  the
evils  that  are  to  come,  they,  when  they  saw
it,  lived  in  pleasure  ...  so  also  now,  anti-
christ, indeed,  shall  appear,  after  whom  is
the  end,  and  the  punishments  at  the  end,
and  vengeance  intolerable;  but  they  that
are  held  by  the  intoxication  of  wickedness
[comp.  Wisd.  iv.  12]  shall  not  so  mnch  as
perceive  the  dreadful  nature  of  the  things
that  are  on  the  point  of  being  done.  Where-
fore also  Paul  saith,  'as  travail  upon  a
woman  with  child '  [1  Tbess.  t.  8],  even  so
■hall  those  fearful  and  incurable  evils  come
upon  them "  (Ohrysostom,  '  Hom.,'  in  Zoc).
Morison  considers  that  Christ  is  not  blam-
ing the  antediluvians,  but  simply  referring
to  the  fact  that  up  to  the  last  moment  they
were  ignorant  of  tne  impending  catastrophe.
But  this  seems  inadequate.

Ver.  40. — The  Lord  gives  two  examples
of  the  suddenness  of  his  advent,  and  its
effect  in  private  life.    Shall  two  be  in  the
field.    They  shall  be  working  together  at
their  ordinary  agricultural  occupations,  with
nothing  outwardly  to  distinguish  one  from
the  other,  good  and  bad  being  mingled  to-
gether.   The  me  shall  be  taken  (irapaXaju-
pivfTat,    it   tahen,  the    present    implying
certainty),  and  the  other  left  (a^Urtu,  ia  Left).
Christ  speaks  as  though  he  saw  the  scene
before  him.    The  **  taking  "  implies  separa-
tion from  companions,  as  cb.  xvii.  1 ;  xviii.
16,  etc.    This  is  the  work  of  the  angels
(ver.  31).    There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the
destiny  of  the  two  classes  named.    Are  the
good  "  taken  "  and  the  evil  "  left "  1  or  are
the  evil  "taken"  and  the  good   "left"?
Some  snppose  that  the  terms  allude  to  the
sudden  approach  of  a  hostile  army  by  which
some  are  taken  prisoners  and  others  allowed
to  escape ;  or,  since  in  the  parable  the  tares
are  first  gathered  for  the  burning,  those
taken  must  be  the  wicked,  those  left  are  for
storing  in  the  everlasting  gamer.    On  the
other  hand,  many  commentators  understand
the  verbs  in  a  sense  opposite  to  that  men-
tioned above.    As  (ver.  31)  the  angels  are
sent  forth  to  gather  the  elect,  the  "  taken  "
are  of  this  class,  who  are  caught  away  to
meet  the  Lord  and  his  saints  (1  Thcss.  iv.
17 ;  John  xiv.  3),  while  the  others  are  left
for  judgment  and  reprobation  (2  Thess.  i.
7 — 9).    Bengel,  continuing  the  reference  to
the  Flood,  writes,  "  Astumitur  in  tutelam
(ver.  31),  ut  Noachus  cum  domo  sua ;  linitur
in  perioulis,  qnicqnid  obveniat,  ut  homines
in  diluvio."  The  latter  interpretation  of  the
two  seems  to  be  the  correct  one.   At  any  rate,


OH.  xxiT.  1-et]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


443


it  ii  plain  tliat  tiie  nicest  discTimiaation  i*
•zeroued,  and  tliat  among  men  and  \romen,
in  all  oonditioni  of  life,  a  final  leveranoe
■hall  then  he  made,  wliich  shall  apportion
their  lot  in  the  other  world.

Ver.  41. — ^Two  women  shall  be  grindln;;
at  (iy)  the  mill,  In  the  absence  of  mills
turned  by  wind  or  water,  which  were  of
much  later  invention,  every  honsehold  had
its  own  little  handmill,  worked  by  women  of
the  family  or  by  slaves  (Exod.  xi.  5 ;  Judg.
zvi.  21 ;  Isa.  zlvii.  2).  "  Two  stones,  about
mghteen  inches  or  two  feet  across,  rest  one
on  the  other,  the  under  one  slightly  higher
towards  the  centre,  and  the  upper  one  hol-
lowed out  to  fit  this  convexity;  a  hole
through  it,  in  the  middle,  receiving  the
grain.  Sometimes  the  nnder  stone  is  bedded
in  cement,  raised  into  a  border  round  it,  to
catch  and  retain  the  flour,  or  meal,  as  it  falls.
A  stick  fitstened  into  the  upper  one  served
as  a  handle.  Occasionally  two  women  sit
at  the  same  pair  of  stones,  to  lighten  the
task,  one  hand  only  being  needed  where  two
work  together,  whereas  a  single  person  has
to  use  both  hands"  (Oeikie,  'Holy  Land
and  Bible,'  p.  155).  "  Two  .women  were
busy  in  a  cottage  at  the  household  mill,
whieh  attracted  me  by  its  sound.  ...  To
grind  is  very  exhausting  work,  so  that,
where  possible,  one  woman  sits  opposite  the
other,  to  divide  the  strain,  thouf^h  in  a  poor
man's  house  the  wife  has  to  do  this  drudgery
unaided"  (ibid.,  p.  661).  St.  Luke  (xvii.
81)  adds  a  third  situation  to  the  cases  men-
tioned by  our  Lord,  viz.  "  two  men  in  one
bed,"  or  on  one  dining-couch,

Vers.42— 51. — Practical  exhortation  drawn
*rom  the  uncertainty  of  the  hut  day  :  Watch.

Ver.  42. — Watch  therefore.  The  end  will
ba  sudden,  the  final  separation  will  be  then
completed ;  be  ye  therefore  always  prepared.
Few  exhortations  are  more  frequently  and
impressively  given  than  this  of  the  duty  and
necessity  of  watchfulness.  Of  course,  the
Christian  has  to  watch  against  many  things
— ^his  own  evil  heart,  temptation,  the  world,
but  most  of  all  he  must  watch  and  be  always
looking  for  the  coming  of  his  Lord;  for
whether  be  ba  regarded  as  Bedeemer,  De-
liverer, or  Judge,  he  will  come  as  a  thief  in
the  night.  What  hour.  Very  many  good
manuscripts  and  some  late  editors  read
«on  what  day."  This  is  probably  the
genuine  reading, "  hour  "  being  an  alteration
derived  from  ver.  44.  What  (irof^)  means
of  what  kind  or  quality — whether  sudden,
immediate,  or  remote.

Ver.  43. — But  know  this;  Itc^tvo  Sh  ytyd-
CKtTt :  illud  autem  icitote  (Yulgate) ;  or,  thii
ye  know.  The  Lord  draws  particular  atten-
tion to  what  he  is  going  to  say,  which  is  a
strange  and  startling  truth  in  »  parabolic


form  (see  Luke  xli.  89,  cto.).  Th«  good  man
of  the  house ;  o'MoSe(nr6rtit :  the  matter  of  the
houte ;  paterfamiliai  (Ynlgatei).  If  .  .  .  had
known  ...  he  would  have  watched.  The
form  of  the  sentence  (ci  with  indicative  in
the  protasis,  and  &v  with  indicative  aorist  in
the  apodosis)  implies  that  the  result  did  not
happen.  The  master  may  have  made  all
secure  as  far  as  bolts  and  bars  were  con-
cerned, but  he  did  not  keep  awake,  though
he  had  reason  to  know  that  a  thief  was  in
the  neighbourhood,  and  so  was  not  ready  to
frustrate  any  attack  made  in  an  unsuspected
manner.  To  be  broken  up ;  SiopvyrJDcu :  to  he
digged  through ;  perfodi  (Vulgate).  Houses
constructed  of  sun-dried  bricks,  mud,  or
loose  stones,  could  be  easily  pierced  and
entered  without  forcing  shuttered  window  or
barred  door  (oomp.  Job  ixiv.  16).  The
significance  of  the  parable  is  easy  to  see.
The  householder  is  the  disciple  of  Christ,
the  thief  is  Christ  himself  who  comes  on  the
nnwatchful  when  and  where  they  expect
him  not.  It  is,  indeed,  a  strange  comparison,
but  one  calculated  to  alarm  the  unwary,  and
to  show  the  necessity  of  the  caution  enjoined.
Similar  warnings  are  found  elsewhere ;  e.g.
1  Thess.  V.  2,  4;  2  Pet.  iii.  10;  Bev.  uL  3  ;
xtI  15.  The  exposition  which  regards  the
tUef  as  the  devil  is  not  so  suitable  to  the
context.

Ver.  44. — ^Therefore.  Begardingthe  solemn
example  just  given,  taking  it  as  applicable
to  spiritual  things.  The  warning  is  of  general
obligatioa,  and  may  be  used  by  each  in-
dividual Christian  for  his  own  benefit ;  for
there  is  a  sense  in  wliicb  the  day  of  death  is
the  coming  of  Christ,  and  as  death  leaves  us
so,  as  far  as  we  know,  judgment  will  find  ua.

Ver.  45.— Who  then  (rls  Spo ;)  ?  In  Luke
xii.  41,  etc.,  Christ  utters  this  parabolic  dis-
course in  reply  to  Peter's  question, "  Lord,
8pe:\kest  thou  this  parable  unto  us,  or  even
to  all  ?  "  He  now  turns  his  exhortation  to
those  in  authority  over  the  house,  specially
to  the  ministers  and  stewards  of  his  mysteries,
proposing  it  in  an  interrogative  form,  not
only  because  the  man  he  wants  is  dif&cult
to  find,  but  in  order  that  each  may  put  the
question  to  himself,  and  see  if  he  reaches  the
high  standard  suggested.  Is  a  {i,  the)
faithful  and  wise  {(pp6vinos,  prudent,  prac-
tically teiee')  servant.  The  idea  is  that  some
good  and  true  slave  is  raised  to  the  steward-
ship of  his  master's  household,  like  Eliezer
whom  Abram  advanced  to  this  position
(Gen.  XV.  2).  Hath  made  ruler  (jcareari)iT(v,
hath  let)  over  his  household  (c'tI  t^s  eepa-
trdas  abrov,  see  on  ver.  47).  The  word
SepaTTeta  is  used  classically  for  a  body  of
attendants,  the  servants  that  form  the  family,
the  manage.  Christ  asks — Where  is  one  to  be
found  fit  for  this  position  in  his  Church?
It  is  the  Lord  who  selects  anH  appoints  the


444  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW.   [CH.  xxiv.  1—51.


steward;  he  is  neither  self-constituted  nor
appointed  by  those  over  whom  he  rules.  To
give  them  meat  {rrjv  rpoc/i))!.,  their  food)  in
_  due  season.  It  was  the  duty  of  suoli  an
'  olifioer  to  dispense  the  regular  allowancB  of
daily  food  to  the  members  of  the  house-
hold. So  the  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of
Christ  have  to  feed  his  flock  with  spiritual
food,  with  the  Word  and  sacraments,  and  to
do  this  wisely  and  discreetly,  according  to
the  capacity,  advancement,  and  circum-
stances of  each  recipient.  The  exhortation
holds  good  for  others  as  well  as  the  clergy,
civil  rulers,  the  rich,  all  men.  All  our  en-
dowments, mental,  spiritual,  physical,ma-
terial,  are  the  gift  of  God,  and  are  to  be
used  in  his  service  and  to  the  good  of  others.

Ver.  46. — Blessed  is  that  servant.  The
Lord  had  asked — Who  is  the  faithful  and
wise  servant  ?  he  virtually  answers — It  is
the  one  whom  his  lord  when  he  Cometh
shall  find  duly  performing  the  duties  of  hig
office.  Such  a  one  he  pronounces  "blessed;"
and  what  happier  lot  can  befall  a  man  in
a  responsible  position,  than  to  be  taken
while  diligently  and  rightly  performing
his  appointed  work  (see  oh.  xxv.  21)?

Ver.  47.— He  shall  make  Mm  rnler  over
(i£aTinrT>io-ei  irri  with  dative,  denoting  per-
manency of  occupation  ;  in  ver.  45  it  is
with  genitive,  as  of  temporary  superin-
tendence) all  his  goods  ;  all  thai  he  hath.
This  is  the  reward.  He  who  before  was  set
over  only  a  small  part  of  his  lord's  posses-
sions is  now  made  superintendent  of  all  his
property;  for  "  he  that  is  faithful  in  that
which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in  much"
(Luke  xvi.  10).  How  we  are  to  take  this
promise  as  applied  to  the  rewards  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  we  know  not  yet.
"  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, neither
hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to
conceive,  what  God  hath  prepared  for  them
that  love  him"  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  There  are
similar  mysterious  statements  elsewhere ;
e.g.  ch.  xix.  28;  Rom.  viii.  32;  Rev.  ii.  26 ;
iii.  21._  This  may  be  one  of  those  passages
in  which  we  are  not  meant  to  press  or
understand  all  the  details  of  the  parable.

Ver.  48.— But  and  if  (eAi/6e).  "  And"
is  a  remnant  of  an  old  use  of  the  "word,
meaning  "if,"  so  that  it  is  here  redundant,
and  the  translation  should  be  simply,  but
if;  si  aittem.  That  evil  servant  (6  Kanht
SoBAos  eneii-os)  is  in  a  sense  the  same  as  he
who,  in  ver.  45,  was  regarded  as  faithful '
and  prudent.  The  opposite  case  is  here  jjut;
he  is  supposed  to  be  wicked  and  untrust-
worthy ;  he  no  longer  is  always  watching
for  his  lord's  coming  and  endeavoring  to
be  always  ready,  because  he  knows  that  he
may  at  any  moment  be  called  to  account.
My  lord  delayeth  [his  coming] .  B,  k,  and
other  good  manuscripts  omit  iMelv  as  un-


necessary; Revised  Version,  my  lord  tar-
rieth.  He  brings  himself  to  believe  that
the  day  of  reckoning  is  still  distant,  and
that  he  will  have  plenty  of  time  to  prepare
his  accounts  before  the  settlement  is  called
for.  So  men  put  off  the  day  of  repentance,
saying,  "To-morrow,  to-morrow,"  when
they  ought  to  feel  that  the  present  alone  is
theirs  in  which  to  prepare  for  judgment.

Ver.  49. — Shall  begin.  As  soon  as  he
conceives  the  idea  of  the  delay  in  his  lord's
arrival,  he  changes  his  conduct,  plays  the
master,  and  uses  his  power  for  oppression
and  injustice.  But  he  has  only  time  to
commence  these  unrighteous  acts,  when  he
is  arrested  by  the  very  occurrence  which
he  had  wilfully  ignored.  To  smite  Ma
fellow-servants;  i.e.  those  who  are  faithful
to  their  master.  Applied-  to  Christian
ministers,such  conduct  would  appertain  to
those  who  use  their  authority  for  oppres-
sion or  self-aggrandizement,  "lording  it
over  the  charge  allotted  to  them' '  (1  Pet.v.3) .
And  to  eat  {itreiji  Si,  and  shall  eat)  and  drink
with  the  dnmken.  He  indulges  in  luxury
and  intemperance,  choosing  as  his  com-
panions men  of  dissolute  habits.  A  self-
indulgent  minister,  or  one  who  is  not
discreet  in  choosing  his  friends  and  ac-
quaintance, has  little  influence  in  checking
the  excesses  of  his  flock,  and  is  far  from
being,  as  he  ought  to  be,  "  a  pattern  of
good  works  "  (Titus  ii.  7).

Ver.  50.— Shall  come,  either  actually  by
his  appearance,  or  virtually  by  calling  the
guilty  soul  to  judgment.  "When  he  looketh
not  for  Mm  (oi  Trpoo-SoKa,  expecteth  not).
He  has  put  away  all  thought  of  the  sudden
advent  of  the  Lord.  That  he  is  not  aware
of  (oil  vn'iuo-Kti,  he  knoweth  not) .  The  awful
hour  was  utterljr  unknown ;  but  this  has
not  made  him  watchful ;  hence  he  becomes
unfaithful.

Ver.  51.— Shall  cut  Mm  asunder  (6ix"-
Toiirjirei.) .  This  mode  of  death  was  inflicted
in  some  cases  (see  1  Sam.  xv.  33;  2  Sam.
xii.  31 ;  Dan.  iii.  28  ,  Heb.  xi.  37  ;  compare
also  the  account  of  the  execution  ofMettius
in  Livy,  i.  28  ;  and  Horace,  '  Sat.,'  I.  i.99).
Thus  in  our  own  country  "  quartering,"
after  hanging  at  least,  was  once  a  usual
penalty  for  some  offences,  such  as  high
treason.  The  term  has  been  here  inter-
preted to  refer  to  the  operation  of  the  cruel
scourge,  which  without  metaphor  might  be
said  to  cut  a  man  to  pieces;  or  "  to  dismiss
fron  his  employment,"  which  seems  to  be
hardly  an  adequate  punishment.  The
difficulty  is  that  the  utter  destruction  of
the  malefactor  implied  in  his  literal  cutting
asunder  is  not  consistent  with  his  sub-
sequent consignment  to  the  lot  of  the
hypocrites.  Hence  the  Fathers  have  vari-
ously explained  the  term  to  signify  sepa-


0H.XXIT.1— 61.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDma  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


448


imtion  from  the  eompany  of  MinU ,  or  from
apiritn*!  grace,  or  nom  all  the  bleisingi
promised  to  the  righteooi,  Bat  we  ma,j
take  the  Lord'i  irordi  ai  applying  flrit
to  temporal  panlshment — the  unrighteoni
steward  ihall  nffer  death  aa  horrible  ai
dichotomjr,  a  leTeranee  of  body  and  aonl,
acoompanied  with  niupeakable  tortures ;  ai
in  the  History  of  Susanna,  rer.  55,  '*  The
angel  of  Ood  hath  leoeired  the  sentence  of
God  to  out  thee  In  two."  Appoint  him  his
portion  irltk  the  kypoe'ritss.     The  Lord


drops  the  parable,  and  speaka  of  the
terrible  realitr.  The  hrpoorites  are  the
faithleu  and  deceitful,  who,  while  pretend-
ing to  do  their  lord's  work,  are  mere  eje-
serrants,  and  reallj  negleot  and  injure  it.
The  remissful  steward  shares  their  punish-
ment in  the  other  world.  There  (jkei)  shall
be,  etc. ;  i.e.  in  the  ploee  where  the  hypo-
crites receive  their  punishment  (oh.  viii.
12;  xxiL  13;  xxr.  90).  The  expression
signifies  measureless  grief  and  despair.


HOMILBTICS.

Ven.  1 — ^14. — 3^  gnat  prophecy :  General  predictioni  of  coming  torrvw*.  L  Thb
TBMPLB.  1.  !Z%e  Lorit  departure.  Jesus  went  out.  He  had  taught  in  the  temple
for  the  last  time.  He  had  greatly  loTed  that  holy  house  of  Ood.  He  had  shown  a
burning  zeal  for  its  hononr.  Twice  he  had  expelled  the  crowd  of  traRickers  who  made
It  a  house  of  merchandise,  a  den  of  thieres.  He  "  would  not  suffer  that  any  man  should
carry  any  Taisel  through  the  temple."  He  so  stroDgly  insisted  upon  the  duty  of
regarding  the  house  of  prayer  with  solemn  reyerencs.  When  but  a  child,  he  had  spent
in  the  temple  the  hours  during  which  Mary  and  Joseph  were  seeking  him.  There
was  no  need,  he  told  them,  for  anxiety ;  they  might  hare  known  where  he  was  to  be
found.  He  was  constantly  in  the  temple  during  his  Tisits  to  Jerusalem.  At  this  last
visit  he  had  "  looked  round  about  upon  all  things,"  showing  his  deep  interest  in  all  that
pertained  to  the  worship  of  God.  He  had  watched  the  people  Casting  money  into
the  treaaury  for  the  temple  service.  Now  he  went  out.  The  rulers  of  the  temple  had
rejected  him.  Chief  priests,  scribes,  and  Pharisees,  all  who  had  authority  in  the  temple,
or  were  held  in  reverence  as  teachers  and  expounders  of  the  Law,  were  ranged  against
him.  He  had  uttered  his  last  awful  warnings,  his  last  sorrowful  lament  for  the  hard-
ness of  their  impenitent  hearts.  He  "  went  out."  Simple  words,  but  very  awful  in  the
depth  of  their  meaning ;  they  are  echoed  in  the  tHeraPadpanty  ivrettey  of  Josephus,  in
the  "  Bxcsdere  decs  "  of  Tacitus.  "  Behold,"  he  said, "  your  house  is  left  unto  yon  deso-
late." The  temple  is  desolate  when  the  Lord  of  the  temple  hath  departed.  The  hum-
blest church  is  glorious  exceedingly  when  the  Lord  is  present.  The  costliest  and  most
gorgeous  building  is  desolate  in  the  sight  of  Ood  when  the  Lord  Jesus  is  not  there.
He  ii  found  of  them  that  seek  him ;  he  is  present  when  two  or  three  are  gathered
together  In  his  Name.  Let  us  seek  him  in  the  Church,  and  we  shall  find  him  there.
Let  Hi  take  heed,  whatever  we  do,  never  to  lose  sight  of  him  whose  presence  gives  the
truest  consecration.  2.  Converiation  with  the  apostles.  They  came  to  show  him  the
buildings  of  the  temple.  They  were  proud,  like  all  other  Jews,  of  that  magnificent
structure,  those  enormous  blocks  of  marble,  those  costly  decorations.  They  called,  the
Lord's  attention  to  those  goodly  stones,  those  precious  gifts.  He  could  not  share  in  the
enthusiasm  of  his  disciples.  Costly  offerings  are  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  only
ai  the  expression  of  faith  and  love.  Outward  magnificence  was  nothing  to  him  when
the  beauty  of  holiness  was  gone.  The  very  splendour  of  the  temple  saddened  the
Saviour's  soul.  It  was  like  the  religion  of  the  Pharisees,  fair  outwardly ;  but  the
service!  there  performed  were  formal  and  heartless.  And  the  Lord  saw,  in  the  clear
vision  of  his  Divine  foreknowledge,  what  in  less  than  forty  years  was  coming.  "  There
shall  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another,  that  shall  not  be  thrown  down."  That
magnificence  was  soon  to  pass  away.  The  holy  city  would  sink  in  blood  and  fire,  and
that  while  some  to  whom  the  Lord  was  speaking  were  yet  living  on  the  earth.  The
temple  buildings  would  be  levelled  with  the  ground ;  nothing  would  remain  save  those
solid  substructions,  which  even  now  excite  the  wonder  of  the  pilgrim.  The  Lord  knew
all  this ;  he  could  not  take  delight,  like  the  apostles,  in  that  short-lived  splendour.

IL  The  Mount  or  Olives.  1.  The  question  of  the  disciples.  The  Lord  sat  on  the
Mount  of  Olives,  In  full  view  of  the  holy  city  with  its  glorious  temple.  He  sat  there
In  sorrowful  ulence;  his  holy  soul  was  filled  with  sadness  as  he  thought  upon  his


446  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxit.  1—61.

people's  sin,  and  the  coming  judgments.  The  crowd  had  dispersed.  Four  of  the
apostles,  Peter  and  James,  John  and  Andrew,  came  privately  to  him.  They  had  listened
in  awe  and  wonder  to  his  stem  condemnation  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  They  had
heard  him  say  that  they  themselves,  the  Lord's  messengers,  would  suffer  many  things,
that  the  accumulated  guilt  of  Jewish  history  would  fall  upon  the  present  generation.
He  had  told  the  Jews  that  their  house  was  left  unto  them  desolate ;  that  they  should
see  him  no  more  till  they,  too,  like  the  multitude  whom  they  had  blamed  on  Palm
Sunday,  should  cry,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  I "  Now  he
had  prophesied  in  plainer  terms  the  coming  destruction  of  the  temple.  They  were
perplexed.  "  When  shall  these  things  be?"  they  asked ;  what  sign  would  there  be  of
that  Parousia,  that  presence  of  which  the  Lord  had  spoken,  and  of  the  consummation
of  the  age  ?  The  Prophet  Daniel  (ix.  26 — 27)  bad  taught  the  Jews  to  associate  the
times  of  the  Messiah  with  the  destruction  of  the  city  and  the  sanctuary.  He  had
spoken  of  a  consummation,  of  a  desolation:  when  should  these  things  be?  It  is  a
question  which  has  been  often  asked,  which  we  often  ask  ourselves  in  shuddering  awe,
in  trembling  expectation.  2.  The  Lord'i  answer.  He  does  not  answer  the  question
directly ;  it  was  not  his  wont  to  satisfy  speculative  curiosity.  When  he  was  asked,
"  Are  there  few  that  shall  be  saved  ?  "  he  said,  "  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate."
So  now  his  first  words  are  words  of  warning,  "  Take  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you."
His  answer  is  intended  rather  to  guide  the  life  of  Christians  than  to  disclose  the  awful
secrets  of  the  future.  The  date  of  the  day  of  judgment  is  an  unsolved  and  insoluble
problem.  It  is  known  only  to  the  Father.  It  is  not  his  will  that  this  mystery  should
be  revealed ;  it  is  better  for  us  to  be  ignorant.  Knowledge  of  the  time,  if  far  hence  in  the
remote  future,  might  lull  us  into  security ;  if  near  at  hand,  might  fill  us  with  intense
excitement,  and  unfit  us  for  our  ordinary  duties,  ai  was  the  case  with  the  Thessa-
lonians  when  they  thought  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  immediate.  The  Lord  givei
us  no  data  for  discovering  when  the  end  shall  be.  The  bearing  of  his  answer  is  prac-
tical ;  he  shows  us  what  ought  to  be  the  attitude  of  the  Christian  soul  toward  the  solemn
future ;  it  should  be  that  of  calm  and  trustful  expectation.  The  Christian  should  keep
in  view  not  only  his  own  death,  but  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  He  should  keep  in  his
thoughts  not  only  the  possibility  that  to-day,  any  day,  he  may  die,  as  he  has  seen
others  die;  but  also  the  possibility  that  to-day,  any  day,  the  Lord  may  come;  and
with  the  coming  of  the  Lord  may  come  the  end  of  the  world,  the  resurrection  of  the
dead,  the  judgment.  This  is  the  purpose  of  the  Lord's  words,  not  to  give  us  that
knowledge  which  (ver.  36)  we  cannot  have,  which,  if  we  could  have  it,  would  not
be  for  our  good.  The  Lord  speaks  throughout  this  chapter  in  the  mysterious  tones  of
prophecy.  He  speaks  of  a  nearer  coming,  and  of  one  comparatively  distant ;  of  the
end  of  the  Jewish  dispensation,  and  of  the  end  of  the  world.  The  two  comings,  the  two
consummations,  are  blended  together  in  the  prophecy.  It  is  not  easy  everywhere  to
disentangle  them.  In  those  passages  which  appear  to  relate  to  one  only  of  the  two  tremen-
dous catastrophes,  we  find  features  which  seem  to  belong  to  the  other.  From  the  prophe-
tical point  of  view,  the  two  seemed  nearer  together  than  they  now  appear  to  us ;  the
intervening  distance  was  lost  sight  of.  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  m  •  thousand  years,
and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple  was
the  end  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  It  might  well  leem  to  the  Jews  like  the  end  of
tba  world.  It  was  so  crushing,  so  tremendous,  attended  with  lufferings  so  frightful,
oloodshed  so  terrible.  To  us  Christians  it  is  a  meet  figure  of  the  greater  catastrophe
which  is  to  come.  We  are  bidden  to  look  forward.  It  is  not  simply  onr  own  death
which  we  are  told  to  expect.  We  may  die  before  the  coming  of  the  day  of  the  Lord ;
we  may  be  soon  called  out  of  the  world ;  and  the  world  may  go  on  its  way  for  ages.
But  he  shall  come  again  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead.  This  is  the  prospect
which  the  Lord  sets  before  us  in  this  solemn  discourse.  We  may  be  among  the  living
when  he  shall  come ;  we  may  hear  the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  God ;
we  may  tee  the  dead  rising  at  the  call  of  Christ ;  we  may,  yet  alive,  "  be  caught  up
together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air."  Then  "  the  heavens
shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the
earth  also  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up.  .  .  .  Nevertheless  we,
according  to  bis  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wWein  dwelV'h
righteousn^s."    St.  Peter's  memory,  as  he  wrote  these  solemn  wariings.  leec^ii  to


OH.  xxrr.  1—61.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  447

Kpioduoe  the  words  which  he  heard  from  Christ,  when,  along  with  Jamei  and  John
and  Andrew,  he  came  nnto  him  privately  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  The  same  apostle
sums  up  the  practical  teaching  of  this  great  eschatological  discourse  in  a  few  striking
words,  "  Wherefore,  heloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things,  be  diligent  that  ye
may  be  found  of  him  in  peace," — "looking  for  and  hasting  the  coming  of  the  day  of
God."  3.  Warnings  in  detail,  (1)  False  Messiahs.  Many  shall  come  saying,  "  I  am
the  Christ,  the  Messiah."  Many  such  there  were  in  New  Testament  times — Theudas,
the  Egyptian  (Acts  zxi.  38),  Simon  Magus.  Many  such  arose  afterwards,  Barcochba,
Manes,  Mohammed,  claiming  the  place  and  ofBco,  if  not  the  name,  of  Christ,  There
have  been  many  deceivers;  some  there  are  still.  God's  people  must  take  heed;  they
must  not  believe  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God  ;  for  many
false  prophets,  St.  John  tells  us,  are  gone  out  into  the  world.  (2)  Wars,  famines,  earth-
quakes. These  things  there  must  be.  There  have  been  again  and  again  in  the  progress
of  history  times  marked  with  a  special  intensity  of  troubles  and  horrors,  when  men's
hearts  have  failed  them,  and  the  end  of  all  things  seemed  close  at  hand.  But  the  Lord
says,  "  Be  not  troubled,  be  not  scared,  excited ;  the  end  is  not  yet.  Be  prepared  for  it,
but  be  calm,  collected."  Alas  I  the  curse  of  war  is  not  yet  removed.  Still  the  earth
which  Gh>d  created  is  reddened  with  the  blood  of  men  made  in  the  image  of  God,  shed
by  their  brethren's  hand.  Yet  the  end  cometh  not.  These  things  are  the  beginning
of  travaU ;  they  are  dreadful,  and  yet  they  offer  hope,  for  they  are  birth-pangs.  The
end  of  the  Jewish  dispensation  is  the  birth  of  the  Christian  Church ;  the  yet  more
awfiil  signs  which  are  to  attend  the  end  of  the  world  are  the  birth-throes  of  the  great
regeneration  (the  vtAryyiveiria,  ch.  xix.  28),  the  birth  of  the  "  new  heavens  and  the  new
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  (3)  Persecutions.  Besides  the  troubles  destined
to  come  upon  all  the  world,  the  Church  of  Christ  was  to  have  its  own  special  trials ;
his  followers  were  to  be  afflicted  and  slain  and  hated  of  all  nations  for  his  Name's  sake.
And  these  persecutions  would  lead  to  worse  things  yet — to  apostasies ;  and  apostasies
would  produce  mutual  hatred  and  the  betrayal  of  Christians  by  Christiana ;  there  would
be  false  prophets,  heretical  teachers  in  the  Church  itself.  Iniquity,  lawlessness,  would
abound,  as  it  did  when  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude  wrote  their  Epistles ;  and,  in  sad  declension
from  the  truth,  the  love  of  the  many  would  wax  cold.  Christians  would  leave  their  first
love,  like  the  Church  of  Ephesus ;  they  would  sink  into  a  routine  of  formal  service
without  heart  and  without  love.  But  some  would  remain  steadfast  even  in  that  evil
time ;  some  would  endure  all  these  temptations,  wliether  of  persecution  from  without
the  Church  or  of  evil  example  from  within ;  their  patience  would  have  its  perfect  work ;
their  endurance  would,  by  God's  grace, be  complete,  their  perseverance  final;  and  such
should  be  saved.  "  The  same  shall  be  saved,"  the  Lord  says  emphatically ;  not,  alas !
all  professing  Christians,  but  "  he  that  endureth  unto  the  end."  How  earnestly,  then,
should  we  pray  and  strive  after  perseverance  I  It  is  not  a  passing  wish  of"  God  forgive
me ! "  that  ensures  our  soul's  salvation,  it  is  not  a  rush  of  excited  feeling,  but  the  patient
continuance  in  well-doing.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown
of  life."  (4)  The  gospel  must  be  preached  in  all  the  world.  This  gospel  of  the  king-
dom is  the  good  news  concerning  the  kingdom  of  heaven  which  Christ  established  upon
earth,  the  good  news  of  salvation  through  Christ  promised  to  those  who  endure  unto
the  and.  That  gospel  was  to  be  preached  in  all  the  world  before  the  end  should  come.
The  world  here,  as  in  other  places  (e.g.  Luke  ii.  1),'  may  mean  no  more  than  the  Roman
empire.  St.  Paul  seems  to  have  regarded  this  -prophecy  as  fulfilled  even  in  his  time.
He  says  (Col.  i.  6,  23)  that  the  gospel  was  present  in  all  the  world,  that  it  had  been
preached  to  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven.  In  a  true  sense  it  was  fulfilled  when
the  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile  was  abolished,  when  the  apostles  were  com-
manded to  make  disciples  of  all  nations,  to  go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel
to  every  creature.  'Thus  the  end  of  which  the  Lord  speaks  here  might  mean  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  end  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  But  as  knowledge  extends
itself,  as  the  known  world  becomes  wider  till  it  is  coextensive  with  the  surface  of  the
earth,  so  the  area  of  missionary  operations  is  enlarged.  And  thus  the  prophecy  acquires
another  and  a  wider  meaning.  "  The  gospel  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world,  for  a
testimony  to  all  the  nations  of  the  earth."  Then  the  end  in  its  most  awful  meaning,
the  end  of  the  world,  shall  come.
Li:ssoNS.    L  The  temple  without  Christ  is  desolate.    Magnificent  buUdings  have  no


448  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    foH.  xxir.  1—61,

beauty  in  Qod'a  light  If  dirist  Is  not  found  thers.  2.  We  must,  like  the  apostlea,
watch  for  the  lignt  of  Ohrist**  comicg.  3.  But  the  tnieit  wiidom  ii  to  lire  in  conitant
ezpeetation  of  it.

Van.  16 — ^28. — Pndictioni  of  th*  ntauw  tnd :  TKe  dutructUm  of  Jtruidhm.  L
Thi  wabkikob  or  thk  oouura  ind.  1.  The  tign.  The  Lord  returos  to  the  first
question  of  the  diaoiples,  "  When  shall  these  thiugs  he  ?  "  His  eye  had  been  looking
forward  in  prophetic  vision  through  the  process  of  the  ages ;  now  he  returns  to  the
nearer  end,  to  that  awful  catastrophe  which,  to  the  Jews,  seemed  like  the  very  end  of
the  world— the  destruction  of  the  holy  city  and  of  the  temple,  the  dwelling-place  of
God,  the  centre  of  their  whole  religions  system.  He  warns  his  followers  of  the  horrors
of  that  awful  time.  The  guilty  city  must  perish ;  the  Lord's  people  mtut  come  out  of
her,  that  they  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  receire  not  of  her  plagues.  The  end
of  Judaism  was  to  be  to  the  Obristian  Church  the  beginning  of  a  more  rigorous  and
independent  life.  The  Jewish  Christians  must  separate  themselves  from  their  unbe-
lieving brethren ;  they  must  escape  for  their  life,  as  Lot  fled  out  of  Sodom.  They
would  know  the  time ;  for  they  would  see  the  abomination  of  desolation,  spoken  of
through  Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy  place:  this  was  to  be  the  signal  for  their
flight.  The  Lord  emphatically  asserts  the  authority  of  Daniel's  prophecy.  He  bids
us  read  it  with  care  and  thoughtfulness.  He  says  that  this  prediction,  difSoult  and
perplexing  as  it  may  seem,  was  given  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  spoken  ihrough  Daniel.
We  cannot  now  with  absolute  certainty  say  what "  the  abomination  of  desolation  "  was
— whether  some  profanation  of  the  temple  by  the  Bomans,  or  some  awful  deed  of  the
Jews  themselves,  such  as  those  horrors  and  blasphemies  related  by  Josephus.  Plainly
it  was  some  definite  event  understood  by  contemporary  Christians,  recognized  as  the
fulfilment  of  the  Lord's  words  and  as  the  signal  for  departure.  2.  Flight  mutt  ie
immtdiaU,  Christians  were  to  flee  at  once  to  the  mountains  before  the  investment  of
the  city,  as  we  are  told  they  did  flee  over  the  mountains  of  Gilead  to  Fella,  in  the  north
of  Ferasa.  Not  a  moment  was  to  be  lost  when  once  the  abomination  of  desolation  was
seen  in  the  holy  place.  AIL  Christians,  whether  then  in  the  city  or  in  the  surrounding
country,  were  to  flee  at  once  for  their  lives ;  they  were  not  to  linger  for  any  purpose,
to  remove  their  property  or  to  fetch  their  clothes.  The  body  is  more  than  raiment.
It  was  a  warning  to  Jewish  Chiislians  then ;  it  is  a  warning  to  all  Christians  still.
No  earthly  considerations  must  keep  the  awakened  soul  from  fleeing  at  once  to  Christ.
We  hear  his  warning  words ;  they  reach  our  hearts  as  perhaps  they  have  never
reached  them  heretofore.  We  see  the  abomination  of  desolation  standing  in  the  holy
place.  This  world  of  ours  was  once  holy ;  God  pronounced  it  "  very  good."  But  the
abomination  of  desolation  is  in  it — sin  in  all  its  forms ;  uncleanness  and  dishonesty  and
cruelty,  unbelief  and  selfishness.  The  converted  Christian  must  arise  at  once ;  he  must
flee  into  the  mountains,  to  the  clear  and  lofty  height  of  communion  with  God,  intq
fellowship  with  Christ  above  the  dull  and  heavy  atmosphere  of  this  wicked  world.  We
must  flee  thither,  and  that  at  once.  If  we  delay  through  lingering  desires  of  earthly
things,  it  may  be  too  late.  3.  Difficultiei  and  horror*  of  the  time.  The  flight  would
be  sudden  and  without  time  for  preparation ;  hindrances  of  whatever  kind  would  be
full  of  danger.  The  Lord  expresses  his  compassion  for  the  afflicted,  "  Woe  unto  them
that  are  with  child !  "  The  "  woe  "  here,  as  in  some  other  places,  is  an  utterance  of  sym-
pathy. We  may  cast  our  care  upon  him  in  our  troubles ;  he  careth  for  us.  And  we
may  pray  for  the  alleviation  of  those  troubles ;  he  allows  ii.  Only  before  the  prayer
for  present  relief,  for  daily  bread,  let  us  pray,  "Thy  will  be  done ;  "  then  we  may  safely
ask  for  such  things  as  are  needful  for  the  body.  The  Jewish  Christians  in  those  times  of
distress  might  pray  that  their  flight  should  not  be  in  the  winter  nor  on  the  sabbath
day.  The  Lord,  indeed,  had  not  encouraged  the  superstitious  observance  of  the  sabbath  ;
Christians  afterwards  were  to  keep  the  first  day  of  the  week  in  place  of  the  seventh.
But  the  early  Jewish  Christians  were  "  all  zealous  of  the  Law  "  (Acts  xxi,  20),'  and  the
scrupulousness  of  those  among  whom  they  lived  would  cause  many  hindrances  and
difficulties.  It  was  in  the  highest  degree  desirable  that  their  flight  should  be  unim-
peded, for  the  misery  of  those  days  would  be  awful.  Such  tribulation  never  was,  nor
would  be  ever  again.  The  Lord's  words  are  strong,  but  not  stronger  than  those  in
which  Josephus  describes  the  actual  horrors  of  the  siege  and  fall  of  Jerusalem.     Never.


aM.xzjT.l-8L]    THB  GOBPKL  AOOORDDia  TO  ST.  MATTHKW.  Uh

he  wiyi,  did  laj  other  oity  suffer  such  mlgerles,  nor  did  »ny  age  breed  a  generation  more
fruitful  in  wickednen  than  thi*  was  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  The  deitruction
of  life  was  enormous.  It  seemed  as  if  th«  whole  Jewish  race  would  be  swept  away.
But  the  days  of  tribulation  wer«  shortened  for  the  elect's  sake — tot  the  sake  of  those
among  the  Jews  who  belieyed  or  would  hereafter  beliere  (comp.  Bom.  xL  ^  7).  "  The
Lord  shortened  those  days,"  we  read  in  St.  Mark.  Goi's  providence  so  ordered  cir-
cumstances that  the  aiege  was  ended  sooner  than  might  hare  been  expected  (in  Ave
months)^  and  thus  the  loss  of  life,  though  tremendous,  was  not  ao  orerwhelmlng  as
otherwise  it  odght  hare  been.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his ; "  he  careth  for
them.  The  great  STents  of  history,  the  convulsions  which  shake  society,  are  ordered
by  him  for  the  good,  for  the  salvation,  of  his  elect.  Uonarohs  and  statesmen  and
warriors  act  &om  Tarions  motives,  often  from  wicked  and  selfish  ambition.  But  the
Lord  reigneth.  Ha  ovemileth  all  things  for  the  elect's  sake.  Let  ui  give  diligence
to  make  our  calling  and  election  sure,  and  then  trust  ourselves  in  entire  rsaignation
to  his  blessed  vrill.

IL  Waskikm  ooMTinuw.  1.  Deotivtr$.  Then,  the  Lord  says.  He  looks  onward
again,  beyond  the  destruction  of  the  holy  city.  Jerusalem  had  fallen,  but  the  Lord
had  not  yet  come.  In  •  real  sense,  indeed,  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  was  a  coming  of  the
Lord  (comp.  ch.  x.  23  and  xvi.  28).  He  came  in  that  awful  event  to  exeouta  Judg-
ment upon  the  guilty,  to  bring  the  old  dispensation  to  an  end.  Bnt  he  had  not  oome
revealed  in  his  majesty.  .  He  bids  his  people  beware  of  false  prophets,  false  Messiahs.
Many  such  there  have  been,  many  such  there  will  he  down  to  the  times  of  the  anti-
christ described  by  Bt  Paul  (2  These.  iL  8—10).  Like  that  antichrist,  these  blse
Christs  will  show  signs  and  lying  wonders,  so  aa  to  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very
elect.  But  that,  thank  God,  is  not  possible,  for  we  have  Christ's  word,  "  They  shall
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."  He  warns  us  now
— "  I  nave  told  you  before  " — that  we  may  be  prepared  in  the  day  of  temptation.  There
will  be  false  Christs,  the  Lord  says,  repeating  nis  warning ;  each  will  have  his  followers,
who  will  try  to  draw  people  after  him.  "  Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert  I "  some  will  say.
Christ's  people  must  not  listen.  The  true  Messiah  has  come ;  we  bear  his  name ;  we
know  him  if  we  are  his  indeed ;  and  that  knowledge  is  life  eternal.  We  need  no  other
prophet ;  thsre  can  be  no  other  Christ.  When  he  cometh  again  men  will  not  say,  "  Lo,
here ; "  or  "  Lo,  there."  "Every  eye  shall  see  him."  When  he  first  came  in  great  humility,
men  said  to  one  another, "  We  have  found  the  Mossias."  But  he  cometh  not  thus  again.
In  power  and  awful  glory  he  shall  come,  a  dreadful  Judge.  Then  Christians  must  not
allow  themselves  to  be  misled  by  false  Messiahs.  They  must  not  believe  the  stories
of  ignorance  or  fanaticism.  Some  may  say,  "  Behold,  he  is  in  the  dasert  I "  others,
"  Behold,  he  is  in  the  secret  chambers  I  "  Some  may  tell  us  that  we  shall  find  Christ  in
the  free  air  of  the  desert,  away  from  creeds,  and  forms,  and  systems  of  doctrine,  and
antiquated  Churches.  Others  may  think  to  find  him  in  the  narrow,  confined  limits  of
this  or  that  sect.  Believe  them  not.  "  Ask  for  the  old  paths,  where  is  the  good  way,
and  walk  therein,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  for  your  souls."  But  seek  not  after  the  Christ
here  nor  there,  in  the  desert  nor  in  the  secret  chambers ;  for  the  true  Christ  is  found
everywhere  by  those  who  seek  him  in  -  simplicity  and  in  truth,  not  only  at  Jerusalem
or  "in  this  mountain."  2.  What  Chritf.B  coming  will  be.  It  will  overspread  the
world  at  once.  "  Every  eye  shall  see  him."  The  sense  of  hu  presence  will  fill  the  whole
universe,  as  the  lightning  fills  the  whole  expanse  of  the  sky.  It  cometh  from  the  east,
and  is  seen  even  to  the  west.  8o  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be ;  in  flaming
fire,  visible  throughout  the  universe,  startling  quick  and  dead  alike  with  its  omnipresent
energy.  "  Whereioever  the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together."
The  carcase  is  the  festering  corruption  of  sin.  There  are  high  authorities  for  a  very
different  interpretation ;  but  both  the  fitness  of  words  and  the  context,  which  speaks
of  God's  awful  judgment  rather  than  of  the  means  of  grace  and  the  Bread  of  life,
Heem  to  necessitate  the  explanation  which  is  perhaps  generally  adopted.  "  Tha  Lord
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  flre  taking
vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  Qod,  and  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jaaus
Ohnst."  That  revelation  will  burst  at  once  upon  the  whole  universe.  Those  mighty
angels  are  the  eagles.  They  shall  gather  the  wicked  from  among  the  just.  Wherever
*h«  carcase  is,  wherever  there  are  impenitent  sinners,  dead  unto  God  and  holiness,

MATTHEW — II.  2  u


450  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xsir.  1—61.

corrupted  with  the  pollutions  of  Bin,  there  shall  the  messengerB  of  Judgment  be  gathered
together ;  as  the  Roman  eagles  were  once  gathered  round  Jerusalem,  to  fulfil  the  awful
behests  of  God.  Wherever  the  carcase  is,  here,  there,  &r  and  near,  throughout  the
vast  universe  of  the  quick  and  dead,  the  angels  of  judgment  will  surely  find  the  guilty
and  the  reprobate.  There  will  be  no  escape.  The  area  of  Judgment  will  be  coextensive
with  that  of  the  vast  multitude- of  souls.  Then  Christians  should  live  in  the  expecta-
tion of  that  awful  day,  not  eager  for  novelties,  not  listening  to  those  who  say,  "  Lo,
here  I "  or  "  Lo,  there  I "  but  living  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  looking  for  the  blessed
hope  and  appearing  of  the  glory  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.

Lessons.  1.  Jerusalem  must  perish.  The  Church  may  not  dare  to  trust  in  external
privileges.  It  must  abide  in  the  love  of  Christ,  in  the  life  of  Christ,  or  the  candlestick
will  be  removed.  .  2.  Christians  must  flee  from  the  world  which  passeth  away  to  the
city  of  God  which  abideth  for  ever.    3.  Live  always  in  the  thought  of  the  Judgment.

Vers.  29 — 51. — The  end  of  the  world.    I.  Its  oiboukstanoes.    1.  Theheavetu.    The
Lord  had  been  glancing  onwards  into  the  future.    There  would  be  wrath  upon  the
chosen  people ;  it  would  last  long ;  they  would  be  led  away  captive  into  all  nations.
Jerusalem  would  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles;  it  would  lie  desolate  long— even
"until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled"  (Luke  iii.  23,  24).    The  tribulation  of
those  days  is  not  yet  ended;  still  Jerusalem  is  lying  waste;  still  her  children  are
scattered.    Again  and  again  the  tribulation  has  seemed  to  come  to  its  climax,  and
men  have  looked  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.    Christ  would  have  his  Church  ever  live
in  the  attitude  of  expectation,  as  men  that  wait  for  their  lord.     But  the  end  is  not
yet — it  Cometh  immediately  after  that  long '  tribulation.     Then  "  shall  the  sun  be
darkened,  the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven."    Words
like  these  were  need  by  the  Hebrew  prophets  as  symbolical  of  the  fall  of  earthly
empires — of  Babylon,  of  Edom,  of  Egypt  (Isa.  xiii.  10;  xxxiv.  4;  Ezek.  xxxii.  7).
The  Prophet  Joel  (ii.  30, 31),  in  a  passage  quoted  by  St.  Peter  (Acts  ii.  19, 20),  describes
the  like  portents  as  ushering  in  "  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord."    St.  John
saw  similar  wonders,  in  vision,  at  the  opening  of  the  sixth  seal  (Rev.  vL  12, 13),  when
"the  great  day  of  his  wrath  was  come."    We  must  receive  the  Lord's  words  with
reverent  awe,  as  foretelling  the  terrors  of  that  tremendous  day,  when  "  the  heavens
being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat."    It  is
the  grand,  lofty  language  of  prophecy ;  we  need  not  attempt  to  bring  the  details  down
to  the  lower  plane  of  science.    Our  part  is  rather  to  listen  to  the  warning  of  St.  Peter,
"  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what  manner  of  persons  ought
ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness  ?  "    2.  The  lign.    The  Jews  had  more
than  once  asked  for  a  sign  from  heaven ;  the  Lord  would  not  give  it.    Now  his  apostles
had  inquired,  "  What  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming  ?  "    He  does  not  define  it.     But
such  a  sign,  he  tells  us,  there  will  be :  "  Then  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man
in  heaven."    What  that  sign  will  be  we  know  not  certainly.    It  will  be  visible  to  all
the  world :  "  Then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  mourn."    It  will  be  a  sight  awfnl
exceedingly  to  the  wicked;  welcome,  above  all  other  visions,  to  the  eye  of  faith.
"  Then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."    It  may
well  be,  aa  very  many  have  thought,  a  cross  of  dazzling  splendour — ^the  cross  that  is
life  to  the  believer,  death  to  the  sinner ;  the  cross  in  which  alone  the  followers  of  the
Lord  may  glory.    That  cross,  it  may  be,  glittering  high  above,  will  be  the  token  of
his  coming ;  then  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail,  some,  perhaps,  even  then  with
the  godly  sorrow  of  repentance  (Zech.  xii.  10 — 12),  some  with  the  wailing  of  despair
and  terror;  for  "  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with
power  and  great  glory."   Every  eye  shall  see  him  then— they  that  love  him  as  the  very
life  of  their  souls,  and  they  that  have  pierced  him  with  their  sins,  and  crucified  the
Lord  afresh.    What  strange,  wonderful  words  for  him  to  utter,  who  then  sat  upon  the
Mount  of  Olives,  rejected  and  despised  by  the  leading  men  of  his  nation,  with  sufierlng
and  ignominious  death  in  immediate  prospect  1    3.  The  angels,    "  He  shall  send  forth
his  angels."    They  are  his,  for  the  Father  had  said,  "Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship
liim"(Heb.  L  6);  they  are  his,  for  be  himself  is  God.    He  shall  send  them  with  a
great  sonnd  of  a  trumpet — ^the  trump  of  God.    The  voice  of  the  trumpet  at  Mount
Sinai  was  exceeding  loud,  lo  that  all  the  people  that  were  In  the  camp  trembled.    How


OH.  xxnr.  1— 51.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  45^

much  louder  and  more  awful  shall  be  that  trumpet-oa]l  which  shall  wake  the  dead,
and  Bummon  quick  and  dead  alike  before  the  throne  I  The  angela,  the  mesBengers  of
the  Son  of  man,  shall  gather  together  his  elect.  The  angela  are  his;  the  elect  are  his ;
they  are  Christ's,  bought  with  his  precious  blood ;  his,  for  the  Father  who  chose  them
and  by  his  choice  made  them  "elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the
Father,"  hath  given  them  to  the  only  begotten  Son ;  they  are  his ;  none  can  pluck
them  out  of  his  hand.  His  angels  shall  gather  them  together  from  the  four  winds —
from  one_  end  of  heaven  to  the  other.  Not  one  of  them  shall  be  lost — wherever  they
may  be,  in  the  remotest  comers  of  the  earth,  or  lying  in  long-forgotten  graves — the
angels  shall  gather  them  together,  from  the  cottage  and  from  the  palace,  from  the
crowded  city  and  the  desolate  wilderness,  from  below  the  green  sods  of  the  churchyard
and  from  the  fathomless  depths  of  the  sea ;  the  angels  shall  bring  every  one  of  God's
elect  safe  to  the  Lord  who  loved  them  and  died  for  them,  whom  they  believed  in,  and
loved  and  trusted  even  unto  death.

II.  The  time.  1.  The  parable  tf  the  fig  tree.  The  disciples  had  asked,  "  When
shall  these  things  be?  and  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of
the  world  ?  "  The  Lord  had  spoken  of  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  great  day ;  he
had  told  them  of  the  abomination  of  desolation  which  should  be  the  warning  of  the
one,  and  of  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  which  should  announce  the  other.  He  now
proceeds  to  the  question  of  time ;  again  he  speaks  first  of  the  nearer  end,  the  end  of
the  temple  and  the  holy  city ;  then  of  the  end  of  all  things.  He  sat  on  the  Mount
of  Olives ;  he  pointed,  it  may  be,  to  a  fig  tree  then  putting  forth  its  leaves ;  those
buds,  those  tender  leaflets,  were  the  earnest  of  approaching  summer.  So,  the  Lord
said,  "  when  ye  shall  see  all  thes«  things  [the  signs  which  he  had  mentioned],  know
that  it  is  near,  even  at  the  doors."  They  would  see  it,  some  of  them ;  for  that  genera-
tion would  not  pass  till  all  these  things  were  fulfilled — all  these  things,  that  is,  of
which  the  Lord  bad  spoken  but  just  before  in  the  temple :  "  Yerily  I  say  unto  you,  all
these  things  shall  come  upon  this  generation"  (eh.  xxiii.  36);  all  those  things  of
which  the  disciples  had  asked  him,  "  Tell  us,  when  shall*  these  things  be  ? " — the
destruction  of  the  temple,  the  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  the  scattering  of  the  people  of  IsraeL
It  was  hard  for  Jews  to  realize ;  Jerusalem  was  all  the  world  to  them ;  their  attach-
ment to  Jerusalem  was  more  than  patriotism — it  was  a  religion  to  them.  Jerusalem
was  the  centre  of  their  worship ;  the  temple  was  the  centre  of  Jerusalem,  the  house  of
Qoi,  the  dwelling-place,  in  ancient  times,  of  his  manifested  glory.  They  regarded
that  glorious  building  with  a  national  pride,  with  a  deep  religious  interest,  with  a
passionate  love,  which,  perhaps,  has  had  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  world.  They
had  watched  the  progress  of  Herod's  restoration  (or  rather  rebuilding),  not  without
some  feelings  of  suspicion,,  but  yet  with  intense  delight  and  enthusiasm.  And  now
they  heard  that  those  goodly  stones  which  they  so  much  admired  were  all  to  be  thrown
down ;  there  would  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  another.  It  was  like  a  death-blow  to
them— like  the  very  and  of  the  world — strange  and  almost  incredible  in  its  terrible
awfulnesB.  But  it  was  true;  it  was  surely  coming;  "Heaven  and  earth  Bhall  pass
away,"  said  the  Lord,  "but  my  words  shall  not  pass  away."  Mark  the  calm  confidence
of  the  assertion.  Only  a  Divine  Person  could  so  speak ;  such  words  in  the  mouth  of
any  human  teacher  would  be  presumptuous  and  intolerable ;  but  Christ  was  meek  and
lowly  in  heart,  for  he  is  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  2.  The  last  day.  The
end  of  Jerosalem  was  soon  to  come,  in  the  lifetime  of  some  who  then  stood  around  the
Lord ;  the  end  of  the  world  was  not  yet.  "  Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,
no,  not  the  angela  of  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  bat  the  Father  only."  It  is  not  for  us
to  know  the  times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power.  That
knowledge  is  hidden  in  the  counsels  of  God;  we  may  not  presume  to  search  into  it.
It  is  not  given  to  the  blessed  angels,  not  even  to  the  Son  in  his  human  nature,  as  he
himself  tells  us  (Mark  xiii.  32).  The  finite  and  the  infinite  met  in  the  one  Person  of
Christ — ^human  limitations  on  the  one  side ;  on  the  other  the  power,  knowledge  and
wisdom  of  God.  The  relations  between  those  two  natures  are  wholly  beyond  our  ooib-
prehension ;  we  cannot  by  any  intellectual  effort  picture  to  ourselves  the  manner  of
their  union— how  the  one  affected  the  other.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  the  Lord,  in
Us  great  love  for  ns,  condescended  to  submit  to  the  conditions  of  our  humanity  ;  and
«na  of  those  conditions  was  this,  that  on  the  human  side  of  his  Person  he  knew  not,  aa


46S         THE  OOBPEL  A(XX)BDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oe.  xxit.  1— CL

we  know  not,  the  daj,  the  hour,  of  his  own  second  adrent.  Strange  that  men  ahould
hart  eTer  ventured  to  think  that  knowledge  within  their  reach.  It  is  hidden  from  ns,
for  our  good.  It  is  Gkd's  will  that  we  should  lire  looking  always  for  th«  judgment.
What  ha  wills  is  best  for  us.  He  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  sarad ;  it  is  not  his
will  that  we  should  know  the  hour  of  the  Lord's  coming,  or  the  hoar  of  our  own
death ;  his  will  is  best.  3.  The  hour  will  he  unknottn  t»  tht  end.  Noah  was  in  the
world  a  preacher  of  righteousness;  God  had  warned  him  of  the  coming  judgment.
Then  the  long-sufiering  of  God  waited  while  the  ark  was  a-preparing.  All  through
that  time  Noah,  we  must  suppose,  was  preaching,  reproring,  bearing  witness  of  the
wrath  to  come ;  but  men  heeded  him  not  For  many  years  the  huge  structura  of
the  ark  was  a  standing  warning  to  those  who  lired  around.  But  they  were  immersed
in  the  ordinary  pursuits  of  life — in  its  business,  pleasures,  sins.  They  fonnd  no  time  to
listen  to  the  preacher's  Toice ;  it  may  be  tbey  mocked  him,  as  the  men  of  Sodom  after-
wards mocked  the  one  righteous  man  who  dwelt  among  them.  They  were  eating  and
drinking,  marrying  and  giring  in  marriage,  until  the  day  that  Noah  entered  into  the
ark.  They  saw  him  enter  wiUi  his  family  and  the  great  nost  of  liTing  creatorea;  they
must  have  known  something  of  the  meaning  of  his  conduct.  But  still  they  heeded
not ;  they  acted  as  though  they  knew  nothing ;  they  did  not  repent,  they  did  not  flee
for  their  lires.  And  after  seren  days  the  Flood  came  and  swept  them  all  away.  So
shall  it  be  at  the  time  of  the  end :  God's  servants  will  preach,  as  Noah  preached  then ;
they  will  prepare  to  meet  their  God,  as  Noah  then  prepared.  The  world  will  be  heed-
less still,  absorbed  in  earthly  things,  unchanged,  unthinking.  Upon  such  idle  thought-
less lives  the  coming  of  the  Lord  shall  flash  in  awful  suddenness.  4.  It  will  eauH
itrang*  s«para<ton«.  Two  men  shall  be  in  the  field ;  one  is  taken  and  one  is  left.
Two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  mill ;  one  is  taken  and  one  is  left.  They  are
engaged  in  the  like  occupation,  alike  ignorant  of  the  nearness  of  the  judgment.
Suddenly  he  cometh ;  one  is  taken  and  one  is  left.  One  is  taken  to  be  with  Christ  in
the  eternal  blessedness;  one  is  left  to  the  awful  judgment.  They  had  seemed  alike  to
the  eyes  of  men ;  but  God  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  hearts.  One  had  served  him
in  the  inner  worship  of  the  spirit,  in  sincerity,  and  faith,  and  holy  love,  and  deep
humility ;  the  other  had  been  worldly  and  selfish,  hia  prayers  had  been  but  lip-service,
his  worship  but  hypocrisy.  That  day  will  make  strange  revelations ;  it  will  tear  away
the  mask  of  the  hypocrites,  it  will  show  the  holiness  and  the  true  nobility  of  the
humble  self-denying  Christian,  it  will  make  an  eternal  separation  between  the  godly
and  the  ungodly,  the  saved  and  the  lost.

III.  Thb  Satiodb's  wabninob.  1.  The  need  of  vatch/ulne$$.  The  Lord  urges  this
upon  us  strongly.  He  repeats  it  again  and  again.  The  warning  is  for  all  people  and
for  all  times:  "  What  I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all.  Watch."  His  apostles  re-echo  the
Saviour's  words,  "Let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others;  but  let  ua  watch  and  be  sober."
The  name  Gregory,  borne  by  bo  many  holy  men,  witnesses  to  the  deep  impression
which  this  solemn  warning  made  on  the  minds  of  early  Christians.  The  duty  is  one
of  paramount  obligation ;  for  the  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand.  This  present '
life  is  night  compared  with  the  full  burst  of  the  resurrection-day.  The  Christian  must
not  slumber,  pleasing  himself  with  the  shadowy  dreams  of  earthly  glories ;  he  must
keep  vigil,  watching  always;  for  the  day  i«  at  hand,  the  effulgent  sunshine  of  the
true  life.  "  Therefore  watch,"  saith  the  Lord :  "  for  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord
doth  come."  2.  The  thief  in  the  night.  The  thief  comes  stealthily  in  the  dead  of  the
night,  when  mon  are  least  expecting  danger.  Had  they  known  the  hour,  they  would
have  watched.  "  The  day  of  tlie  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night; "  "  In  such
an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  cometh."  The  Lord's  words  sank  very  deeply
into  the  minds  of  the  apostles:  witness  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  illustration
(1  These,  v.  2;  2  Pet.  iii.  10 ;  Rev.  iii.  3  and  xvi.  15).  "  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready."
The  Lord's  earnest  admonitions  should  bring  home  to  our  hearts  the  momentous
importance,  momentous  above  the  power  of  language  to  express,  of  watching  for  his
coming.  Yery  blessed  are  those  wlio  know  him  now  as  a  most  loving  Friend,  a  most
gracious  Saviour ;  and,  alas  1  very  intense  must  be  the  misery  of  those  who  neglect
his  solemn  warnings,  living  without  watchfulness,  without  prayer ;  who  must,  umes)
they  repent,  know  him  for  the  first  time  as  an  awful  Judge,  when  he  cometh  suddenly
upon  the  careless  slumberers,  as  the  thief  cometh  in  the  dead  of  night.


CH.  xxiT.  1— 61.]    THK  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHBW.  453

IV.  Thb  fakablm  of  THK  fEBTAFTi.  1.  Ths/oith/ul  and  wUe  itrvant,  Accord-
iDf[  to  St  Luke  (xii.  42),  where  the  p»r»bl«  occurs  in  another  connection,  it  wm  a
queitlon  of  St.  Peter's  which  gave  occasion  to  it,  "  Lord,  speakest  thou  this  parable
unto  ui,  or  eren  to  all  ?  "  It  is  plainly  addressed  in  the  first  instance  to  the  apoitles,
and  to  thoie  who,  in  the  providence  of  God,  have  been  called  to  the  like  offic*  and
ministry.  But  it  embraces  in  the  range  of  its  application  all  Ohrlatian  men  who
have  been  placed  in  any  position  of  trust,  and  have  the  power  of  inftuencing  ethers
for  good.  The  Lord  asks,  "  Who  is  the  faithful  and  wise  servant  t"  He  answers
his  own  question.  It  ii  he  who  feels  and  recognizes  the  duties  rather  than  the
advantagea  of  his  position.  He  has  been  set  over  a  portion  of  the  Lord's  household.
He  knows  the  reason.  It  is  not  for  his  own  enjoyment  or  profit,  but  that  he  should
give  them  meat  in  due  season.  He  must  be  a  faithful  dispenser  of  the  Word  of  God
and  of  his  holy  sacraments';  and  that  in  all  himiility  and  self-distrust,  in  the  Name
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  must  take  heed  to  the
flock  oyer  which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  him  overseer,  to  feed  the  Church  Of  God,
which  he  hath  purchaseii  with  his  own  blood.  And  this  he  must  do  in  constant
watclifulness,  looking  always  unto  Jesus,  waiting  for  the  appearing  of  the  Lord.
"  Blessed  is  that  servant,  whom  his  Lord  when  he  cometh  shall  find  so  doing " —
blessed  exceedingly  above  all  that  heart  can  conceive  of  rapture  and  of  gladness ;
for  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  He  shall  make  him  ruler  over  all  his  goods."  He  shall
exalt  him  to  the  highest  place  in  his  kingdom.  The  highest  places  in  heaven  are  not
like  those  of  earth ;  one  man's  exaltation  does  not  exclude  others.  "  To  him  that
overcometh  will  I  give  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne."  That  highest  promise  is  for
all  who  overcome ;  there  is  room  for  all  faithful  Christians  in  the  throne  of  Christ.
"  Wherefore  we  labour  [^iKoriiioifuBa,  'we  are  ambitions']  that,  whether  present  or  absent,
we  may  be  accepted  of  bim."  This  is  the  high  ambition  of  the  faithful  Christian.
2.  The  tvil  lervant.  Alas  I  not  all  are  watchful.  Some  who  have  been  left  in  charge
of  the  Lord's  household  think  only  of  themselves.  They  say  in  their  hearts,  "  My
Lord  delayeth  his  coming."  They  care  nothing  for  their  Lord's  household,  nothing
for  their  fellow-servants.  They  think  only  of  their  present  ease  and  comfort,  nothing
>f  the  awful  future.  They  are  hard,  proud,  tyrannical;  they  carry  themselres  as
''  lords  over  God's  heritage."  They  are  selfish,  sensual,  self-indulgent,  absorbed  in
>heir  own  pleasures,  their  own  emoluments.  The  doom  of  such,  unless  by  God's
mercy  they  repent,  is  dreadful  exceedingly.  "  The  Lord  of  that  servant  shall  come
In  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  him."  Then  shall  come  the  tremendous  sentence
ihadowed  forth  in  a  most  frightful  form  of  punishment;  but  more  fearful  even  than
that  frightful  punishment,  for  it  points  to  an  eternal  doom :  "  He  shall  appoint  him
hii  portion  with  the  hypocrites :  there  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."

Lebbons.  1.  Let  us  mourn  in  true  repentance  now,  that  we  mourn  not  in  that
day  when  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  shall  appear  in  heaven.  2.  One  is  taken,  one  is
left.  Most  awful  words !  "Watch  ye  therefore."  3.  He  cometh  suddenly.  Nona  can
know  the  hour  of  his  coming ;  therefore  watch  always.  4.  Blessed  are  the  watchful  j
miserable  exceedingly  must  the  careless  be.    Therefore  let  us  watch.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  6. — False  Chriitt.  It  is  a  fact  of  history  that  pretenders  appeared  who  daimed
to  be  sent  by  God  for  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews,  and  practically  usurped  to  them-
selves the  position  of  the  Christ.  But  all  this  belongs  to  far-distant  ages.  In  a  larger
application  of  our  Lord's  idea,  the  world  has  seen  many  other  false  Christs  down  even
to  our  own  time,  for  whoever  or  whatever  assumes  to  do  the  work  of  Christ  or  claims
his  honours  is  a  false  Christ.    Let  us  look  at  some  of  these  usurpers.

L  The  fbixst.  Men  who  come  between  us  and  God,  so  that  we  are  shut  off  from
the  privileges  of  religion,  excepting  as  we  submit  to  their  authority,  are  false  Christs.
Priests  who  offer  to  intercede  with  peculiar  efficacy,  claim  to  sacrifice  on  the  behalf  of
others,  and  arsert  that  they  are  the  channels  of  sacramental  grace,  take  on  themselves
functions  which  rightly  belong  to  Christ.  At  the  head  of  this  great  assumption  is  the
pope ;  but  the  humblest  minister  wno  would  have  us  look  for  salvation  through  his


454        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.    MATTHEW.     [CH.  xxrv.  1—51.

mystic  grace  shares  in  the  same  offence.  In  fairness  it  should  be  seen  that  Romanist
priests  and  their  imitators  do  not  claim  to  set  aside  the  work  and  honour  of  Jesus
Christ,  but  merely  to  administer  his  grace.  Yet  practically  their  functions  are  sub-
stituted for  Christ's  and  the  people  are  induced  to  look  to  them  instead  of  going  to
Christ,  the  one  High  Priest,  and  to  God,  as  themselves  kings  and  priests.

II.  The  Ckbed.  Theologians  only  profess  to  interpret  the  mind  and  will  of  Christ.
Nevertheless,  the  scholasticism  of  the  Church  has  led  to  the  exaltation  of  doctrinal
statements  into  the  place  which  of  right  belongs  to  Christ  himself.  Thus  it  was  once
a  popular  presentation  of  the  gospel  to  describe  it  as  a  group  of  saving  truths  which
a  person  was  to  believe.  The  great  thing  was  for  him  to  see  the  way  of  salvation
clearly.  The  whole  idea  of  salvation  by  orthodoxy  was  the  substitution  of  dogma
for  Christ.  It  taught  that  men  are  saved  by  believing  a  Creed  ;  but  the  New  Testa-
ment teaches  tliat  salvation  is  dependent  on  faith  in  Christ.alone.

III.  TiibChukch.  This  is  an  institution  founded  by  Christ  himself.  It  is  his  own
body,  the  body  of  which  he  is  the  Head.  But  there  is  a  great  perversion  when  the
body  is  put  in  the  place  of  tlie  Head,  and  is  thought  to  perform  its  functions.  The
Churchly  notion  'of  religion  is  that  men  are  saved  through  their  connection  with  the
Church.  It  is  true  that  all  Christians  maintain  that  salvation  is  in  and  through
Christ  alone.  There  is  no  formal  and  confessed  substitution  of  the  Church  for  Christ.
But  the  perversion  is  not  the  less  real  in  practice.  As  a  fact,  multitudes  of  people
are  led  to  think  much  more  of  their  inclusion  in  the  Church  than  of  their  being  in
Christ.  The  assertion  that  there  is  no  salvation  outside  the  Church  is  soon  twisted
into  the  idea  that  there  is  salvation  for  all  in  the  Church,  and  that  membership
therein  is  the  primary  condition  of  salvation.  Against  these  and  all  other  substi-
tutes for  Christ  we  have  to  be  on  our  guard,  that  we  may  look  alone  to  the  giving
personal  Saviour  for  grace  and  life. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  IS.— Mnal  perseverance.  It  is  evident  that  our  Lord  was  speaking  with
especial  reference  to  the  series  of  calamities  that  was  to  accompany  the  death-throes
of  the  Jewish  state.  In  them  are  typified  and  illustrated  the  trials  which  test  the
fidelity  of  the  Christian  in  many  walks  of  life.

I.  "We  abb  warned  to  expect  heavy  trials.  No  woes  can  have  been  greater
than  the  troubles  of  that  tragedy  of  history,  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  But  Job  justly
tells  us  that  "  man  is  born  unto  trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward  "  (Job.  v.  7) .  It  is
foolish  to  anticipate  calamity,  for  "sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof;"  but
it  is  equally  foolish  to  deny  its  possibility,  or  to  be  astounded  and  amazed  when  we
have  our  share  of  what,  after  all,  is  just  the  common  lot  of  mankind.  Most  as-
suredly the  feeble  faith  that  will  be  swamped  in  the  first  gale  of  adversity  is  not  fit
to  be  launched  on  the  uncertain  seas  of  life.

II.  These  trials  will  require  the  grace  of  contintjous  endurance.  _  It
might  be  possible  to  muster  courage  for  the  encounter  with  one  huge  calamity  in  a
rare  crisis  of  life.  The  exceptional  necessity  would  call  out  exceptional  energy,  and
the  very  excitement  of  the  novel  situation  would  help  to  brace  the  spirit  of  heroism.
But  in  many  lives  the  trial  of  faith  is  long  aod  tedious.  There  is  not  one  brief  and
brilliant  hour  of  martyrdom,  but  there  are  years  of  repeated  difficulties  and  renewed
troubles.  To  face  such  experiences  a  gift  of  patience  and  stubborn  endurance  is
requisite.  Por  most  of  us  this  is  needed,  because  in  some  form  the  whole  of  life  is
a  course  of  discipline,  although  it  is  not  the  purgatory  pessimists  paint  it.

III.  The  endurance  of  adversity  and  temptation  is  not  independent  op
OUR  OWN  efforts.  It  is  not  solely  dependent  on  those  efforts.  Nobody  can  stand
firm  in  his  own  strength  alone.  If  we  are  enabled  to  be  faithful,  tliisis  because  God
is  with  us,  oiir  Strength  and  our  Stay.  There  is  no  possibility  of  continuous  endur-
ance excepting  through  his  presence  and  help.  The  trials  are  certainly  too  severe
for  unaided  human  strength.  But  this  is  not  all.  It  is  but  one  side  of  the  situation.
The  Divine  grace  is  given  to  those  who  seek  it ;  it  is  given  according  to  the  measure
of  faith  ;  and  it  is  given  to  inspire  and  energize  our  efforts,  not  to  supersede  them.
We  must  strive,  or  we  shall  fail.

IV.  A  GREAT  DELIVERANCE  WILL  CROWN  THE  ENDURANCE  THAT  18  PERSEVERED

IN  TO  THE  END.     1.   There  will  be  an  end.

"  Now  wc  fight  the  battle.  "


CM.rHT.1— 51.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  «»

But  the  battle  will  not  last  for  eyer.  Patience  and  courage  I  The  affliction  it  but
brief.  It  is  foolish  to  risk  all  rather  than  itand  out  its  short  time.  2.  It  is  necessary
to  endure  to  the  end.  The  ship  that  has  weathered  many  a  storm  on  her  long  voyage
must  be  prepared  to  face  the  last  tempest,  or  she  will  perish  in  sight  of  her  haven.  It
is  not  enough  that  we  were  yictorious  in  bygone  days.  The  fidelity  of  youth  will  not
excuse  the  failure  of  later  years.  The  battle  is  not  over  till  it  la  won,  and  the  battlo
of  life  ia  not  won  till  life  is  finished.  8.  Thenwill  he  the  final  victory.  Faithful,  per-
sistent endurance  will  issue  in  the  end  of  the  trial  and  in  the  salvation  of  the
sufferer*.  Salvation  is  perfect  and  secure  for  those  who  are  **  faithful  unto  death." —
W.F.A.

Yer.  27. — Lightning.  Our  Lord  oomparea  his  coming  to  •  great  flash  of  lightning
which  biases  out  in  the  east  and  illumines  earth  and  sky  as  far  as  the  west.  This  is
in  contrast  to  the  notion  of  an  obscure  and  doubtful  appearance,  or  one  that  is  local
and  limited,  or  one  the  coming  of  which  is  so  gradual  that  it  can  scarcely  be  discerned.
In  opposition  to  these  erroneous  conceptions,  the  advent  of  Christ  is  to  be_  lightning-
like. Let  ua  consider  its  characteristic*  as  they  are  suggested  to  us  by  this  startling
image.

I.  YisiBiLiTT.  Bursting  out  of  the  darkness  of  the  storm,  the  lightning  blinds  us
with  the  brilliancy  of  its  illumination.  There  is  no  mistaking  the  fact  that  it  has
come.  We  may  not  observe  the  glow-worm;  we  cannot  ignore  the  lightning.  The
awful  "  day  of  Qod "  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  has  made  its  impress  on  all
history.  Other  advents  of  Christ  in  judgment,  as  in  the  sack  of  Borne  by  the  Goths,
the  wreck  of  the  Spanish  Armada,  etc.,  have  startled  the  world  with  their  terror.  The
present  more  peaceful  coming  of  Christ  to  heathen  nations  in  the  spread  of  his  gospel
produces  most  visible  effects  in  the  transformation  of  degraded  fetich-worshipping
cannibals  into  civiliced,  humane  Christians.  Our  Lord's  words  lead  us  to  anticipate
that  there  will  be  no  obscurity  about  his  great  final  advent.  Then  every  eye  shall
behold  him.

IL  Breadth.  The  lightning  flashes  from  east  to  west ;  or  it*  flash  is  so  splendid,
that  while  for  a  moment  it  plays  in  the  east,  the  far-off  west  is  illumined  by  the
radiance  it  spreads  in  all  directions.  There  is  a  greatness  in  the  appearance  of
Christ  Even  when  he  came  in  humiliation,  he  was  "  a  Light  to  lighten  the
Gentiles."  Perhaps  he  had  some  thought  of  his  first  appearance  in  the  Bast,  and  of
the  spread  of  his  light  to  Europe,  when  he  spoke  of  the  lightning  shining  in  this
direction.  But  if  it  is  a  strain  of  fancy  to  assert  that  any  such  idea  is  to  bo  found  in
this  image,  the  notion  of  breadth  is  certainly  there.  Christ's  life  was  lived  in  the  open.
As  St.  Paul  boldly  said,  "This  thing  was  not  done  in  a  corner"  (Acts  iivi.  26).
Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  his  radiance  is  spreading  over  the  earth.  The
last  advent  will  be  for  all  the  world  to  see,  and  it  will  concern  all  mankind.

III.  Stjddennkss.  Nothing  is  so  sudden  or  so  startling  as  the  lightning.  In  its
very  silence  it  gives  us  a  greater  shock  than  the  roaring  thunder.  There  is  something
peculiarly  awful  in  its  momentary  blaze  of  splendour,  especially  as  we  know  that  there
is  death  and  destruction  in  its  shaft.  In  a  moment  the  steeple  is  shattered,  the  stout
oak  is  blasted  and  riven  to  its  core,  the  strong  man  is  scathed  and  flung  down  dead,
it  is  not  clear  that  our  Lord  meant  us  to  attach  any  idea  of  destruction  to  his  image
of  the  lightning.  We  know  that  there  is  a  terror  in  the  wrath  of  the  Son  (Ps_.  ii.  12).
In  his  advent  to  judgment  Christ  must  smite  down  his  foes.  He  is  not  the  incarna-
tion of  unruffled  amiability  which  modern  hymns  represent,  although  he  is  not  the
stern  Judge  of  Byzantine  art.  Part  of  the  terror  of  his  judgment  is  its  suddenness.
We  know  not  when  he  will  come.  Yet  if  we  are  his  true  people  we  need  not  fear.
His  sudden  advent  will  be  our  sudden  joy. — ^W.  P.  A.

Yer.  36  (as  in  Eevised  Yersion). — 1%«  unknown  day  and  hour.  This  is  one  of  the
most  striking  words  of  our  Lord.  The  record  of  it  shows  the  veracity  of  the  Gospel
Writers.  No  early  Christian  would  have  invented  such  a  sentence  as  this.  The  words
themselves  testify  to  the  truthfulness  and  to  the  humility  <.t  Christ.  They  are
significant  also  in  the  light  they  throw  on  the  limitations  of  knowledge.

L  ^HB  FACT.    No  one  but  our  Fkther  in  heaven  knows  the  whole  future.    Some


469  THB  OOSPEl.  AOOORDINO  TO  BT.  MATTHISW.    [ot  xxxw.  I— «1.

parts  of  it  tro  rerealed  to  all  of  ur,  8om«  are  within  the  perception  of  propbeti,  more
may  be  specisilj  known  to  angels,  very  much  must  have  lain  open  liefora  the  ^e  of
Christ.  But  God  only  knowB  the  whole.  The  final  judgment  is  known  only  to  him.
Why  is  this?  1.  Perhapi  the  date  i»  not  fixed.  To  Ckd,  who  is  independent  of  time,
all  our  uncertainties  and  contingencies  must  bo  risible  and  sure.  But  it  is  impossible
for  us  to  imagine  the  form  of  thought  that  comprehends  such  things.  To  va  many
things  are  uncertain,  in  part  because  they  are  dependent  on  changing  condition*.  Will
a  particular  man  be  saved  or  lost  ?  No  one  can  say,  because  no  fixed  destiny  deter-
mines bis  future.  It  will  be  conditioned  by  his  conduct,  by  the  action  of  his  free-wilL
It  is  open  for  him  to.  repent  at  any  time.  So  it  may  be  that  the  date  of  the  final  Judg-
ment will  be  determined  according  to  th«  conduct  of  men,  according  to  the  course  of
history.  It  may  be  hastened  or  it  may  be  postponed,  as  the  behaviour  of  the  world
changes.  2.  Certainly  ftiU  knowledge  would  be  injwiout.  It  is  one  of  the  ereatest
mercies  of  life  that  God  hides  the  future.  If  any  sorcery  could  reveal  it,  the  £pUi  of
folly  would  belong  to  those  people  who  resorted  to  that  sorcery.  The  knowledge
of  future  evil  would  crush  us ;  the  knowledge  of  future  good  would  take  the  cest  out  of
our  joys  and  make  the  blessings  of  life  stale  and  uninteresting.  Moreover,  God  disci-
plines us  by  ignorances.  This  should  not  make  us  indifferent  to  troth ;  it  must  \m  our
duty  to  learn  what  God  teaches.  But  it  cannot  be  healthy  to  attempt  to  pry  into
secrets  which  God  means  to  keep  to  himself.  Calculations  of  modem  prophets  about
jinfulfilled  prophecy  are  here  rebuked  beforehand  by  our  Lord.

II.  Infebences  in  beoabd  to  Jebus  Cbbibt.  1.  The  ditiinciion  letween  Christ
and  hie  Father.  Clearly  they  are  here  seen  as  two  Persons.  Yet  it  is  the  fashion  of
popular  theology  to  "  confound  the  Persons,"  and  to  speak  of  Jesus  as  if  he  were  just
the  same  as  the  Father.  2.  The  comparative  iubordination  of  Ohritt.  We  dare  not
say,  with  Cyril,  that  the  ignorance  of  Christ  was  only  apparent.  That  must  be  to
represent  him  as  an  unreal  Actor.  He  meant  what  he  said  in  all  honesty.  It  may  be
that  Athanasius  was  right  in  applying  all  such  passages  as  that  before  us  to  the  earthly
humiliation  of  our  Lord.  Still,  the  statements  of  Scripture  as  to  the  Son  1>eing  sent  by
the  Father  {e.g.  John  zx,  21),  applying  as  they  do  to  the  first  advent  and  the  very
origin  of  the  Incarnation,  suggest  something  like  a  secondary  position  even  priw  to
the  earthly  life,  as  we  shall  see  if  we  reverse  the  phrases,  and  think  of  the  Son  sending
the  Father — a  most  improper  notion.  The  Sender  must  be  in  some  way  superior  to  the
Sent.  8.  The  Divinity  of  Christ.  This  is  apparent  even  in  this  passage,  where  the
secondary  position  is  stated :  (1)  Because  Christ  separates  himself  from  all  other  men,
and  even  places  the  angels  between  himself  and  them.  (2)  Because  Christ  shows
Divine  knowledge  of  the  fact  of  the  ignorance  of  angels  aa  well  as  men,  and  of  the  fact
of  his  Father's  unique  consciousness.— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  40,  41.—0ne  taken,  and  another  left.  What  our  Lord  here  somewhat  obscurely
applies  to  the  time  of  the  coming  judgment  is  clearly  seen  in  all  ages  and  In  every
family  where  death  is  plying  bis  erratic  craft.

I.  The  distinction.  There  are  the  greatest  possible  variations  in  providence.  God
does  not  follow  any  regimental  orders.  The  ages  do  not  march  with  the  measured
tramp  of  drilled  battalions.  Families  are  broken  up.  Aged  men  are  left,  while  young
men  are  snatched  away.  Bad  people  flourish  to  a  green  old  age,  and  some  "  whom  the
gods  love  die  early."  The  useless  remain  to  cumber  the  ground,  and  the  useful  are  cut
down  in  the  midst  of  their  work.  1.  Similarity  o/ external  eonditione  u  no  guarantee
of  eimilarity  of  fate.  The  two  men  are  at  the  same  field-work,  the  two  women  are
both  alike  grinding  corn.  Yet  how  different  are  their  fates !  We  cannot  judge  of  a
man's  future  by  his  worldly  position.  2.  Association  in  life  does  not  secure  association
in  death.  The  family  is  grievously  broken ;  old  friends  are  parted ;  life-partnerships
come  to  an  end.  Two  friends  may  be  rery  near  in  life,  yet  death  may  make  an  awful
separation,  if  one  is  called  to  the  world  of  light  and  the  other  banished  to  the  realm  of
darknem.

II.  The  twofold  fatb.  1.  The  one  taken.  Whither?  There  is  an  eerie  vague-
nesi  in  our  Lord's  language.  The  summons  comes,  and  the  most  reluctant  must  obey
without  a  shadow  of  resistance.  But  whither  does  it  call  ?  We  vainly  strive  to  follow
the  flight  of  the  passing  soul,  and  the  utmost  effort  of  imagination  cannot  trace  it  one


OH.  my.l— «!.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  457

step  beyond  the  old  familiar  earthly  scenes.  A  cloud  receirea  the  trareller  out  of
sight  the  moment  he  takes  his  departure.  Yet  we  know  that  there  are  tremendous
possibilities  in  the  unseen,  and  we  know  that  the  blessedness  or  woe  of  the  future  life
depends  on  the  conduct  of  this  life.  He  who  is  taken  has  gone  "  to  his  own  place."  2.
lie  one  left.  (1)  To  what  is  he  left?  To  grief,  desolation,  and  loneliness — but  also  to
God  who  never  leaves,  to  Christ  who  Is  nerer  taken  from  us.  (2)  Why  is  he  left  ?
Perhaps  for  further  work,  perhaps  for  finer  chastening,  perhaps  to  gire  one  more  oppor-
tunity for  repentance.  But  let  him  consider  that  his  time  also  must  come.  Before
long  all  are  taken.  The  distinction  is  temporal,  not  final ;  it  is  •  matter  of  the  post-
ponement of  the  dreaded  end,  not  of  its  aroidance.

nL  Tbk  TWOiSBTAiJiTT.  Our  Lord  evidently  desires  to  lay  stress  on  this.  We  do
not  know  when  the  final  judgment  will  be.  We  do  not  even  know  when  our  own  last
d»y  will  come.  This,  too,  m^y  be  swift  and  sudden  as  the  lightning-fiash,  unexpected
as  the  thief  in  the  night.  Wenever  know  which  will  be  taken  and  which  left.  How
often  the  feeble  invalid  outlives  the  strong  man  who  is  smitten  down  by  some  accident
or  fatal  disease  in  the  midst  of  his  busy  life!  Such  thoughts  should  not  induce  a
morbid  melancholy,  or  a  listless  indifierence  to  life.  They  warn  us  to  be  always  ready
for  the  summons  that  shall  call  us  hence.  But  then  he  is  fit  to  die  who  is  most
truly  equipped  for  the  duties  of  life,  and  to  him  the  sudden  message  will  be  no  awful
terror,  but  the  trumpet  of  victory,  or,  better  than  that,  the  Father's  voice  calling  his
child  home  to  himself. — ^W.  ¥.  A.

Vert.  45 — 61. — The  two  tervantt.  Our  Lord  here  applies  his  teaching  about  the
suddenness  of  the  advent  of  the  unforeseen  judgment  to  the  conduct  of  his  servants.
In  view  of  the  possibility  of  being  called  to  account  at  any  moment,  what  manner  of
men  should  we  be?  Jesus  gives  us  contrasted  pictures  of  two  very  diflFerent  servants
as  they  are  found  at  his  coming,  and  of  their  consequent  fate.

L  The  rAiTHFUL  and  wise  seevant.  1.  Sit  character.  No  doubt  his  known
fidelity  and  wisdom  furnish  the  reasons  for  his  appointment  to  an  important  ofSce.
(1)  The  first  requisite  is  fidelity.  Our  business  is  not  to  please  ourselves,  but  to  serve
our  Master.  (2)  The  second  requisite  is  wisdom.  This  is  more  than  acuteness  of  intel-
lect. It  ia  a  moral  faculty,  the  right  use  of  the  intellect.  2.  Hie  trust.  (1)  A  post
of  responsibility.  God  is  the  supreme  Lord,  yet  he  grants  to  the  several  provinces  of
his  kingdom  a  considerable  measure  of  "  home-rule."  He  does  not  humiliate  by  driving
us  like  cattle ;  he  gives  us  scope  for  the  exercise  of  our  powers  and  the  proof  of  our
fidelity.  (2)  A  post  of  useful  service.  The  servant  is  to  provide  food  for  the  house-
hold. He  is  •  steward  of  the  provisions  of  the  family.  God  trusts  his  servants  to
feed  his  family.  If  they  are  unfaithful,  the  children  will  starve.  3.  EU  conduct.  He
simply  does  what  is  required  of  him.  His  Master  finds  him  "  so  doing."  He  is  not
expected  to  devise  novelties  of  self-willed  service.  He  cannot  exceed  his  duty.  But
it  is  •nouj''  if  he  does  it.  Christ  looks  for  simple  obedience — service  according  to  his
wilL  4.  Bis  reward.  This  is  in  the  form  of  promotion.  The  faithful  servant  is  to
serve  still,  but  in  a  higher  position.  God  does  not  reward  service  by  granting  idleness
or  selfish  indulgence  in  luxury,  which  would  mean  no  reward  to  the  true  servant.  As
it  is  a  great  honour  to  be  permitted  to  serve,  it  cannot  be  a  reward  to  be  set  aside  from
further  service ;  the  great  reward  is  just  the  privilege  of  larger  service.

II.  The  evil  sbbvant.  1.  Hit  excuse.  "  My  lord  tarrieth."  This  is  but  a
thought  of  his  heart,  yet  it  bears  fatal  fruit  in  his  life.  Evidently  the  miserable  man
is  an  "eye-servant,"  He  has  no  sense  of  duty,  no  Interest  in  his  work.  A  lazy,  dis-
honourable slave,  he  will  not  work  if  he  can  escape.  The  very  delay  of  his  master,
which  is  meant  to  enlarge  his  honourable  trust,  he  seems  to  regard  as  a  mark  of  indif-
ference, as  though  he  would  blame  his  lord  for  apparently  neglecting  the  household.
Here  we  see  the  hypocrisy  of  which  the  man  is  accused  later.  2.  Si*  vile  conduct.
(1)  Cruelty.  He  beats  his  fellow-servants.  He  abuses  his  position  of  trust.  Instead
of  feeding  the  household,  he  flogs  it.  The  very  power  that  was  given  to  him  for  good
uses  he  turns  to  evil.  The  shepherd  has  become  a  wolf.  So  has  it  been  in  the  Church
of  Christ  with  men  in  high  ofiSce.  (2)  Intemperance.  The  man  is  tyrannical  and  ill-
tampered,  because  he  is  weak  and  self-indulgent.  No  men  are  at  heart  so  cold  and
cruel  as  those  who  live  for  their  own  pleasures.-     Selfishness  and  sensuality  lead


458  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xmt.  1-«1.

directly  to  hardness  and  harshness  in  dealing  with  other  people.  All  this  is  eMentially
degrading.  The  honoured  steward  l)ecomes  the  l>oon  companion  of  low  drunkards.  3.
Hit  thick  of  surprise.  Because  his  lord  tarried,  he  hegan  to  think  he  should  nerer  be
called  to  account.  He  was  the  more  amazed  and  confounded  with  the  sudden  advent
of  his  master.  Christ  will  come  in  judgment  to  men  who  never  expect  him.  4.  Hi*
awfvfl  doom.  To  such  a  man,  and  not  to  the  abandoned  outcast,  Christ  threatens
the  most  fearful  punishment.  The  professed  servant  of  God,  the  man  in  tnist  and
honour  who  abuses  his  privileges,  will  be  the  victim  of  the  direst  wrath  of  Heaven.
— W.  P.  A.

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  coming  of  Christ.  After  dooming  the  temple  to  desolation,  "Jesus
went  out."  The  action  was  significant  (see  Luke  xiz.  44).  In  every  case  the  departure
of  the  Saviour  is  a  solemn  event.  "  His  disciples,"  viz.  Peter,  James,  John,  and  Andrew
(see  Mark  xiii.  3),  called  his  attention  to  the  magnificence  of  the  structure.  Men  are
naturally  influenced  by  material  glories.  They  had  especially  noticed  the  greatness  of
the  stones  (see  Mark  xiii.  1),  and  were  astonished  when  Jesus  declared  that  these
should  become  disjointed  and  overthrown.  How  "slow  of  heart"  are  even  good  men
"  to  believe  oM  that  the  prophets  have  spoken "  (see  Micah  iii.  12 ;  Jer.  ixvi.  18)  1
What  havoc  in  the  material  world  is  wrought  through  moral  obliquity!  "And  as
they  sat  "  in  full  view  of  the  temple  and  city  (ver.  3),  where  the  Shechinah  had  rested
after  leaving  the  temple  and  the  city,  and  whence  it  ascended  into  the  heavens — awful
presage  of  the  desolation  of  the  temple  and  city  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  captivity
of  the  people  by  the  Babylonians  (Ezek.  xi.  23) : — the  action  of  Jesus  here  therefore
was  not  only  the  expression  of  a  tender,  sorrowful,  patriotic,  human  sympathy,  but
moreover  a  parable  and  a  prophecy  of  momentous  import.

I.  Christ  was  coMura  nr  his  kikodom.  1.  The  advent  of  the  King  Messiah  was
the  constant  subject  of  ancient  promise.  2.  It  was  accordingly  the  chief  expectation
uf  the  Jews.  3.  But  so  dazzled  were  they  with  the  splendour  of  the  imagery,  in  which
the  coming  of  Messiah  in  his  glory  is  set  forth  in  prophecy,  that  they  overlooked  the
predictions  setting  forth  an  earlier  advent  of  Messiah  in  humiliation.  4.  Hence,  when
Jesus  came  in  that  earlier  advent  his  people  were  offended  in  him.

IL  He  comes  in  bpieit  and  poweb.  1.  So  he  came  upon  the  memorable  Day  of
Pentecost.  Jesus  had  been  corporeally  transiently  present  with  his  disciples  as  their
Comforter,  and  he'  promised,  after  his  removal  from  them  in  that  capacity,  to  come  again
as  their  permanent  or  abiding  Comforter  in  his  Divine  Spirit  (see  John  xiv.  15 — 21).
2.  That  sdvent  was  quickly  followed  by  the  "  end  of  the  world,"  or,  more  properly,  the
"  consummation  of  the  age."  The  Levitical  dispensation  ended  with  the  destruction
of  the  temple.  For  the  temple  was  the  very  centre  of  that  system.  "  The  temple  wat
destroyed:  (1)  Justly;  because  of  the  sins  of  the  Jews.  (2)  MereifuUy;  to  take  away
from  them  the  occasion  of  continuing  in  Judaism.  (3)  Mysteriously;  to  show  that  the
ancient  sacrifices  were  abolished,  and  that  the  whole  Jewish  economy  was  brought  to
an  end,  and  the  Christian  dispensation  introduced  "  (Clarke).  3.  The  judgment  in  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  a  figure  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  The  scattered
Jew-Christians  found  relief  in  the  judgment  which  brought  desolation  to  their  perse-
cutors (cf.  Mark  xiii.  13 ;  Jas.  v.  7 — 9).

III.  He  will  yet  comb  visibly,  in  foweb  and  globt.  1.  He  will  then  come
"  in  the  clouds."  (1)  He  will  come  upon  a  glorious  throne.  (2)  He  will  come  with  a
myriad  retinue.  Clouds  of  angels.  Clouds  of  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  (see
Heb.  xii.  1).  2.  He  will  come  to  introduce  the  millennium.  (1)  He  will  begin  that
reign  with  judgments  upon  the  obstinately  wicked.  The  antichristian  nations  will  be
overthrown.  (2)  He  will  end  that  age  with  the  final  judgment  upon  the  dead,  small
and  great.

lY.  Ha  couEB  IN  THE  ARTICLE  OF  DEATH.  1,  This  is  the  "  eud  of  the  age  "  to  us
as  the  term  of  our  probation.  2.  It  is  to  us  virtually  the  day  of  judgment.  3.  Christ
comes  in  person  to  receive  to  himself  his  own  (see  JobJn  xiv,  3).  4.  Let  us  b«
admonished  and  prepare. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  4 — 14. — Signs  of  the  advent.  The  coming  of  Christ  in  his  kingdom  being  the
great  event  of  prophecy  to  be  fulfilled,  the  tinie  and  signs  of  that  coming  became  ques*


OT.rnT.l— 61.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  469

tioDS  of  Intense  interest  to  the  disciples.    The  time  ii  generally  indicated  by  the  signs.
These  are —

I.  Afobtabt  thbouoh  the  iNrLUENOE  or  rALSB  Chbistb.  1.  Many  antidirisU
appeared  le/ore  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  (1)  Even  in  apostolic  days  the  mystery
of  iniquity  was  already  working  (see  2  Thess.  ii.  7 ;  1  John  ii.  18).  Note :  Antiquity
is  no  certain  evidence  of  truth.  Error  is  very  nearly  as  ancient.  The  spirit  of  false-
hood invaded  the  garden  of  Eden,  (2)  Many  came  professing  to  be  the  Christ.
"  Theophylact  has  recorded  that  one  Dosatheus,  a  Samaritan,  put  himself  forth  as  the
prophet  foretold  by  Moses;  that  Simon  of  Samaria  also  declared  himself  to  bo  the  great
powtr,  that  is,  the  '  great  power  of  God,'  mentioned  in  the  Acts.  This  prophecy  *lso
seemi  to  contemplate  Theudas,  and  '  that  Egyptian '  (see  Acts  xzL  38),  and  another
impostor  mentioned,  but  not  named,  by  Josephus,  all  of  whom  styled  themselves
prophets,  though  only  rebels  and  deceivers.  Manes,  in  later  times,  presumed  to  call
himself  the  Christ,  and  to  choose  twelve  apostles,  in  imitation  of  our  Lord  "  (Joachim
Camerarius).  Since  Christ  in  Christianity  is  all  that  is  Divine  and  saving,  so  all  false
systems  of  Christianity  are  false  Christs.  2.  Many  have  since  been  deceived  hy  the  popes.
(1)  The  popes  affect  to  be  vicars  of  Christ,  and  usurp  his  prerogatives.  They  claim
infallibility.  They  assert  dominion  over  the  faith  of  Christians.  They  undertake  to
forgive  sins  committed  against  God.  (2)  Multitudes  have  apostatized  through  their
deceptions.  The  state  of  Christendom  was  deplorable  before  the  Beformation.  The
mischief  is  still  extensive  (see  Bev.  liii.  3).  (3)  This  seems  to  be  the  apostasy
indicated  by  Paul  as  that  destined  to  be  developed  when  the  restraining  power  of  the
Roman  emperors  should  be  taken  out  of  the  way  (see  2  Thess.  ii.  7,  8).  Z.Many
have  liten  deceived  in  the  Mohammedan  delusion.  (1)  Mohammed  was  an  antichrist,
as  he  set  himself  above  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  He  made  converts  by  hundreds  of
thousands  by  the  eloquence  of  his  sword.  How  extensive  wure  the  conquests  of  the
Saracens!  What  an  empire  was  once  that  of  the  Turks!  (3)  Mohammedan  Mahdis
are  ever  arising.  We  are  warned  to  take  heed  against  deceivers.  "  The  colour  of  the
greatest  good  is  often  the  cover  of  the  greatest  evil "  (Henry).  Seducers  are  enemies
more  dangerous  to  the  Church  than  persecutors.

II.  Excitements  of  militabt  commotion.  1.  These  existed  lefore  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem.  (1)  When  Jesus  was  born  there  was  peace.  The  temple  of  Janus  was
shut.  (2)  But  think  not  that  he  came  to  continue  such  a  peace  (see  Luke  xiii.49— 53  )
War  comes  of  refusing  the  gospel.  (3)  "Rumours  ofwars."  When  Caius  [Caligula]
resolved  to  erect  hi  s  statue  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  the  consternation  was  so  great
that  the  people  omitted  to  till  the  land.  (4)  Christians  were  to  "^easT- ofwars."  They
are  more  apt  to  "  hear  "  of  them  than  to  engage  in  them.  Many  of  them  submitted  to
die  rather  than  serve  in  the  armies.  (5)  "Nationrising  against  nation."  In  Palestine,
before  the  time  of  Joshua,  there  were  ' '  many  nations  and  great."  At  this  time  there
were  many  divisions  in  the  land— Judaja  with  Samaria,  Galilee,  Itursea,  Abilene.
These  were  in  conflict  and  commotion  (see  Bishop  Newton's  'Diss,  on  Prophecy')-
2.  They  <sr«  to  precede  tlie  millennial  reign.  (1)  The  war-spirit,  born  in  depraved
human  nature, has  becomeorganized  in  these  last  times,  viz. since  the  greatprophetical
era  marked  by  the  first  French  Revolution.  (3)  Standing  armies  have  now  swollento
enormous  proportions ;  and  science  has  been  taxed  to  render  weapons  of  war  terribly
destructive.  (8)  To  support  this  system  industry  is  oppressed.  Ploughshares  are
beaten  into  swords— a  process  which  was  destined  to  precede  the  reverse  operation  of
beating  swords  into  ploughshares  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  4;  Joel  iii.  9,  10;  Micah  iv.  3).

Ill  Feaefijl  public  calamities.  \.  Famines.  (1)  Such  there  were  before  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  One  of  these  was  foretold  by  Agabus  (see  Acts  xi.  28).
Josephus  and  Eusebius  mention  two  famines  which  tookplace  in  the  days  of  Claudius;
and  Josephus  expressly  says,  "There  was  a  great.famine  throughout  Jud^a  "  ('Ant.'
XX.  2).  (2)  Such  have  occured  in  modern  times,  and  are  likely  to  become
increasingly  destructive  as  the  population  of  the  world  increases,  and  the  war-spirit
increases  with  it.  3.  Pestilences.  These  are  the  usual  attendants  of  famines.  (1)
Epidemic  disorders  are  generally  produced  from  the  scarcity  or  badness  of  provision.
(2)  The  carnage  of  the  battle-field  is  also  a  source  of  epidemic  disease.  3.  Sa/rthqi^i/cet.
(1)  Such  there  were  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  first  of  the  series  wat
that  in  connection  with  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus.    The  histories  of  Claudius  and  <^  the


460  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxiv.  1— BL

following  emperoH  notice  mtjrr  in  Asia  and  the  islands  of  the  ^gean.  Ther  took
place  in  Crete,  in  Smyrna,  Mifetua,  CMoi,  Samoa ;  in  Laodictea  in  the  conBulahip  of
Kero ;  at  Hierapolii  and  Coloaie.  In  all  these  places  the  Jews  resided.  Add  to  these
that  dreadful  one  in  Judca  mentioned  by  Josephus  ('  Wars,'  iv.  4),  accompanied  .by
a  furious  tempest,  with  continual  lightnings,  thunders,  and  rain.  (2)  The  thought-
ful obserrer  of  the  signs  of  these  times  cannot  o?crlook  the  earthquakes  by  which  they
are  eter  increasingly  distinguished  (see  Mallett's  tables).

lY.  Ths  wide  rcxLiOATiON  or  the  oobpel.  1.  Th«  publieatUm  trai  atjtrit  Umtted
to  th*  Jeum,  (1)  Oar  Lord  in  Person  came  to  the  "  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  IsraeL"
(2^  OccasionaUy,  howerer,  he  presaged  the  publication  of  his  gospel  to  the  Gentiles.
(3)  Though  he  commissioned  his  disciples  to  preach  the  gospel  to  erery  creature,  h«
instructed  them  to  begin  at  Jerusalem.  2.  When  th«  Jews  rejected  it,  then  th*  apotth$
turned  to  ths  0*ntile$.  (1)  It  soon  was  carried  throughout  the  Boman  empire^  then
styled  the  world  (see  Bom.  L  8;  x.  18;  Col.  1.  6,  23).  Then  followed  "the  end"  in
the  judgment  upon  Jerusalem.  (2)  Now,  through  the  great  erangelistic  societii*—
Bible  w^cietiea  and  missionary  societies — the  testimony  of  the  gospel  is  carried  into
"all  the  world"  in  the  wider  sense.  May  we  not  therefore  look  for  the  day  of  Judg-
ment upon  the  antichristian  nations?  Of  all  these  things  Christians  are  to  take  need.
For  the  confirming  of  their  faith.  For  the  Inspiration  of  their  hope.  For  their  personal
safety v—^.  A.  M.

Yen.  16—28. — Salutary  warntngt.  Having  annoimced  the  signs  of  his  adrent,
first  for  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  antichrist,  and  secondly  for  that  of  its  Gentile
counterpart,  Christ  gives  to  his  disciples  salutary  warnings  suited  to  the  crises.

L  Ix  BEBPEOT  TO  SECULAB  BTiLB.  1.  W«  do  Well  to  take  heed  to  th*  lure  Word  tf
propheey.  (1)  "  The  abomination  of  desolation,  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,"
equiTalent  to  the  Boman  army  with  its  ensigns.  The  cps  in  Dan.  ix.  27  may  denote
the  Boman  voing  or  army  (cf.  Isa.  viii.  8).  Josephus  shows  that  the  ancient  Jews
understood  this  prophecy  of  Daniel  to  relate  to  the  Bomans.  The  ensign  was  an  eagle,
an  unclean  or  abominable  creature,  and  especially  abominable  as  it  was  an  idol.
(cf.  1  Kings  xi.  6,  7).  Images  of  the  C»sars  were  inscribed  in  the  shields  On  the
ensigns.  Our  Lord  fixes  the  interpretation  in  this  sense  (cf.  Luke  xxi.  20).  (3)
"  Standing  in  the  holy  place."  This  cannot  be  the  temple,  for  the  Bomans  did  not
stand  there  until  after  the  opportunity  for  the  flight  had  passed.  The  circuit  of  the
holy  city  was  in  the  holy  place  (cf.  Acts  rii.  7).  Before  this  time  the  Boman  soldiers
Stationed  in  Jerusalem,  in  deference  to  the  scruples  of  the  Jews,  had  ensigns  without
the  effigies  of  Ciesar.  Pilate  attempted  to  introduce  the  images,  but  yielded  to  the
remonstrances  of  the  Jews,  and  commanded  them  to  be  carried  back  to  Cnsarea.  (3)
"  Whoso  readeth  let  him  understand."  Those  who  read  the  Scriptures  should  endearour
to  understand  them.  We  should  have  understanding  of  the  times  (cf.  1  Chron.  xiL
32 ;  ch.  XTL  3).  "  The  wise  shall  understand."  Daniel  is  intelligible  in  the  interpre-
tations of  Christ.  When  untoward  things  occur,  the  people  of  God  should  confer
with  the  prophets.  2.  Chritt  it  a  mountain  of  tafety  to  those  who  fly  to  him  for
refuge.  (1)  "Then  let  them  which  be  in  Judsa  flee  into  the  mountains."  Oestius
Gallus,  Prefect  of  Syria,  besieged  Jerusalem  for  some  years,  and  then  raised  the  siege.
This  was  the  sign  to  the  Christians  to  flee.  They  accordinsly  removed  to  Pella  and
other  towns  in  the  mountainous  region  of  Gilead,  east  of  the  Jordan.  In  the  territories
of  Agrippa,  who  remained  faithful  to  the  Romans,  they  wore  safe.  When  Titus  came
some  months  later,  there  was  not  one  Christian  remaining  in  the  city.  "  The  Lord
knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly,"  (2)  "Let  him  which  is  on  the  house-top  not,"  etc.
In  the  promptitude  of  obedience  there  is  safety.  Had  the  Christians  delayed  their
flight  when  Cestius  Gallus  raised  the  siege,  they  must  hare  suffered  for  their  unbelief
with  the  unbelieving  Jews.  Josephus  relates  that  Titus  completed  his  lines  of  circum-
vallation  with  incredible  celerity.  "None  of  the  wicked  shall  understand."  The
Jews  perished  because  they  would  not  understand  the  salutary  warning  of  Jesus,
(3)  Life  is  more  than  property.  If  wo  sacriflce  property  to  secure  the  life  of  the  body,
much  more  should  we  sacrifice  it  to  secure  the  more  precious  life  of  the  spirit.  Plight
must  not  be  hindered  by  burdens.  The  Christian  carries  all  his  property  in  Christ.
It  is  not  to  trust,  but  to  tempt  God,  when  we  refuse  to  pass  through  the  door  which


OH.xxrT.1— 6L]    THE  GOSFBL  AOOORDINQ  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  4»l


he  open*  for  our  escape.  8.  Oakunitie$  are  mitigated  for  the  $akt  of  th«  elect.  (1)
"Woe  unto  them  I "  etc.  (ver.  19).  Frightful  accounts  are  found  in  Joaephui  of  the
sufferings  of  helpless  women  and  children  in  those  "  days  of  Tengeanoe."  (2)  "  But
pray  ye,"  eta  (Ters.  20 — 22]).  We  must  labour  to  make  the  best  of  the  inevitable.
The  followers  of  Christ  in  times  of  calamity  should  be  much  in  prayer.  The  prayer
that  anticipates  may  mitigate  evil.  "  That  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter,"  when
the  ways  would  be  scarcely  passable.  "  Neither  on  the  sabbath  day,"  lest  they  should
be  exposed  tu  the  indignation  of  the  Jews,  or  hindered  by  their  own  superstitions.
(3)  "  But  for  the  elect's  sake  those  days  shall  be  shortened."  The  prayers  of  the  good
ate  effective,  and  the  wicked  profit  by  their  successes.  As  there  is  a  community  of
suffering  between  the  wicked  and  the  good,  so  is  there  a  community  of  mitigations
between  the  good  and  the  bad.    Gbd  rules  in  human  affairs.

II.  Is  BXBFEOT  TO  SFIBITUAL  DSCEFTIONS.  1.  He  worni  them  agaitut/dUe  Ghritts.
(1)  There  were  many  such  about  the  time  of  the  siege.  Some  before  it  (see  Acts  y.
36,  37).  Others  soon  after,  as  Jonathas,  who  formed  an  army  in  Cyrene;  and  Barcho-
chebas,  in  the  leign  of  Adrian.  (2)  Those  who  observe  the  signs  of  our  times  cannot
fail  to  see  false  Christs.  Not  only  is  there  the  Roman  impostor  (see  2  Thess.  iL  3 — 10)
and  his  Eastern  rivals,  but  many  minor  deceivers  are  springing  up.  (3)  As  the
counterfeit  presupposes  the  genuine  coin,  so  do  false  Ohrists  indicate  the  true.  As
the  appearance  of  false  Christs  nearly  two  thousand  years  ago  showed  that  the  true
Christ  had  then  come  (cf.  Dan.  ix.  25),  so  do  the  appearance  of  false  Christs  now
presage  the  approaching  second  advent  of  the  true.  2.  He  toami  them  against  fake
prophetB,  (1)  False  Chritits  have  also  their  false  prophets.  Every  Mahomet  has  his
Abubeker.  (2^  Our  Lord  not  only  foretold  the  appearance  of  these  deceivers,  but  the
manner  of  their  proceeding  (cf.  Acts  xxi.  38 ;  Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xx.  7 ;  '  Wars,'  vi.  6 ;
vii.  11).  (3)  "  If  it  be  possible,"  etc.,  imports  simply  that  it  is  difiScult  to  deceive  the
elect  of  God  (cf.  Acts  ix.  16 ;  Rom.  xii.  18).  "  To  fear  the  worst  oft  cures  the  worst "
(Shakespeare).  To  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed.  "  A  prudent  man  foreseetfa  the
evil "  (see  Prov.  xxiL  3 ;  Heb.  xL  7).  (4)  Times  of  great  trouble  are  times  of  great
temptation.  3.  St  warns  them  against  their  deceptions.  (1)  "  Great  signs  and
wonders."  The  Jews  had  magical  arts,  interpreted  dreams,  and  pretended  to  work
miracles  and  predict  the  future.  (2)  The  Rornan  antichrist  comes  "with  all  the
deceivableneas  of  unrighteousness  "  (see  2  Thess.  ii.  9 — 11 ;  Rev.  xiii.  13, 14).  If  not
the  elect,  the  inSdels  are  deceived.  They  fly  from  the  extreme  of  sliperstition  into  the
opposite  extreme  of  scepticism,  and  so  miss  the  truth.  (3)  The  coming  of  the  true  Christ
is  a  grand  thing,  like  the  sheet  lightning.  So  the  Roman  armies  came  in  public,  as
the  executioners  of  the  Judge,  in  contradistinction  to  the  stealthy  manner  in  which  the
ialse  Christs  came.  They  came  suddenly,  without  any  premonitory  whispering  as  to
the  "secret  chamber."  They  came  universally,  for  they  filled  the  land.  Like  the
lightning  shining  from  the  east,  they  entered  Judasa  from  that  quarter,  and  carried  their
conquests  westward.  (4)  The  coming  of  Christ  here  also  refers  to  his  second  personal
advent  (cf.  Luke  xvii.  22 — 37).  When  a  people  do  by  their  sins  make  themselves
carcases,  Gkid  will  send  his  vultures  among  them  (cf.  Deut.  xxviil.  49 ;  Heb.  viii.  1).—
J.  A.M.

Vers.  29 — 31. — The  signs  of  the  heavens.  The  earlier  verses  of  this  chapter  set  forth
principally  the  signs  from  the  earth.  The  "tribulation"  referred  to  here  is  that
consequent  upon  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  in  the  first  place,  and  in  an  extended  sense
may  be  viewed  as  continued  through  the  whole  period  of  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews.

L  The  smn  of  thb  Son  of  mah  is  pbecbdbd  by  bevolutions.  1.  These  qre  described
wider  the  figwe  of  the  shaking  of  the  powers  of  the  heavens.  (1)  The  mechanical
heavens  bear  rule  over  the  physical  earth.  They  are  therefore  made  emblems  of
government,  whether  political  or  religious  or  Iwth.  The  shaking  of  the  heavens
imports  the  removal  of  such  governments  (see  Isa.  xiii.  10;  xxiv.  23  j  xxxiv.  4;
Jer.  iv.  23 ;  Ezek.  xxxii.  7,  8 ;  Dan.  viii.  10 ;  Joel  ii.  10,  30,  31 ;  iiL  15 ;  Amos  viii.
9, 10).  (2)  The  sun  is  the  symbol  of  the  supreme  power  in  the  state,  and  of  monarchy
in  particular.  The  darkening  of  the  sun  imports  the  humiliation,  if  not  extinction,  of
the  supreme  civil  rulers.  (3)  The  moon  is  the  emblem  of  the  ecclesiastical  system.
Anciently,  the  times  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church  were  measured  and  ordered  by  the


462  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxiv.  1—61.

revolutions  and  changes  of  the  moon.  As  the  trae  Church,  like  the  moon,  borrows  its
light  from  the  Sun,  viz.  "of  righteousness,"  so  have  spurious  religious  systems  borrowed
theirs  from  civil  rulers.  The  moon  eclipsed  represents  a  dispensational  change  in  the
true  Church,  and  confusion  to  the  false  Churches,  (4)  Stars  represent  particular  rulers,
as  princes  and  leaders  in  the  state;  and  "angels"  or  ministers  in  the  Church.  The
stars  leaving  their  orbits  and  falling  obviously  imports  the  effects  of  revolution  upon
the  leaders  of  religious  corporations.  2.  Trace  now  the  fid/ilment  of  the  prophecy.  (1)
The  Jewish  system  literally  collapsed  "  inimediately  after  the  tribulation  "  of  the  days
of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  Romans  took  away  their  "  nation.''  They  also
took  away  their  "  place,"  or  temple.  And  the  destruction  of  the  temple  involved  the
abolition  of  the  Levitical  system,  of  which  the  temple  was  the  very  centre.  Thus
the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  of  that  people  came  to  grief  together.  (2)  The  prophecy  had
a  further  fulfilment  in  the  calamities,  revolutions,  and  ultimate  overthrow  of  the  Roman
empire.  We  find  the  same  figures  applied  in  the  Apocalypse,  first  to  the  overthrow  of
the  pagan  powers  of  the  empire  by  Constantine;  and  next,  to  the  subversion  of  the
empire  itself  by  the  northern  invaders  (see  Rev.  vi.  12 ;  viii.  12).  The  application  of
the  word  "  immediately  "  in  reference  to  these  events  will  not  surprise  when  we  take
into  account  the  character  of  prophetic  language,  and  the  vast  range  of  time  to
which  it  is  applied.  (3)  The  final  instalments  of  fulfilment  will  take  place  when  the
antichristian  powers,  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  shall  come  into  judgment.  This  event
will  come  "immediately  after  the  tribulation"  upon  the  Jews  comes  to  its  end  in
their  restoration  to  their  land  and  covenants.  (4)  Who  can  say  whether  this  prophecy
may  not  also  have  a  literal  accomplishment  in  the  mechanical  heavens  themselves?
There  is  a  remarkable  relation  between  astronomical  and  political  changes.  3.  In  all
commotions  Christ  toill  b«  merciful  to  his  people.  "  And  he  shall  send  forth  his  angels
with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,"  etc.  (ver.  31).  (1)  These  words  may  be  applied  to
the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  They  are  said  to  come  from  the  "  four  windi"  or  "comers
of  the  earth  "  (of.  ch.  yiil.  11,  12 ;  Luke  liii.  28,  29).  God's  message  comes  as  the
sound  of  a  trumpet  (of.  Numb.  x. ;  Isa.  Iviii.  1 ;  Jer.  vi.  17 ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  3,  6 ;
Bom.  X.  18).  (2)  They  may  be  applied  to  the  gathering  of  the  Jews.  They  are  still
in  a  sense  God's  "  elect."  They  are  destined  to  be  gathered  out  of  all  the  nations  into
which  God  has  driven  them  in  his  anger.  The  angels  with  the  trumpet  will  be  God's
messengers  in  gathering  them  (cf.  Dan.  viii.  10 ;  Esth.  viiL  16 ;  Jer.  xv.  9  ;  Amos  viii.
9).  (3)  They  may  be  applied  to  the  gathering  together  of  the  elect  of  God,  who  shall
be  called  forth  from  their  graves  "  by  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  the  trump  of
God"  (cf.  Exod.  lix.  13, 16;  Lev.  xxv.  9;  1  Thess.  iv.  16;  1  Cor.  xv.  52).

IL   THK  "  8I0N  OF  THE   SON   OF   MAN   IK  HEAVEN,"  AND  THE  "  COMIKO   OF   THE   SoU
OF   MAN   rS  THS  CLOUDS  OF   HEAVEN,"   ABB    THE    SAME.       1.    ThtS    WOS    the    lign  foT

which  the  sc^tiei  clamoured,  (1)  The  Jewish  rulers  were  offended  at  the  mean
appearance  of  Jesus.  " The  carpienter's  Son ! "  "Of  Nazareth ! "  " Have  any  of  the
rulers  believed  T  "  Pride  has  a  natural  antipathy  to  humility.  But  the  pride  of  all
false  glorying  must  be  stained,  (2)  They  overlooked,  or  refused  to  see,  that  Messiah
was  to  come  in  this  very  quality  of  humiliation.  The  "  Root  out  of  a  dry  ground  1 "
(see  Isa.  lii.  14;  liii.  2,  3;  Ps,  xxii.  6;  Mark  ix.  2),  The  antitype  of  "David  in  all
hii  afflictions."  So  of  the  "  prophets  and  righteous  men  "  who  suffered  for  righteous-
ness' sake.  (3)  The  rulers  had  refused  the  "  signs  which  Jesus  did,"  most  unreason-
ably accounting  them  insufficient.  Men  are  not  now  sceptics  for  lack  of  cogent
evidence.  Unbelief  is  of  the  "evil  heart"  (cf.  Ps.  xiv.  1;  Heb.  iii.  12).  (4)  The  sign
from  heaven,  for  which  they  clamoured,  was  that  of  the  Prophet  Daniel  (of,  Dan.  vii.
13 ;  ch,  xvi.  1).  That  sign  was  not  intended  for  this  generation.  The  sign  from
the  earth — that  of  the  Prophet  Jonah,  was  to  be  given  to  them  (see  ch,  xiL  38 — 40).
2,  They  wQl  receive  it  to  their  confusion.  (1)  Confounded  by  their  pride,  they  missed
the  event  of  the  first  advent  of  Messiah.  let  by  that  very  pride  which  blinded  them
they  were  urged  to  fulfil  the  prophecies  which  they  failed  to  see.  So  God  makes  the
perversity  of  scepticism  to  praise  him,  (2)  They  confounded  the  time  of  the  second
advent.  They  looked  for  Messiah  as  a  Sing  when  they  should  have  looked  for  him  as
a  Priest.  Here  also  their  pride  confused  them,  (3)  How  will  that  pride  be  confounded
when  they  shall  see  the  very  blessed  Person  whom  thev  had  rejected  and  crucified,
"ooming  in  th«  oloods,  of  heaven,  with  powor  and  )gre»t  ^ory  "1    Aa  th«  **  licB  of  the


OH.  xxiT.  1—51.]    THB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  463

Prophet  Jonah  "  was  Jonah,  so  the  "  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  "  is  the  Son  of  m«n.  In
the  cloud,  viz.  of  the  Shechinah,  Jesus  went  into  heaven,  and  in  the  same  cloud  will
he  return  (see  Acts  L  9 — 11).  (4)  Sooner  or  later,  all  sinners  will  "  mourn."  Those
who  have  not  mourned  in  contrition  will  "wail"  in  despair  (cf.  ver.  30;  Bev.  L  7).
The  cloud  of  the  Presence  was  a  pillar — support,  viz.  in  union,  of  vapour  and  fire.  As
iudgment  came  from  that  Presence  in  the  water  which  destroyed  the  old  world,  so  from
the  fire  of  the  cloud  wiU  come  forth  those  flames  which  will  consume  in  the  judgment
to  come. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  32 — 42. — The  event  and  tht  time.  Having  unfolded  to  the  disciples  the
manner  and  circumstances  of  the  two  great  events  respecting  which  they  had  inquired,
our  Lord  now  proceeds  to  speak  more  particularly  of  their  certainty  and  of  the  time  of
their  occurrence.

I.  The  event  of  the  jtjdqment  is  OBBTAni.  1.  This  it  asserted  under  a  timile.
(Vers.  32 — 35.)  (1)  The  fig  tree  was  a  symbol  of  the  Jewish  nation  (of.  Joel  i.  7 ;  ch.
xxii.  19).  To  the  literal  Israel  these  things  were  primarily  spoken.  They  have  rele-
vance also  to  the  spiritual  Israel,  viz.  in  a  future  fulfilment.  The  outside  world  give
no  heed  to  sacred  signs.  "  None  of  the  wicked  shall  understand  "  (see  Dan.  xii.  10).
(2)  The  teaching  is  that  as  the  budding  of  the  fig  tree,  then  probably  visible  before
them  (cf.  ch.  xxi.  19 ;  Luke  xxi.  29),  was  a  sure  presage  of  summer,  so  must  the  signs
indicated  In  the  preceding  discourse  be  taken  to  pledge  the  near  approach  of  the  sequel,
glorious  to  the  righteous,  disastrous  to  the  wicked  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  3;  Luke  xxi.  31 ;  Rev.
i.  1).  (3)  "  The  summer  is  nigh."  -When  the  trees  of  righteousness  put  forth  the  leaf
of  faithful  promise,  it  is  a  happy  presage  of  good  times.  But  that  which  to  the  good  is
an  enlivening  light  is  to  the  wicked  a  scorching  and  consuming  fire.  2.  The  assertion
is  repeated  in  the  comment.  (1)  The  generation  that  witnesses  the  signs  will  also
witness  the  sequel.  This  was  literally  so  in  regard  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
(cf.  cb.  xvi.  28 ;  xiiii.  36).  There  is  a  distinction  between  "  these  things,"  which
refer  to  the  events  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  "  that  day "  (ver.  36),  which
indicates  the  season  of  the  final  judgment.  Yet  was  the  judgment  upon  Jerusalem
a  type  of  the  judgment  of  the  last  day.  (2)  The  "  generation  "  destined  to  see  the
end  of  "  all  things  "  in  the  wider  sense,  is  the  Jewish  race  (see  A.  Clarke,  Steir,  and
Alford).  Therefore  the  preservation  of  that  race  amidst  untoward  circumstances  pledges
the  certainty  of  the  sequel.  (3)  It  is  easier  for  the  heavens  and  the  earth  to  pass
away  than  for  the  word  of  Christ  to  fail  (see  Luke  xvi.  17).  The  creation  had  a
beginning,  so  may  have  an  end ;  but  Christ's  truth  is  from  eternity,  and  cannot  but
abide.  The  failure  of  the  truth  of  God  would  be,  in  other  words,  the  failure  of  his
existence,  which  is  a  supposition  superlatively  absuKl.

IL  The  time  of  that  event  is  not  wholly  itnoebtaik.  1.  It  i$  partieularbf
known  to  Ood  alone.  (1)  To  him  it  is  known.  It  is  therefore  distinguished  as  "  the
day  of  the  Lord."  Christ,  as  QoA,  therefore,  knew  it.  "  It  is  necessary  to  distinguish
between  the  knowledge  of  Christ  as  a  Divine  Person  and  that  which  he  possesses  as  the
Prophet  of  his  Church.  As  Divine  he  knows  aE  things ;  but  aa  a  Prophet  he  leceives
his  messages  from  the  Father,  and  makes  them  known  to  us.  In  this  sense  he  knew
not  the  day  of  judgment;  that  is.  It  was  no  part  of  the  revelation  which  God  gave  to
him  to  make  known  to  men  "  (A.  Fuller).  "  To  know  "  has  the  idiomatic  sense  of  "  make
known  "  (cf.  1  Cor,  iL  2 ;  Acts  i.  6,  7 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  15).  (2)  As  it  was  not  given  to  the
Son  to  make  it  known,  so  neither  was  it  given  to  the  angels.  They  have  great
capacities  for  knowledge,  and,  dwelling  at  the  fountain  of  light,  have  also  great  oppor-
tunities ;  but  their  prescience  is  limited,  or  at  least  it  is  not  given  to  them  to  make  it
known.  (3)  The  day  on  which  Titus  was  to  invest  Jerusalem  was  not  known  to  the
disciples  when  our  Lord  advised  tbem  to  pray  that  their  flight  might  not  be  on  the
tabhath.  The  hour  or  season  was  not  known  to  them  when  he  advised  them  to  pr«y
that  it  might  not  be  in  winter  (ver.  20).  So  are  we  without  knowledje  cf  the  day  and
season  of  the  great  event  of  which  the  judgment  upon  the  Jews  was  but  a  figure.
Wisdom  withholds  particular  revelations  of  the  future  to  encourage  prayer.  2.  Tet  it  it
generally  made  known  to  the  wise.  (1)  Many  ancient  prophecies  contiun  approximate
anticipations  of  the  time.  Light  upon  tlus  subject  was  progressively  increasing.
Dsnitl  gave  istimation  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  to  the  year  in  hit  period  of  font


464  THS  OOBPEL  AOOORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [fls.  zxit.  1— Bl.

liundred  and  ninety  yean,  though  not  the  day  or  season.  (2)  Our  Lord  himself  speaka
of  great  political  reTolatiom  that  should  happen  before  hi*  return ;  and  his  language
plidnly  implies  that  the  event  was  then  remote  (see  ver.  48 ;  ch.  xxy.  6,  19).  (3)
Paul  declares  that  before  that  great  erent  there  should  occur  a  gradual  development
and  subsequent  gradual  wasting  of  a  great  apostasy,  the  germs  of  which  were  already
working  in  his  day  (see  2  Thess.  ii.).  (4)  Proceeding  further,  we  find  Peter  using
language  evidently  designed  to  prepare  tne  Church  for  a  long  delay  (see  2  Pet.  iiL).
(6)  The  series  of  intervening  events  is  wonderfully  disclosed  in  the  course  of  the  reve>
lations  given  to  John.  The  wise  who  study  this  series  cannot  bo  ignorant  as  to  the
approaching  time.  8.  Sut  to  tTte  wicked  U  wUl  come  a*  a  turpriu,  (1)  So  the  Flood
came  upon  the  men  of  that  generation.  "  They  knew  not."  They  were  warned,  but
did  not  need.  "  Death  never  comes  without  a  warrant,  but  often  without  a  warning  "
(Anon.).  Kot  knowing,  i.e.  acknowledging,  is  joined  with  eating  and  drinking  and
marrying.  They  were  sensual  because  secure ;  but  the  ignorance  of  wickedness  is  an
ima^narv  security.  "  The  flood  came."  Those  who  will  not  know  by  faith  shall  be
made  to  know  hy  feeling.  The  evil  day  is  never  fm^her  off  for  men's  putting  it  o£
Judgments  are  most  terrible  to  those  who  make  a  Jest  of  them.  (2)  "  As  in  the  days
of  mah."  The  design  here  is  to  show  that  the  desolation  will  be  as  general  as  it  will
be  imezpected.  The  miserable  Jews  neglected  the  advice  of  Jesus  to  watch,  and  were
destroyra.  It  is  for  us  to  learn  wisdom  by  the  things  which  they  have  suffered.  The
genend  neglect  of  religion  is  a  more  dangerous  symptom  to  a  people  than  particular
instances  of  irreligion.  (3)  The  siege  of  Jerusalem  surprised  the  Jews  in  the  midst  ot
their  festivity  at  the  Passover  (cf.  Judg.  xviii.  7,  27 ;  1  Thess.  v.  3).  Man's  unbelief
shall  not  make  the  truth  of  Qod  s  threatenings  of  none  effect  (cf.  Isa,  xlviL  7 — 9 ;  Bev.
xviii.  7).  "  The  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  CJhrist's  coming  is  to  those  who  are  watchful
a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  and  makes  them  more  watchful ;  but  to  those  who  are  careless
it  is  a  savour  of  death  unto  death,  and  makes  them  more  careless  "  (Henry).  4.  It
will  be  a  time  of  teparation.  (1)  "  Then  shall  two  men  be  in  the  field,"  etc.  (ver.  40).
Many  who  have  been  united  in  the  closest  earthly  relations  will  then  be  found  separated
in  their  spiritual  condition  and  eternal  allotment.  (2)  Those  "  taken "  correspond  to
Noah  and  his  family,  who  were  taken  into  the  ark,  and  to  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  who
removed  to  PeUa.  Those  "  left "  correspond  to  the  people  shut  out  of  the  ark,  and
those  shut  into  Jerusalem  when  it  was  devoted  to  destruction.  In  the  last  day  the
elect  will  be  gathered  out  of  the  devoted  world  into  the  cloud  of  Christ's  protecting
presence.  (3)  Here  our  Lord  enjoins  upon  his  disciples  to  watch,  and  that  too  in
reference  to  bis  coming — an  event  so  far  remote  that  when  it  occurs  they  will  be  found
among  the  dead.  In  like  manner,  we  find  the  apostles  exhorting  their  brethren  to
watchfulness,  and  urging  the  same  reason,  while  they  certainly  knew  that  event  to  be
remote.  The  lesson,  then,  is  that  it  is  manifestly  the  Divine  purpose  that  the  thoughts
of  the  people  of  God  should  be  carried  forward  to  and  fixed  upon  that  momentous  time
when  Christ  shall  come  to  judge  the  world.

Observe,  then :  1.  That  to  live  in  a  state  of  preparation  for  this  event  is  also  to  live
prepared  for  death.  2.  That  every  exhortation  of  Scripture  to  watch  for  the  former  is
alike  applicable  to  the  latter.  3.  That  in  a  most  important  respect  the  hour  of  death
is  to  every  man  the  hour  of  judgment— J.  A.  M.

Vers. 43 — 51. — The  two  »ervant*.  The  "household"  of  God  is  his  Church  (see  Eph.
iii.  15).  In  the  professing  Church  there  are  two  classes  of  persons,  viz.  the  "wise"
and  the  "  evil."  In  minor  particulars  there  may  be  an  infinite  diversity,  but  ultimately
all  will  be  visibly  separated  into  these  great  classes.  This  will  hold  in  respect  to  both
ministers  and  people.

I.  "  Who,  then,  ib  the  faithful  and  wise  bebyaiit  ? "  1.  Ee  tTuit  watches  for
the  return  of  his  Lord.  (1)  "  Wisdom  "  is  a  synonym  for  "  religion."  In  this  sense  the
term  is  commonly  used  in  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon.  The  "  wise  "  servant,  therefore,
is  he  that  has  repented  of  his  sin  and  has  accepted  his  Saviour.  (2)  True  Christians
are  "  of  the  day,"  and  are  instinctively  watching  for  "  that  day  "  in  which  the  Lord
Jesus  will  appear  in  his  glory  (see  1  Thess.  v.  4r— 6 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10 — 12).  (3)  To  such
the  advent  of  the  Master  can  he  no  surprise.  If  Jesus  threatens  the  angel  of  the
Church  at  Sardis  to  come  on  him  as  a  thief,  it  is  because  he  was  neither  penitent  nor


CH.  xxiT.  1—51.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  465

watchful  (gee  Ber.  HI.  8).  (4)  "If  tha  master  of  the  hou8e  had  known  In  what
watoh,"  eto.  (tot.  43).  LUTe,  like  the  night,  is  distributed  into  matchet.  A  watch  in
Old  Testament  times  was  four  hours;  at  this  time  it  wag  three.  The  Ohristian's
TigUance  should  be  undumbering.     2.  He  that  is  "ready"  to  welcome  tliat  return.

(1)  "Therefore  be  ye  also  ready  "  (ver.  44).  Readiaeas  is  now  substituted  for  watch-
fulness. To  he  ready  we  must  not  only  look  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  but  so  to  look
as  to  be  prepared  for  it  (see  2  Pet.  iii.  11 — 14).  (2)  To  b«  ready  is  to  have  such  an
assured  faith  in  Ohrist  as  a  present  Saviour  that  whensoever  he  may  come  in  his  Lord-
ship he  will  be  welcomed.  (3)  But  the  service  of  Q-od  is  not  limited  to  trust  and
worship ;  obedience  is  the  complement  of  these.  When  the  Master  comes  the  servant
must  be  found  "  doing."  Doing  the  will  of  Christ  is  watching  for  him  in  readiness.
(4)  He  must  be  found  "  to  doing."  Note :  There  are  activities  in  the  Church  which
are  mischievous.  Ministers  are  in  the  Church  rulers  in  the  sense  of  being  bishops  or
overseers  to  direct  the  work  of  Ohrist  (see  Heb.  xiii.  17).  They  have  also  to  "  give  "
or  dispense  the  bread  of  life  (see  Ezek.  iixiv.  8 ;  Acts  ii.  35).  For  this  they  must
not  substitute  the  "  stone "  of  profitless  doctrine  or  the  "  serpent "  of  poisonous  error.
The  "bread"  must  be  sound  and  wholesome.  It  must  also  be  given  in  fitting  "por-
tion" and  in  "due  season."  Note:  There  are  certain  portions  of  the  bread  of  life
which  lose  their  efTect  by  being  administered  to  improper  persons  and  out  of  proper
season.  (5)  He  must  be  "found  so  doing,"  viz.  when  the  Master  comes.  This
implies  constancy  and  perseverance.  "  It  is  expected  of  the  steward  that  he  ba  found
faithful,"  so  faithful  that  he  cannot  be  surprised  (see  1  Oor.  iy.  2 ;  1  Tim.  L  12 ;  iv.
16 ;  vi.  14 ;  Heb.  iii.  2  ;  Bev.  u.  25).

II,  Who,  then,  m  thb  «vil  sbrvamt?  1.  Ee  that  has  little  faith  in  ths  speedy
coming  of  Christ.  (1)  (Ver.  48.)  This  is  one  who  is  nominally  a  Christian,  but  really
a  hypocrite.  The  first  manifestation  of  the  hypocrite  is  the  heart-reflection,  "  My
Lord  tarrieth."  The  thought  is  in  the  heart ;  it  is  the  ofTspring  of  desire.  As  when
Jesus  said  to  John,  "  Behold,  I  come  quiekly,"  meaning  certainly,  so  the  hypocrite
saying,  "  My  Lord  terrleth,"  expresses  secret  disbelief  that  his  Lord  would  come  at  alL

(2)  Christ  knows  what  men  say  in  their  hearts.  (3)  The  evil  servant  through  his
unbelief  neglects  to  get  ready.  Note:  Faith  influences  practice.  (4)  "  But  know  this,"
eto.  (ver.  43).  This  is  a  description  of  what  a  man  would  do  rather  than  of  what  he
should  do.  He  would  indeed  watch  at  the  hour  if  he  knew  it,  but  not  till  then.  Tha
teaching  here  is  a  discouragement  of  death-bed  repentances.  It  is  against  all  procrasti-
nation. Religion  is  not  to  be  separated  from  the  duties  and  enjoyments  of  common
life.  He  leads  a  heavenly  life  who  sanctifies  his  earthly  deeds  to  heavenly  ends.  2.
He  that  governs  urith  oppressiim.  (1)  "  And  shall  begin  to  heat  his  fellow-serrants."
Here  is  the  Ishmael  in  the  family  of  Abraham.  (2)  Evil  ministers  strike  their  fellow-
servants  with  the  fist  of  office.  They  lord  it  over  God's  heritage.  Fellow-service  is
forgotten.  (8)  Rich  men  tyrannize  over  their  poorer  brethren  sometimes  by  shaking  in
th&  &oe8  the  golden  fist.  "  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you  ?  "  Here  also  fellow-service
is  too  often  forgotten.  (4)  Could  such  things  happen  but  for  a  disbelief  in  the  speedy
coming  of  the  Lord?  The  dignity  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  service.  Christ  was
among  his  disciples  as  one  that  served.  8.  He  that  leads  an  irregular  l^s.  (1)  He
does  not  love  the  company  of  the  children  of  God.  Their  spiritual  fellowship  is  dis-
tasteful to  him.  (2)  But  he  "  eats  and  drinks  with  the  drunken."  Feasting  together
is  the  sign  of  fellowship.  (3)  The  fellowship  of  wickedness  tends  to  wickedness.  Ha
becomes  "drunken."  Perhaps  not  with  wine.  All  wickedness  is  intoxication.  (4)
The  evil  minister  "  feeds  himself  without  fear."  So  does  his  evil  lay  fellow-servant.
(5^  Could  these  things  take  place  but  for  a  disbelief  in  the  speedy  coming  of  the  Lord  ?
When  the  Israelites  eoncluded  that  Moses,  through  his  long  absence  in  the  mount,
might  never  return,  they  set  about  making  to  themselves  gods.  (6)  The  coming  of
the  Lord  in  his  mercy  is  indeed  delayed  by  the  wickedness  of  his  professed  servants,
but  his  coming  to  them  in  judgment  is  thereby  hastened.

IIL  How  wHiL  tem  Loss  dkil  with  thbsb  bsbvamts  ?  1.  The  faithful  he  will
promote  to  honour,  (1)  "  Blessed  is  that  servant."  He  is  happy  in  the  approbation
of  his  Lord.  The  question,  "  Who  is  that  wise  and  faithful  servant  ?  "  may,  perhaps,
be  taken  as  though  Jesus  had  said,  "  I  should  very  much  like  to  know  him,  so  rare,  so
valued,  are  such  In  my  sight"    (2)  Not  only  is  he  blessed  in  his  present  sense  of  the

MATTHSW— H.  2  ■


466  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxit.  1-61.

approval  of  Christ,  but  the  happiness  is  reserred  for  him  of  s  public  approbation  before
an  assembled  universe :  "  Well  done."  (3)  He  is  blessed  in  the  promotion  which
depends  upon  that  public  approbation.  Having  been  faithful  in  his  earlier  oppoi^
tunities,  he  is  further  trusted.  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  He  wUl  set  him  over  all  that
he  hath."  The  bliss  of  heaven  is  not  the  fancied  bliss  of  inactivity.  The  bliss  of
heaven  is  still  the  bliss  of  service.  2.  The  evU  will  he  relegated  to  punishment.  (1)
His  death  will  be  a  degradation.  It  is  separation  from  the  communion  of  saints,  aad
from  all  the  gifts  he  had  abused.  (2)  "  I  will  cut  him  asunder."  Some  take  this  in  the
sense  of  severe  scourging  (see  margin,  Eevised  Version).  It  may  be  taken  in  the  sense  of
discerning  and  exposing  the  thoughts  of  his  heart.  So  the  Word  of  God  is  compared  to
a  sharp  sword,  which  "pierces  to  the  dividing  of  soul  and  spirit,  of  both  joints  and  marrow,
and  quick  to  discern  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart "  (Heb.  iv.  12).  Such  exposure
to  a  hypocrite  is  a  terrible  mortification.  Note  :  Death  literally  cuts  asunder  the  animal
soul  and  the  rational  spirit.  (3)  "  And  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites."
The  hypocrite  will  be  punished  with  his  kind.  The  associations  of  perdition  are  mono-
tonous. "  If  the  devil  ever  laughs,  it  must  be  at  hypocrites.  They  are  the  greatest
dupes  he  has.  They  serve  him  better  than  others,  and  receive  no  wages ;  nay>  what  is
still  more  extraordinary,  they  submit  to  greater  mortifications  to  go  to  hell,  than  the
sincerest  Christian  to  go  to  heaven"  (Oolton).  (4)  "There  shall  be  weeping."  Not,
however,  the  weeping  of  contrition.  It  is  the  weeping  that  is  associated  with  "  gnash-
ing of  teeth.''    It  is  the  weeping  of  helpl«ss  rage  and  of  hopeless  despair. — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  3. — "  The  end  of  the  world."  This  term  is  a  figure  of  speech.  It  represents
something.  It  does  not  describe  something.  The  actual  ending  of  the  world  is  an
almost  impossible  conception.  So  far  as  we  are  able  to  trace  Divine  dealings,  there  are
no  "  endings ; "  there  are  stages.  But  what  we  call  an  "  ending  *  from  one  point  of  view
is  a  "  beginning  "  when  seen  from  another  point  of  view.  What  we  ought  to  inquire
is — Was  this  a  familiar  figure  of  speech  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  ?  and  if  it  was,  what
ideas  were  attached  to  it  as  familiarly  used  ?  The  patriarchal  age  came  to  an  end,  but
there  was  no  abrupt  scene  which  can  be  called  an  ending.  The  same  remark  may  be
made  concerning  the  closing  of  the  Mosaic  age.  And  we  need  imagine  no  catastrophe
as  the  close  of  the  Christian  age.  The  coming  of  Messiah  was,  in  Jewish  thought,  con-
nected with  the  "end  of  the  world,"  and  vague,  wild,  and  extraordinary  were  the
things  associated  with  that  "coming"  (see  Stapfer'c  'Palestine  in  the  Time  of
Christ,'  ch.  v.).

lU  Thx  end  of  ths  wobls  IB  THi  stTD  OF  THX  iiOK.  Distinctly  present  the  truth  that
God  ever  works  in  stages,  making  each  stage  prepare  the  way  for  another  and  a  higher.
This  may  be  shown  by  the  revelations  of  the  primeval  ages  made  by  geological
researches ;  or  by  the  history  of  separate  nations ;  dynasties  and  royal  houses  represent
distinct  ages  or  dispensations.  So  we  find  stages  within  the  history  of  Mosaism,  the
Jewish  Church  passing  through  several  dispensations.  Those  who  can  read  the  philo-
sophy of  tbie  Christian  centuries  can  trace  stages  in  them.  One  such  stage  was  nearing
completion  in  the  time  of  Christ ;  and,  with  a  very  human  tendency  to  exaggeration,  men
were  imagining  that  an  end  of  a  particular  polity  for  a  small  nation  was  to  be  the  "  end
of  the  world."

II.  Teb  end  of  the  xaa  is  alwatb  tui  BEOiNiima  of  a.  kbw  age.  If  we  did
but  fully  grasp  this  idea,  we  should  be  delivered  from  many  hindering  mistakes.  1.
Kndings  are  always  local.  There  never  has  been  any  ending  that  concerned  the  whole
world,  2.  Endings  insensibly  glide  into  the  new  scenes.  Abrupt  endings  may  belong
to  man's  spheres,  his  dynasties,  and  hii  systems ;  but  abruptness  seldom,  if  ever,  cha-
racterizes God's  ending.  His  spring  has  an  e>ding,  but  it  is  a  gliding  into  summer.
If  we  can  think  of  an  actual  **  end  of  the  world,"  we  must  think  of  a  glidmg  into  the  new
and  eternal  age. — B.  T,

Ver.  6. — Tht  Ohriitian  attitude  in  timtt  of  civil  eommotion.  There  is  always  a
tendency  to  exaggerate  their  importance.  It  is  strange  to  find  Christian  people  able
to  find  some  high  prophetic  allusion  for  every  little  war  or  social  disturbance  within
the  sphere  of  their  knowledge.  Every  national  trouble  is  manufactured  into  a  sign  of
ih^  "  coming  end."    Frecioely  of  this  strange  tendency  our  Lord  w  anxiously  warned


OH.  xzrr.  1— 61.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  467

his  disdplea  in  this  discourse.  "  Do  not  run  away  into  extraragant  imaginations  nnder
tlte  impulse  of  every  bit  of  local  civil  commotion.  Thare  will  be  a  good  deal  of  that
■ort  of  thing,  but  the  *  end  is  not  yet.'  The  world  is  not  going  to  faU  to  ruin,  even  if
Jerusalem  should  become  a  desolation."  Our  Lord  bade  the  disciples  take  warning
from  passing  events,  so  that  they  might  secure  their  personal  safety ;  but  he  intimated
that  they  would  be  wise  to  leave  the  world's  future  altogether  in  God's  hands,  and  not
attempt  to  be  wise  above  what  was  written.

L  Chbistiaks  should  let  pjissiNa  events  help  to  ouiob  theie  oondcot.  Our
Lord  commended  observing  the  "  signs  of  the  times."  Illustrate  by  reference  to  the
anticipated  siege  and  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Our  Lord  pointed  out  certain  events
which  the  disciplei  should  take  as  distinct  warnings.  They  should  respond  to  them
by  instant  flight ;  and,  a*  •  matter  of  fact,  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem  did  note  those
signs,  and  did  effect  their  escape  to  Pella.  For  Christians  civil  commotion  is  warning
and  education.  It  decides  conduct,  and  it  develops  and  tests  character.  Through  the
Ohristia  ages  this  has  been  fiilly  illustrated.  There  have  been  times  of  faction  fight,
of  civil  war,  of  invasion  and  national  ruin.  Christ  prepares  his  disciples  for  such  times,
which  give  them  the  chance  of  showing  noble  examples  and  exerting  holy  influences.

11.  Christians  sbould  avoid  TBTiNa  to  fit  fassino  events  into  God's  beobet
PLANS.  1.  Because  Christians  never  can  know  God's  secret  plans.  2.  Because  Chris-
tians could  never  fit  their  little  pieces  into  the  plan,  even  if  they  knew  it.  It  is
extraordinary  that  there  has  always  lieen  a  strong  disposition  to  expect  a  speedy  termi-
nation of  the  whole  system  under  which  we  live.  It  may  be  one  of  the  forms  of  human
conceit.  We  cannot  imagine  that  things  can  last  much  longer  after  we  are  gone.  J.
A.  Alexander  wmrks  out  these  two  points.  1.  So  far  as  we  have  any  means  of  judging,
the  "  end  is  not  yet."  2.  So  far  as  it  remains  a  matter  of  doubt,  it  is  better  to  assume
that  "  the  end  is  not  yet,"  than  to  assume  the  contrary.— B.  T.

Ver.  9.— 2%e  mission  of  religious  peneeution.  Religious  persecution  is  an  evil,  and
a  serious  evil,  but  it  cannot  be  called  an  unmitigated  evil.  Persecutors  come  under
Divine  judgments;  but  persecutors,  in  the  Divine  overruling,  are  made  to  do  the
Lord's  work.  The  Lord  Jesus  was  persecuted,  and  we  fully  sympathize  with  him  in
those  persecutions.  And  yet  we  only  know  him  through  them.  His  perfect  obedience
as  a  Son  only  comes  to  view  on  the  hackground  of  the  sufferings  he  endured.  What
is  true  of  the  Master  is  true  of  his  Church.  It  has  ever  been  sanctified  through  the
persecutions  it  has  been  called  to  endure.

I.  Its  mission  in  belation  to  the  tbutr  ov  the  Chuboh.  Illustrate  two
points.  1.  The  conflicts  of  the  Church  have  helped  to  formulate  the  doctrine  of  the
Church.  Persecutions  have  dealt  with  opinion,  and  have  helped  to  make  right
opinion.  It  may  even  be  shown  that  the  influence  on  truth  has  not  been  altogether
good,  because  the  strain  of  persecution  has  tended  to  exaggerate  particular  opinions,
and  put  them  out  of  the  Christian  harmony.  2.  The  martyrdoms  of  persecuting  times
have  vivified  the  leading  truths  of  the  Church.  The  things  men  have  died  for  are  all-
important.     They  must  be  worth  dying  for;  they  are  primary  truths  of  the  "  faith."

II.  Its  mission  in  belation  to  the  spirit  op  the  Chokoh.  1.  The  ages  of
persecution  have  been  spiritual  ages.  Then  the  critical  spirit  is  wanting.  Men  easily
believe.  The  underlying  meaning  of  God's  Word  is  more  important  than  its  literary
form.  Men  find  they  need  "  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word."  2.  The  ages  of  persecution
have  been  ages  of  hrotherhood.  The  common  peril  ensures  common  service.  There
is  mutual  shielding,  mutual  sympathy,  and  the  records  tell  of  heroic  acts  of  self-
sacrifice  done  at  such  times.  The  story  of  such  ages  acts  upon  us  to-day  as  an
inspiration  to  brotherhood.

III.  Its  mission  in  belation  to  tee  sfbbad  of  the  CHnBCH.  It  has  been,  over
and  over  again,  as  it  was  in  the  first  Christian  age.  The  disciples  were  "  scattered
abroad"  in  consequence  of  the  persecution  that  arose  over  the  preaching  of  Stephen,
and  they  "  went  everywhere,  preaching  the  Word."  1.  At  such  times  there  is  a  secret
spreading  of  the  Church.  Hidden,  it  works  like  leaven.  Illustrate  by  history  of  the
Church  in  Madagascar  and  Uganda.  2.  At  such  times  there  is  the  entering  of  new
spheres,  and  possession  of  new  lands  in  the  name  of  Christ  (see  story  of  the  Pilgrim
Fathers).— B.  T.


168  THK  OOSFEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  zxrr.  1-41.

Yen.  12, 13.— The  difficulty  of  keeping  m.  "Becanse  iniquity  shall  abound,  th«
lor*  of  many  shall  wax  cold."  These  verses  are.eoimeoted  with  Ohrlst'a  prophecy  of
the  history  of  his  Church.  There  may  be  difQoulty  in  fixipg  the  precise  references  of
his  language,  but  he  describes  general  features  which  are  seen  la  every  passing  age.
Ther«  is  idways  a  dispoBition  to  exaggerate  or  over-estimate  the  evils  of  the  age  in
which  ui(  happen  to  live,  because  they  are  specially  prominent  to  ui.  But  we  may
certainty  say  this  much — we  live  in  an  age  when  outside  wiokedness  and  semi-wicked-
ness are  telling  very  directly  and  very  injuriously  on  the  Christian  spirit.  It  cannot  be
said  that  there  is  general  failing  from  the  Christian  profession ;  but  there  is  a  strange,
sad  "  chilling  of  the  Christian  love,"  a  "  leaving  of  the  first  love."  In  some  ages  the
separation  of  the  Church  from  the  world  is  more  marked,  and  so  the  influence  of  the
world  on  the  Church  is  less  felt.  Illustrate  by  Slapton  Sands  in  Devonshire.  A  fresh-
water lake  well  stocked  with  fish  is  divided  from  the  sea  only  by  a  road  and  a  narrow
belt  of  sand.  Usually  the  two  are  well  kept  apart  Bnt  when  wind  and  tide  unite,
the  sea  rises,  floods  the  sand  and  the  load,  and  pouie  the  defiling  and  destructive  salt
waters  into  the  sweet  lake.

L  EFfEOT  or  oBowiMo  DnQuiTT  oa  tbi  Cbbibtiah  bfiuit.  "  Love  waxes  cold."
The  true  idea  of  Christian  life  is  the  sanctifying  and  ennobiiug  power  of  a  personal
love  to  Christ.  Iniquity,  self-willedness,  and  self-willed  ways  chill  this  love  (1)  by
presenting  to  us  other  and  Tival  claims  to  our  love  (preacher  must  be  left  to  select
illustrations  of  such  claims) ;  (2)  by  undervaluing  and  putting  slights  on  Christ.  Show
how  human  friendships  are  spoiled  when  onr  friends  are  satirised  and  scorned.  Show
how  jealously,  in  these  criticizing  days,  we  need  to  watch  over  our  high,  adoring,
admiring  thoughts  of  Christ.

IL  Thk  mastebt  or  ansRonNsiHa  ihiquitt  is  the  tkiduph  or  Obbistub
STKADFASTiTEBS.  "He  that  shall  endure  to  the  end."  It  will  cost  persistent  and
persevering  effort  if  we  are  to  keep  loving  Christ  supremely.  True  enduiance  is  not
possible  unless  we  have  a  strong  grip  of  Christ.  We  must  have  and  cherish  warm
feeling  toward  Christ.  We  must  keep  on  (1)  trusting,  (2)  obeying,  (3)  following,  (4)
honouring,  (6)  working  for  Christ.  And  if  ever  faint,  it  must  be  "  &int,  yet  pursuing.
— B.T.

Ver.  14.— 3%e  goBpel-witneii,  The  expression, "  in  all  the  world,"  can  only  mean
the  "  world  "  as  men  then  thought  of  it.  Our  Lord's  statement  is  verified  in  the  fact
that  there  was  "  hardly  a  province  of  the  vast  Soman  empire  in  which  the  gospel  had
not  been  preached  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem."  The  "  world  "  is  an  altogether
larger  idea  to  us;  but  the  gospel  has  to  be  preached  to  "all  the  world"  as  we  appr»-
hend  it.  The  Apostle  Paul  uses  very  broad  terras.  He  speaks  of  the  gospel  as  having
gone  out  into  all  the  earth  (Kom.  x.  18) ;  as  being  present  in  all  the  world ;  and  as
having  been  preached  in  the  hearing  of  every  creature  which  is  under  heaven  (CoL  i.
6,  23).  A  diSBculty  is  suggested.  These  representations  do  not  seem  to  match  the
facts  in  the  apostolic  age  or  in  any  other  age.  The  gospel  has  not  actually  reached
every  part  of  the  earth  yet;  and  it  has  been  effective  unto  the  salvation  of  but  a
minority  of  the  human  race.  Some  have  thought  they  could  find  explanation  in  the
limitation  "  for  a  witness ; "  as  if  the  conversion  of  "  all  nations  "  were  not  the  design
of  the  gospel-preaching.  This  idea  may,  however,  be  presented  in  an  exaggerated  form.
We  may  see  the  reasonable  senses  in  which  the  gospel  is  a  witness  to  all  nations.

I.  Thb  gobfel-witnebb  IB  Jl  wttnebs  roB  OoD.  The  right  knowledge  of  Qod
comes,  always  has  come,  always  must  come^  by  revelation.  A  creature,  limited  by  the
senses  and  sense-relations,  cannot  reach  the  apprehension  of  unseen  things  without
help.  Such  a  creature,  having  the  help  of  revelation,  is  yet  constantly  disposed  to
materiahze  its  apprehension:  this  is  seen  in  the  disposition  to  make  visible  symbols
of  the  unseen  Grod.  This  tendency  takes  the' coarser  forms  of  idolatry,  and  the  more
refined  forms  of  philosophy.  The  gospel,  then,  is  a  witness,  because  it  is  a  fresh  and
corrective  declaration  of  what  God  is,  what  God  thinks,  and  what  God  requires.

IL  Tbb  oospbl- witness  IB  A.  WITNESS  AGAINST  iDOLATBTi  This  may  be  illus-
trated by  St.  Paul's  work  at  Lystra  and  at  Athens.  Take  such  points  as  these.  1.
Preach  the  gospel,  and  men  see  that  the  true  Qod  asks  for  love.  So  it  witness(<s
•gainst  all  regions  of  /ear.    2.  Preach  tno  gospel,  and  men  see  that  the  true  God


OKUiT.l— SL]   THB  OOSFEL  AOOOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHKW.  469

ean  only  be  Berred  bj  rtght«ouinet$.    80  it  witnessM  againit  all  immoralitieii  of  rites
•nd  ceremonies.

IIL  Thx  aoBPSv-mrswrn  is  a.  witksu  oonoxbhibo  hbn.  Preach  it,  and  the
"  thoughts  of  many  hearta  will  be  revealed."  It  will  prove  everywhere  a  "  discemer
of  the  thoaghta  and  intents  of  the  heart."  What  is  strange  is  that,  wherever  the
gospel  ii  preached,  men  are  discovered  to  themselyes,  and  know  that  they  are  imn»rs.
That  ia  the  beginning  of  the  gospel-mission. — R.  T.

Ver.  24.— Z%0  mitchhfi  wrought  ly  anfiehristi,  "For  there  shall  arise  falsa
Ohrlsts,"  i.9,  false  Messiahs.  In  the  period  between  our  Lord's  ascension  and  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  many  so-called  prophets  arose  who  claimed  Divine  authority.
It  is  not  clear  that  they  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah ;  but  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  one
appeared  who  called  himself  Barchoohebas,  the  "  Son  of  a  star,"  and  claimed  to  be  Messiah,
and  deceived  many.  If  we  can  get  a  proper  meaning  to  the  term  '^antichrist,"  we
shall  see  that  such  have  appeared  in  every  age,  and  repeated  in  every  age  the  aanie
mischief-making.  An  "antichrist"  Is  any  man  or  any  woman  who,  in  any  sphere,
undoes  or  resists  the  work  of  Ohrist,  or  compels  men  to  think  unworthy  thoughts  of
Christ.  Fitting  introductory  matter  would  he  an  account  of  the  social  and  religious
mischiefs  wrought  by  the  antichrists  of  the  first  century,  especially  of  Barchoohebas.

I.  Ths  antichrist  ofposks  thb  AtrrEOBiTT  of  Chbist.  That  authority  is  not
only  absolute  and  supreme  in  Christ's  Ohurch,  it  is  also  in  constant,  immediate,  and
direct  administration  ;  to  it  the  Church  can  always  appeal.  Antichrist  (1)  withdraws
us  from  the  Divine  authority;  (2)  criticizes  the  Divine  authority;  (3)  substitutes
something  for  the  Divine  authority.    Antichrist  comes  between  the  soul  and  Christ.

II.  Tex  amtichbist  opposes  thk  ruBiTT  or  Chbist.  The  sinless  Christ  has  it
as  his  supreme  aim  to  make  sinless  disciples,  and  present  his  Church  perfect  even  as
he  is  perfect.  Purity,  therefore,  is  the  great  aim  of  Christ's  Church ;  and  to  it  purity
is  a  high  ideal.  Any  one  whose  influence  tends  to  sully  the  Church's  purity,  or  to
lower  the  Church's  standard,  is  an  antichrist.  There  are  those  who  teach  a  liberty
which  is  licentiousness,  and  a  self-indulgence  which  ia  disloyalty.  "Te  are  called
unto  holiness : "  this  will  test  all  antichrists.

III.  Thx  amticebibt  opposes  thb  itnitt  or  Chbist.  Sectarianism  is  the  exalta-
tion of  opinion  over  truth.  The  Church  oould  be  one  if  it  were  only  based  on  loyalty,
iove,  and  obedience  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  Church  is  broken  up  into  sections,  ever-
multiplying  lections,  by  the  particular  opinions  of  men,  who  presume  to  declare  Divine
authority  for  their  opinions.  Christ  Is  one  with  the  Father  by  his  loyalty  to  him ;
and  that  is  the  way  in  which  we  must  be  one-in  Christ.

IV.  The  anticheist  opposes  the  ohabitt  of  Chbist.  This  may  be  opened  in
two  ways.  1.  There  is  the  selfishness  which  shuts  men  up  to  what  is  called  the
"  enjoyment  "of  religion,  heedless  of  the  ministry  the  world  needs.  2,  There  is  the
bitterness  of  the  heresy-cry  against  those  who  do  not  happen  to  think  exactly  as  we
do.— B.  T.

Ver.  29. — Bky-sign».  The  figurative  character  of  this  verse  is  apparent.  It  does  not
describe  actual  events.  It  belongs  to  astrological  rather  than  to  astronomical  asso-
ciations. There  is  no  literal  interpretation  of  these  words  possible.  Isaiah  uses  similar
symbols  in  prophesying  the  Divine  judgments  on  Babylon  (Isa.  xiiL  10),  and  we  may
reasonably  think  that  such  a  scriptural  passage  suggested  our  Lord's  statement.
"  Even  the  common  speech  of  men  describes  a  time  of  tribulation  as  one  In  which  'the
skies  are  dark,'  and  the '  sun  of  a  nation's  glory  sets  in  gloom.' "  The  verse  is  plainly
poetical  and  pictorial,  but  what  it  pictures  is  the  series  of  terrible  civil  calamities  and
commotions  and  distresses  which  attended  the  Roman  siege  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  not
necessary  to  suppose  any  allusion  to  a  future  breaking-up  of  the  framework  of  the
earth  in  the  last  times.  Of  ihat  no  man  really  knows;  and  no  precise  description  has
been  or  could  be  given.

I.  Skt-bions  that  teaoh  God's  woBKnia  nt  the  wobld.  Men  might  be  dis-
posed, even  those  disciples  might  be  disposed,  to  look  upon  the  events  of  the  siege  of
Jerusalem  as  just  ordinary  national  incidents.  Jesus  therefore  used  figures  in  relation
to  them  which  lifted  them  to  a  higher  plane,  and  made  the  disciples  think  about  them.


♦70  THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  ixiv.  1-«1.

discern  their  relation  to  the  whole  course  of  God's  dealing  with  his  ancient  people,  and
trace  his  direct  working  in  them.  All  the  events  connected  with  the  history  of  the
Jewish  nation  are  designedly  revelational ;  and  it  ii  their  revelational  value  which
disciples  must  be  helped  to  discern.  But  when  once  we  see  that  this  is  true  for  the
Jewish  nation,  we  begin  to  see  that  it  is  true  for  all  nations.  Men  make  much  now
of  the  "  philosophy  of  history."  They  never  can  read  history  aright  until  they  begin
to  study  the  "religion  of  history."  Wars,  migrations,  changing  dynasties,  are  not
understood  till  they  are  seen  to  be  "  sky-signs."

n.  Skt-siqnb  that  teach  God's  ebdemptivb  pubposb  fob  the  woeld.  Christ's
way  of  referring  to  the  overthrow  of  organized  Judaism  by  the  destruction  of  the  sacred
city  fitted  that  historical  fact  into  the  Divine  redemptive  plan.  It  was  the  removing
of  the  scaffolding,  that  the  complete  building  might  come  into  view.  It  was  the
withdrawal  of  dependence  on  material  forms,  in  order  that  the  spiritual  reality  might
fully  occupy  men's  minds  and  hearts. — B.  T.

Ver.  34. — A  hey  to  our  Lord'$  meaning,  "  This  generation  shall  not  pass  till  all
these  things  be  fulfilled."  The  position  in  which  these  words  stand  is  significant.
Many  writers  see  references  to  the  commonly  called  "  end  of  the  world  "  in  vers.  29 —
31  because  the  imagery  is  so  large  as  to  seem  unsuitable  for  a  mere  natioual  desolation.
Our  Lord  meets  that  difBculty,  and  distinctly  declares  that  the  figures  picture  events
which  belong  to  that  generation.  What  needs  to  be  clearly  seen  is,  that  this  discourse
of  our  Lord's  is  not  a  general  discourse  on  the  "last  things,"  but  a  precise  anticipation
of  the  experiences  through  which  his  disciples  were  about  to  pass,  and  a  gracious
preparation  for  them.  He  was  leaving  those  disciples  to  themselves.  He  Jiad  indica-
tions to  the  very  last  of  their  unfitness  to  be  left.  They  were  still  so  hampered  by
their  notions  of  a  material  kingdom.  They  were  Jews,  full  of  Jewish  ideas.  It  would
be  a  distress  to  them  that  the  Jewish  system  was  to  be  put  away,  as  having  fulfilled  its
mission.  It  might  even  be  overwhelming  to  them  that  the  very  city  and  temple  were
destroyed.  Our  Lord  would  forewarn  them.  Their  knowledge  of  the  fact  would  help
them  to  think  aright,  and  to  act  aright,  when  the  time  came.  This  is  the  key  to  our
Lord's  meaning.

I.  Thb  dircifles  helped  to  teikk  abioht.  We  know  how  great  a  strain  on
them  was  the  opening  of  the  gospel  to  the  Ctentiles.  St.  Peter  had  to  explain  his
conduct  in  baptizing  Coi-nelius.  St.  Paul  had  to  give  account  of  his  teachings  of  the
Gentiles.  And  we  can  understand  how  much  greater  must  have  been  the  strain,  when
not  only  were  Gentile  Churches  formed,  but  the  Jewish  Church  was  broken  up.
Suppose  that  our  Lord  bad  never  spoken  pf  this  removing  of  organized  Judaism.  We
can  quite  see  that  the  Jewish  Christians  would  have  been  altogether  alarmed  and  over-
whelmed. They  could  think  aright,  and  realize  the  permanency  of  the  Church  as  a
spiritual  institution,  independent  of,  if  related  to,  any  material  forms.

IL  Thk  disciples  bclfxd  to  act  abioht.  Explain  that,-  from  a  Jewish  point  of
view,  the  centre  for  the  new  Christian  mission  must  be  Jerusalem.  Those  disciples
would  be  likely  to  cling  to  Jerusalem  in  a  way  that  would  involve  their  personal  safety.
Our  Lord  therefore  forewarned  them.  When  certain  events  happened,  they  must
finally  and  quickly  forsake  the  sacred  city.  That  there  might  be  no  self-delusions,
no  procraatinations,  he  made  his  meaning  plain  by  the  worda  of  the  text. — ^R.  T.

Ver.  40. — 77it  taken  and  the  Irft.  This  suggests  suitable  instruction  for  a  time  when
sudden  death  visits  a  family  or  a  Church.  At  luch  times  there  is  gracious  work  to  be
done,  in  sympathizing  with  the  smitten  and  bereaved,  and  in  teaching  solemn  lessons.

L  IlluBtrate  the  text  in  cases  of  fbebebvation  fboic  danqeb.  Help  toward  the
nourishing  of  devout  gratitude.  Take  cases  of  the  few  spared  from  a  shipwreck,  or
recovered  from  a  mine  accident.  Or  case  of  Luther's  friend  Alexis,  who  was  smitten
by  lightning  at  his  side.  All  of  us  can  think  of  friends  of  our  schoul-time  or  our
youth  who  have  been  called  away.  Wherefore  are  we  spared  ?  What  is  it  that  God  has
for  us  to  do?    Are  we  doing  it?

II.  Illustrate  the  text  in  cases  of  bblioious  exfibiksob.  Help  toward  nourishing
religions  anxiety.  Take  times  of  mission  and  rerival;  the  saved  and  unsaved  work
together,  sit  together.


m.  xxT.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACXX)RDINO  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  471

IIL  Ijtinstrate  the  text  in  cases  of  ruaur  bkbiatbments  ;  so  bring  to  view  and
impress  spiritual  consolatioiui.  Family  separations  always  causing  grief  and  distress.
Different  scenes  at  graTe-sldes  beheld  by  ministen.  Extreme  distress  may  be  shown
only  in  noble  lelf-restraints ;  see  Abraham's  sorrow  orer  Sarah.  What  must  it  be  to
sever  two  souls  that  have  grown  together  in  loTing,  mutual  dependence  and  service
through  long,  long  years  ?  It  is  like  tearing  the  climbing  plant  from  the  stem  round
which  it  has  clung  so  hard  that  the  two  seemed  to  share  a  common  life.  There  are
three  great  sources  of  consolation  that  maybe  urged.  1.  The  "  taken  "  are  taken  from
toll  and  suffering  to  rest  and  peace.  All  life  must  be  suffering  toil ;  all  heaven  must  be
restful  toiL  Illustrate  by  the  friendship  of  Christian  and  Faithful  in  the  '  Pilgrim's
Progress.'  Faithful  was  taken  away  to  rest  by  the  fire-chariot  at  Vanity  Fair.  2.
Those  "  left "  are  left  with  abundant  provisions  of  Divine  grace.  The  Hebrew  youths
in  the  blazing  furnace  were  not  left  alone.  There  are  (1)  promises  to  cheer  the  sadness
of  the  way;  (2)  there  is  a  lamp  to  lighten  the  darkness  of  the  way;  and  (3)  there  is
a  Friend  to  guide  amid  the  dangers  of  the  way.  3,  ^e  "  taken  "  and  the  "  left "  will
soon  be  reunited  where  there  is  no  separation.  "A  little  while;"  "We  shall  know
even  as  we  are  known ; "  "  They  go  no  more  out  for  eyer." — R.  T.

Ver.  44. — Abiding  rtadineu.  "  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready."  The  one  point  which
our  Lord  seeks  to  impress  on  his  disciples  is  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the  great
testing-day,  and  of  all  testing-days.  The  fact  that  •  reckoning-day  for  the  Lord's
servants  must  come  has  to  be  fully  accepted.  If  there  is  any  sense  in  which  we  are  now
in  trust  during  our  Lord's  absence,  it  is  certain  that  his  absence  can  only  be  temporary.
We  can  never  cease  to  be  servants  in  charge.  We  can  never  get  a  personal  right  in  the
things  of  which  we  are  set  in  charge.  Purposely  our  Lord  withholds  from  his  disciples
of  every  age  the  date  of  his  return.  It  is  truest  kindness  to  do  so.  It  is  moral  train-
ing to  do  so.  His  disciples  always  go  wrong  when  they  try  to  fix  dates.  Christ
distinctly  refuses  to  allow  any  data  on  which  such  fixtures  can  be  made.  Prophets  of
the  "  second  coming,"  and  of  the  "  end  of  the  world,"  are  wise  above  what  is  written,
and  let  their  imaginations  run  riot  over  Bible  figures  of  speech.

I.  ThB   UOBAIi    INFLTTENOK  OV     rBELINO    THAT    THE   MaBTXB     KAT   OOUB     AT    AMT

TIME.  1.  It  keeps  the  thought  of  the  Master  close,  near  to  us  at  all  times.  So  it  takes
us  out  of  ourselves.  2.  It  keeps  us  thinking  what  the  Master  would  like  to  see  when
he  comes.  So  it  makes  us  ever  busy  about  our  work.  3.  It  sets  us  upon  thinking
what  pleasant  surprises  we  can  give  our  Master  when  he  comes.  So  it  lifts  our  work
high  above  the  drudgery  of  service.  4.  It  keeps  in  om:  hearts  the  ever-cheering  confi-
dence of  the  Master*?  smile,  if  he  sees  all  has  been  right  and  is  right  in  his  home.  Add
that  all  this  filling  of  our  souls  with  the  thought  of  our  Master  provides  the  healthiest
deliverance  from  all  self-centred  sentimentalism.  Illustrate  from  our  Lord's  picture
of  the  good  servant,  who  was  found  "  watching,"  in  the  sense  of  being  busy  about  his
work.

II.  The  mokal  influbmok  o»  fbblino  that  the  Mastbb  is  dblatiko  hib
ooKiNQ.  This  represents  the  most  striking  contrast.  The  thought  of  the  Master  is
lifted  away,  and  self  rises  to  fill  the  vacant  space.  No  need  to  hurry  preparations ;  it
will  be  soon  enough  when  he  sends  notice.  Meanwhile  there  can  be  self-enjoyment.
There  is  no  fear  of  being  taken  at  unawares.  See  the  picture  of  the  unworthy  servant.
Whether  men  think  they  can,  or  think  they  cannot,  fix  the  time  of  Christ's  coming,
the  fact  for  them  all  will  be  that  he  will  come  to  them  at  unawares,  and  find  them  out.
— B.T.


EXPOSITION.
OHAPTBB  XXV.


Vers.  1 — IS. — PoroWe  of  the  ten  virgin*.
(Peoulisr  to  St.  Matthew.)  This  parable,
as  a  continuation  of  the  teaching  of  tbe


last  chapter,  sets  forth  the    neoossity   of     point  is  that  the  oil  of  God's  grace  alone


having  and  rotainlnf^  grace  unto  the  end,
in  order  to  be  able  to  welcome  the  advent
of  Christ,  The  duty  of  watohfalness  and
preparation  for  the  great  day  is,  of  course,
implied  and  set  forth  (ver.  13);  but  the


472


THE  GOSPEL  A(XX)RDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    [«.  xxr.  1— 4«.


enablea  the  lonl  to  meet  the  bridegroom
joyfnUy,  without  dismay.  The  nsneil  mar-
riage coitomi  of  the  Jewi  ere  well  known.
On  the  appointed  day,  the  bridegroom,  ao-
oompanied  by  his  friends,  proceeded  to  the
bride's  house,  and  thence  eeeorted  her,  with
her  attendant  maidens  and  friends,  to  his
own-  or  Ilia  parents'  home.  In  the  parable,
howeyer,  the  proceedings  are  somewhat
different  Here  the  bridegroom  is  not  in
the  town,  but  somewhere  at  a  distance,  so
that,  though  the  day  is  settled,  the  exact
hour  of  hia  arrival  is  uncertain.  He  will
come  in  the  course  of  the  night,  and  the
virgins  who  are  to  meet  him  hare  aa-
sambled  in  the  house  where  the  wedding  la
to  take  place.  They  wait  fer  the  summons
to  go  forth  and  meet  the  bridegroom  and
conduct  him  to  the  bridal-plaoe ;.  and  when
the  signal  is  given  that  ha  is  approaching,
they  set  forth  on  the  road,  each  bearing  her
lamp  (Edersheim).

Yer.  1.— Then.  The  time  refers  to  the
hour  of  the  Lord's  advent  (oh.  xziv,  50, 51),
and  the  paronsia  of  the  Son  of  man  (ch,
xxiv.  36,  etc.).  Shall  the  Mngdom  of  heaven
be  likened.  At  the  time  named  something
analogous  to  the  coming  story  shall  happen
in  the  Church,  in  the  gospel  dispensation.
Ten  virgins.  Ten  is  the  number  of  per<
fection ;  such  a  number  of  persons  was  re-
quired to  form  a  synagogue,  and  to  be  pre-
sent at  any  office,  ceremony,  or  formal
benediction.  Talmudio  authorities  affirm
that  the  lamps  used  in  bridal  processions
were  usually  ten.  The  "  virgins  "  here  are
the  friends  of  the  bride,  who  are  arranged  to
sally  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom  as  soon
as  his  approach  is  signalled.  "  The  Church,
in  her  aggregate  and  ideal  unity,  is  the
bride ;  the  members  of  the  Church,  aa  in-
dividually called,  are  guests;  in  their
separation  from  tlie  world,  and  expectation
of  the  Lord's  coming,  they  are  his  virgins  "
(Iiange).  The  bride  herself  ia  not  named
in  the  parable,  as  she  ia  not  needed  for
illustration,   and    the   virgins   occupy  her

Slace.  These  virgins  repreaent  believers
ivided  into  two  sections;  evidently  they
are  all  supposed  to  hold  the  true  flpiith,  and
to  be  pure  and  undeflled  followers  of  the
Lord  (2  Cor.  li.  2 ;  Eev.  xiv.  4),  to  be  wait-
ing for  his  coming,  and  to  love  his  appear-
ing ;  but  some  fail  for  lack  of  grace  or  of
perseverance,  as  is  shown  further  on.  Their
lamps  (tAs  \aiiviSas  aireiy,  better  iavTuy,
their  own  lampt).  They  all  made  separate
and  personal,  independent  preparation  for
the  meeting.    These  lamps  (for  they  were


not  torches)  were,  aa  Dr.  Edersheim  notea,
hollow  cups  or  sanoers,  with  a  round  m-
ceptaolo  for  the  wiok,  which  waa  fed  witk
pitch  or  oil.  They  were  on  theaa  ocoaaiona
fastened  to  a  long  wooden  pole,  and  borne
aloft  in  the  procession.  Went  forth.  This
does  not  refer  to  the  final  going  forth  to
meet  the  bridegroom  on  the  road  (ver.  6),
as  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  they  aU  feU
asleep  by  the  wayaide,  with  their  lampa  ia
their  banda  (ver.  5),  and,  as  a  fact,  only
five  went  out  at  last;  but  it  doubtless  in
timates  that  they  left  their  own  homes  to
unite  in  duly  celebrating  the  wedding.  To
meet  the  bridegroom.  An  evident  interpo-
lation adds,  "and  tha  bride,"  which  the
authorized  Ynlgate  nnhappily  confirms,
reading,  eaierutU  obviam  spotuo  «<  ipontm^
In  this  caae  the  soene  refera  to  the  bride
gioom'a  return  in  company  with  hia  bride.
Bnt  this  is  a  misconception,  as  no  mention  is
made  of  the  bride  anywhere  in  the  genuine
text  The  bridegroom  comes  to  fetch  home
the  bride ;  and  these  maidens,  her  friends,
assembled  In  her  house  to  be  ready  to  escort
him  thither  (ef.  1  Maco.  iz.  87).  The
wedding  seema  to  take  place  at  the  bride'a
house,  as  Jndg.  xiv.  10.

Yai.  2. — ^Fiva  of  them  were  wise  (ippininoi,
oh.  xxiv.  45),  and  five  were  foolish.  The
best  uncials  (K,B,0,D,L)  invert  the  clauses,
in  agreement  with  the  order  in  vera.  3, 4.
So  the  Vulgate.  In  this  case  the  idea  would
be  that  the  foolish  were  a  more  prominent
and  noticeable  class  than  the  others.  All
the  virgins  were  outwardly  the  same,  were
provided  with  the  same  lamps,  prepared  to
perform  the  same  office;  the  difference  in
their  characters  is  proved  by  the  result
Their  folly  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  at  the
time  of  action  they  were  unable  to  do  the
part  which  a  little  care  and  forethought
would  have  enabled  them  to  perform  suc-
eessfully.

Ver.  3. — ^Ihey  that  were  foolish  Qalnyes
Umpat)  .  .  .  took  no  oil  with  them.  It  has
been  doubted  whether  they  brought  no  oil
of  their  own  at  all,  trusting  to  get  their
lamps  filled  by  others,  or  uhether  they
neglected  to  bring  an  additional  supply  to
replenish  them  when  exhausted.  The  latter
seems  most  likely  to  be  the  sense  intended ;
as  the  spiritual  aspect  of  the  parable  places
both  classes  in  exactly  the  same  position  at
starting,  and  wo  know  from  other  sources
that,  the  oil-resorvoirs  being  very  small,  it
was  the  custom  to  carry  another  vessel  from
which  to  retill  them.  Some  good  manuscripts
commence  the  verse  with  "  for,"  thus  making
the  verse  justify  the  epithets  applied  to  the
virgins.

Yer.  4. — In  their  Tessels.  These  wer«
the  flasks  or  vases  carried  by  tlie  maidem
to  replenish  the  oU  in  the  lamps  as  nooaaioi-


m.  XTT,  1—46.]    THE  OOSPBL  ACCOKOmQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


473


demanded.  The  eontnat  between  tbe  two
elasseg  eeemi  to  lie  in  the  foreitght  of  the
one  and  the  negligent  oweleMneas  of  the
other.  It  bee  been  eemmon  from  early
times  to  find  in  the  lamps  the  symbol  ef
faith,  in  the  oil  the  good  works  tiiat  pro-
ceed therefrom.  The  wise  virgins  exercise
their  faith  in  charity  and  good  works ;  the
foolish  profess,  indeed,  the  faith  of  Christ,
but  carry  it  not  out  to  the  production  of  the
good  works  in  which  Ood  ordained  that
they  should  walk  (Eph.  ii.  10).  But  this
exposition,  time-honoured  though  it  is,
surely  does  not  meet  the  reqnirements  of
the  parable.  What  one  wants  is  an  interpre-
tation which  shall  show  bow  it  is  that  the
want  of  oil  and  its  sudden  failure  debar  one
from  meeting  the  bridegroom.  If  the  oil  be
good  works,  and  the  IwlieTer  has  gone  on
doing  these  until  the  Lord's  advent  is
signalled,  why  should  he  fail  at  the  last  7
How  comes  it  that  in  a  moment  he  leaTes
off  doing  his  duty,  and  making  his  calling
and  election  sure?  These  are  questions
which  the  patristic  and  mediaval  explana-
tion leaves  unsolved.  I  doubt  not  that  the
right  solution  is  to  be  found  in  regarding
the  oil  as  symbolical  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or
the  graces  of  Ood.  This  is  a  truly  scriptural
notion,  as  declared  by  the  use  of  this  sub-
stance in  holy  rites.  Accepting  this  view,
we  should  say  that  the  ten  virgins  had  so
far  alike  taken  and  nsod  the  grace  of  God,
but  that  they  differed  in  this — that,  while  the
wise  maintained  the  supply  ef  grace  by  con-
stant recourse  to  the  means  thereof,  the
foolish  were  satisfied  with  their  spiritual
state  once  for  all,  and  took  no  pains  to  keep
their  spiritual  life  healthful  and  active  by
the  renewal  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  theu
hearts.  They  retained  the  outward  show
and  form  of  faith,  but  neglected  the  tnu
Inward  life  of  faith;  they  had  the  appear-
ance without  the  reality.

Ver.  S.— While  the  bridegroom  tarried
(ch.  xxiv.  48).  We  may  suppose  that  all
hAd  lighted  their  lamps  at  first,  in  expecta-
tion of  being  immediately  called  to  meet  the
bridegroom.  But  he  came  not.  The  ad-
vent of  Ohrist  was  not  to  be  as  speedy  as
the  disciples  imagined.  No  one  could  divine
when  it  would  take  place.  As  St.  Angus-
tine  says, "  Latet  ultimns  dies,  ut  observetnr
omnia  <Ues."  See  here  a  figure  of  each
Christian's  probation.  They  all  slumbered
{MffTofay)  and  slept  (<ki(0<i/Soi>)  The  first
verb  implies  the  nodding  and  napping  of
persons  sitting  np  at  night;  the  second
means  "  they  began  to  sleep,"  actually.  All,
wise  and  foolish,  did  this ;  so  in  itself  it  was
not  sinful,  it  was  only  natural.  To  such
drowsiness  the  best  of  Christians  are  liable.
The  bow  cannot  be  kept  always  strung ;
"N»i|M   aaiapM    emnn    tanAit   ApeUft**


Having  made  all  preparations,  the  virgins
eeased  for  a  while  to  think  of  the  bride-
groom's coming.  The  Fathers  take  this
sleep  to  be  an  image  of  death,  the  awaking
to  be  the  resurrection,  when  the  difference
between  the  two  classes  is  known  and  dis-
played.  But  this  would  imply  that  all  the
faithful  will  be  dead  when  the  Lord  comes,
which  is  contrary  to  1  Theas.  iv.  17.  Nor,
on  the  other  hand,  Is  it  conceivable  that
they  whose  lamps  are  kept  burning  till
the  day  of  death  will  be  nnprorided  when
the  Lord  comes.

Ver.  6. — ^At  midnight.  When  sleep  is
deepest  and  awaking  most  unweloome.  The
Lord  will  come  **  as  a  thief  in  the  night "
(oh.  xxiv.  42—44 ;  1  Thess.  v.  2).  There  was
a  cry  made  (y4yovftt,  hath  betn  made).  The
cry  comes  either  from  the  watchers  or  from
the  advancing  company.  We  are  told  by
the  apostle  (1  Thesa.  iv.  16)  that  "  the  Lord
himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  aroliangel,  and
with  the  trump  of  God."  The  suddenness
of  the  event  is  indicated  by  the  tense  of  the
verb — "  there  hath  been,"  "  there  is,"  a  cry.
The  bridegroom  cometh  I  The  best  manu-
scripts omit  the  verb,  which  omission  makes
the  expression  more  graphic.  The  bride-
groom is  Christ ;  he  comes  now  to  judge,  to
punish  and  reward ;  and  Christians  have  to
meet  him,  and  show  how  their  duties  have
been  performed,  and  how  their  personal  pre-
paration has  been  made.

Ter.  7.— Trimmed  their  lamps.  The
trimming  eousisted  in  remoring  the  charred
portion  of  the  wick,  and  raising  the  wick
itself  by  means  of  a  pointed  wire  which  was
fastened  by  a  chain  to  each  lamp.  These
operations  would  be  followed  by  the  re-
plenishment of  the  vase  with  oil  from  the
vessel  carried  for  that  purpose.  In  a
spiritual  eeuse  the  dormant  grace  has  to  be
rerived  at  the  awful  summons.  It  had,
indeed,  come  upon  all  unexpectedly  at  the
moment ;  but  while  one  party  was  ready  to
meet  the  emergency,  the  ether  was  wholly
unprepared.  The  foolish,  indeed,  got  their
wicks  ready  to  light,  when  they  suddenly
discovered  that  they  had  no  oil  in  Uieir
lamps,  and  remembered  that  they  hod
brought  no  further  supply  with  them.

Ter.  8. — The  foolish  said  nnts  the  wise.
They  apply  to  their  prudent  companions  for
aid  at  this  crisis.  They  recognize  now  the
superior  wisdom  of  the  others,  and  would
fain  have  their  assistance  to  hide  their  own
deficiencies.  Are  gone  out  {r$4yyvvrmi,art
going  eui).  The  lamps,  fresh  trimmed,  had
Dumed  for  a  few  moments,  and  then,  having
no  oil,  soon  waned  and  died  out.  Spiritually
speaking,  the  idea  of  these  people  seems  to
have  been  that  the  merits  of  others  could
supply  tbeii  laek,  or  that  there  was  a  general


474


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    foH.  rxr.  1— 48.


■torn  of  grace  to  whleh  thej  oonld  h»n  t«-
oouree,  and  which  would  aerve  instead  of
individual  personal  preparation.  See  here
a  terrible  warning  against  delay  in  the
matter  of  the  sonl,  or  against  trusting  to  a
death-bed  repentance.

Ver.  9. — Not  so ;  lest  there  be  not  enongh
(iffiiroTf  oj  fi^  ipKiap,  haply  U  will  not
mfice).  Edersheun  renders,  "  Not  at  all —
it  will  never  suffice  for  na  and  you,"  in
order  to  give  the  force  of  the  double  negation.
In  Aristotle,  /lijirore  is  often  equivalent  to
••  perhaps,"  e.o. '  Eth.  Nio.,'  1. 1.  8.  «  Even
so  they  failed,"  says  St.  Ohrysoetom,  "  and
neither  the  humanity  of  those  of  whom  they
begged,  nor  the  easiness  of  their  request,
nor  their  necessity  and  want,  made  them
obtain  their  petition.  And  what  do  we  learn
from  hence  ?  That  no  man  can  protect  us
there  if  we  are  betrayed  by  our  works ;  not
t>ecanse  he  will  not,  but  because  he  cannot.
For  these,  too,  take  refuge  in  the  impos-
■ibility.  This  the  blessed  Abraham  also
indicated,  saying,  'Between  us  and  you
there  is  a  great  gulf,'  so  that  not  even
when  willing  is  it  permitted  them  to  pass
it."  Bat  (probably  spurious)  go  ye  rather
to  them  that  seU.  The  answer  is  not  harsh,
and  the  advice  is  not  ironical  or  unkind.
The  wise  cannot  of  themselves  supply  the
lack.  They  have  no  superabundant  store
of  grace  to  communicate  to  otliers ;  at  best
even  they  are  unprofitable  servants;  the
righteous  shall  scarcely  be  saved;  so  they
d^eot  their  companions  to  the  only  source
where  effectual  grace  may  be  obtained.
They  that  sell  are  the  ministers  and  stewards
of  Ohriiit's  mysteries,  who  dispense  the
means  of  grace.  These  are  said  to  be  bought,
as  the  treasure  bid  in  the  field  or  the  pearl
of  great  price  is  bought  (oh.  xiii.  44 — 46).
Divine  grace  can  always  be  procured  by
those  who  will  pay  the  price  thereof;  and
the  price  is  faith  and  prayer  and  earnest-
ness,— ^nothing  more,  nothing  less  (Isa.  Iv.  1 ;
Bev.  iii.  18).  But  the  time  is  short ;  delay  is
fatal;  hence  the  counsel  so  urgently  given,
"  Go  ye,"  etc.  Buy  for  yourselves.  This  is
important.  Every  one  must  bear  his  own
burden.  The  grace  must  be  their  own ;  what
is  required  of  those  who  would  meet  the
Bridegroom  without  shame  and  fear  is
personal  preparation,  personal  faith  and
holiness.  We  shall  be  judged  individually  ;
our  Ohristian  virtues  must  be  entirely  our
own,  wrought  in  us  by  the  grace  of  God,
with  which  we  have  humbly  and  thankfully
co-operated.  It  is  curious  that  some  ancient
and  modern  commentators  see  in  this  fiart
of  the  parable  only  an  ornamental  detail
without  special  signification.

Ver.  10. — While  they  went  to  buy.  They
followed  the  advice  given  them.  Whether
they  were  successful  or  not  is  left  untold ;


tke  Imne  wonld  1i«t»  been  the  same  In
either  ease;  their  return  would  have  been
too  late.  The  opportunity  they  had  had
was  not  properly  used;  when  preparation
was  comparatively  easy  they  had  neglected
to  make  it ;  they  had  been  once  converted,
so  to  speak,  and  rested  in  that  fact,  and
thought  it  sufficient  for  all  time,  omitting
to  seek  for  daily  supplies  of  grace,  and
now  they  find  themselves  miserably  deceived.
There  is  a  certain  wilful  forgetfulness  and
negligence  which  can  never  be  remedied  on
this  side  the  grave.  They  that  were  ready.
The  five  wise  virgins  who  had  made  pro-
vision for  the  meeting,  had  renewed  the
grace  of  God  in  their  hearts,  and  kept  it
alive  by  diligence  and  perseverance,  accord-
ing to  the  apostle's  counsel  (2  Pet.  i.  4 — 8).
Went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage  (robs
yAnovt,  the  marriage  featf).  They  not  only
duly  met  the  bridegroom  on  his  way,  but
accompanied  him  into  the  joyful  scene,  the
bridal  feast,  the  type  of  all  spiritual  hap-
piness (Bev.  xix.  9).  "  This  world,"  says
'  Firke  Aboth,'  "  is  like  the  vestibule,  the
world  to  come  is  like  the  dining-chamber:
prepare  thyself  in  the  vestibule,  that  thou
mayest  be  able  to  enter  into  the  dining-
chamber."  Well  says  the  Son  of  Siraoh,
"Let  nothing  hinder  thee  to  pay  thy  vow
in  due  time,  and  defer  not  until  death  to  b«
justified  "  (Eoclus.  xviii.  22).  The  door  was
ihnt  (Luke  xiii.  25).  It  is  customary  in  the
East,  at  great  entertainments,  to  close  the
doors  when  all  the  guests  are  assembled.
So  at  our  universities,  during  the  dinner
hour,  the  gates  of  the  colleges  are  always
shut.  Scott,  in  *  Old  Mortality '  (ch.  viii.
note),  remarks  that  this  custom  was  rigo-
rously.  observed  in  Scotland.  When  the
door  is  shut  in  the  parable,  there  is  no  more
entrance  for  any  one.  Trench  quotes  St,
Augustine's  saying,  "  Non  inimicus  intrat,
nee  amicus  exit"  Christ  is  the  door  by
which  our  prayers  reach  God ;  through  him
alone  they  prevail ;  when  this  is  closed  the
access  to  the  heavenly  throne  is  barred.

Ver.  11. — Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us.  They
apply  to  the  bridegroom  himself  as  now
taking  the  direction  of  affairs.  So  when
Christ  the  spiritual  Bridegroom  comes,  he
rules  over  aU.  Here,  as  elsewhere  in  the
parable,  the  great  spiritual  reality  shines
through  the  earthly  delineation.  Whether
the  five  foolish  ones  obtained  oil  or  not  at
this  late  hour  matters  nothing ;  they  were
too  late  to  do  that  which  they  had  to  do,
too  late  to  join  in  the  bridal  procession,  and
thus  procure  admission  to  the  festivaL
Tteir  piteous  cry  is  not  answered  as  they
hoped.  It  is  too  late  to  ask  for  mercy  when
it  is  the  time  of  vengeance.  In  this  present
state  of  grace  we  have  the  comforting  in-
junction, "  Knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened


CH.TX*.1— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


476


nnto  yon  j "  In  the  day  of  retribntion  the
door  is  slmt,  and  no  knocking  will  nndose
its  hatred  portal.  Tme  it  is  that  "not
every  one  that  saith  nnto  me.  Lord,  Lord,
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father."

Ver.  12. — I  know  you  not.  Ihej  had  not
been  iu  the  bridal  company,  nor  joined  in
the  festive  procession,  so  the  bridegroom
conld  only  answer  from  within  that  he  had
no  knowledge  of  them.  "What  ia  meant
spiritually  by  this  rejection  is  donbtful.
This  is  not  a  solitary  instance  of  the  use
of  the  expression.  In  the  sermon  on  the
monnt  Christ  declared  that  his  sentence  on
those  that  professed,  but  practised  not,
would  be,  "  I  never  knew  you  :  depart  from
me  1 "  (ch.  vii.  23).  He  is  said  to  know  those
whom  he  approves  and  acknowledges  to  be
his  (see  John  z.  14).  God  says  of  Abra-
ham, "  I  know  him  "  (Gen.  xviii.  19)  and
of  Moses, "  I  know  thee  by  name  "  (Exod.
xxxiii.  12).  To  be  known  of  God  is  a  higher
blessing  than  to  know  God  (GaL  iv.  9).
Many  think  that  the  words  of  our  text
imply  utter  reprobation.  So  Nosgen ;  and
Ohrysostom  writes,  "  When  he  hath  said
this,  nothing  else  but  hell  is  left,  and  that
intolerable  punishment ;  or  rather,  this  word
is  more  grievous  even  than  hell.  This  word
hs  speaks  also  to  them  that  work  iniquity."
But  we  must  observe  that  in  the  present
case  we  have  not  the  terrible  addition,
"  Depart  from  me  1 "  The  sentence  of  ex-
elusion  from  Christ's  presence  is  not  equiva-
lent to  that  ID  ver.  41,  which  dooms  souls
to  the  everlasting  fire  prepared  for  the  devil
and  his  angels.  Tbfse  five  virgins  had
received  the  grace  of  God,  and  used  it  well
for  H  time,  and  only  failed  at  the  last  for
lack  of  care  and  watchfulness.  They  had
still  some  love  for  the  Lord,  still  desired  to
serve  him ;  it  is  not  conceivable  that  they
should  suffer  the  same  pimishment  as  the
utterly  godless  and  profane,  whose  wicked-
ness was  perfect  and  Satanic.  Doubtless
they  were  punished ;  but  as  there  are  degrees
of  happiness  in  heaven,  so  there  may  be
gradation  of  pains  and  penalties  for  those
debarred  from  its  blessings  (see  1  Cor.  iii
15).  But  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  ex-
clusion in  the  first  place  refers  to  the
deprivation  of  participation  in  Messiah's
future  kingdom,  whatever  that  may  be,
according  to  the  vision  in  Bev.  xx.,  and  that
the  proceedings  at  the  final  judgment  axe
not  here  intended.

Ver.  13.— Watch  therefore.  This  Is  the
lesson  which  the  Lord  draws  from  the
parable,  as  elsewhere  he  gives  the  same
warning,  e.g.  Luke  xii.  35,  repeated  by  the
apostle  (1  Tliess.  v.  2,  6).  Ye  know  neither
the  day  nor  the  hour  [wherein  the  Son  of
man  soineth].    The  words  ia  brackets  are


omitted  by  the  earlier  uncials,  the  Vulgate,
Syriao,  eto.,and  are  to  be  regarded  as  an
exegetical  interpolation  (comp.  ch.  xxiv.  42).
Tertullian  well  says, "  Ut  pendnla  expeota-
tione  solioitodo  fidei  probetur,  semper  diem
observans,  dum  semper  ignorat,  quotidie
timens  quod  quotidie  sperat "  ('  De  Anima,'
33).  It  remains  to  observe  that,  mystically,
Christ  is  the  Bridegroom,  who  celebrates  his
nuptials  with  his  bride  the  Church,  and
comes  to  conduct  her  to  heaven ;  those  who
are  ready  will  accompany  him  and  enter
into  the  joy  of  their  Lord ;  those  who  have
not  made  tiieir  calling  sure  will  be  shut  out.

Vers.  14—30. — Parable  »f  the  talmU.
(Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.)  Following  on
the  lesson  of  watchfulness  and  inward  per-
sonal preparation  just  given,  this  parable
enforces  the  necessity  of  external  work  and
man's  accountability  to  God  for  the  due  use
of  the  special  endowments  which  he  has
received.  The  former  was  concerned  chiefly
with  the  contemplative  life,  the  waiting
virgins;  this  chiefly  with  the  active,  the
working  servant ;  though,  in  fact,  both  states
combine  more  or  less  in  the  good  Christian,
and  the  perfect  disciple  will  unite  in  him-
silf  the  characteristics  of  John  and  Peter,
Mary  and  Martha.  St.  Luke  (xix.  11 — 27)
has  recorded  a  somewhat  analogous  parable
spoken  by  Christ  on  leaving  the  bouse  of
ZacchsBus,  known  as  the  parable  of  the
pounds ;  and  some  critics  have  deemed  that
the  two  accounts  relate  to  the  same  saying
altered  in  some  details,  which  are  to  be
accounted  for  on  the  hypothesis  that  St.
Luke  has  combined  with  our  parable  another
on  the  rebellions  citizens.  That  there  are
great  resemblances  between  the  two  cannot
be  disputed,  but  the  discrepancies  are  too
marked  to  allow  us  to  assume  the  unity  of
the  two  utterances.  Christ  often  repeats
himself,  using  the  same  figure,  or  illustra-
tion, or'expression  to  enforce  different  truths
or  different  phases  of  the  same  truth,  as  here
he  may  have  desired  more  emphatically  to
Impress  on  the  disciples  their  special  respon-
sibilitieB.  The  variations  in  the  two  parables
are  briefly  these :  The  scene  and  occasion
are  different;  this  was  spoken  to  the  dis-
ciples, that  to  the  multitude;  in  one  the
lord  is  a  noble  who  was  to  receive  a  king-
dom, in  the  other  he  is  simply  a  landowner ;
here  his  absence  is  a  matter  of  local  space,
then  it  is  a  matter  of  time ;  the  servants  are


47«


THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINO  TO  BT.  MATTHKW.    [«B.  szr.  1^48,


ten  in  tlie  one  case,  and  three  in  the  other ;
in  one  we  have  pounds  spoken  of,  in  the
other  talents;  in  St.  Lnke  each  servant
has  the  same  earn  delivered  to  him,  in  St.
Matthew  the  amount  is  divided  into  talents,
five,  two,  and  one;  in  the  "pounds"  the
servants  show  differing  faithfulness  with  the
same  gifts,  in  the  "talents"  two  of  them
display  the  same  faithfulness  with  differing
gills ;  here  the  idle  servant  hides  his  money
in  a  napkin,  there  he  buries  it  in  the  earth ;
the  eonclusions  also  of  the  parables  vary.
Their  objeot  is  not  identical:  the  parable
in  our  text  illnstrates  the  truth  that  we
shall  be  judged  according  to  that  which  we
have  received;  the  parable  in  St.  Luke  shows,
to  use  Trench's  words,  that  "  as  men  differ
ill  fidelity,  in  zeal,  in  labour,  so  will  they
differ  in  the  amount  of  their  spiritual  gain."
The  latter  treats  of  the  use  of  gifts  common
to  all,  whether  bodily,  mental,  or  spiritual,
Buch  as  one  faith,  one  baptism,  reason,  con-
science, sacraments,  the  Word  of  God;  the
former  is  concerned  with  the  exercise  of
endowments  which  have  been  bestowed
according  to  the  recipient's  capacity  and  his
ability  to  make  use  of  them, — the  question
being,  how  he  has  employed  his  powers,
opportunities,  and  circumstances,  the  par-
ticular advantages,  examples,  and  means  of
grace  given  to  him.

Ver.  14. — ^Fw  the  kingdom  of  heaven  Is
as  a  man.  The  opening  sentence  in  the
original  is  anacoluthio,  and  our  translators
have  supplied  what  they  supposed  to  be
wanting.  The  Greek  has  only.  For  jW  as
a  man,  etc. ;  Vulgate,  ricutenim/ionio.  The
other  member  of  the  comparison  is  not  ex-
pressed. The  Revised  Version  gives, "  It  is
as  when  a  man."  They  who  receive  the
possible  interpolation  at  the  end  of  ver.  13
would  simply  render,  "  For  he  (the  Son  of
man)  is  as  a  man."  The  Authorized  Ver-
sion plainly  affords  the  intended  meaning
in  the  words  of  the  usual  preface  to  such
parables  (ver.  1 ;  ch.  xiii.  24, 81,  etc.).  The
conjunction  "for"  carries  us  back  to  the
Lord's  solemn  injunction,  introducing  a  new
illustration  of  the  necessity  of  watchfulness.
Travelling  into  a  far  country  (iwoSij/tSv,
leaving  lunm).  Here  our  Lord,  being  about
to  withdraw  his  bodily  presence  from  the
earth  and  to  ascend  into  heaven,  represents
himself  as  a  man  going  into  another  country,
and  first  putting  his  affairs  in  order  and
Isiuing  instruotions  to  his  servants  (oomp.
eh.  xxi.  83).  Who  called  his  own  (rai>T  iSlmi)


servanti.    Tb«  wntenM  VXettXij  iM,  A»  •

mam . . ,  eaUedhitmm  b<mdt»rmmU.  Those
who  qieoially  belonged  to  him — a  flgnra  of
all  Onristiani,  members  of  Christ,  dcring
him  service  as  their  Master.  Selivered  unto
them  hi*  goods  (rA  tmifx**^'  a&roS,  hit  pot-
lestiont).  This  woe  not  ma  absolute  gift,
as  we  see  from  rahsequent  prooeedings^and
from  the  well-known  relation  of  Imaster  and
slave.  The  latter,  generally  speaking,  eould
possess  no  property,  but  be  was  often  em-
ployed to  administer  his  master's  property
for  his  lord's  advantage^  or  was  set  np  u
business  on  capital  advanced  by  his  owner,
paying  him  all  or  a  certain  share  of  the
profits.  The  money  still  was  not  the  slave's^
and  legally  all  thot  a  slave  acquired  by  what-
soever means  belonged  to  his  master,  though
custom  had  sanctioned  a  more  equitable
distribution.  The  "goods"  delivered  onto
the  lord's  servants  represent  the  special  pri-
vileges accorded  to  them— differences  of  ohi^
racter,  opportunities,  edneation,  etc.,  whioh
they  do  not  share  in  common  with  all  men.
This  is  one  point,  as  above  remarked,  in
which  this  parable  varies  from  that  of  the
"ponnds."  In  both  cases  the  gfts  are
figured  by  money — a  medium  current  and
intelligible  everywhere  on  earth.

Ver.  15. — ^Vnto  one  he  gave  flvs  talents.
The  talent  of  silver  (taking  silver  as  worth
a  little  overs*,  an  ounce)  was  nearly  equiva-
lent to  £400  of  our  money.  It  is  from  the
use  of  the  word  "  talents  "  in  this  parable  thot
we  moderns  have  derived  its  common  mean-
ing of  natural  gifts  and  endowments.  The
three  principal  slaves  receive  a  oertaia
amount  of  property  to  use  for  their  master's
profit  to  every  man.  To  all  is  given  some
grace  or  faculty  which  they  have  to  employ
to  the  glory  of  God.  "  Unto  every  one  of
us  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure
of  the  gift  of  Christ "  (Bph.  iv.  7).  No  onecoa
justly  say  he  is  neglected  in  this  distribu-
tion. Whatever  natural  powers,  eto.,  we
possess,  and  the  opportunitids  of  exercising
and  improving  them,  are  the  gift  of  God,
and  are  delivered  to  us  to  be  put  out  to  in-
terest. According  to  his  several  ability  (Karjt
TJ)v  ISlav  Siva/uv).  The  master  apportioned
his  gifts  in  accordance  with  his  knowledge
of  the  slaves'  oepaoity  for  business,  and  the
probability  of  their  rightly  employing  much
or  little  capital.  So  God  distributes  his  en-
dowments, not  to  all  alike,  but  in  such  pro-
portions as  men  are  able  to  bear  and  to  profit
by.  The  infinite  variety  in  men's  disposi-
tions, intellects,  will,  opportunities,  position,
and  so  on,  are  all  taken  into  accoimt,  and
modify  and  condition  their  responsibility.
Straightway  took  his  journey  (imeHnvirti'
tiBius).  Immediately  after  the  distribution
he  departed,  leaving  each  slave,  uncontrolled
and  undirected,  to  use  the  property  assigned


.XXT.l— «.]    THE  GOSPBL  AOOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


477


to  Um.  60  God  (Itm  m  fkeft-wUl  at  Ih*
Mune  time  that  he  leU  before  na  opportiiiii-
tlei  of  showing  out  faithfnlnoM.  Tlie  Lord
may  be  referring  primarily  to  the  apostles
whom  ha  left  immediately  after  he  had
bestowed  upon  them  authority  and  commis-
sion. The  Bevised  VersioD,  Weetoott  and
Hort,  Nosgen,  and  others  transfer  the  adverb
"  straightway  "  to  the  beginning  of  the  next
verse  (omitting  Si  in  that  verse).  It  is  sup-
posed to  be  superfluoos  here.  The  Vulgate
accords  with  the  Beoeived  Text;  and  there
seems  to  be  no  suffloient  reaaon  for  accents-
ating  the  first  slave's  activity  above  that  of
the  second,  who  was  eqoally  faithful.

Ver.  16. — ^Went.  Tho  one  who  had  re-
ceived the  five  talents,  the  mark  of  the
greatest  trust,  lost  no  time,  bnt  betook  him-
self to  bnsincss  with  zeal  and  energy.
Traded  with  the  same  (cipytbraTo  in  uiroTs,
made  gain  ieith  them).  The  verb  is  applied
to  husbandry  or  any  work  by  which  profit
is  obtained.  A  special  method  of  increasing
Uie  allotted  sum  is  mentioned  in  ver.  27;
but  here  the  term  is  general,  and  implies
only  that  the  slave  used  the  money  in  some
business  which  would  prove  to  his  master's
advantage.  In  other  words,  he  exercised
his  faculties  and  powers  in  his  master's
service  and  with  •  view  to  his  master's  in-
terests. Hade  [tbem]  other  five  talents.
The  addition  "  tbem  ''^is  annecessary.  He
doubled  ills  principal — "made"  being  equi-
valent to  "  gained."  In  the  parable  of  the
"  pounds"  we  find  the  same  sum  increased
indifferent  proportions;  here  we  have  dif-
ferent sums  multiplied  in  the  same  pro-
portion.

Ver.  17. — Likewise,  ete.  The  second  ser-
vant made  an  equally  good  use  of  hia  smaller
capital  It  matters  not  whether  our  endow-
ments are  large  or  little,  we  have  to  use
them  all  in  the  Lord's  service.  "  To  whom-
soever much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much
required  "  (Luke  xii.  48) ;  aad  vice  mrsA,  to
whomsoever  less  is  committed,  of  him  lees
shall  bo  required.  The  burden  is  propor-
tioned to  the  shoulder.  We  continually
observe  what  to  os  seem  anomalies  in  the
distribution  of  gifts,  but  faith  sees  the  hand
of  God  dividing  to  each  severally  as  he  will,
and  we  are  confident  that  God  will  take
account  at  last  not  only  of  the  man's  ability,
but  also  of  his  opportunities  of  exercising
the  same.  "  He  also  "  is  omitted  by  Tischen-
dorf,  Westcott  and  Hort,  and  others.

Ver.  18. — He  that  had  received  one  (rh  tv,
the  one  talent).  Limited  opportunities  do  not
condone  neglect.  This  third  servant  was
as  much  bound  to  put  out  to  interest  his
little  capital  as  the  first  was  his  larger  moaus.
Went ;  tetnt  away.  He  too  was  not  altogether
idle ;  he  in  some  sort  exerted  himself,  not
indeed  actually  in  evil  (as  the  tervant  in  oil.


zxiv.  18, 49),  bnt  yet  not  practically  In  his
lord's  ierviee.  Hid  his  lord's  money.  He
thought  the  amount  so  small,  or  his  master
so  rich,  that  it  was  of  no  oonsequenoe  what
was  done  with  it;  it  was  not  worth  the
trouble  of  traffic.  60,  like  all  Easterns,  he
buried  the  little  treasure  in  the  ground,  to
keep  it  safe  till  his  lord  should  ask  for  it,
recognizing  that  it  was  not  his  own  to  treat
as  he  likei^  bat  that  it  still  belonged  to  him
who  had  entrusted  it  to  his  care.  The  man
had  some  special  grace,  but  he  never  exer-
cised it,  never  let  it  shine  before  men,  or
bring  forth  the  fruit  of  good  works.

Ver.  19.— After  a  long  time.  The  interval
between  Ohrist's  ascension  and  his  second
advent  (ver.  S)  is  long  in  men's  view,  though
Christ  can  say,  **Lo,  X  come  quicldy  "  (Bev.
lii.  11,  etc.).  And  reckoneth  with  them  (ch.
s  viii.  23).  The  opportunity  of  labouring  for
Ohrist  in  the  earthly  life  is  ended  at  death ;
but  the  reckoning  is  reserved  for  the  par-
ousia — the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Tlio  matter
in  the  parable  is  concerned  with  the  past
actions  of  the  servants  of  Christ  (ver.  11) ;
about  the  final  judgment  of  the  rest  of  the
world  nothing  is  here  expressly  said,  though
certain  inferences  mnst  be  drawn  from
analogous  proceedings.

Ver.  20.— He  that  had  received  [the]  five
talents.  The  slaves  appear  in  the  same
order  as  they  had  oome  to  receive  the  de-
posits. The  first  comes  joyfully,  showing
boldness  in  his  day  of  judgment  (1  John  iv.
17),  because  he  has  dealt  faithfully  and
diligently,  and  prospered  in  his  labours.
Thou  deUvsredst  unto  me.  He  rightly  ac-
knowledges that  all  ha  had  came  from  his
lord,  and  that  it  was  his  duty  and  his  plea-
sure to  increase  the  deposit  tor  his  master's
benefit  The  long  delay  had  not  made  him
careless  and  negligent;  rather,  he  had  used
the  time  profitably,  and  thereby  added
greatly  to  his  gains.  I  have  gained  beside
them  {in'  avTois).  The  two  last  words  are
omitted  by  Westcott  and  Hort,  Tischendorf,
and  the  Bevised  Version.  If  they  are  not
genuine,  they  are,  at  any  rate,  implied  in
the  account  of  the  transaction.  The  Vulgate
has.  Alia  qainque  $uperltuiratu§  lum.  The
good  servant  says,  Behold,  as  if  he  pointed
with  joy  to  the  augmented  wealth  of  his
master.  He  does  not  speak  boastfully ;  he
does  not  praise  himself  for  his  success ;  he
had  simply  done  his  best  with  the  means .
entrusted  to  him,  and  he  can  speak  of  the
result  with  real  pleasure  (comp.  2  Cor.  i
14;  Plia  iv.  1;  1  Thess.  ii.  19).  So  in  a
religious  sense  the  obligation  to  improve
talents  is  even  more  imperative.  '-The
manifestation  of  tlie  Spirit  is  given  to  each
one  to  profit  withal "  (1  Cor.  xii.  7).  Tho
grace  nbich  he  receives  he  must  employ  lor
his  own  sanctificaliuu,  as  a  member  of  Christ,


478


THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh,  ixt.  1—46


for  the  ediBcation  of  othen,  for  the  Intereits
of  God's  Ohuroh ;  such  work  will  ahow  that
he  is  worthy  of  his  Lord's  tnutand  faithful
in  Mb  stewardship.

Yer.  21. — Well  done  («u),  thoa  good  and
faithfnl  serrant.    He  is  praised,  not  for  sno-
oess,  but  for  being  "good,"  i.«.  kind  and
merciful  and  honest  in  exercising  the  tmst
for  others'  benefit ;  and  "  faithful,"  true  to,
his  master's  interests,  not  idle  or  inactive,
but  keeping  one  objeot  always  before  him,
steadily  aiming  at  fidelity.    Some  regard
the  words  as  a  commendation  of  the  servant's
works  and  faitli,  but  this  is  not  the  primary
meaning  according  to  the  context.    Over  a
few  things.     The  sum  entrusted  to  him  was
considerable  in  itself,  but  little  compared
with  the  riches  of  his  lord,  and  little  in  oom-
parisun  of  the  reward  bestowed  apon  him.
The  Greek  liere  is  M  ixlyn,  the  accusative
case  denoting  "extending  over,"   or    "as
regards."    I  will  make  thee  ruler  (trt  xara-
ariaa,  I  will  set  thee,  ch.  xxiv.  45)  over
many  things ;  ^^1  TroWQv,  the  genitive  im-
plying fixed  authority  over.    From  being  a
slave  he  is  raised  to  the  position  of  master.
He  is  treated  according  to  the  principle  in
Luke  ivi.  10,  "  Ho  that  is  faithful  in  that
which  is  least  is  laithful  also  in  mnch."  The
spiritual  import  of  this  reward  is  hard  to
understand,  if  it  is  wished  to  assign  to  it  a
definite  meaning.   It  seems  to  intimate  that
in  the  other  world  Christ's  most  honoured
and  faithful  fuUowers  will  have  some  special
work  to  do  for  him  in  guiding  and  ruling
the  Church  (see  on  oh.  xii.  28 ;  and  comp.
Luke  xix.  17,  etc.).   Enter  thou  into  the  joy
of  thy  lord.    Here  is  seen  a  marked  contrast
between  the  hard  life  of  the  slave  and  the
happiness  of  the  master.    Literalists  find
here  only  a  suggestion  that  the  lord  invites
the  servant  to  attend  the  feast  by  which  his
return  home  was  celebrated.    Certainly,  the
word  translated  "joy  "  (xop"*)  may  possibly
be  rendered  "feast,"  as  the  LXX.  translate
mulUeh  in  Esth.  ix.  17,  and  a  slave's  eleva-
tion to  his  master's  table  would  imply  or
involve  his  manumission.    On  tlie  earthly
side  of  the  transaction,  this  and  his  extended
and  more  dignified  office  would  be  sufficient
reward  for  his  fidelity.    The  spiritual  signi-
fication of  the  sentence  has  been  variously
interpreted.  Some  find  in  it  only  an  explana-
tion of  the  former  part  of  the  award, "  I  will
make  thee  ruler  over  many  things,"  convey-
ing no  further  accession  of  beatitude.^  But
surely  this  is  an  inadequate  conception  of
the  guerdon.    There  are  plainly  two  parts
to  this.    One  is  advancement  to  more  im-
portant position ;  the  second  is  participation
in  the  fulness  of  joy  whioli  the  Lord's  pre-
sence ensures  (Ps.  xvi.  U;  xxi.  6),  which,
possessed  entirely  by  himself,  ho  communi-
cates to  his  faithful.    This  comprises  all


bleiiedneii.  And  it  is  noted  that  the  joy  Is
not  mid  to  enter  into  m.  That  indeed,
though  •  blessing  unspeakable,  wonld  be  an
Inferior  boon,  as  Ang^tine  says ;  but  we
enter  into  the  joy,  when  it  is  not  measured
by  our  capacity  for  receiving  it,  but  absorbs
us,  envelops  us,  becomes  our  atmosphere,
our  life.  Commentators  quote  Leighton's
boantiful  remark,  "  It  is  but  little  that  we
ean  receive  here,  some  drops  of  joy  that
enter  into  us ;  but  there  we  shall  enter  into
joy,  as  vessels  put  into  a  sea  of  happiness."
Ver.  22. — That  had  reoeived  [the]  two
talents.  This  man,  who  had  received  a
less  sum,  had  been  as  faithfnl  as  the  first,
and  comes  with  equal  confidence  and  joy-
fulness  to  render  his  account,  because  he
had  been  true  and  diligent  in  furthering
his  lord's  interests  to  the  best  of  his  means
and  faculties.  He  had,  it  seems,  less  capacity,
but  had  used  it  to  the  full.

Ver.  23. — Enter  thon,  etc.  Both  these
servants  had  doubled  their  capital,  and  the
lord  commends  and  rewards  them  both  in
the  same  terms.  The  point  is  that  each
had  done  his  best  according  to  his  ability.
Their  different  talents,  greater  or  less,  had
been  profitably  employed,  and  eo  far  the
two  were  equal.  Fidelity  in  a  smaller
sphere  of  labour  may  bo  of  greater  impor-
tance than  in  a  larger  area ;  and  seemingly
insignificant  duties  well  performed  may  be
of  incalculable  spiritual  advantage  to  one's
■elf  and  to  others.  Differences  in  talents
make  no  distinctions  in  rewards,  if  tha
utmost  is  made  of  them.  "  If  there  be  first
a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted  according  to
that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  thut
he  hath  not "  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).

Ver.  24.— He  which  had  reoeived  the  one
talent.    The  rest  of  the  parable  is  concerned
with  the  case  of  this  unprofitable  servant.
Usually,  those  who  have  most  privileges
neglect  or  misuse  them  or  some  of  them;
here  the  man  apparently  least  favoured  is
taken  as  the  type  of  the  useless  and  wicked
disciple,  because  his  task  was  easiest,  his
responsibility  less,  his  neglect  most  inex-
cusable.  He  has  heard  the  words  of  his  two
fellow-servants,  and  the  great  reward  which
their  faithful  service  has  received ;  he  comes
with  no  joy  and  confidence  to  render  his
account ;  he  feels  fully  how  unsatisfactory
it  is,  and  begins  at  once  to  defend  his  con-
duct by  proclaiming  his  view  of  his  lord's
character.    I  knew  thee  that  thou  art  an
hard  {aKKiiphs)  man.   He  chooses  to  conceive
of  his  lord   sis   harsh,   stem,  churlish  in
nature,  one  without  love,  who  taxes  men
above  their  powers,  and  makes  no  allowance
for  imperfect  service,  however  honest.    He
dares  to  call  this  impudent  fiction  know-
ledge.   Thus  men  regard  God,  not  as  he
it,  but  according  to  their  own  perverted


OH.  XXV,  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


47*


Tiewi;  they  read  their  own  eharaoter  into
their  eonception  of  him ;  as  the  Lord  aayi,
in  Ps.  I.  21,  "Thon  thoughtest  that  I  wai
altogether  snoh  an  one  as  thyself."    Beap-
hig  where  then  bast  not  sown  (fhou  tonedtt
fMt"),  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not
strawed  (!i9cv  o&  Sico-KifpirKrai,  whence  thou
leaiteredtt  not).    This  is  a  -proverbial  Bay-
ing, implying  a  desire  of  obtaining  results
withont  sufiBcient  means.    The  last  verb  is
interpreted  either  of  sowing  or  winnowing ;
the  latter  seems  to  be  oorreot  here,  thns
ayoiding  tautology.    It   is   nsed   by  the
geptuagint  in  this  sense  in  Ezek.  v.  2,  as
the  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  verb  larah
(Edershoim).    So  the  phrase  here  signifies
gathering   oom  from  a  floor  where  thon
didst  uot  winnow.      The  slare  virtually
brings  a  twofold  charge  against  his  master.
Tie.  that  he  enriched  himself  by  others'
toil;   and   that   he   expected   gain   from
quarters  where  he  had  bestowed  no  labour.
Ver.  25. — ^I  was  afraid.     He   took   as
certain  the  ooneeption  which  he  had  formed
of  hii  master's  character,  as  harsh,  exact-
ing, and   unsympathizing,  and   therefore
feared  to  speculate  with  his  money,  or  to
put  it  to  any  use  whereby  it  might  be  lost
or   diminished.     This   u   his  excuse  for
negligence.     He   endeavours  to  cast  the
bult  from  his  own  shoulders  to  those  of  his
superior.    8o  evil  men  persuade  themselves
that  God  asks  firom  them  more  than  they
can  perform,  and  content  themselves  by
doing  nothing;  or  they  consider  that  their
powers  and  means  are  their  own,  to  use  or
not  as  they  like,  and  that  no  one  can  call
them  to  aeoonnt  for  the  way  in  wtiich  they
treat  them.    Sid  thy  talent  in  the  aar&
(see  on  ver.  18).    Put  it  away  for  safety,
that  it  might  come  to  no  harm,  and  not  be
employed  for  evil  purposes.    He  recognizes
not  any  duty  owed   to  the   giver  in  tlw
possession  of  the  money,  nor  the  responsi-
bility for  work  which  it  imposed.   Lo,  there
thon  hast  that  is  thine ;  lo  I  them  hati  thy  own.
This  is  sheer  insolence ;  as  if  he  had  said,
"  Ton  cannot  complain ;  I  have  not  stolen  or
lost  your  precious  money ;  here  it  is  intact,
just  as  I  received  it"  What  a  perverse  mis-
taken view  of  his  own  position  and  of  God's
nature  I    The  talent  was  given  to  him,  not
to  bury,  but  to  use  and  improve  for  his
lord's  profit.    Hidden  nvay,  it  was  wasted.
The  time,  too,  during  which  he  hni  &e
talent  in  his  possession  was  wasted  ;  ha  had
not  honestly  used  it  in  Ms  master's  service,
or  labonred,  as  he  was  tx>nnd  to  do.    He
ought  to  have  had  much  more  to  show  than
the  original  endowment.    To  vaunt  that,
if  he  had  done  no  good,  at  least  he  had  done
•o  harm,  is  condemnation.    He  might  not
thns  shirk  his  responsibility.    His  answer
only  aggravated  his  bait


Yer.  26.— Thon  wicked  and  slothful
servant.  In  marked  eontraat  with  the  com-
mendation, "  good  and  faithful,"  in  vers,  21,
23.  He  was  "wicked,"  in  that  he  calumniated
his  master,  who  really  seems  to  have  been
ready  to  acknowledge  the  least  service  done
to  him,  and  never  looked  for  results  beyond
a  man's  ability  and  opportunities ;  and  he
was  "  slothful,"  in  that  he  made  no  effort
to  improve  the  one  talent  entrusted  to  him.
Thou  knewest  {■/Seis),  etc.  Out  of  hia  own
mouth  be  judges  him  (Luke  xix.  22).  He
repeats  the  slave's  words,  in  which  he  ex-
pressed his  notion  of  his  lord's  character
and  practice,  and  deduces  therefrom  the
inconsistenoy  of  his  action,  without  deigning
to  defend  himself  from  the  calumny,  except,
perhaps,  by  the  use  of  ^Stis,  which  gives
a  hypothetical  notion  to  the  assumed  know-
ledge. "  Yon  knew,  yon  say."  Some  editors
place  a  mark  of  interrogation  at  the  end  of
the  clause,  which  seems  unnecessary.

Yer.  27. — Thon  onghtest  therefore,  eto.
Tour  conception  of  my  character  ought  to
have  made  you  more  diligent  and  scrupu-
lous ;  and  if  you  were  really  afraid  to  run
any  risks  with  my  money  or  invest  it  in  any
hazardous  speculation,  there  were  many
ordinary  and  safe  methods  of  employing  it
which  would  have  yielded  some  profit,  and
some  of  these  yon  wonld  have  adopted  had
you  been  faithful  and  earnest.  The  return
might  have  been  trifling  in  amount,  but  the
lord  shows  that  he  is  not  graspiog  and
harsh  by  being  willing  to  accept  even  this
in  token  of  the  servant's  labour.  To  have
put  {$a\t7v).  The  term  means  to  have
thrown  the  money,  as  it  were,  on  the
banker's  table.  This  wonld  have  been  less
trouble  than  digging  a  hole  to  bury  it.  Ex-
ohangari ;  rpairc^Taii :  numulariit ;  bariktre.
In  St  Luke  (xix.  23)  we  find  iwl  T/utrtC*",
with  the  same  meaning.  These  money-
changers or  bankers  (for  the  business  seema
always  to  have  combined  the  two  branches)
were  a  numerous  class  in  Palestine,  and
wherever  the  Jewish  eommuoity  waa
established.  They  received  deposits  at
interest,  and  engaged  in  transactions  such
as  are.  usual  in  modem  times.  With  usury
(_irbv  t6kip,  aith  intereit).  At  one  time,  law
had  forbidden  usurious  transactions  between
Israelites,  though  the  Gentile  was  left  to
the  mercy  of  his  creditor  (Dent  xxiii.  19,
20);  but  later  such  limitations  were  not
observed.  The  rate  of  interest  varied  from
four  to  forty  per  cent.  The  spiritual  inter-
pretation of  this  feature  of  tlie  parable  has
most  unnecessarily  exercised  the  ingenuity
of  commentators.  Some  see  in  the  InnkerB
an  adnmbration  of  the  religions  sooietiei
and  oharitable  institutions,  by  means  of
which  persons  can  indirectly  do  some  work
bt  Ohiist,  thongk  anabk   personally  to


t80


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxt.  1— 48.


undertake  raeh  eBterprbea.  Olthanien  and
Trench  regard  them  aa  the  atronger
oharaobn  who,  by  example  and  gaidanoe,
lead  the  timid  and  hesitating  to  employ
their  gil'ta  aright.  But  it  in  more  reasonable
to  consider  this  detail  of  the  parable  as
supplementary  to  its  chief  purpose,  and
not  to  be  pressed  in  the  interpretation.
The  Lord  Is  simply  concerned  to  show  that
all  talents,  great  or  small,  must  be  used  in
his  service  according  to  opportunities;  and
that,  whether  the  return  be  large  or  little,  it
is  equally  acceptable,  if  it  show  a  willing
mind  and  real  fidelity  in  the  agent.  In
illustration  he  uses  two  eases  which  yield
most  profit,  and  one  whieh  produces  tli*
least.  Nothing  can  be  inferred  hence  oon-
oeiuing  the  morality  of  usury.  Christ
draws  his  picture  from  the  world  as  he  finds
it,  pronouncing  no  opinion  on  its  ethical
bearing.

Yer.  28. — ^The^entenoe  on  the  unprofitable
servant  follows.  It  is  to  be  obBerved  that
he  is  punished, not  for  fraud, theft,  malversa-
tion, but  for  omission.  He  bad  left  undone
that  which  he  ought  to  hare  done.  Take
therefore  the  talent  from  Mm.  The  forfeiture
of  the  talent  was  just  and  naturaL  It  was
given  to  him  for  a  special  purpose ;  he  had
.]  not  carried  this  out ;  therefore  it  oonld  be
his  no  longer.  A  limb  unused  loses  its
powers;  grace  unemployed  is  withdrawn.
Uod's  Spirit  will  not  uways  strive  with
man.  There  comes  a  time  when,  if  wilfully
resiuteil  and  not  exercised,  it  ceases  to  in-
spire and  to  influence.  Well  may  we  pray,
"  Take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us  I "  Give
it,  etc.  Tliis  is  done  on  the  principle  stated
in  the  next  verse  and  oh.  xiii  12.  God's  work
must  be  done ;  his  gifts  are  not  lost ;  they
are  transferred  to  another  who  has  proved
himself  worthy  of  suoh  a  eharge.  As  the
servant  who  bad  the  ten  talents  liad  already
brought  in  his  aceonnt  and  had  received  his
reward,  it  seems,  at  first,  difficult  to  under-
stand how  additional  work  and  responsi-
bility should  ba  given  to  Um.  But  it  is  tho
blessedness  of  Christ's  servants  that  they
lejoica  in  a  now  trust  received,  in  added
opportunities  of  serving  Um,  whether  in
this  life  or  in  the  life  to  eome,  and  all  the
increaa*  which  they  make  is  their  own
eternally  and  augments  their  joy.

Yer.  29. — TTnto  every  oa*  that  hath  .  .  .
abundance  (oh.  xiii.  12).  So  we  have  seen
in ,  the  first  part  of  the  parable.  The
proverb  says,  "Money makes  money;"  a
man  who  has  capital  finds  various  means  of
increasing  it ;  it  grows  as  it  is  judiciously
employed.  Thus  the  naoe  of  God,  duly
stirred  np  and  exeroiseo,  reeeives  oontinnal
accession,  "graoe  tot  grao*"  (John  i.  16).
The  Ohiistiaa's  spiritnal  foroes  are  d»-
Tek>p«d  Vy  boinc  properly  directed ;  Provi-


dence pats  in  bis  way  added  opportunities,
and  as  he  ases  these  he  is  more  and  more
strengthened  and  replenished.  From  him
that  hath  not  ^iirh  S^  tov  /i^  ix°^'^'^^^'  ^^  ^^
Received  Text,  probably  from  Luke  xix.  26;
the  best  manuscripts  and  editions  risad,  tov
Si  li^  cxavrat,  hui  at  to  him  that  hath  not ;
this,  followed  by  air'  mrav  at  the  end  of  the
verse,  is  leas  tautological  than  the  other
reading.  To  "have  not,"  in  accordance
with  the  oontext,  signifies  to  possess  nothing
of  any  consequence,  to  be  oomparatively
destitute,  in  the  world's  estimate  of  riches.
Bhall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  hath ;
men  that  which  he  hath  $hall  be  taken  aviay
from  him.  The  Yulgate,  following  some
few  manuscripts,  has,  M  quod  vicMur  habere
auferttur  iU>  to,  from  Luke  viii.  18.    The

Soor  unpractical  man  shall  lose  even  the
ttle  which  he  possessed.  So  the  spiritnally
nnprofitable  shall  be  punished  by  uttor  de-
privation of  the  grace  which  was  given  for
his  advancement  in  holiness.  If  applied  to
the  special  circumstances  of  the  time  and
of  the  persons  to  whom  it  was  addressed,
the  parable  would  teach  that  the  disciples
who  recognized  and  duly  employed  the
riohes  of  the  doctrine  and  powers  delivered
nnto  them  would  receive  further  revela-
tions; but  that  the  people  who  spnmed  the
oifered  salvation  and  neglected  the  gracious
opportunity  would  forfeit  the  blessing,  and
be  condemned.

Yor.  30. — Oast  ye  the  anprofltable  servant
into  [ih«]  outer  darkness  (ch.  vili.  12).    The
parable  merges  into  the  real.     The  matter
represented  bursts  through  the  veU  under
which  it  was   delivered,  and  stands  forth
plainly  and    awfully.      The    command  is
issued  to  the  ministers  of  the  Lord's  ven-
geance, whether  earthly  or  angelic.    The
slave  was  truly  unprofitable,  as  he  advanced
neither  his  masters  interests  nor  his  own,
which    were   bound    up    with    the    other.
While  the  faithful  servants  enter  into  the
joy  of  the  Lord,  he  is  rejected  from  his
presence,  expelled  from   tiie  kingdom   of
heaven,  banished  we   know  not  whither.
And  why?    Not  for  great  iU  doing,  sacrilege,
6rime,  offenoe  against  the  oommon  laws  of
God  and  man;  but  for  neglect,  idleness,
omission  of  duty.    This  la  a  very  fearful
thought.    Hen  endeavour  to  screen  them-
aelvoa   from  blame   by    minimizing  their
talents,  ability,  opportnnitiea ;  this  parable
OBveUs  the   flimsmeaa   of   this    pretence,
shows  that  all  hava  responsibilities,  and
•re  answerable  for  the  use  they  make  of  the
graces  and  faculties,  be  they  never  so  small,
which  they  possess.    Spiritual  indolence  is
as  serious  a  sin  as  active  wickedness,  and.
meets  with  similar  punishment.    Our  Lord's
account  of  the  last  judgment  terribly  oon-
flrms  this  truth  (vers.  4S — IS).    Thar*  ihall


nn.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


481


be  [th«]  weeping  and  [the]  gnashing  of  teeth
(oh.  ixiv.  51).  "Tliere,"  viz.  in  the  outer
darkness.  The  remembrance  of  lost  oppor-
tunities, wasted  graces,  bartered  privileges,
mil  till  the  mind  of  the  banished  with
terrible  remnrse,  and  make  existence  a  very
hell;  and  what  more  shall  be  added?  Some
of  the  Fathers  have  recorded  a  gnomic
saying  derived  from  this  parable,  if  not  an
ntteranoo  of  our  Lord  himself,  *  Be  ye
approved  bankers."

Vers.  81 — *6. — The  final  jttdgment  on  all
the  naiiont.  (Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.)
Before  entering  upon  the  exposition  of  this
majestic  section,  which  is  a  prophecy,  not
a  parable,  we  have  to  settle  the  preliminary
question  as  to  who  are  the  subjects  of  the
judgment  here  so  graphically  and  feixrfully
delineated.  Are  they  only  the  Ireatiien,
or  Christians,  or  all  mankind  without  ex-
ception 1  The  Lord's  present  utterance  is
plainly  the  development  of  the  account  of
the  parousia  in  oh.  iiiv.  80,  31.  There
those  that  are  gathered  are  "  the  elect,"
nothing  being  said  ooncerning  the  rest  of
mankind;  here  we  have  the  forecast  com-
pleted, both  righteous  and  unrighteous
receiving  their  sentence.  "All  the  nations  "
uauslly  represent  all  Gentiles  distinguished
from  the  Jews.  But  there  is  nothing  to
indicate  separate  judgment  for  the  Jew  and
Gentile.  Equally  unlikely  is  the  notion
that  the  transaction  is  confined  to  the
heathen,  whether  tbe  opinion  is  grounded
on  a  supposed  extension  of  the  mercies  of
Ohrist  to  those  ignorant  of  him,  but  having
lived  acoording  to  the  laws  of  natural
religion;  or  whether  it  assumes  as  certain
that  believei-s  will  not  be  judged  at  all
(an  erroneous  deduction  from  John  v.  24).
It  seems,  on  the  one  hand,  incongruous  that
persons  who  have  never  heard  of  Christ
should  be  addressed  as  "  blessed  of  my
Father,"  etc.,  ver.  34 ;  and  it  seems,  on  the
other  hand,  monstrous  that  such,  having  failed
.through  ignorance  and  lack  of  teaching,
should  be  condemned  to  awful  punishment.
That  Christians  alone  are  the  persons  who
are  thus  assembled  for  judgment  is  nut
likely.  Is  there,  then,  to  be  no  inquisition
held  on  the  life  and  character  of  noii-
Christians  f  Are  they  wholly  to  escape  the
great  assiie?  If  not,  where  else  does  Christ
refer  to  their  case?  What  reason  can  be
givan    for   the   exolusion     of   this    great

MATTHEW — II.


majority  from  tbe  account  of  the  pro-
ceedings at  the  last  day  1  It  appears,  on
the  whole,  to  be  safest  to  consider  "  all  the
nations  "  as  meaning  the  whole  race  of  men,
who,  dead  and  living,  small  and  great,  Jew
and  Gentile,  shall  stand  before  God  to  be
judged  according  to  their  works  (Eev.  xx.
11 — 13).  This  is  not  a  parable,  but  a  state-
ment of  future  proceedings  by  him  who
himself  shall  conduot  tliem.  It  is  not  a  fnll
account  of  details,  but  an  indication  of  the
kind  of  criteria  which,  shall  govern  the
verdicts  given.

Ver.  31.— When  (Stoj-  8i,  but  when).
The  particle,  unnoticed  in  the  Authorize<l
Version,  indicates  the  distinction  between
this  section  and  the  preceding  parables,  the
latter  exemplifying  the  judgment  specially
on  Christians,  this  setting  forth  the  judg-
ment on  the  whole  world.  Son  of  man.
With  his  glorified  body,  such  as  he  was
seen  at  his  Transfiguration  (Acts  i.  11).  In
his  glory.  The  term  occurs  twice  in  this
verse,  as  elsewhere  (ch.  xvi.  27 ;  xix.  28 ;
xxiv.  30,  where  see  notes)  denoting  that
then  his  liumiliation  will  have  passed  away,
and  he  will  appear  as  he  is.  All  the  holy
angels  with  him.  "Holy"  is  probably  a
transcriber's  addition,  wliich  has  crept  into
the  later  text.  The  Vulgate  omits  it.  At
this  time  all  the  family  of  heaven  and  earth
shall  be  assembled  (ch.  xvi.  27;  Dent
xxxiii.  2).  Of  angels  and  men  none  shall  be
wanting.  "  Omnes  angeli,  omnes  nationes.
Quanta  celebritas  I  "  (Bengal).  Then  shall
ha  sit,  eto.  He  shall  take  his  seat  as
Judge  on  his  glorious  throne  (Eev.  xx.  11),
surrounded  by  the  angels  and  the  saints
(Jude  14 ;  Eev.  xix.  14).  Observe,  this  was
spoken  three  days  before  his  death  (comp.
ch.  xxvL  53,  64).

Ver.  82. — Shall  be  gathered  (oh.  xxiv.
31).  The  angels  shall  gather  them,  the
dead  being  first  raised  to  life.  All  (tA,  the)
nations.  Kot  the  heathen  only,  but  all
mankind  (see  praUmiuary  note).  The
criteria  upon  which  the  judgment  proceeds,
in  the  following  verses,  seem  to  imply  that
all  men  have  the  opportunity  of  receiving
or  rejecting  the  gospel  (ch.  xxiv.  14  ;  Mark
xiii.  10  ;  Bom.  xi.  32).  How  this  can  apply
to  those  who  died  ijeiore  the  incarnation
of  Christ  and  the  consequent  evangelization
of  tho  worldj  we  know  not,  though  we
may  believe  that,  ere  tho  end  oomes,  Christ
will  have  been  preached  in  every  quarter
of  the  globe.  That  some  process  of  en-
lightenment goes  on  in  the  unseen  world
we  learn  from  the  mysterious  passage,  1  Pet.
iii.  18 — 20;  but  we  have  no  reason  to
suppose  that  probation  is  extended  to  the

2  I


482


THE  GOSPEL  AOCORDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1— 46.


other  life,  or  that  loali  wlU  there  haTe
the  offer  of  accepting  or  repelling  the
claims  of  Jesai  (bat  aee  Phil,  ii  10 :  1
Pet.  !▼.  6).  By  desoribing  mankind  ai
"  all  the  nations,"  Ohrist  Bboiri  the  minute
particularity  of  the  judgment,  which  will
enter  into  diatinctions  of  country,  race,  etc.,
and  while  it  ii  universal  will  be  striotly
impartial.  He  is  the  Shepherd  of  all  man-
kind, whether  coDsidered  as  sheep  or  goats,
and  oan  therefore  distinguish  and  class
them  perfectly.  Those  who  have  never
heard  of  Ohrist  (if  such  there  shall  be)  can
be  tried  only  by  the  standard  of  natural
religion  (Rom.  1.  20).  Shall  separate  them
(auTfiis).  Individuals  of  all  the  nations.
Hitherto  good  and  bad  had  been  mingled
together,  often  indistinguishable  by  man's
eye  or  judgment;  now  an  eternal  distinction
is  made  by  an  unerring  hand  (ch.  xiii.  49).
Tiie  idea  is  already  found  in  Ezek.  xxxiv.  17,
"  Behold,  I  judge  between  cattle  and  cattle,
between  the  rams  and  the  he-goats."  As  a
shepherd  divideth  bis  sheep  from  the  goats.
The  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  generally
keep  together  during  the  day  (Gen.  xxx.
33),  but  are  separated  at  night  or  when
being  driven.  The  Syrian  goat  is  usually
black.  The  Lord  delights  in  employing
simple  pastoral  illustrations  in  his  teach-
iug.

Yer.  33. — The  sheep  on  his  right  hand.
The  sheep  are  the  type  of  the  docile,  the
profitable,  the  innocent,  the  good  (see  Eom.
ii.  7,  10).  The  right  hand  is  the  place  of
favour  and  hcmour  (Gen.  xlviii.  17 ;  Luke
i.  11 ;  Mark  xvi.  6).  The  goats  (,lpl<l>ia,
kids)  on  the  left.  The  diminutive  is  here
used  for  the  goats,  to  convey  an  impression
of  their  worthlessnesB.  Compare  xvi^dpia,
"  wiielps,"  in  the  conversation  of  our  Lord
with  the  Syio-Phoenician  woman  (ch.  xv.
26,  27).  They  are  the  type  of  the  unruly,
the  proud  (Isa.  xiv.  9,  Hebrew),  the  unprofit-
able, the  evil  (see  Kom.  ii.  8,  9).  This
judicial  distinction  between  the  right  and
left  hands  is  found  in  ilassical  writers.  Thus
Plato,  '  De  Kepublica,'  x.  13,  tells  of  what
a  certain  man,  who  revived  after  a  cataleptic
attack,  saw  when  his  soul  left  his  body.
He  come  to  a  mysterious  place,  where  were
two  chasms  in  the  earth,  and  two  openings
in  the  heavens  oppo.site  to  them,  and  tlie
judges  of  the  dead  sal  between  these.  And
when  they  gave  judgment,  they  commanded
the  just  to  go  on  tiae  right  hand,  and  up-
wards through  the  heavens ;  but  the  unjust
they  sent  to  the  left,  and  downwards  ;  and
both  the  just  and  unjust  had  upon  them
the  marks  of  what  they  had  done  in  the
Imdy.  So  Virgil  makes  the  Elysiau  Fields
to  lie  on  tlie  riglit  of  the  palace  of  Dis,  and
the  penal  Tartarus  on  the  left  ('  .^n.,'  ri.
640,  etc.).


Yer.  84.— Then.     When  the  division   ii
made,  the  lentenoes  are  prononnoed.  _  At
death  a  separation  between  good  and  evil  is
in  some  sort  made,  as  we  learn  by  the  parable
of  Dives  and  Lazarus ;  bnt  the  final  award
is  not  given  till  the  great  day.    The  King.
He  who  had  called  himself  the  Son  of  man,
here  for  the  first  and  only  time  in  Scripture
names  himself  the  King  (comp.  ch.  xxvii.  11).
He,  the  Messiah,  takes  his  throne  and  reigns.
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  (Bev,  xix.
16),  Lord  of  both  the  dead  and  the  living
(Bom.  xiv.  9).     Unto  them  on  his   right
hand.      He  speaks  first  to  them,  as  more
worthy  than  the  others,  and  as  he  loves  to
reward  better  than  to  punish.      How  the
sight  and  hearing  of  this  first  sentence  musf
awake  the  remorse  of  the  reprobate  I    Come.
He  calls  them  to  be  by  his  side,  to  share  his
kingdom  and  glory  (John  xii.  26).     Ancient
commentators  have  tenderly  expanded  this
invitation,  conceiving  it  addressed  individu-
ally to  patriarch,  prophet,  apostle,  martjr,
saint ;  others  have  paraphrased  it  in  affecting
terms :  "  Come  from  darkness  to  light,  from
bondage  to  the  liberty  of  Gud's  children, from
labour  to  peTp^tual  rest,  from  war  to  peace,
from  death  to  life,  from  the  company  of  the
evil  to  the  fellowship  of  angels,  from  conflict
to  triumph,  from  daily  temptation  and  trial
to  stable  and  eternal  felicity."  Ye  blessed  of
(equivalent  to  by)  my  Father.  So  SiSoktoI  toD
0€oD,  "  taught  of  [t.e.  by]  God  "  (John  vi.  45).
They  were  beloved  by  God,  and  were  to  be
rewarded  by  the  gift  of  eternal  life.    This
was  their  blessing  (Eph.  i  3).    Nothing  is
said  about  election  or  predestination,  as  if
they  were  saved  because  tliey  were  blessed
by  the  Father.    There  is  a  sense  in  which
this  is  true;  but  they  were  rewarded,  not
because  of  their  election,  but  because  they
used  the  grace  given  to  them,  and  co-operated
with  the  Holy  Spirit  which  they  received.
Inherit  (KATjpovo/n^aoTe,  receive  at  your  Zoi).
"  Of  what  honour,  of  what  blessedness,  are
these    words  1      He  said  not  —  Take,   but
Inherit,  as  one's  own,  as  your-  Father's,  as
yours,  as  due  to  you  Irom  the  first.    '  For,
before  you  were,'  saith  he,  'these  things
had  been  prepared,  and   made   ready  for
you,  forasmuch  as  I  knew  you  would  be
such  as  you   are ' "    (St.   Chrysostom,    in
loo.).    Christians  are  by  baptism  made  in-  ■
heritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  gifted
with  heavenly  citizenship,  which,  duly  used,
leads  to  eternal  glory.    "  If  children,  then
heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with
Christ"  (Eom.  viii.  17).    From  the  founda-
tion of  the  vrorld  (&7r6  KaTa$oKrjs  Kdar/iou,  a
conititutione  muiidi).    In  other  passages  we
have,  "  before  (irpb)  the  foundation  of  the
world  "  (John  xvii.  24 ;  Eph.  i.  4).  The  two
expressions  virtually  correspond,  implying
God's  eternal  purpose,  "who  willeth  that


ca.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW.


483


all  men  should  be  saved,  and  come  unto  the
knowledge  of  the  truth  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  4).

Ver.  35. — For.  Jesus  here  gives  the  reason
which  influences  him  in  conferring  this  great
boon  on  "the  sheep"  of  his  Dock.  He
instances  certain  works  of  mercy  which  they
performed  during  their  earthly  pilgrimage,
IS  examples  of  the  kind  of  acts  which  he
deems  worthy  of  eternal  reward.  It  is  not
that  he  regards  no  other  with  favour,  but
these  six  works,  as  they  show  the  temper
and  virtue  of  the  doer,  are  taken  as  the  type
of  those  which  are  approved.  They  are
proofs  of  self-denial,  pity,  sympathy,  charity ;
they  demonstrate  that  the  doer  has  some-
thing of  God  in  him,  that  according  to  hig
lights  he  possesses  and  has  exercised  the
supreme  grace  of  love.  The  Lord  confines
himself  to  one  detail ;  lie  docs  not  disparage
other  requirements  necessary  for  salvation,
as  faith,  prayer,  sacraments,  chastity,  truth,
honesty;  but  he  looks  on  one  particular
class  of  works  as  the  great  result  of  all  the
aids  and  provocatives  offered  by  his  Spirit,
and  herein  sets  forth  the  principle  by  which
judgment  ia  guided,  and  which  can  be  ap-
plied universally.  The  .Judge  asks  not  what
we  have  felt  or  tliought,  but  what  we  have
done  or  left  undone  in  our  dealings  with
others.  "It  is  plain,"  says  Bishop  Bull
('  Harm.  Ap.,'  diss.  i.  5.  4),  "  that  our  works
are  considered  as  the  very  things  on  account
of  which  (by  the  merciful  covenant  of  God
through  Christ)  eternal  life  is  given  us."
He  quotes  Vossius  ('  De  Bon.  Op.,'  10) :  "  It
is  asked  whether  a  reward  is  promised  to
works  as  signs  of  faith  ?  Now,  we  conceive
they  say  too  mnch  wlio  suppose  it  promised
to  works  as  deserving  it,  and  that  they  say
too  little  who  think  It  promised  to  them  only
as  signs  of  faith.  For  there  aro  many  pas-
sages of  Scripture  where  it  is  shown  tliat
our  works,  in  tlie  business  of  salvation,  are
regarded  as  indispensably  requisite,  or  as  a
primary  condition,  to  which  the  reward  of
eternal  life  is  inseparably  connected."  I  was
an  hungrod,  equivalent  to  "  very  hungry  "
(ch.  xii.  1).  Christ  enumerates  the  chief  of
whiit  are  called  the  corporal  works  of  mercy,
omitting  burial  of  the  dead  (see  on  ver.  86).
We  may  note  hero  an  argument  a/ortiort ;  if
such  simple  acts  (comp.  cli.  x.  42)  meet  with
■o  gicat  a  reward,  what  shall  be  the  portion
of  those  who  are  enabled  to  rise  to  more  per-
fect obedience  and  higher  degrees  of  devotion
and  self-sacrifice?  Ye  took  me  in  ((rwriyi-
yeTf  fif);  i.e.  into  your  houses,  received  me
with  hospltality,or  iis  one  of  j our  own  family.
We  have  instances  of  such  hospitality  inGcnT
xviii.  ^  Judg.  xix.  20,  21 :  and  of  this  iisoof
the  verb  fruvayeir  in  2  Sam.  xi.  27,'SBptuagint.
Why  Christ  speaks  of  hiriisolf 'iis  receiving
these  ministratiouiitiS'explained  in  ver.  40.

Ver.  3(>.— «¥^l»'^Ti>ited  me.    The  visitatiun


of  the  sick  hRS  become  a  common  term  among
US.  It  implies  properly  going  to  see,  though
other  ideas  are  connoted.  Ye  oame  unto
me.  It  was  easier  in  those  days  to  visit
friends  in  prison  than  it  is  at  the  present
time.  Good  men,  if  they  could  not  obtain
release  of  prisoners,  might  comfort  and  sym-
pathize with  them.  The  seven  corporal
works  of  mercy  which  antiquity  has  endorsed
have  been  preserved  in  the  mnemonic  lino,
"  Visito,  poto,  cibo,  redimo,  tego,  coUigo,
condo."  All  these  might  be  performed  by
non-Christians  who  professed  the  fear  of  God
and  followed  the  guidance  of  conscience.
God  never  leaves  himself  without  witness ;
bis  Spirit  strives  with  man,  and  in  the
absence  of  higher  and  completer  revelation,
to  be  wholly  guided  by  these  inner  motions
is  to  work  out  salvation,  as  far  as  circum-
stances allow,  and  in  a  certain  restricted
sense.  In  a  universal  judgment  regard  is
had  to  this  consideration.  "In  return  fof
what  do  they  receive  such  things?  For
the  covering  of  a  roof,  for  a  garment,  for
bread,  for  cold  water,  for  risiting,  for  going
into  the  prison.  For  indeed  in  every  ease
it  is  for  what  is  needed;  and  sometimes
not  even  for  that.  For  surely  the  sick  and
he  that  is  in  bonds  seek  not  for  this  only,
but  the  one  to  be  loosed,  the  other  to  be
delivered  from  his  infirmity.  But  he,  being
gracious,  requires  only  what  is  within  our
power,  or  rather  even  less  than  what  is
within  our  power,  leaving  to  us  to  exert  our
generosity  in  doing  more  "  (St.  Ohrysostom,
in  loc.).

Vers.  37 — 39.— Shall  the  righteous  answer
him.  The  righteous  are  those  on  the  right
hand,  those  who  have  passed  through  earthly
probation,  and  have  come  forth  holy  and
pure.  Their  reply  (which  is  given  before
the  Lord's  explanation)  is  contained  in  three
verses,  which  recapitulate  the  deeds  specified
by  the  Lord,  with  some  slight  variation  in
the  wording.  When  saw  we  thee,  etc.?
If  this  i-eply  is  conceived  as  spoken  by  the
followers  of  Christ,  who  must  be  supposed  to
know  what  he  had  said  (ch.  x.  40 — 42,  "  He
that  receiveth  you  reoeiveth  me,"  etc.),  it
must  be  considered  as  expressive,  not  so
much  of  surprise,  as  profound  humility,
which  had  never  hitherto  realized  the  grand
idea.  They  had  done  so  little,  tliey  had
rendered  him  no  servioo  personally,  they
were  unworthy  so  to  do — now  could  they
merit  such  a  reward  7  If  the  answer  is
taken  a:s  given  by  non-Christians,  it  shows
iguoirance  of  the  high  value  of  their  service,
and  astonishment  that,  in  following  the  dic-
tates of  conscience  and  charity,  they  had
unwittingly  had  the  supieme  honour  of
serving  Christ.  MedisBval  legemis  liave
exemplified  tlie  identity  of  Christ  and  his
.sufi'ermg  members  by  telling  how  saiula


484  THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cw.  xxt.  1— W.


have  seen  Lim  in  those  whom  they  rellered.
Such  itories  are  told  of  Saints  Augnstine,
OhriitoplieT,  Martin,  and  others.  And  fed  thee
{iSpi^afuii).  Instead  of  "  gave  me  to  eat "
(ver.  85).  Biok  or  in  prison,  and  came  onto
thee.  Instead  of  "  sick,  and  ye  visited  me ;  in
prison,"  eto.  The  Lord  could  not  more
emphatically  have  recommended  works  of
mercy  as  having  the  highest  value  in  hii
estimation.  "  There  is  a  mystery  in  many
of  the  actions  of  men,  which  needs  the
interpretation  of  the  Master  "  (Uorison).

Ver.  40.— The  King  shall  answer.  The
royal  Judge  condescends  to  explain  the
meaning  of  the  seeming  paradox.  Inasmuch
as ;  Elf)'  '6(rov,  rendered  in  the  Vulgate  quam-
diu,  rather,  qwUenui,  in  which  sense  the
phrase  is  found  also  in  Bom.  xi  13.  Unto
one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren.  That
is,  not  the  apostles,  nor  specially  Christians,
but  all  the  afflicted  who  have  fellowship
with  Christ  in  hia  sufferings  and  sorrows.
Any  such  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  his
brethren.  Ye  have  done  Qye  did)  it  unto
me.  The  Lord'  so  perfectly  identifies  him-
self with  the  human  family,  whose  nature
he  assumed,  that  he  made  their  sorrows  and
Bufferings  his  own  (Isa.  liil.  4 ;  Ixiii.  9 ;  ch.
viii.  17),  he  suffered  with  the  sufferers ;  his
perfect  sympathy  placed  him  in  their  posi-
tion ;  in  all  their  affliction  he  was  afflicted.
From  this  identification  it  follows  that  he
regards  that  which  is  done  to  others  as  done
to  Ijimself.  Thus  he  could  expostulate  with
the  persecutor,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  perse-
cutest  thou  UM  ?  "  And  we  have  the  amazing
revelation  that  he  receives  with  the  same
gr.iciousness  the  pious  workings  of  natural
religion  in  the  ease  of  those  who  Icnow  no
better.

Ver.  41. — Unto  them  on  the  left  hand.
The  sentence  on  these  is  comprised  in  vers.
41 — 45.  It  is  conveyed  in  terms  parallel  to
that  on  the  rightuous  ;  but  how  infinite  the
difference  I  Depart  from  ma  1  Not "  Come  t "
(ver.  84).  What  a  world  of  misery  is  con-
tained in  this  word,  "Depart"!  Ai  the
light  of  God's  countenance  is  happiness,  so
banishment  from  lus  presence  is  utter  woe.
What  it  implies  we  know  not ;  we  will  not
attempt  to  imagine.  God  preserve  us  from
ever  knovring  I  Te  onried.  He  had  called
the  righteons,  "  blessed  of  my  Father ; "  he
dues  not  term  these,  *'  oarsed  of  my  Father,"
because  Qod  willeth  not  the  death  of  a
■inner.  "  Not  he  laid  the  enrse  upon  them,
but  their  own  works "  (St.  Chrysostom,  in
loo.').  It  was  no  part  of  Ood'i  design  that
any  .of  his  creatures  should  suffer  this
misery.  "  God  made  not  death,  neither  hath
he  pleasure  in  the  destruction  of  the  living.
For  he  created  all  things,  that  they  might
have  their  being  •  •  •  but  ungodly  men  with
tkaii  wordf  Mtd  works  called  death  onto


them  "  (Wlsd.  L  IS,  etc.).  Into  eTerlastlng
fire  (t^  nip  rh  cuiyiov,  tltc  fire  which  it  ever-
kuiing).  To  the  poignant  regret  for  the
loss  of  happiness  and  of  the  preuence  of  God
there  is  added  physical  anguish,  expressed
metaphorically  by  the  term  "  fire."  This  ii
called  everlasting,  and  however  in  tliese
days  of  compromise  we  may  seek  to  mlnimizo
or  modify  the  attribute,  it  was  so  understood
by  our  Lord's  hearera  (see  below  on  ver.
46).  Prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,
This  region  or  sphere  of  torment  was  not,
as  the  kingdom  of  the  righteous,  prepared
for  man  originally;  it  was  particularly  de-
signed (rh  TiTOiiiaaiiivov)  for  Satan  and  his
myrmidons  (see  2  Fet.  ii.  4,  9),  and  will  not
be  perfected  till  the  last  judgment  (Bev.  xx.
10).  There  is  no  bint  of  its  being  remedial
or  corrective;  and  what  it  is  to  the  devil
it  must  be  to  those  who  share  it  with
him.  It  is  man's  own  doing  that  be  is  nnfit
for  the  company  of  saints  and  angels,  and,
having  made  himself  like  imtu  the  evil
spirits  by  rebellion  and  hatred  of  good,  he
must  consort  with  them  and  share  their  doom.
It  seems  as  thongh  there  were  no  proper
place  for  man's  punishment ;  there  is  no
book  of  death  corresponding  to  the  book  of
life  (Bev.  xx.  12,  etc.);  the  wicked  are  in
an  anomalous  state,  and,  shut  out  by  their
own  action  from  their  proper  inheritance,
fall  into  the  society  of  demons.  How  to  re-
oouoile  this  destiny,  which  seems  inconceiv-
ably terrible,  with  God's  mercy,  love,  and
justice,  has  always  proved  a  stumbling-block
to  free-thinkers.  It  is,  indeed,  a  mystery
which  we  cannot  understand,  and  which
Christ  has  pniposely  left  unexplained.  We
can  only  bow  the  head  and  say,  "  Shall  not
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  dorigbi?"  (Oea
xviiL  25).

Vers.  42,  43. — The  Lord  gives  the  ground
of  the  sentence,  which  proceeds  on  the  same
terms  as  the  former  one.  The  crimes  foi
which  these  souls  are  punished  are  those  of
omission  and  negligence;  they  failed  to  per-
form the  most  elementary  duties  of  charity
and  brotherly  love  whioh  conscience  and
natural  religion  enjoin;  they  had  lived
utterly  selfish  and  nnprofitaUa  lives.  U
sins  of  omission  are  thus  punished,  we  may
infer  that  positive  transgressions  shall  meet
with  still  heavier  retribution.

Ver.  44. — Then  shall  they  also  answer
[him].  Not  in  words,  for  at  that  time  objeo-
tion  and  expostulation  would  not  be  allowed,
but  in  thought, "  standing  at  the  judgment-
seat,  yet  ceasing  not  to  sin."  There  is  a
certain  self-oonSdence  in  their  reply,  very
different  from  the  humility  and  misgiving
of  the  righteous.  When  saw  we  thee,  eto.  f
Thev  put  all  these  neglected  duties  in  a
careless  summary.  They  had  never  thought
•f  Obiist  ia  the  matter:  wcro  they  to  bo


OH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  8T.  MATTHEW.


485


condemmed  foT  this  ?  Some  had  never  even
lieard  of  Christ,  never  been  taught  faith  in
liim :  waa  this  their  fault?  This  is  the  line
which  their  aelf-jutitifioation  took;  there
was  nothing  of  love,  nothing  of  humility.

Ver.  45.^Inasmnoh  as,  etc.  The  Jndg*
at  once  disallows  all  snch  pleas.  He  exacts
rjothing  which  any  good  man,  Christian  or
not,  might  not  have  done.  As  before,  iden-
tifying himself  witli  the  human  race,  he
shows  that,  in  neglecting  to  perform  acts  of
mercifulness  and  charity  to  the  afflicted,
they  disregarded  hini,  despised  him,  dis-
honoured Urn.  One  of  the  least  of  these.
He  adds  not  "  brethren,"  as  above  (ver,  40),
because  the  evil  acknowledge  no  such
brotherhood ;  they  live  for  self  alone,  they
own  not  their  real  relation  to  the  whole
family  of  man,

Ver.  46. — Shall  go  away,  Bengel  notes
that  the  King  will  first  address  tlie  righteous
in  the  audience  of  the  unrighteous,  but  these
last  will  be  dismissed  to  their  place  of  pun-
ishment before  the  others  actually  receive
their  reward.  Thus  the  evil  will  see  nothing
of  the  life  eternal,  while  the  good  will  be-
hold the  vengeance  inflicted  on  the  others
(ch.  xiiL  49).  Into  everlasting  punishment
((IS  K6Kariv  cidirutv)  ,  . .  life  eternal  (ever-
lasting, (ttiiv  Mmov).  The  same  term  is
used  in  both  places,  and  ought  to  have  been
eo  translated.  The  word  kSauctis  in  strict
classical  usage  denotes  punishment  inflicted
for  tlie  correction  and  improvement  of  the
offender,  Tinapia  being  employed  to  signify
punishment  in  satisfaction  of  outraged  jus-
tice, or  to  revenge  an  injury.  But  it  is  open
to  doubt  whether  the  former  term  is  to  be
taken  in  its  striflMst  lenee  in  the  New  Tes-
tament. A  ceaseless  controversy  rests  on
the  meaning  of  at^yios,  some  contending
that  it  signifies  "  everlasting,"  and  nothing
else ;  others  that  its  sense  is  modified  by
the  idea  to  which  it  is  atttiched;  and  others
again  that  it  ought  to  be  rendered  by
"wonian,"  to  which  is  given  an  indeter-
minate signification  governed  by  our  con-
ception of  the  duration  expressed  by  non.
This  is  not  tlie  place  to  disi;us8  this  perplex-
ing question,  nor  shall  I  attempt  to  dogma-
tize upon  the  problem.  Suffice  it  to  make
these  few  observations.  On  tlie  one  hand,
tuking  the  literal  sense  of  our  Lord's  words,
and  the  meaning  which  his  hearers  would
attach  to  them,  we  must  believe  that  the
risen  life  and  the  second  death  are  equally
everlasting  (see  Judith  xvi.  17 ;  Ecclus.  vii.
17,-4  Maco,  xii.  12).  And  if  it  is  thought
that  eternity  of  punishment  is  incompatible
with  love  and  benevolence,  and  inequitable
as  the  penalty  of  offences  committeil  in
time,  it  must  be  remembered  that  eternity
of  reward  il  infinitely  beyond  all  human


claims,  and  bears  no  proportion  to  the  merits
of  the  recipient.  Nor  may  we  reason  from
onr  conception  of  the  nature  and  attribute*
of  God;  how  these  attributes  work  har-
monionsly  together,  though  seemingly  op-
posed, we  cannot  presume  to  determine.
The  consequences  of  sin  even  in  this  world
are  often  irretrievable,  as  are  some  hnman
punishments.  We  have  no  reason  to  sup-
pose that  punishment  is  inflicted  only  for
the  correction  of  the  criminal  (sea  on  yer.
41),  nor  is  it  possible  to  conceive  how  this
result  could  be  effected  by  condemning  him
to  the  society  of  devils.  Farther,  we  have  to
regard  the  heinousness  of  sin  in  Gkid'a  sight,
remembering  the  infinite  price  paid  for  its
expiation.  And  lastly,  the  doctrine  does  not
depend  upon  this  passage  only,  but  is  sup-
ported by  many  other  statements  in  both  tlie
Old  and  New  Testaments :  e.g.  Isa.  IxtL  24 ;
Daa.  xii.  2 ;  Mark  ix.  44,  46, 48 ;  Bev.  xxL  8.
Such  are  some  of  the  chief  arguments  in
favour  of  the  everlasting  nature  of  future
punishment.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  to
remark  that  our  Lord  is  here  not  concerned
with  teaching  this  doctrine  of  eternity ;  he
assumes  the  authorized  view  of  the  matter,
and  draws  his  awful  lesson  from  that  view.
It  is  certainly  true  tliat  the  meaning  of
aitiiiios  is  not  fixed  and  uniform ;  it  is  con-
ditioned by  the  term  to  wliich  it  appertains.
No  one  would  say  that  "  everlasting  "  was
applied  to  God  and  to  a  mountain  in  the
same  sense;  and  though  it  seems  incon-
gruous to  find  a  difference  of  meaning  in  the
same  sentence,  yet  there  may  be  reasons  for
distinguishing  the  signification  of  the  quali-
fying adjective  in  the  terms  "  eternal  life "
and  "  eternal  punishment."  God,  indeed,
cannot  draw  back  from  his  promise,  but  he
may  be  more  merciful  than  the  ttmor  of  liis
threats  seems  to  imply.  It  is  possible  that
"nonian"  may  denote  merely  indefinite
duration  without  the  connotation  of  never-
ending.  Such  like  are  the  pleas  brought
forward  to  lessen  the  plain  enunciation  of
the  awfol  truth.  For  myself  I  do  not  see
any  escape  from  the  import  of  the  state-
ment, nor  any  hope  of  amelioration  in  the
case  of  the  lost,  when  relegated  to  the  scene
of  their  penal  existence  (see  on  ch.  xviii.  8,
9).  But  I  set  no  bounds  to  the  Divine
mercy  and  wisdom ;  and  God  may  see  a
mode  of  reconciling  his  strict  justice  with
his  desire  of  man's  salvation,  which  our  finite
understanding  cannot  grasp.  All  we  can
say  here  is  that  infinite  misery  and  infinite
happiness  are  set  before  as,  and  that  God
has  thus  shown  the  two  ends  without  reserve
or  possible  modification,  in  order  that  we
may  be  aroused  to  shun  the  one  and  to  win
tlie  other.  "  From  thy  wrath, and  from  ever-
lastinj-fiotrmRtionigdod  Lord,  deliver  oa."


486  THE  GOSPEL  ACXDORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1—46,


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Theparabh  o/ihtUn  virgint.  I.  Thxt  oo  rosTH.  L  The  kingdom  oj
heaven.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  that  kingdom  is  the  risible  Church.  But  the  present
parable  seems  to  relate  to  a  part  only  of  the  kingdom,  a  portion  of  the  Church.  There
may  possibly  be  no  spiritual  significance  in  the  word  "  virgins."  Like  the  number  ten,
perhaps  a  common  number  at  such  times,  it  may  belong  merely  to  the  structure,  the
imagery  of  the  parable;  young  unmarried  women  were  and  are  usually  attendants  of  the
bride  (comp.  Fs.  xl7. 14).  But  these  virgins  all  alike  took  their  lamps ;  all  alike  went
forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom ;  all  too  had  oil  in  their  lamps,  though  not  all  had  a  store
of  oil  in  their  vessels  also.  Then  all  were  something  more  than  nominal  Christians ;  all
had,  in  some  sense,  come  out  of  the  world,  and  had  gone  to  meet  the  Bridegroom.
There  are  no  hypocrites  in  the  parable,  no  openly  wicked  and  disobedient  men.  This
consideration  gives  It  a  very  awful  meaning ;  it  is  not  enough  to  have  been  once
awakened,  there  is  need  of  constant  persevering  watchfulness.  The  parable  embodies
and  enforces  the  lesson  of  the  last  chapter,  "  Watch  therefore :  for  ye  know  not  what
hour  your  Lord  doth  come."  The  virgins  all  had  lamps ;  the  lamp  seems  to  represent
the  outward  Chi  istian  life  of  worship  and  obedience  which  is  seen  by  the  eye  of  men.
They  all  had  oil  in  their  lamps;  the  oil  is  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  They  all  went
forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom.  The  Bridegroom,  of  course,  is  Christ ;  he  had  come
from  heaven  to  fetch  home  his  bride  the  Church.  Lange  well  remarks,  in  his  com-
mentary, "  As  it  respects  the  relations  of  .the  virgins  to  the  bride,  we  must  bear  in
mind  the  analogy  of  the  marriage  supper  of  the  king's  son  and  his  guests.  The  Church,
in  her  aggregate  and  ideal  unity,  is  the  bride ;  the  members  of  the  Church,  as  indivi-
dually called,  are  guests ;  in  their  separation  from  the  world,  and  expectation  of  Christ's
coming,  they  are  his  virgins."  The  bride  is  not  mentioned  in  this  parable.  It  describes
not  the  Church  as  a  whole, but  its  individual  members;  not  all  its  members, but  those
only  who  have  been  once  awakened,  who  have  at  least  begun  to  come  after  Christ,
and  have  made  some  progress,  more  or  less,  in  the  way  of  godliness.  In  the  visible
Church  the  evil  are  ever  mingled  with  the  good,  and  among  those  who  seem  to  be  good
there  are  always  some  whose  "  goodness  is  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew
it  goeth  away."  So  among  these  virgins  who  all  went  forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom,
there  were  five  wise,  but  the  remaining  five  were  foolish.  2.  The  difference*  which
exist  among  it$  citizens.  All  the  virgins  took  their  lamps ;  all  the  lamps  were  burning
as  they  went  forth.  Outwardly  there  was  no  observable  difference  among  them  ;  but
the  foolish  took  no  oil  with  them ;  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their  lamps.
It  is  not  enough  to  have  been  "once  enlightened; "  we  may  not  dare  put  our  trust  in
the  grace  once  given  in  holy  baptism,  or  in  what  may  seem  to  have  been  the  change
of  repentance  and  conversion.  The  foolish  virgins  went  forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom.
They  had  their  lamps ;  and  the  lamps  were  not  empty  or  dark,  they  were  burning,
they  had  oil  in  them.  Then  even  the  foolish  were  using  the  means  of  grace,  they  bad
been  made  "  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Heb.  vi.  4),  they  seemed  to  be  living
Christian  lives,  they  had  made  some  real  progress.  But  they  took  no  oil  with  them  ;
they  acted  as  iif  the  lamps,  once  lighted,  would  burn  on  for  ever;  they  had  no  store  ot
oil  for  future  use.    They  had  "  the  washing  of  regeneration ; "  they  delighted  in  their

{>ast  experience,  and  trusted  in  it  as  if  they  had  all  that  was  needed  for  their  spiritual
ife.  They  had  not  "  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Their  lamps  burned  brightly
for  a  time ;  all  seemed  well,  but  they  had  not  brought  their  vessels,  flasks  of  oil,  to
supply  their  lamps.  Perhaps  the  vessels  were  cumbrous,  heavy  to  carry ;  plain,  too,
not  striking  in  appearance;  they  made  no  show  like  the  burning  lamp.  These  virgins
were  like  the  seed  that  was  sown  upon  the  rock.  They  heard  the  Word,  and  at  once
received  it  with  joy,  but  they  had  no  root.  They  were  wanting  in  perseverance,  in
watchfulness.  They  did  not  keep  In  their  minds  the  thought  that,  though  the  Bride-
groom might  come  at  any  moment,  yet  he  might  long  delay ;  that  there  was  need  of
daily  preparation,  of  constant  watchfulness,  for  his  coming.  The  wise  took  oil  in  their
vessels  with  their  lamps.  They  knew  that  it  was  not  safe  to  trust  to  the  grace  of  their
baptism,  to  a  flush  of  excitement,  to  past  experience,  however  precious  ;  they  counted
not  themselves  to  have  apprehended ;  they  forgot  what  was  behind,  and  ever  reached
forth  unto  those  things  which  were  before ;  they  sought  in  persevering  prayer  aud  daily


CH. XXV. 7— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  487

self-denials,  and  the  constant  faithful  use  of  the  appointed  means  of  grace  for  "  the
supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  Spirit  is  the  holy  oil,  the  oil  with  which
the  Lord  himself  was  anointed  ("  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"
Acts  X.  38),  the  "unction  from  the  Holy  One,*'' which  is  given  to  all  his  faithful
servants ;  that  anointing  ahideth  in  them,  and  teacheth  them  (1  John  ii.  27)  because
they  "  stir  up  the  Gift  of  God  that  is  in  them,"  not  quenching  the  Spirit,  as  careless
slothful  Christians  do,  but  treasuring  in  their  hearts  that  sacred  Gift,  striving  always
to  grow  in  grace,  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  to  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  to  be  filled
with  the  Spirit,  to  increase  in  the  Holy  Spirit  more  and  more.  We  must  treasure  the
sacred  oil,  the  Divine  anointing ;  we  must  seek  for  its  daily  renewing.  We  shall  not
seek  in  vain  if  we  seek  in  persevering  prayer.  "  My  Father  will  give  the  Holy  Spirit
to  them  that  ask  him."  3.  The  protracted  absence  of  the  King.  The  Bridegroom
tarried.  The  end  was  not  yet ;  the  second  advent  was  not  so  near  at  hand  as  wa.s
almost  universally  expected  in  the  early  Church.  The  Bridegroom  tarried ;  the  time
of  waiting  was  long — longer  much  than  men  had  thought.  The  first  excitement  passed
away,  some  had  left  their  first  love,  the  love  of  most  was  growing  cold.  Drowsiness
seized  the  virgins  in  their  watch ;  first  they  bowed  their  heads  in  slumber,  then  they
were  all  sleeping.  So  it  is  now.  Many  true  Christian  souls  have  been  gathered  to
their  fathers,  to  the  countless  multitude  of  the  departed,  since  this  parable  was  spoken ;
through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  they  have  been  laid  to  sleep  in  the  quiet  rest  of
Paradise.  In  another  sense  those  who  are  now  living  upon  tbe  earth  slumber  and
sleep  in  the  eye  of  God  ;  the  vigilance  of  the  most  earnest  is  but  as  sleep  compared
with  that  constant  and  intent  watchfulness  which  is  the  ideal  of  the  Christian  hfe.
We  ought  to  live  aa  men  waiting  for  their  Lord,  our  loins  ever  girded,  our  lamps  ever
burning,  in  daily  expectation  of  his  coming,  in  constant  readiness  to  meet  him.  Alasl
vre  slumber  and  sleep ;  we  forget  the  first  fervour  of  our  conversion ;  our  religious
exercises  are  performed  as  a  matter  of  routine,  sometimes  almost  unconsciously,  with-
out energy,  without  that  deep  and  awful  sense  of  their  immense  importance  which
ought  to  fill  the  heart  of  every  Christian.  The  shades  of  difl'erence  among  Christians
are  innumerable:  some  are  utterly  careless;  some  rouse  themselves  from  time  to  time
to  thought  and  real  effort ;  some  try  by  the  power  of  faith  and  prayer  to  keep  them-
selvea  in  the  love  of  God,  and  to  love  the  appearing  of  the  Saviour.  But  none  realize
to  the  full  the  tremendous  necessity  of  watchfulness ;  none  live  in  that  fixed  attention,
in  that  constant  looking  unto  Jesus,  in  that  full  preparedness,  in  that  daily  and  hourly
anticipation  of  the  Saviour's  coming,  which  we  should  regard  as  the  true  Christian
Trame  of  mind,  to  which  we  should  strive  to  approximate  nearer  and  nearer,  in  all
humility  and  self-distrust,  not  counting  ourselves  to  have  attained,  but  ever  pressing
forward,  Alas !  as  the  Lord  looks  upon  the  Churches,  they  all  in  various  degrees  are
seen  to  slumber  and  sleep.

IL  Tei  Kma  is  at  hand.  1.  The  midnight  ery.  It  came  suddenly,  in  tbe  dead
of  night.  The  long-expected  Bridegroom  was  coming  now,  coming  in  his  glory,  coming
with  all  his  angel-train  to  take  unto  himself  his  chosen  bride.  So  one  day  the  Lord
will  come  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God ;  so  now  the
hour  of  death  cometh  upon  us  one  by  one,  when  we  are  not  looking  for  it,  when  we  are
sleeping,  engaged  in  this  world's  business  or  amusement,  thinking  nothing  of  the  awful
change  which  is  at  hand.  Suddenly  we  seem  to  hear  a  cry — a  cry  that  thrills  through  our
hearts,  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God ! "  2.  2%e  awakening.  Then  all  those  virgins  arose
and  trimmed  their  lamps.  All  heard  the  midnight  cry;  all  prepared  to  meet  the
Bridegroom.  When  death  is  at  hand,  when  the  thought  of  the  Lord's  speedy  coming
is  borne  with  power  into  the  soul,  a  man  looks  into  his  own  heart.  We  must  remember
that  this  parable  relates  only  to  Christians  who  have  led  in  various  degrees  a  religious
life.  Men  who  have  never  felt  religious  impressions,  who  are  without  any  spiritual
experience,  are  often  so  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  that  they  slumber  on,
dying  as  they  lived,  without  the  sense  of  sin,  without  the  fear  of  God,  and  never
waking  till  they  pass  out  of  this  world  into  his  most  awful  presence.  But  those  who
have  been  believers  in  any  real  sense  must  hear  that  solemn  cry.  Thev  ask  themselves,
they  are  forced  to  ask  whether  they  will  or  no— What  is  their  religion  ?  Is  it  tme  ?  is  it
real  ?  is  it  deep  ?  They  all  want  their  repentance  deepened,  their  faith  confirmed,  their
love  to  (jod  increased,  kindled  to  •  holier  affection,  to  a  more  trustful  confidenc*.    AU


488  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  ixt.  1—46.

the  virgins  trimmed  their  lamps,  they  all  sought  to  prepare  themselTes  to  meet  the
Bridegroom.    But  there  was  a  difference.    The  foolish  virgins  felt  now  the  want  of
those  Teasels  which  they  had  heedlessly  left — the  want  of  that  oil  which  they  had  neg-
lected to  provide.     When  they  awoke  to  a  sense  of  the  Bridegroom's  near  approach,
they  found,  alas  I  that  their  lamps  were  going  out;  there  was  still  a  faint,  flickering
flame ;  but  it  was  dying,  almost  gone,  and,  alas  1  they  had  no  oil  to  replenish  the
empty  lamp.    So  dying  men  leel  when  they  are  not  ready ;  they  feel  that  their  reli-
gion has  not  been  deep  and  real ;  it  has  been  too  much  a  thing  of  words  and  outward
forms,  with  some  excitement  of  the  feelings  now  and  then ;  but  it  has  taken  no  deep
hold  upon  the  character,  it  has  not  sunk  into  the  heart.     They  felt  some  interest  in
religion  once ;  they  made  a  little  progress ;  it  was  enough  to  give  them  some  comfort
under  ordinary  circumstances ;  but  ah  I  not  enough  to  support  them  now  in  the  presence
of  the  king  of  terrors ;  it  is  weak,  it  fails  them  at  the  last ;  their  lamp  is  being  quenched,
they  have  almost  quenched  the  Spirit  by  their  spiritual  indolence.  (The  Greek  word  here
rendered  "  going  out "  and  that  translated  "quench  "  in  1  Thess.  v.  19  are  the  u>mo.)
In  their  distress  they  send  for  the  clergyman,  for  some  Christian  friend;  but  ah  I  it
is  little  that  they  can  do.  "  There  is  not  enough,"  the  wise  virgins  answered, "  for  us  and
for  you."    Each  man  must  have  that  saered  oil  in  his  own  vessel,  iii  his  own  heart  and
character.     He  must  have  bought  it  too;  it  must  be  bought  of  him  who  sells  without
money  and'without  price.    "  1  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire, . .  .  and
white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed;  .  .  .  and  anoint  thine  eyes  with  ejeaalve,
that  thou  mayest  see."    The  precious  oil  must  be  bought  with  prayer,  with  strong,
persevering,  faithful  prayer;  it  must  be  treasured  in  the  heart;  it  must  so  fill  the
character  that  by  the  grace  of  God  it  becomes  our  own,  our  very  own,  and  cannot  be
taken  from  us.    One  man  cannot  give  that  holy  oil  to  another — only  God  can  give  it ;
one  man  cannot  save  another's  soul — only  God  can  save  us.   The  wise  virgins  did  all  that
they  could  for  their  companions — they  bade  them  go  to  them  that  sell.  AH  that  we  can
rto  Is  to  point  the  sinner  to  Christ :  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world  I  "    Sinners  must  come  to  him  in  their  need  ;  they  must  buy  of  him
as  he  counsels  them,  and  that  for  themselves.     Others  cannot  buy  the  precious  oil  for
them ;  it  must  be  bought  with  their  own  prayers,  their  own  crying  and  tears,    3.  The
coming  of  the  Bridegroom.    The  warning  was  short ;  there  was  little  time  to  prepare;
very  soon  the  Bridegroom  came.    Then  they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the
marriage,  and  the  door  was  shut.    The  wise  virgins  were  ready ;  they  had  been  slum-
bering, but  they  had  oil  in  their  vessels.    Christian  men  may  he  taken  unawares ;
death  may  come  suddenly  upon  them ;  the  Lord  may  come  suddenly ;  but,  if  they
have  been  living  in  faith  and  prayer,  they  will  be  able,  so  to  speak,  to  put  themselves
at  once  into  an  attitude  of  devotion.     Such  men  are  filled  with  the  Spirit;  the  Spirit
is  there,  ready  to  make  intercession  for  them  with  groaninga  that  cannot  be  uttered.
They  can  rouse  themselves  at  once  into  preparedness ;  they  are  ready  to  say  their
"  Kuno  dlmittis,"  for  they  have  been  waiting  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel,  and  their
eyes  have  seen  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.    The  wise  virgins  were  ready ;  they  went  in
with  the  Bridegroom  to  the  marriage.    4.  Th«  door  wot  ihut.    It  ia  open  now ;  peni-
tent sinners  may  enter;  penitent  sinners  have  entered  in  multitudes — David  and
Peter,  and  she  who  had  sinned  much,  to  whom  much  was  forgiven.     It  is  open  to  all
who  are  ready,  who  are  cleansed  by  the  purifying  influences  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  by
the  pervading  virtue  of  the  sacred  oil,  from  the  defilement  of  sin.     But  the  time  will
come  when  it  must  be  shut ;  it  was  shut  to  those  foolish  virgins  when  they  returned.
They  bad  not  found  the  oil,  we  may  be  sure ;  but  they  cried  in  their  despair,  "  Lord,
Lord,  open  to  us  I "    Alas  1  it  was  too  late.     He  answered,  "  I  know  you  not."    The
Lord  knoweth  those  that  are  his;  he  knows  them  every  one.    "  I  know  mine  own,  as
the  Father  knoweth  me."     He  knows  them  with  the  knowledge  of  Divine  love,  of
intimate  affectionate  communion.    He  knoweth  not  thus  those  who  have  lived  without
persevering  prayer,  who  have  left  their  first  love,  who  have  not  kept  themselves  in
the  love  of  God,  building  themielves  up  on  their  most  holy  faith,  praying  in  the  Holy
Ghost.     "  I  know  you  not,"  he  said.     The  words  are  not  so  dreadful  as  the  awful
condemnation  of  the  slothful  servant  in  the  next  parable,  or  of  those  that  were  set  on
the  left  hand  in  the  prophecy  of  the  judgment ;  it  may  be,  we  cAnnot  tell,  that  they
denote  •  milder  doom.    But  this  it  a  subject  involved  in  the  very  deepest  mystery.


OH.  xxT.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  489

It  is  enough  for  us  if  we  feel  the  exceeding  awfulness  of  those  words, "  The  door  was
shut,"  and  take  into  our  hearts  the  solemn  warning  of  the  Lord,  "  Watch  therefore,
for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  whereio  the  Son  of  man  cometh."  It  must  he
Tery  dreadful  to  he  found  unprepared,  even  if  the  lamp  is  not  quite  gone  out,  even  if
it  had  been  burning  brightly  once.  Very  dreadful  it  must  be  to  pray,  "  Lord,  Lord,
open  to  us  1 "  and  to  obtain  no  answer  save  those  awful  words,  "  I  know  yon  not ; "
dreadful  exceedingly,  even  if  those  words  do  not  imply  the  extremest  condemnation ;
still  more  dreadful — dreadful  beyond  the  reach  of  thought,  if  they  do  mean  perpetual
exclusion  from  the  presence  of  God  in  the  great  outer  darkness.  Therefore  waUsh —
watch  and  pray  always.

Lessons.  1.  It  is  not  enough  to  belong  to  the  visible  Church.  We  must  grow  in
grace.  2.  We  must  pray  daily  for  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  We  must
exandne  ourselves  daily,  not  leave  self-examination  to  the  hour  of  sickness  and  approach-
ing death.    4.  The  Lord  cometh  suddenly  ;  therefore  watch.

Vera.  14 — 30. — The  parable  of  the  tdlenti.  I.  Thk  Master  and  his  skbvants.
1.  TJia  Master't  departure.  This  parable  is  the  complement  of  the  last.  The  two
together  cover  both  sides  of  the  Christian  life — the  contemplative  and  the  active.  The
burning  lamp  represents  the  life  of  faith  and  worship  kindled  by  the  presence  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  The  trading  represents  the  outward  life  of  active  work  fir  Christ.  Under
•11  ordinary  circumstances  the  two  must  be  combined.  A  living  faith  cannot  exist  ia
the  heart  without  manifesting  itself  in  outward  work ;  while  active  work  for  Christ's
sake  springs  from  that  living  fsuth,  and  loses  all  its  worth  and  beauty  if  it  becomes
dbsociated  from  faith  and  love.  The  two  elements  must  coexist  in  all  Christians ;  but
they  may  be  combined  in  different  proportions,  so  that  some  are  mainly  men  of  action,
others  mainly  men  of  contemplation.  In  large  measure  we  must  be  both.  We  must
keep  the  lamp  of  zeal  and  faith  ever  burning,  and  we  must  work  for  Christ.  Christ
himself  was  the  man  travelling  into  a  far  country.  He  was  about  to  depart  out  of  this
world  unto  the  Father.  The  parable  relates  primarily  to  the  apostles,  to  whom  it  was
spoken ;  then  to  the  ministers  of  God's  Holy  Word  and  sacraments,  who  are  his  servants,
who  must  work  for  him  in  his  Church ;  then  to  all  Christians,  for  all  belong  to  Christ,
being  bought  with  his  blood,  and  all  have  work  to  do  for  him.  The  Master  was  about
to  depart.  He  called  his  own  servants.  We  must  remember  that  those  servants  were
not  like  servants  now,  as  free  as  their  masters.  They  were  slaves,  bought  with  their
master's  money;  they  belonged  to  him;  their  time,  strength,  ability,  all  were  his.  2.
TJie  Matter's  goods.  He  deUvered  his  goods  to  his  servants ;  they  were  to  trade  with
them.  Slaves  often  earned  money  for  their  masters  in  various  trades  or  professions.
He  entrusted  large  sums  to  them — five  talents  to  one,  three  to  another,  one  to  a  third.
Here  we  notice  one  of  the  leading  distinctions  between  this  and  the  cognate  parable  in
Luke  xii.  12 — 27.  There  each  of  the  ten  servants  received  the  same  sum,  a  pound,
a  mina;  here  the  sums  entrusted  to  the  servants  differ  greatly.  The  two  parables
supplement  one  another.  That  in  St.  Luke  teaches  that  the  necessary  means  of  grace
are  given  in  like  measirre  to  all  the  servants  of  the  King.  They  show  various  degrees
of  seal  and  diligence  in  the  use  of  them.  The  rewards  of  the  great  day  will  vary
according  to  those  varying  degrees  of  &ithfulness.  The  parable  of  the  talents  teaches
a  somewhat  different  lesson.  "  There  are  diversities  of  gifts  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  4) ;  "  God
haih  set  some  in  the  Church,  first  apostles,  secondarily  prophets,  thirdly  teachers ; "
"  But  all  these  worketh  one  and  the  selfsame  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as
he  will."  The  talents  must  represent  first  and  chiefly  spiritual  gifts,  such  as  those  first
granted  on  the  great  Day  of  Pentecost,  the  gifts  necessary  for  the  apostles  of  Christ,  and
in  various  degrees  for  those  who  have  been  called  to  continue  the  apostles'  work.  Those
gifts  are  not  given  to  all  God's  servants  alike.  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  differ ;  there  are
great  differences  in  energy,  zeal,  strength  of  character,  spiritual  eloquence.  "The
Spirit  divideth  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will,"  according  to  the  needs  of  the  Church,
according  to  the  capacity  of  the  individual  servant.  But,  secondarily,  the  talents  must
also  signify  all  the  good  gifts  of  God — ^health,  time,  intellectual  powers,  earthly  riches,
station,  influence ;  these  and  such-like  are  his  giits,  entrusted  to  us  for  a  while,  to  be
used,  not  for  our  own  enjoyment,  but  tor  his  service.  They  are  bestowed  in  widely
different  measure.     Elach  man's  responsibility  varies  according  tr  tlie  greatness  of  the


490  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxy.  1—46.

gifts  entrnsted  to  him.  3.  The  use  made  of  them.  Straightway  (according  to  what
seems  to  be  the  best  arrangement  of  the  text)  he  who  had  received  five  talents  went
and  traded  with  them.  He  lost  no  time  ;  he  felt  the  greatness  of  his  trust,  and  set  to
work  at  once  to  do  his  best  for  his  lord.  He  was  successful ;  he  made  other  five
talents.  The  second  servant  was  equally  industrious,  and  in  proportion  equally  suc-
cessful ;  each  gaijed  cent,  per  cent. ;  each  did  his  master's  work  faithfully.  The  third
digged  in  the  earth  and  hid  his  lord's  money.  He  knew  that  the  profit  of  his  trading
would  not  be  his  own ;  he  did  not  care  to  labour  for  his  lord.  He  represents  those  who
neglect  spiritual  gifts,  who  do  not  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  i»  in  them,  who  quench
the  Spirit ;  and  secondarily,  those  who  use  the  good  things  of  this  world  simply  for
themselves,  not  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  their  fellow-men.  The  talent  was
liidden  in  the  earth ;  buried  amid  worldly  cares  and  worldly  amusements.  The  unhappy
man  had  received  the  grace  of  God  in  vain ;  he  had  wasted  his  earthly  means  upon  his
own  selfish  pleasures.

n.  The  EECKONiNa.     1.  The  first  servant.      The  lord  cometh  after  a  long  time
(another  hint  that  the  second  advent  was  not  to  be  expected   immediately),  and
reckoneth  with  his  servants.    The  first,  to  whom  five  talents  had  been  entrusted,  hal
gained  other  five  talents.    He  brings  them;  he  attributes  his  gains  entirely  to  big
lord's  original  gifts;  "Lord,  thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five  talents."     He  had  worked  ;
but  it  was  the  lord  who  had  enabled  him  to  work,  who  had  given  him  the  means.
He  represents  the  few  highly  gifted  and  eminently  faithful  Christians,  such  as  St.
Paul,  who  could  say,  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am :  and  his  grace  which  was
bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain ;  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all ;
yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me."     The  Lord  recognized  his  dili-
gence :  "  Well  done,"  he  said,  in  those  precious  words  which  thrill  through  the  Chris-
tian's heart,  filling  him  with  high  and  blessed  hope,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful
servant."    It  is  that  highest  praise,  the  praise  of  God,  which  the  Christian  should
desire  with  all  his  heart  and  soul,  heeding  not  the  praise  of  men.     He  shall  have  that
crowning  praise  who  hath  been  faithful  here,  who  ever  regards  himself  as  the  Lord's
servant,  set  here  to  work  for  God;  who  regards  his  powers,  his  means,  whatever  they
may  be,  as  his  Lord's  money,  to  be  used  in  his  Lord's  service.     Those  gifts  are  "  few
things."     Even  the  five  talents,  the  great  personal  gifts,  the  vast  means  of  doing  good,
which  have  been  bestowed  on  some  of  the  Lord's  servants,  are  "  few  things,"  very
small  indeed  compared  with  the  glory  and  the  blessedness  reserved  for  the  faithful.
For  those  faithful  ones  shall  be  admitted  into  "  the  joy  of  their  Lord,"  the  Lord's  own
joy,  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  for  which-  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the
shame.    They  shall  sit  with  him  in  his  throne ;  for  he  hath  given  them  the  glory
which  was  given  him  of  the  Father.    Heart  of  man  cannot  tell  the  entrancing  rapture
of  that  holiest  joy.    2.  Th«  iec<md  servant.     He  too  had  done  his  best     His  gains
were  lesi  than  those  of  the  first  servant,  but  he  was  not  so  richly  endowed.     He  had
been  equally  faithful ;  he  had  made  the  best  use  of  his  humbler  gifts ;  he  was  as  good
and  holy  and  noble-hearted  a  man  as  his  more  highly  gifted  brother.     He  is  welcomed
with  the  same  high  praise ;  he  receives  the  like  reward.     It  is  faithfulness,  not  gilts,
which  will  be  considered  in  the  great  day.    Many  men  of  mean  capacities  and  poor
endowments  will  be  among  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.    "  Many  that  are
first  shaD  be  last,  and  the  last  shall  be  first."    3.  The  third  servant.    He  lingered  to
the  last ;  his  conscience  was  uneasy.    But  he  could  not  escape  his  master's  eye ;  he
must  render  his  account.    He  comes  at  length,  but  not  in  humility  and  self-abasement,
coufessing  his  sinful  negligence ;  he  comes  with  false  excuses,  trying  to  shift  the  blame
from  himself  upon  his  lord.    He  knew,  he  said,  that  his  master  was  a  hard  man,  harsh
and  exacting ;  he  required  from  his  servants  more  than  they  could  render,  more  than
he  had  enabled  them  to  render.     He  feared  him ;  he  would  not  trade  with  his  talent,
lest  in  the  risks  and  uncertainties  of  business  he  should  lose  some  portion  of  it ;  but  he
had  kept  it  safe ;  there  it  was.    His  master,  he  implied,  had  no  right  to  ask  for  more.
So  men  argue,  or  pretend  to  argue,  now.    They  will  not  work  for  the  glory  of  God  or
for  the  good  of  souls.    The  real  reason  is  sloth,  selfish  sloth ;  they  will  work  only  for
themselves.    But,  like  the  slothful  servant,  they  have  their  excuses ;  they  are  unequal,
they  say,  to  the  work  to  which  God's  providence  seems  to  call  them ;  God's  demands
are  so  large,  to  deep-reaching ;  he  requires  more  than  weak  human  nature  can  give,


OH.  XXV.  1-46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  4P]

more  than  ought  to  bo  expected  of  them.  They  shrink  from  nndertaking  religious
work,  lest  by  failure  in  that  work  they  incur  the  wrath  of  God  and  bring  themselves
into  danger.  So  they  do  nothing  for  God.  They  own  that  they  had  hidden  the  talent,
the  grace  once  given  to  them,  but  at  any  rate  they  had  not  wasted  it  in  riotous  living
or  lost  it  by  misfortunes  in  trade.  They  were  free  from  gross  offences.  Their  lives
had  been  at  least  decent  and  respectable.  Neither  are  they  unbelievers ;  they  own
that  the  talent  belonged  to  their  Lord ;  he  had  given  it  them,  and  they  would  restore
it.  "There  thou  hast  that  is  thine."  They  are  no  worse  than  others,  they  say,  no
worse  than  they  have  always  been.  They  will  not  see  that  this  excuse  is  false,  that
negative  obedience  is  not  suflBcient.  They  are  God's  servants ;  they  belong  to  him ;
their  time,  health,  strength,  money,  intellect,  are  not  their  owa  ;  all  these  things  are
God's  gifts,  lent  to  them  for  a  while ;  they  must  give  an  account  of  their  use  of  them
at  thegreatdayofreckooing.  4.  The  judgment.  "  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant."
Those  most  awful  words  put  into  the  clearest  light  the  solemn  truth  that  more  than
freedom  from  gross  offences  is  needful  for  salvation.  The  slothful  servant  was  wicked,
for  he  had  defrauded  his  lord ;  he  had  not  given  him  that  service  which  was  his  boundea
duty ;  he  had  lived  as  if  he  were  his  own  master,  and  had  ouly  himself  to  please.  Ha
was  wicked,  too,  because  he  made  these  miserable  excuses ;  because,  instead  of  con-
fessing his  sin,  he  slandered  his  lord.  The  lord  repeats  the  servant's  words  in  righteous
indignation ;  he  judges  him  out  of  his  own  mouth.  If  he  had  been  such  as  the  servant
falsely  said,  fear,  if  not  love,  should  have  urged  the  man  to  do  his  duty.  If  he  had
feared  the  risks  of  trading,  at  least  he  should  have  put  his  lord's  money  to  the
exchangers.  The  returns  would  have  been  small  compared  with  the  gains  of  the  faith-
ful servants ;  but  even  those  small  returns  would  have  showa  that  the  servant  had
taken  some  care  of  his  lord's  interests.  The  Lord  seems  to  imply  that  those  small
returns  would  have  been  accepted.  Any  real  work  for  Christ  is  better  than  spiritual
sloth.  Some  Christians  are  abundant  in  their  labours ;  all  must  work  if  they  would
be  saved ;  if  they  have  not  the  energy  of  a  St.  Paul,  they  must  help  those  who  are
foremost  in  Christian  work  with  their  alms  and  with  their  prayers.  They  must  at  the
least  show  their  interest  in  their  Master's  cause  in  this  way,  if  they  are  incapable  of
more  active  exertion.  And  work  they  must,  every  one,  in  accordance  with  their
powers.  "  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required ; "  but  he  also
to  whom  little  is  given  must  use  that  little  in  his  Master's  service.  The  smallness  of
our  gifts  is  no  excuse  for  sloth.  The  most  ignorant,  the  very  poorest,  can  do  something
for  their  Lord.  They  may  do  much,  for  the  value  of  the  work  is  measured  by  its  pro-
portion to  the  worker's  powers.  The  second  servant  received  the  same  reward  as  the
first,  though  his  earnings  were  in  themselves  far  less.  The  poor  widow's  two  mites
were  more  precious  in  the  sight  of  God  than  the  costly  offerings  of  the  rich.  He  that
doth  not  use  his  talent  must  lose  it.  God's  gifts  cannot  be  neglected  with  impunity.
The  Gift  of  God,  if  not  stirred  up  by  constant  use,  will  be  taken  away.  It  will  be  given
to  those  who  have  worked  faithfully.  Others  will  step  into  the  places  of  the  unfaith-
ful, will  do  the  work  which  they  have  neglected,  and  obtain  the  reward  which  might
have  been  theirs  if  they  had  done  their  duty.  For  it  is  a  law  of  God's  kingdom  that "  uDto
every  one  that  hath  shall  be  given."  He  giveth  more  grace— grace  for  grace.  Grace
is  ours  when  it  is  used ;  then  it  is  wrought  into  the  character ;  then  we  have  it.  "  And
to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundantly.  But  from  him  that
hath  not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  bath."  He  hath,  and  yet  he  hath  not.
God  had  given  him  that  grace  without  which  we  can  do  nothing,  but  he  hath  not  made
it  his  own  by  diligent  use.  It  must  be  taken  from  him  in  the  righteous  judgment  of
God.  The  grace  of  God  cannot  lie  dormant  in  the  heart.  If  it  is  not  valued,  if  it  ii
not  used,  it  must  be  taken  away.  But  the  loss  of  the  talent  was  not  the  only  punish-
ment. We  hear  again  those  dreadful  words  which  the  Lord  had  uttered  twice  already
(oh.  viii.  12 ;  xxiv.  51),  which  he  repeated,  we  may  be  sure,  in  mercy,  to  warn  us  of
the  sinner's  doom,  "Cast  ye  the  unprofitable  servant  into  outer  darkness:  there  shall
be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."

Lessons.  1.  We  are  all  God's  servants  j  all  alike  have  a  work  to  do  for  him ;  all
must  do  it.  2.  All  that  we  have  is  his,  whether  external  gifts,  or  personal  endow-
ments,  or  gifts  of  the  Spirit ;  all  must  be  used  in  his  service.  3.  The  joy  of  our  Lord
is  blessed  beyond  the  power  of  thought.    Then  work  for  Christ;  it  is  laitbful  work.


492  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xiv.  1—46

not  apparent  succesi,  which  determines  the  reward.     4.  The  condemnation  of  the
slothful  servant  ii  awful  exceedingly.    Then  work  while  there  is  time.

Vers.  31 — 46. — Ha  last  Judgment.    I.  The  Jusoe.    1.  Eis  glory.    The  Lord  was  '
sitting  on  the  Mounc  of  Olires,  looking  sadly  back  upon  the  holy  city  and  the  temple
which  he  had  finally  left.    He  had  been  rejected  by  the  hierarchy  of  the  chosen  nation ;
the  shadow  of  the  cross  was  falling  on  iiim ;  in  three  days  would  come  the  awful  agony
and  the  tremendous  sacrifice.    He  knew  all  this  with  the  clear  calm  knowledge  of
Divine  omniscience ;  but  his  thoughts  dwelt,  that  Tuesday  afternoon,  not  on  his  own
sufferings  now  so  near,  but  on  the  great  results  of  his  incarnation  and  atonement  which
were  to  be  manifested  in  the  far-distant  future,  the  salvation  of  his  chosen,  and,  alas  1  the
condemnation  of  the  impenitent.    With  the  cross  in  near  prospect,  he  speaks  of  himself
as  the  King — the  king  of  all  nations ;  the  Son  of  man  indeed,  still  in  our  human  nature,
for  the  two  whole  and  perfect  natures,  the  Godhead  and  the  manhood,  once  joined
together  in  the  one  Person  of  Christ,  were  never  thenceforth  to  be  divided  ;  but  coming
in  his  glory,  himself  in  that  body  of  glory  of  which  a  passing  glimpse  bad  bevu
vouchsafed  to  the  three  most  favoured  apostles  on  the  Mount  of  the  Transfiguration,
surrounded  by  the  holy  angels,  his  attendants  and  ministers.    Then  shall  he  sit  upon
the  throne  of  his  glory,  that  great  white  throne  which  St.  John  saw  in  that  awful
vision  of  the  great  day  which  was  revealed  to  him  for  our  instruction  and  warning.
No  human  words  could  describe  the  glory  of  the  Judge.    St.  John  could  only  say  that
from  his  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away ;  and  there  was  found  no  place  for
them.    2.  Hie  gathering  of  all  nations  before  him.    The  parables  of  the  virgins  and
the  talents  are  parables  of  judgment;  but  they  deal  with  a  portion  only  of  the
tremendous  subject.    Judgment,  St.  Peter  says,  "  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God."
These  two  parables  embrace  in  their  range  only  Christian  people,  those  who  have  gone
forth  to  meet  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  and  the  immediate  servants  of  the  Lord.    The
first  parable  represents  the  judgment  of  the  inner  life  of  the  soul ;  the  second,  the
judgment  of  the  outward  life  of  obedience  or  idleness.     Bach  parable  reveals  to  us
one  of  the  many  aspects  of  that  tremendous  assize.     Now  parable  passes  into  prophecy.
A  wider  scene  is  opened  out — the  judgment  of  the  whole  world.    Our  thoughts  are  no
longer  to  bo  concentrated  on  a  portion  only  of  the  vast  multitude.    All  nations  are
gathered  together  before  the  Son  of  man ;   quick  and  dead  alike ;   all  the  countless
millions  that  have  been  bom  unto  the  world  from  the  Creation  to  the  great  day ;  every
one  from  Adam  the  first  man  to  the  new-born  babe ;  all,  summoned  by  the  Toice  of
the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  God,  gathered  together  by  the  attendant  angels,  all
shall  stand  before  the  Judge.    His  eye  will  range  over  those  countless  hosts.    He
knows  the  whole  history  of  each  individuaL    The  books  of  which  we  read  in  the
Revelation  represent  the  infinite  knowledge  of  Gk)d.    "The  dead  were  judged  out  of
those  things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  works."    The  Judge
will  divide  the  thronging  crowds  with  unerring  accuracy,  as  a  shepherd  divideth
his  sheep  from  the  goats.    The  division  will  be  as  easy  to  the  Almighty  Judge  ;  the
differences,  often  almost  Invisible  to  us,  as  clearly  marked  in  his  right    "  He  shall
set  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left."

II.  The  blessed.  1.  Hie  welcome.  The  Lord  describes  himself  as  the  heavenly
King.  He  knew  that  in  three  days  the  mocking  title,  "This  is  Jesus,  the  King  of  the
Jews,"  would  be  set  above  his  head  as  he  hung  dying  on  the  cross.  But  he  knew  also,
in  his  inmost  consciousness,  that  he  was  indeed  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  The
kingdom  of  heaven  was  his  by  right.  It  was  he  who  should  hereafter  open  that
kingdom  to  the  blessed  :  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,"  he  will  say.  Come ;  for
it  is  his  will  that  his  chosen  should  be  with  him  to  behold  his  glory,  and  to  share  his
glory.  Come ;  for  their  salvation  is  his  joy,  the  joy  for  which  he  endured  the  cross.
He  bringeth  home  rejoicing  the  sheep  that  once  was  lost.  He  saith  unto  his  friends,
"  Rejoice  with  me."  Come ;  for  he  loveth  them  with  an  everlasting  love,  a  love
stronger  than  death.  He  calls  them  blessed,  "  Ye  blessed  of  my  Father ; "  for  the
Father  had  pronounced  them  blessed.  He  had  chosen  them  by  his  electing  grace ;  he
had  given  them  to  the  only  begotten  Son ;  they  were  "  elect  according  to  the  fore-
knowledge of  God  the  Father,  through  sanctificatlon  of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience  and
sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jeaus  Christ."    He  bids  them  take  possession  of  the  kingdom


OH.  XX  T.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  493

— the  kingdom  of  glory,  that  glory  which  passeth  all  that  eye  hath  seen,  or  ear  hath
beard,  or  that  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of  man.  That  kingdom  had  been  prepared
for  them  from  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  even  before  the  world  wag  (Eph.  L  4),
God  knew,  in  the  fulness  of  his  Divine  omniscience,  each  elected  spirit,  and  predesti-
nated each  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son.  The  kingdom  had  long  been
theirs  in  the  purpose  of  God ;  now  it  was  to  be  theirs  in  possession.  2.  The  ground  of
the  welcome.  Tliey  bad  loved  the  Lord;  they  had  tended  him  (he  said)  in  distress  and
Borrow;  they  had  laid  him,  the  Lord  God  Almighty,  under  obligations  by  their  love
and  tenderness.  He  would  reward  them  now.  The  righteous  are  bewildered  with  that
wondrous  welcome.  It  is  a  joy  almost  too  great  for  them  to  bear — a  sweetness  so
penetrating  that  the  heart  well-nigh  faints  in  the  intensity  of  its  rapture.  They  knew
that  notliing  they  had  done  could  deserve  that  unutterable  blessedness  now  opened  to
their  view.  They  can  see,  as  they  look  back  on  their  past  lives,  no  deeds  so  good  and
holy  as  the  Lord  had  said.  They  had  learned  of  him  the  grace  of  humility,  those  of
them  who  were  Christians;  those  who  had  not  heard  the  gospel  (for  surely  maay
heathen  men  will  be  among  the  number  of  the  blessed)  had  shown  the  law  of  love
written  in  tlieir  hearts,  and  were  a  law  unto  themselves,  doing  by  nature  things  con-
tained in  the  Law  (Rom.  ii.  14, 15).  None  of  them  fully  understood  the  preciousuess
of  acts  of  unselfish  love.  They  felt  their  own  shortcomings;  in  their  self-abasement
they  had  ever  thought  themselves  the  chief  of  sinners.  But  the  King  now  shows  to
them  the  meaning  of  their  deeds  of  love.  Charity,  that  chiefest  of  graces,  springs  out
of  faith.  It  looks  to  Christ,  and  rests  in  Christ  as  its  ultimate  centre.  It  is  so,  in
some  sense,  even  with  the  good  deeds  of  heathen  men ;  for  Christ  ia  the  Saviour  of  all
men.  Christ  died  for  all  men ;  and  all  who  in  truth  and  earnestness  seek  after  Groi,
consciously  or  unconsciously,  follow  Christ.  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-
seat  of  Christ ;  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  body."  The  judg-
ment will  be,  as  Holy  Scripture  says  in  many  places,  according  unto  works ;  but  those
works  spring  out  of  faith,  and  derive  their  whole  spiritual  value  from  the  faith  and
love  which  prompted  them.  The  Lord,  in  this  place,  speaks  of  one  class  only  of  holy
deeds.  He  does  not  exclude  other  Christian  graces,  other  forms  of  obedience.  All  wiU,
we  may  be  sure,  be  taken  into  account  in  the  judgment.  But  in  this  prophecy,  as  in
many  of  his  parables,  the  Lord  takes  one  aspect  of  God's  dealings  with  mankind.  He
insists  on  that  one  aspect,  and  impresses  it  forcibly  upon  his  hearers.  One  important
truth  is  best  driven  home  by  being  presented  alone ;  other  balancing  truths  can  be
taught  on  other  occasions.  We  must  study  the  Scriptures  as  a  whole.  One  part
explains  another ;  one  part  suggests  the  necessary  qualifications  for  the  iuterpretatipn
of  another.

IIL  The  lost.  1.  The  eondemnation.  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  Very  awful
and  tremendous  words.  All  the  more  so  as  coming  from  hii  mouth  who  bade  idl  men,
"  Come  unto  me ; "  who  came  not  into  the  world  "  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the
world  through  him  might  be  saved."  He  had  loved  those  lost  souls;  he  had  called
them  again  and  again ;  he  had  wept  over  their  hardness  and  unbelief.  But  they  would
not  come  unto  him  that  they  might  have  life.  They  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost ;  they
closed  their  eyes  in  wilful  blindness ;  they  persevered  in  disobedience  till  their  heart
was  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  and  there  was  no  more  hope  of  amendment.
Now  they  must  depart  from  him  whom  in  life  they  would  not  hear ;  they  must  depart,
and  that  into  the  eternal  fire  prepared  (not  for  them ;  it  was  not  the  wUl  of  God  that
any  should  perish ;  he  wUleth  that  all  men  should  be  saved)  "  for  the  devil  and  his
angels."  They  had  loved  darkness  rather  than  light ;  they  must  dwell  in  the  great
outer  darkness  away  from  the  light  of  God's  presence.  They  had  listened  to  the
tempting  voice  of  Satan  ;  they  must  share  his  doom.  2.  The  ground  of  eottdemnation.
They  h»i  done  no  good ;  they  had  lived  only  for  themselves.  They  had  seen  sorrow
and  distress  and  poverty  all  around  them;  they  had  shown  no  love,  no  pity,  no
sympathy.  And  in  neglecting  the  poor,  the  afflicted,  they  had  neglected  Christ  the
hoti.  For  the  poor  are  his  representatives.  "  He  that  hath  pity  on  the  poor  lendeth
to  the  Lord; "  and  he  that  careth  not  for  the  poor  careth  not  for  Christ,  who  ii  present
in  his  poor,  who  bids  us  love  one  another  as  he  bath  loved  us.  They,  who  have  no  pity
on  the  poor  would  not  have  ministered  to  the  Lord  if  they  had  Uved  when  he  had  not
where  to  lay  his  head,  when  holr  women  ministered  to  him  of  their  lubstance.    And


494  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1—49,


these  shall  go  away  into  eternal  punishment  They  are  not  accused  of  any  crime— of
theft,  or  murder,  or  impurity ;  but  they  were  without  love,  and  he  that  loveth  not
knoweth  not  God  who  is  love,  and  cannot  enter  into  heaven  which  is  the  home  of
love.  It  is  a  most  solemn  thought  that  this  tremendous  condemnation  was  incurred,
not  by  crime,  not  by  actual  sin,  but  by  neglect  of  duty,  by  selfishness  and  want  of  love!
Let  us  rouse  ourselves  to  a  sense  of  the  danger  of  selfiahoess  ;  let  us  covet  earnestly
the  best  gifts,  especially  that  highest  gift  of  love.  "  The  righteous  shall  go  into  life
eternal."  It  is  love,  the  Lord  saitb,  which  is  the  mark  of  the  blessed ;  "  charity  never
faileth."  '

Lkssoot.  1.  The  Lord  is  at  hand.  He  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory.  On
which  side  shall  we  be  set— on  the  right  hand  or  on  the  left  ?  2.  "  Come,  ye  blessed."
There  is  no  joy  so  intense,  so  rapturous ;  may  it  be  ours  I  3.  Then  follow  after
charity.  4.  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  There  is  no  misery  so  awful ;  God  in  his
mercy  save  us  from  it  I  5.  Then  follow  Christ  the  Lord ;  love  the  brethren ;  imitate
the  example  of  the  King.


HOMILIES  BT  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  ten  virgin*.  I.  Chbist  invites  his  Chubch  to  shake  his  joy
Here  is  a  festal  occasion,  and  the  joy  and  splendour  of  it  will  not  be  complete  unless
the  virgin-friends  of  the  bride  go  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom  with  their  lamps  illu-
minating the  gay  scene.  More  than  once  is  the  gospel  gladness  compared  to  that  of  a
wedding.  Under  such  an  image  the  service  and  the  warfare  of  life  are  for  the  moment
forgotten,  and  its  bright,  glad  side  is  brought  to  light.  This  too  is  to  be  seen  in  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  and  its  happiness  is  to  be  shared  by  Christ's  people.

II.  Wb  need  preparation  to  participate  in  the  jot  of  oub  Lord.  The  virgins
must  not  only  be  in  wedding  array,  they  must  have  their  lamps  trimmed  and  fed  for
the  illuminated  procession.  The  wise  virgins  were  thoughtful  enough  to  take  oil  for
the  further  supply  of  their  lamps.  The  preparation  of  these  lamps  was  a  preliminary
work.  The  soul  must  be  prepared  to  enter  into  Chiist's  joy  by  kindling  the  flame  of
devotion,  and  by  providing  the  oil  of  grace  to  feed  this  flame.  If  there  is  no  grace  on
earth  there  can  be  no  glory  in  heaven.

III.  It  IB  POSSIBLE  to  make  inadequate  pbefabatiok.  The  foolish  virgins  had
their  lamps  and  lit  them.  There  must  have  been  some  oil  in  them.  But  there  was  no
further  supply.  If  the  bridegroom  had  not  tarried,  all  would  have  been  well.  It  was
his  delay  that  was  so  fatal.  The  foolish  virgins  are  like  the  rocky  ground  on  which
the  seed  sprang  up  quickly,  but  on  which  tiie  green  plant  only  endured  for  a  short
time.  They  represent  persons  of  brief,  temporary  religious  experience.  These  people
have  no  stores  of  grace  to  fall  back  on.  Time  reveals  their  shallowness.  We  may
have  grace  to  live  passably  for  a  short  time,  but  the  requisite  is  to  endure  to  the  end ;  to
be  shining  in  the  light  of  God  whenever  Christ  shall  come.

lY.   DlLIQENOB     IS    THE    FUTURE    CANNOT    ATONE     FOK    NEaLIQENOE   IN   THE    PAST.

Seeing  that  their  lamps  are  going  out,  the  foolish  virgins  apply  for  help  from  their  wise
sisters.  But  these  virgins  are  too  prudent  to  part  with  any  of  their  precious  oil.
Their  conduct  strikes  us  as  selfish.  But  it  is  human,  and  as  such  it  is  a  warning
against  neglecting  God's  grace  and  trusting  to  the  tender  mercies  of  our  fellow-
creatures.  Moreover,  in  the  spiritual  region  we  cannot  transfer  grace.  The  wise
virgins  recommend  an  impossible  course,  in  ignorance,  or  as  a  rebuke,  or  to  relieve
themselves  of  the  unpleasant  importunity  of  the  other  five.  The  course  is  impossible.
The  shops  are  shut  at  night.    Lost  opportunities  never  retarn.

V.  Christ  most  disown  those  who  were  once  his  people  if  they  have  ceased
TO  POSSESS  HIS  ORACE.  In  their  dismay  and  bewild(  rment,  the  foolish  virgins  clamour
for  admission  to  the  wedding  feast,  even  though  they  have  not  their  lamps,  for  "  the
bridegroom  is  so  sweet."  But  they  are  refused.  Does  the  conduct  of  the  bridegroom
seem  harsh,  the  punishment  too  severe  ?  Let  us  observe  that  all  things  are  in  pro  -
portion.  If  the  offence  is  slight — only  forgetting  to  fill  vessels  with  oil,  so  also  is  the
penalty — only  to  miss  a  family  festival.  Translate  this  into  the  spiritual  realm,  and
Doth  sides  become  proportionately  aggravated.     The  ofi'euce  is  negligence  as  to  the


flH.nT.1— 46.]    THE  008FBL  AOCORDINQ  TO  BT.  MATTHEW.  496

exhaustion  of  grace ;  the  penalty,  •xoliuion  from  the  ]oy  of  OhrUt.    Eaoh  li  negatire ;
each  is  serioai.

YI.  OHBiBTiAm  Hau>  to  ouiiiTTATi  A  WATOMivL  BPiBiT.  Th«  ten  rlrgini  must
be  all  ChrigtiaDa,  for  they  all  belong  to  the  intimate  circle  of  friende,  and  they  all  have
lamps  alight  at  first.  The  fault  of  the  foolish  ones  is  negligence,  carelessness,  caused,
one  would  say,  by  comparative  indifference.  It  is  well  to  be  alwavs  watchful ;  but
if,  like  all  the  ten,  we  sometimes  sleep,  at  least  let  us  see  that  we  haye  proyided  for
coming  need,— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  14 — 30, — The  parable  of  the  talenU.  This  parable  is  natorally  associated  with
that  of  the  ten  virgins.  In  both  we  have  the  time  for  preparation,  the  crisis  of  judg-
ment, the  differences  of  conduct,  and  subsequent  results.  But  this  second  parable  treats
of  higher  responsibilities  and  graver  issues.  Here  we  have  a  specific  trust;  the  duty  is
more  than  watching,  it  is  diligent  working;  and  the  rewards  and  punishments  are
proportionately  greater.  We  pass  from  the  joys  of  the  kingdom  and  the  possibility  of
missing  them,  to  the  serious  duties  of  the  kingdom  and  the  great  honours  and  heavy-
penalties  that  follow  obedience  and  negligence.

I.  The  talents  kntbusted.  1.  The  lignificanee  of  the  taUntt.  This  parable  has
given  a  secondary  meaning  to  the  very  word  "  talent "  in  the  literature  of  Christendom
— a  meaning  which  has  come  to  supersede  its  original  application,  so  that  a  taleat  witii
us  is  not  a  sum  of  money,  but  a  power  or  faculty,  and  a  talented  person  is  a  person
highly  endowed  with  natural  gifts.  In  the  large  use  of  the  word  by  our  Lord  the  talent
is  anything  that  gives  scope  and  facility  for  service — intellect,  wealth,  position,  etc.
2.  The  variety  of  the  talent.  Some  are  more  richly  endowed  than  others.  Nothing  is
more  false  to  nature  than  the  doctrinaire  theory  of  equality.  There  is  the  greatest
possible  inequality,  not  only  in  the  distribution  of  property — which  is  often  owing  to
man's  injustice,  but  in  the  providential  bestowal  of  personal  gifts.  3.  The  trust  of  the
taknte.  The  owner  takes  a  journey  into  another  country,  and  leaves  his  property  with
his  servants.  God  is  not  really  absent,  but  his  presence  is  not  apparent,  and  he  leaves
scope  and  freedom  for  the  right  use  of  what  he  has  entrusted  to  men.

n.  The  servants'  conddot.  1.  The  diligent  servants.  Two  do  their  best  with
what  is  committed  to  their  charge,  and  work  equally  well,  each  just  doubling  his
capital.  (1)  Ood  expects  active  service,  and  not  merely  negative  innocence.  (2)  Our
powers  and  faculties  are  not  our  own ;  they  are  to  be  used  for  God,  (3)  'I'hese  gifts
grow  with  use,  and  to  ourselves  the  natural  and  the  chief  result  of  diligent  service  is
the  enlargement  of  our  own  powers.  (4)  The  liest  service  must  be  proportionate  to
our  natural  gifts.  The  man  with  two  talents  can  only  make  two  more,  iiot  five ;  yet
he  works  as  well  as  his  more  gifted  companion,'  2.  The  slothful  servant.  This  man
had  but  one  talent.  K  he  had  possessed  more  he  might  have  been  inspired  to  some
enthusiasm.  (1)  There  is  a  temptation  to  neglect  small  gifts.  (2)  It  is  wicked  to  be
slothful.  (3)  Inability  is  no  excuse  for  indolence,  because  all  have  some  powers  for
service.

ni.  The  final  account.  This  must  be  rendered.  The  owner  will  return  to  his
estate,  thoush  he  may  be  long  absent,  God  will  caU  all  his  servants  to  account  for  the
use  they  make  of  their  powers  and  opportunities.  1.  The  reward  of  fidelity.  (1)  This
is  for  faithfulness  in  service,  not  merely  in  keeping  what  is  committed  to  us.  (2)  It
takes  the  form  of  a  larger  trust.  2.  2%e  punishment  of  indolence.  The  idle  man  has
his  excuse,  but  it  is  a  false  one.  The  Master  does  not  reap  where  he  has  not  sown ;  for  he
gave  the  talents  which  were  to  be  the  seed  of  more  wealth.  (1)  Neglected  gifts  are
withdrawn.  If  we  will  not  use  our  faculties,  we  shall  lose  them.  (2)  The  indolent
servant  is  cast  into  darkness  and  despair.  He  might  have  done  well.  Hot  positive  sin
alone,  but  neglect  to  do  our  duty  in  God's  service,  will  be  heavily  punished. — W.  F.  A,

Ver.  21. — Oood  and  faithful  servants.  We  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  cheerful
tone  of  these  generous  words.  They  encourage  us  to  look  to  the  brighter  side  of
Christian  life  and  work.  This  is  not  all  failure.  It  is  largely  fruitful  and  acceptable
to  God.

I.  Thebi  abb  oood  and  rAiTHruL  bbbvants  of  God.  No  age  in  the  history  of
the  Church  has  be«n  without  such  people.   Even  when  the  five-talent«d  men  are  scarce,


496  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOMDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1— 46.

men  of  two  talenti  have  abonnded,  and  have  proved  their  fidelity  by  their  fruitful
industry.  It  \n  well  for  us  to  be  on  the  look  out  for  these  worthy  servants  of  God,  that
we  may  recognize  and  honour  them.  They  are  the  salt  of  the  earth ;  they  show  us
that  God  has  not  left  himself  without  witness.  It  is  especially  pleasing  to  see  men  of
the  greatest  endowments  laying  all  their  gifts  out  in  the  service  of  God.  A  truly
Cbristian  statesman  or  a  poet  of  leading  rank  presents  to  us  an  inspiring  sight  of  faith-
ful service  in  high  places.  But  the  service  may  be  equally  true  in  the  humblest  walks
of  life.  There  is  no  reason  why  the  man  of  one  talent  should  not  be  as  faithful  as  the
man  of  five  talents.

IL  God  genebouslt  becoonizes  the  uebttb  of  his  tbub  bbbvaxtb.  Here  we
read  of  unstinted  praise  lavished  upon  them.  It  is  true  that  no  men  have  absolute
merit  with  God,  that  all  of  us  are  sinful,  and  that  all  our  good  work  is  marred  with
evil.  Any  good  in  the  work  wo  liave  done  is  only  accomplished  by  means  of  the  grace
of  God,  and  therefore  we  must  say,  "  Not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  Name  be  the  glory."
Yes ;  the  glory  is  all  God's.  Still  there  is  room  for  effort  and  fidelity.  God  acknow-
ledges these  qualities,  and  when  he  sees  them  he  rejoices  over  them.  In  his  great
judgment  he  will  generously  acknowledge  them.

HI.  The  ononsua  op  Divine  eewabdb  abe  is  tiib  chabaotbb  of  tub  bibviob
BENDKBES.  These  are  not  fotmd  in  the  amount  of  work  considered  by  itself.  God  does
not  give  men  wages.  Nor  does  the  system  of  payment  by  "  piece-work  "  obtain  in  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  God's  method  is  to  take  account  of  character,  of  motive,  of  the
way  in  which  a  person  makes  use  of  what  is  entrusted  to  him.  Thus  they  who  produce
most  results  will  not  be  honoured  more  than  those  people  whose  efforts  result  in  less
visible  efifects,  but  who  are  equally  faithful  with  their  smaller  gifts.  Still  there  is  a
sort  of  "  payment  by  results."  God  looks  for  fruit.  Fidelity  cannot  be  sterile.  The
faithful  servant  will  certainly  have  something  to  show  for  his  efforts,  though  it  may
uot  be  all  he  hoped  for,  or  anything  like  what  men  demanded  of  him.

IV.    God   BEWABDS    his    good    and    FAITHFtTL    SERVANTS   BY   COMMITTINO  A    LABOB

UiNiBTBT  TO  TUEiB  cuABGE.  Instead  of  talents,  these  servants  are  to  have  cities.
Fidelity  in  small  things  proves  the  character  and  trains  the  powers,  and  so  prepares
for  service  in  large  things.  Now,  this  enlarged  service  is  the  best  reward  that  can  be
offered  to  the  diligent  servant.  Such  a  man  does  not  desire  to  be  released  from
responsibility.  The  paradise  of  idleness  would  be  no  heaven  to  him.  He  has  a  reward
which  would  be  a  purgatory  to  the  indolent  man.  Here  lies  the  way  to  the  joy  of  the
Lord.  They  share  God's  joy  who  serve  in  God's  kingdom,  and  the  joy  is  greatest  when
the  service  is  most  full. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  29. — The  Divine  law  of  increase.  Jesus  Christ  here  enunciates  a  deep  and
far-reaching  principle.  It  is  one  which  at  first  sight  may  strike  us  as  harsh  and  even
as  unjust;  yet  a  little  consideration  should  reveal  its  absolute  equity.  So  great  and
important  a  law  cannot  be  without  its  serious  lessons  of  warning  and  encouragement.

I.  The  scope  of  the  law.  1.  In  external  nature.  We  not  only  see  the  survival
of  the  fittest,  but  its  propagation  and  extension.  Those  plants  and  animals  which  are
most  suited  to  their  circumstances  not  only  fiourish  best;  they  multiply  greatly.
Moreover,  it  is  just  in  them  that  we  are  to  look  for  the  appearance  of  new  and  more
advantageous  modifications  of  structure.  2.  In  our  bodily  life.  The  athlete
Btrengthens  his  muscles  with  exercise.  The  musical  ear  becomes  more  musical  by
listening  to  music.  On  the  other  hand,  the  muscle  of  the  feeble  invalid  who  is  not
Btrong  enough  to  take  exercise  dwindles  away,  and  the  senses  that  are  not  used  become
dull  and  blind.  3.  In  our  mental  facultiet.  The  powerful  intellect  of  the  thinker
grows  stronger  by  bis  thinking,  while  the  feeble  intellect  of  the  dullard  becomes
weaker  by  neglect.  4.  In  spiritual  experience.  The  life  of  communion  with  God
grows  deeper  and  larger  the  more  truly  it  is  lived.  6.  In  Christian  work.  This  is
-what  our  Lord  had  especially  in  mind  when  ho  proclaimed  his  great  law.  It  is  by
working  for  God  that  we  grow  strong  in  God.  Thus  if  there  ii  a  rivalry  between  the
contemplative  and  the  active  life  in  religion,  our  Lord  would  seem  to  favour  the  latter
as  the  more  fruitful  in  good  to  the  Christian  himself.

IL  The  justice  of  the  law.    A  similar  principle  seems  to  be  at  work  among
human  afiairs  where  it  issues  in  most  hard  and  cruel  results,  and  wheri  it  certainly


OH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  4'^7

appears  to  be  unjnst.  Thug  the  capitalist  la  enabled  to  enlarge  his  business,  while  the
\iooi  tradesman  who  needs  an  increase  much  more  is  not  able  to  go  forward  at  all.
Great  houses  tend  to  monopolize  commerce  which  once  divided  itself  araoDg  many
shops,  and  the  larger  the  business  is  the  more  people  flock  to  it  and  add  still  more  to
its  gigantic  proportions.  Thus  the  successful  man  wins  favour,  while  the  failing  man
who  wants  it  much  more  fails  to  get  it.  All  this  looks  unfair.  We  must  recognize,
however,  that  it  only  deals  with  the  external  life.  That  earthly  means  should  lead  to
earthly  results  is  naturaL  But  there  are  higher  regions  where  the  injustice  is  counter-
acted. The  successful  man  of  the  world  may  be  a  dismal  failure  in  his  higher  life.
Here  the  law  works  justly.  It  is  right  that  a  man's  future  should  grow  out  of  his
present  conduct.  In  the  parable  of  the  talents  it  is  not  the  mere  possession  of  the
talents,  but  the  use  of  them,  that  determines  the  retributive  treatment.  The  man  of
five  talents  is  not  rewarded  because  he  holds  the  five,  but  because  he  multiplies  them.
It  is  the  second  five  acquired  by  his  own  industry,  not  the  first  five  received  as  a  gift,
that  occasions  his  further  honour  and  enrichmeat.  QoA  will  give  more  according  to
what  we  have  attained  in  our  own  spiritual  life.  In  this  there  is  no  injustice,  but
much  more  than  justice,  for  we  could  not  claim  the  increase.  It  is  added  by  God's  great
bounty  In  graciously  rewarding  faithful  service. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  31 — 46. — The  Judgment  of  th»  natiotu.  The  two  earlier  parables  of  judgment
refer  to  those  who  are  in  confessed  relationship  with  God.  The  parable  of  the  ten
virgins  represents  the  relationship  of  friendship, — that  of  people  who  would  share  in  the
joys  of  God's  home,  as  friends  at  a  wedding  feast;  the  parable  of  the  talents  represents
a  less  intimate  relationship, — that  of  service ;  the  talents  are  committed  to  their  pro-
prietor's "  own  servants."  Now  the  scene  changes,  and  we  are  brought  out  to  the  larger
world  of  the  nations ;  the  judgment  of  those  who  do  not  know  Christ  as  their  Friend  or
consciously  serve  him  as  their  Master  is  here  typified.  To  Jews  this  would  mean  the
judgment  of  the  Gentiles;  to  Christians  it  represents  the  judgment  of  the  heathen,
with  those,  also,  who  live  in  Christendom,  but  who  do  not  give  their  adherence  to  any
of  the  Churches.

I.  Chbist  will  jtidoe  the  world.  1.  There  viill  he  a  judgment  of  the  world.
This  is  not  to  be  confined  to  the  Church;  it  will  not  be  only  for  those  who  acknowledge
Christ.  We  cannot  escape  from  it  by  ignoring  the  rule  of  Christ.  The  most  heedless
and  careless,  the  most  worldly  and  unspiritual,  the  most  sceptical  and  materialistic,
will  be  brought  before  the  bar  of  the  universal  judgment.  2.  Thit  Jttdgment  wiU  be
in  the  hand*  of  Christ.  It  will  be  conducted  by  the  "  Son  of  man,"  who,  even  when
acting  as  a  Judge,  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  Shepherd  dividing  his  flocks.  Therefore  the
judgment  will  be  conducted  with  humanity  and  with  sympathy,  with  the  discrimina
tion  of  knowledge  gained  in  experience.

II.  The  judgment  of  Chbist  will  eesclt  is  a  twofold  division.  1.  There  win
he  two  classes.  All  are  not  condemned ;  but  all  are  not  approved.  Even  Jesus  with
all  his  graciousness  must  reprobate  what  is  wrong.  His  gospel  is  not  a  security  of
salvation  for  the  sinful  impenitent.  2.  There  will  be  hut  two.  These  are  the  main
divisions.  All  characters  tend  either  downward  or  upward.  We  are  all  either  in
the  narrow  way  or  in  the  broad  way — either  sheep  or  goats.  3.  ITiese  classes  will  be
separated.  At  present  they  are  united.  There  will  be  a  revelation  and  a  division,  and
each  man  will  then  go  to  his  own  place.

III.  The  gbohnd  of  judgment  will  be  men's  conduct  towaeds  otheb  people.
It  will  not  be  a  profession  of  religion,  nor  a  creed,  nor  a  performance  of  acts  of  worship.
Christ  looks  chiefly  to  conduct  in  the  world.  He  takes  what  is  done  to  one  of  his
brethren  as  the  test.  This  is  just  the  same  as  if  it  were  done  to  him,  because  he  is
so  perfectly  sympathetic,  that  he  feels  what  is  done  to  his  brother  exactly  as  though
it  were  done  to  himself.  The  rule  is  for  the  judgment  of  the  heathen  and  those  outside
the  Church  of  Christ.  More  is  expected  of  Christ's  own  confessed  followers — ^lamps
well  supplied  with  oil  of  grace,  and  faithful  use  of  entrusted  talents.  But  such  people
cannot  be  excused  from  what  is  expected  even  of  the  heathen.  We  can  all  best  serve
Christ  by  ministering  to  his  brethren.    This  is  what  he  most  cares  for.

IV.  The  jodgment  will  ebsult  in  blessedness  and  punishment.  1.  There  is  the
ioy  of  the  hingdom  for  the  sheep  on  the  right  haad.    It  is  remarkable  to  see  that  the

MATTHEW— n.  2  &


498  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1— 4&

kingdom  was  prepared  for  such  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  From  the  first  its
blessings  were  for  many  who  are  not  in  any  visible  Church,  for  many  who  do  not  know
themselves  to  be  Christians.  2.  There  is  punishment  for  the  goats  on  the  left  hand.
The  hard  and  selfish  are  those  who  receive  this  punishment.  They  will  not  escaf«
it  because  of  their  igno'-ance  or  their  refusal  to  recognize  Christ.  It  will  be  unbearably
awfuL— W.  F.  A.

Ver,  46. — The  eternal  future.  This  is  a  fearful  subject,  and  one  from  which  we
naturally  shrink.  Yet  if  Christ  spoke  of  it  he  must  desire  us  to  study  his  words ;
if  what  he  said  was  true,  we  can  only  neglect  it  at  our  peril.  The  difficulty  is  to  take
his  words  just  for  what  lie  meant  them  to  teach  us,  without  over-weighting  them  with
the  fantastic  horrors  of  the  mediseval  imagination,  and  also  without  diminishing  their
force  when  we  liave  set  them  free  from  those  monkish  accretions.

I.  The  dkeadful  doom.  1.  This  is  called  punishment.  The  word  in  the  Greek  is  not
the  strongest  term  that  could  have  been  employed,  viz.  one  that  stands  for  vengeance.
It  is  a  word  that  generally  signifies  chastisement,  i.e.  remedial  punishment.  But
whether  such  an  idea  was  in  the  mind  of  our  Lord  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  say,
especially  as  he  did  not  speak  in  Greek,  but  used  the  less  definite  Aramaic  language.
It  is  BuSicient  to  know  that  his  language  plainly  teaches  (1)  that  there  will  l)e
Buffering  in  the  future  for  those  who  are  hard  and  selfish  in  this  life  •  and  (2)  that  this
suffering  will  be  justly  apportioned  according  to  character.  Of  its  nature  Jesus  says
little,  but  his  dreadful  words  about  "  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth "  show  that  it
must  be  very  severe — a  suffering  to  be  avoided  by  all  means  as  a  fearful  evil.  2.  This
is  to  he  eternal.  The  adjective  is  indefinite ;  though  it  is  frequently  used  for  what  is
everlasting,  it  is  not  always  so  employed,  and  a  stronger  term,  which  plainly  means
"  endless,"  is  not  applied  to  future  punishment.  We  can  infer  nothing  positively  from
the  usage  of  the  word  in  regard  to  the  question  of  the  possible  termination  of  future
punishment.  On  the  one  hand,  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  forbids  all  hope ;  on  the
other,  it  must  be  affirmed  that  it  offers  no  hope.  It  presents  a  dark  prospect  stretching
out  into  the  ages  of  the  future,  and  it  shows  no  gleam  of  light  beyond  it.  It  is  not
wise  for  us  to  dogmatize  on  what  God  has  left  thus  veiled.

II.  The  glorious  bewabd.  1.  It  is  personal.  Life  is  not  a  possession  like  money
or  lands,  which  can  be  detached  and  valued  separately.  It  is  in  ourselves.  God's  best
gift  is  within  the  soul.  2.  It  is  positive.  Here  is  more  than  rest  after  toil  and  peace
after  storm.  A  gift  of  actual  energy  is  suggested  to  us.  Life  has  its  powers  and
faculties.  This  life  of  God  is  more  than  existence  in  the  future,  for  St.  John  tells  us
that  some  men  on  earth  have  it,  and  that  others  have  it  not  (1  John  v.  12).  While
its  full  development  is  for  the  future,  it  begins  here  and  now.  It  is  the  life  of  God  in
the  soul,  the  powers  and  energies  of  the  spiritual  nature.  The  prospect  of  such  a  life
teaches  us  that  we  do  not  yet  know  what  it  is  to  live ;  the  future  will  unfold  possi-
bilities not  yet  even  dreamed  of.  3.  This  too  is  to  be  eternal.  Its  endurance  rests  on  a
better  foundation  than  the  endurance  of  the  punishment,  though  the  same  adjective  is
used  for  both  states,  for  it  rests  on  the  everlasting  love  of  God.  Still  the  word
"eternal"  in  its  vast  vagueness  points  to  the  life  growing  and  expanding  in  the
future  ages,  so  far  on  that  we  cannot  trace  its  remotest  future.  That  is  the  glorious
future  of  "  the  righteous ; "  and  "  the  righteous  "  are  Just  those  who  minister  to  their
needy  fellow-men. — W,  F.  A.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Parable  of  th*  ten  virgiiu.  This  parable  illnstrates  chiefly  these
three  things  :  the  meaning  of  our  Lord's  command  to  watoh;  its  reason;  and  the  means
of  fulfilling  it.

I.  It  shows  us  that  it  dobs  hot  mbah,  Bk  always  on  the  watoh,  but,  Bb
ALWAYS  PBEPABED.  The  fishorman's  wife  who  spends  her  time  on  the  pier-head
watching  for  the  boats  cannot  he  so  well  prepared  to  give  her  husband  a  comfortable
reception  as  the  woman  who  is  busy  about  her  household  work,  and  only  now  and
again  turns  a  longing  look  seaward.  Our  life  is  to  bear  evidence  that  one  of  the  things
we  take  into  account  is  the  approach  of  our  Lord.

II.  It  ILLUSTRATES  ALSO  THE  BEASON  OF  THE  oouuAND.  No  One  Can  tell  when  the
second  great   interruption  of  the  world's  even  coiu-se   is  to  take  place.     It  may  b«


OH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDtNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  499

nearer  than  some  expect ;  or  it  may  be  more  distant.  The  virgins  who  neglected  to
carry  oil  were  those  who  expected  the  bridegroom  would  soon  appear.  It  is  your
baseless  supposition  that  the  Lord  will  not  come  quickly  that  betrays  you  into  care-
lessness. If  any  one  feels  that  this  comes  to  no  more  than  an  appeal  to  fear,  it  can
only  be  said  in  reply  that  the  expectation  of  Christ's  coming  does  not  give  rise  only
to  fear,  but  also  to  hope ;  that  it  braces  the  Christian  energies,  and,  in  accordance  with
human  nature,  quickens  the  spiritual  life.  The  expectation  of  Christ's  coming  becomes
merged  in  the  sense  of  his  presence.

III.  It  shows  na  how  wb  abb  to  pbbpare  fob  HSETiNa  thx  Lokd.  The  lamps
of  the  virgins  were  meant  to  add  brilliancy  to  the  scene.  They  were  in  keeping  with
it.  Everything  in  us  that  heartily  welcomes  Christ's  presence,  and  heartily  rises  to
do  him  honour,  everything  that  will  seem  a  suitable  accompaniment  in  the  triumph
of  a  holy  Bedeemer,  is  a  preparation  for  Christ's  coming.

Passing,  however,  to  some  detail  brought  before  us  in  the  parable,  we  are  at  once
brought  face  to  face  with  the  warning  that  all  who  may  at  one  time  show  preparedness
for  Christ's  presence  do  not  in  the  end  show  the  same.  The  folly  of  the  foolish  virgini
consisted  in  this — that  they  lit  their  lamps,  but  made  no  provision  for  feeding  them :
the  flame  was  to  all  appearance  satisfactory,  but  the  source  of  it  Vas  defective.  They
are  a  warning  to  all  who  are  tempted  to  make  conversion  everything,  edification
nothing ;  who  can  remember  the  time  when  they  had  very  serious  thoughts  and  very
solemn  resolutions,  but  have  made  no  earnest  effort,  and  are  making  none,  to  maintain
within  themselves  the  life  they  once  began.  The  wise  are  those  who  recognize  that
they  must  have  within  them  that  wiiich  shall  enable  them  to  endure  to  the  end ;  not
only  impressions,  right  impulses,  tender  feelings,  but  ineradicable  beliefs  and  principles
which  will  at  all  times  produce  all  right  impulse  and  feeling,  and  bring  us  into  contact
with  Christ  and  with  things  unseen.  Another  hint  may  be  accepted  from  this
part  of  the  parable — that  there  must  be  regard  paid  both  to  the  outward  and  inward
life.  On  the  one  hand,  if  you  do  not  renew  your  supply  of  grace,  if  you  do  not
Citrefully  see  to  the  condition  of  your  own  spirit,  your  good  works  will  soon  become  less
frequent,  less  sincere,  and  less  lovely,  your  flame  will  burn  low.  But  on  the  other
hand,  if  you  tend  only  the  life  of  your  own  soul,  if  you  are  not  letting  your  light  shine
before  and  upon  men,  then  you  will  soon  find  it  impossible  to  receive  oil,  your  internal
life,  the  graces  of  your  own  spirit,  will  languish  and  stagnate.  If  you  are  to  be  prepared
to  meet  your  Lord,  the  vessel  of  oil  is  not  enough  without  the  burning  lamp,  nor  the
lamp  merely  lighted  and  with  no  supply  of  oil.  This  being  the  distinction  between  the
wise  and  foolish  virgins,  that  which  brings  it  to  light  is  that  the  bridegroom  did  not
come  while  all  the  lamps  were  burning,  and  that  during  his  delay  they  all  slumbered
and  slept.  This  seems  to  mean  no  more  than  that  all  having  made  such  preparation
as  they  judged  sufScient,  calmly  and  securely  waited  the  approach  of  the  bridegroom.
But  the  security  which  is  excusable  and  the  repose  which  is  necessary  in  one  condition
is  in  another  utter  madness.  It  ii  one  thing  to  turn  away  yotir  attention  from  the
Person  and  coming  of  Christ  when  you  have  made  sure  you  are  prepared  to  meet
him,  and  altogether  another  thing  to  turn  your  attention  to  other  things  in  mere
thoughtless  security.  But  we  may  learn  from  the  slumber  of  the  wise  as  well  as
from  the  rash  sleep  of  the  foolish.  There  is  a  kind  of  sleep  in  which  the  sense  of
hearing  at  least  is  on  the  alert,  and  takes  note  of  the  one  sound  it  jraits  for.  Whatever
necessary  occupation  turns  our  direct  attention  from  the  approach  of  our  Lord,  there
should  still  be  an  openness  of  sense  in  his  direction,  an  inwrought  though  latent
expectation  of  his  coming,  a  consciousness  which  but  a  whisper  will  arouse.  "At
midnight  the  cry  is  heard.  Behold  the  bridegroom  comethl"  And  now  the  difference
between  the  really  and  apparently  prepared  is  manifested.  This  sudden  and  appalling
reversal  of  their  hopes,  this  mingling  at  a  marriage  feast  of  exultant  joy  and  the  most
melancholy  and  calamitous  ruin,  seems  intended  to  fix  in  our  minds  an  idea  opposite
to,  and  that  should  extirpate,  the  idle  fancy  that  things  somehow  will  come  all  right,
that  there  is  no  real  need  of  all  this  urgent  warning  and  watching.  Men  cannot
believe  that  out  of  a  life  that  may  be  jested  or  trifled  away  consequences  so  lasting
and  so  awful  can  possibly  flow.  You  may  defer  all  seriousness,  all  thought  of  God,
all  trying  of  your  hope  and  security  till  the  coming  of  your  Lord,  but  further  you
cannot  defer  it,  then  it  will  be  made  manifest  that  this  life  Aos  momentous  issues.


500  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxt.  1— 46.

Then  it  is  not  an  easy,  lazy  turning  to  one's  neighbour  for  help  that  will  do  any  good.
Those  who  are  rtady  pass  in  to  the  marriage,  and  "  the  door  is  shut."  A  new  thing  it
is  for  that  door  to  be  shut.  So  long  has  it  stood  open,  thrown  wide  back,  that  we  forget
there  is  a  door  that  can  shut  that  entrance.  But  the  time  comes  when  whosoever  will
shall  not  be  lared,  when  it  will  be  vain  pointing  men  to  the  door,  when  whosoever  is
outside  there  remains.  The  great  lesson  our  Lord  himself  draws  from  the  parable  is
that  sinca  we  know  not  the  day  nur  the  hour  of  his  coming,  our  only  safety  is  to  watch
through  them  all.  And  for  those  who  have  found  in  Christ  salvation  and  life,  the
expectation  of  his  speedy  coming  can  only  be  grateful  and  stimulating.  It  is  this
which  occupies  the  future ;  whenever  .\  on  look  in  that  direction  it  is  the  Person  of
Christ  that  meets  the  eye.  He  teaches  us  to  look  forward  from  the  sorest  day  of  our
lives  to  that  certain  day  when  we  shall  meet  and  enjoy  himself,  and  enter  into  that
joy  that  is  satisfying  his  ample  nature.  From  the  saddest,  darkest  night  he  bids  us
watch  for  that  moming  that  shall  more  surely  rise  upon  us  than  to-morrow's  sun.^ — ^D.

Vers.  14 — 30. —  The  parable  of  the  talents:  There  are  three  parables  which  illustrate
the  relation  of  work  and  wages  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven — the  labourers  in  the  vineyard,
the  pounds,  and  the  talents.  What  this  parable  chiefly  illustrates  is  that  men  are
rewarded,  not  solely  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  work  produced,  but  that  their
ability  and  the  means  at  their  disposal  are  taken  into  account.  And  in  order  that  this
life  be  a  fair  field  for  the  test  of  hdtlity,  two  or  three  things  are  requisite,  and  these  are
noted  in  the  parable.

L  What  is  committed  to  our  trust  is  no  trifle,  but  the  goods  of  our  Lord — all  he  has
on  earth — ^whatever  can  produce  on  earth  the  fruit  he  himself  wrought  for  and  died  for.
There  is  no  interest  of  his  carried  forward  without  the  labour  of  men ;  if  his  servants
cease  to  work,  his  cause  on  earth  is  at  an  end.

IL  The  Master  distributes  his  goods  "according  to  the  several  ability"  of  his
servants.  Bach  gets  what  each  can  conveniently  and  effectively  handle,  and  no  one  is
expected  to  produce  results  out  of  proportion  to  his  ability  and  his  means.

IIL  It  is  only  "  after  a  long  time  that  the  Lord  of  those  servants  cometh  and
reckoneth  with  them."  They  are  not  summoned  to  a  reckoning  while  yet  embarr.issed
by  the  novelty  of  their  position ;  they  have  time  to  consider,  to  wait  opportunities,  to
try  experiments.  The  wise  have  time  to  lay  up  great  gains,  and  even  the  foolish  to
have  learnt  wisdom.

It  is  not  without  signidcance  that  the  servant  who  did  nothing  at  all  for  his  master
was  he  who  had  received  but  one  talent.  This  is  the  peculiar  temptation  of  the  man
who  has  little  ability.  By  showing  no  interest  in  that  situation  in  life  that  Qod  has
seen  fit  he  should  fill,  he  would  have  us  believe  he  is  qualified  for  a  higher.  You  are
in  the  same  condemnation  when  you  refuse  to  do  anything  because  you  cannot  do
a  great  deal ;  when  you  refuse  to  help  where  you  cannot  lead ;  when  you  hesitate
about  aiding  in  some  work  because  those  with  whom  you  would  be  associated  in  it  do
it  better  and  show  better  in  the  doing  of  it  than  yourself.  This  miserable  fear  of  being
mediocre,  how  many  a  good  work  has  it  prevented  or  crippled !  The  insolence  of  this
man's  words  is  not  intentional.  He  reads  otf  correctly  his  own  state  of  mind,  and
fancies  that  his  conduct  is  appropriate  and  innocent.  All  wrongness  of  conduct  is  at
bottom  based  on  a  wrong  view  of  Giod.  Nothing  so  conduces  to  right  action  as  right
thoughts  about  God. '  If  we  think,  with  this  servant,  that  God  is  hard,  grudging  to
give,  never  really  delighting  in  our  efforts  after  good,  and  that  whatever  we  attempt
in  our  life  he  will  coldly  weigh  and  scorn,  then  manifestly  we  have  no  heart  to  labour
for  him  But  this  view  of  God  is  unpardonably  wrong,  for  the  very  heartiness  with
which  the  other  servants  were  greeted  refutes  it.  Moreover,  the  action  flowing  from
it  is  inconsistent.  If  the  Master  is  so  slow  to  recognize  sincere  effort,  so  oppressive  iu
h'8  exactions,  why  did  you  not  at  least  put  your  money  into  the  hands  of  men  who
would  have  found  a  use  for  it  and  paid  you  a  good  interest  ?  There  are  numberless
ways  in  which  the  most  slenderly  equipped  among  us  can  fulfil  the  suggestion  here
given.  There  is  no  lack  of  great  works  going  on  for  our  Lord  to  which  we  may  safely
attach  ourselves,  and  in  which  our  talent  is  rather  invested  for  us  than  left  to  our
own  discretion.  The  parable  does  not  acknowledge  any  servants  who  have  absolutely
nothing.     There  is  something  to  be  done  whicn  precisely  you  can  do,  aomelhing  by


OH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOORDIXa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  50]

doing  which  you  will  please  him  whose  pleasure  in  you  will  fill  your  nature  with  glud-
nusa ;  it  is  given  to  you  to  increase  your  Lord's  goods.  See,  then,  that  you  be  not
burying  your  talent.  Money  is  made  for  circulation;  so  is  grace.  Yet  some  men
might  as  well  have  no  grace  for  all  the  good  it  does  ;  it  is  carefully  wi'ai>ped  up,  as  if
encounter  with  the  world  would  fret  its  edges  and  lower  its  value.  What,  then,  is  the
result  of  this?  The  great  law  is  enforced,  "To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  he
shall  have  abundance :  but  from  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  which
he  hath."  And  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  this  law  is  self-acting,  as  it  is  also  in  our
own  bodies  and  in  all  matters  physical.  The  muscle  that  is  unused  dwindles  and  disap-
pears ;  no  one  needs  to  come  and  remove  it ;  want  of  use  removes  it.  So  it  is  with  every
faculty — bodily,  mental,  or  spiritual.  Yet  how  many  think  they  can  retain  just  so
much  godliness  and  no  more !  How  many  think  they  are  hitting  the  right  mean
between  over-righteousness  and  worldllness  I  This  is  proof  that  there  is  something
radically  wrong  in  their  notion  of  the  kingdom  and  work  of  Christ.  You  cannot
possibly  have  just  so  much  grace  and  no  more;  it  must  grow,  or  it  will  die.  The
reward  is  as  certain,  and  provided  for  by  the  same  great  law,  as  the  punishment.
Beginning  with  such  grace  as  you  have,  there  lies  before  you  the  possibility  of  indefinite
increase,  if  you  do  what  you  have  power  to  do — resolutely  crush  out  what  you  know  to
be  your  weaknesses  and  faults,  and  seek  to  have  your  whole  life  gathered  up  into  some
ascertained  and  intelligible  connection  with  Christ.  This  increase  of  grace  is  itself  the
reward,  or  at  any  rate  the  essential  part  of  it.  The  talents  gained  are  left  in  the  hands
that  gained  them,  and  wider  opportunities  for  their  use  afibrded.  The  faithful  servant
of  Christ  is  always  entering  upon  his  reward,  and  entrance  into  heaven  only  marks  the
point  at  which  his  Lord  expresses  his  approval,  and  raises  him  to  a  position  of  acknow-
ledged trustworthiness,  the  position  of  one  who  has  acquired  an  interest  in  the  work,
whose  joy  is  his  Lord's  joy — ^joy  in  advancing  man's  best  interests,  joy  in  the  sight  of
others  made  righteously  happy.  There  can  be  no  reward  more  certain,  for  it  begins  here.
No  one  need  tell  i/ou  there  is  no  heaven;  the  kingdom  of  heaven  »»  within  you.  It  is
also  the  best  you  could  picture  to  yourself.  The  reward  a  person  in  sickness  receives
for  careful  attention  to  every  pre-^icription  of  his  physician  is  that  ho  becomes  healthy.
If  you  ask — What  is  it  that  makes  life  worth  living,  which  we  can  set  before  us  as  our
sufficient  reward  and  aim?  the  answer  can  only  be  that  we  have  the  hope  of
becoming  satisfactory  persons,  of  becoming  perfect  as  our  Father  is  jierfeot,  who  needs
no  reward,  but  delights  in  being  and  doing  good,  who  loves,  and  is  therefore  blessed. — D.

Vers.  31 — 46. — The  judgment.  No  human  imagination  avails  to  grasp  the  con-
ception of  the  judgment  of  a  world — the  great  white  throne,  the  voice  of  the  archangel,
the  generations  of  all  time  gathering  from  all  quarters.  There  is  one  feature  of  the
judgment  which  is  here  and  elsewhere  made  prominent — that  Christ  himselt  is  to  be
Judge.  The  Father  hath  given  him  authority  to  execute  judgment  also,  "  because  he  is
the  Son  of  man."  Jesus  Christ  is  that  Person  through  whom  God  has  seen  fit  to
transact  with  men  from  the  first,  and  it  will  be  so  to  the  end.  It  is  in  the  Person  of
Christ  that  God  has  been  accepted  or  rejected  of  men;  and  it  is  fit  tliat  in  this  Person
also  men  be  accepted  or  rejected  of  God.  We  shall  be  judged  by  One  who  can  read  our
soul  with  his  own  human  knowledge  of  men  and  their  ways.  There  are  only  two
points  in  this  great  subject  which  will  now  be  taken  up :  (1)  the  duration  of  the  doom
pronounced  ;  (2)  the  grounds  on  which  it  proceeds.

L  Bound  these  words  of  our  Lord  a  sea  of  controversy  has  continually  raged.  In
every  generation  there  are  numbers  who  explicitly  declare  that  they  cannot  believe  in
the  everlasting  punishment  of  any  of  their  fellow-creatures.  And  although  many  do
BO  from  mere  thoughtlessness,  in  others  it  arises  from  the  feeling  that  it  would  be
inconsistent  with  their  own  expectatioi.  of  h%|jiness,  and  with  their  best  ideas  of  God.
Men  of  feeble  imagination,  to  whom  the  doctrine  is  little  more  than  a  form  of  words,
have  little  temptation  to  rebel  against  it.  But  there  are  others  to  whom  it  makes  life
an  intolerable  misery ;  and  rather  than  resign  all  mental  comfort  and  happiness,  they
resign  their  belief  in  eternal  punishment.  But  belief  is  not  to  be  determined  by  our
wish,  but  by  Scripture  and  reason.  If  we  turn  to  our  Lord's  teaching,  and  try  to  make
out  whether  he  taught  universal  restoration,  the  distinct  conclusion  seems  to  be  that
be  did  not.     His  words  here  are  a  fair  sample  uf  his  teaching  on  this  point,  and


602  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOIlDmG  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1—44

apparently  he  meant  by  them  to  convey  the  impression  which  every  simple-minded,
unbiassed  reader  receives  from  tliem,  that  the  duration  of  the  punishment  of  the  lost
equalled  the  duration  of  the  blessedness  of  the  saved.  The  word  translated  "everlasting"
in  the  one  clause  and  "  eternal "  in  the  other  is  the  same  in  both  clauses.  And  though
this  is  scarcely  the  place  to  discuss  the  meaning  of  a  Greek  word,  so  much  has  been
said  of  the  proper  translation  of  the  word  being  "  age-long,"  that  it  is  necessary  to
guard  against  tlie  accepting  of  such  an  account  as  suSBcient.  Even  in  its  first  original
iense  t'oere  is  prominent  the  idea  of  enduring  to  the  end,  of  permanence.  So  that  in
the  course  of  time  it  became  the  commonest  term  to  express  that  which  lasts,  in
opposition  to  that  which  passes  away.  It  occurs  everywhere  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews,  the  purpose  of  which  Epistle  is  to  bring  out  the  enduring,  permanent,
absolute,  final,  eternal  nature  of  the  Christian  religion  in  opposition  to  the  temporary,
transient  nature  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  Plato,  falls  into  almost  the  very
language  of  Paul,  and  says  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth  that  these  visible  things  are
temporal,  but  the  unseen  is  eternal,  abides;  and  in  saying  this  he  uses  the  word  used
here.  But  no  doubt  besides  its  application  to  what  is  absolutely  eternal,  as  to  God
himself,  the  word  may  legitimately  be  applied  to  epochs  long  but  not  eternal.  But
unquestionably  it  conveys  the  idea  that  what  is  spoken  of  will  last  so  long  as  its
subject  lasts  unless  something  is  said  to  the  contrary.  The  bliss  promised  and  the
punishment  threatened  would  be  understood  to  last  so  long  as  the  subject  of  them  lasts
unless  an  explicit  intimation  were  given  that  it  would  not  be  so.  But  so  far  from  this,
the  New  Testament  everywhere  implies  that  the  state  of  things  introduced  by  Christ
and  bis  work  is  a  final  and  permanent  state,  suitably  described  by  the  word  that  is
applied  to  God  himself  when  he  is  called  Eternal.  It  is  to  be  noted  also  that  the  Jews
of  our  Lord's  time  certainly  believed  in  a  final  jutlgment  and  irreversible  doom ;  and  it
is  not  to  be  believed  that  our  Lord  should  have  used  the  very  figures  and  language
used  by  them  if  he  had  bad  any  new  doctrine  to  publish  regarding  the  future.

II.  The  grounds  on  which  the  final  separation  proceeds  must  commend  themselves
to  the  most  blunted  conscience.  The  friends  of  mankind  are  to  share  the  destiny  of
the  great  Friend  of  our  race,  the  haters  of  mankind  are  to  partake  with  the  great
enemy.  At  first  sight  the  duties  taken  account  of  seem  the  easiest.  But  the  spirit  of
Christ  is  that  which  iuducerl  him  to  pity  us  and  come  down  for  our  help,  and  it  is  this
spirit  of  love  which  is  fundamental.  The  man  who  is  like  him  in  this  will  one  day  be
like  him  in  all  else.  "  Love  is  of  God,"  and  will  still  be  recognized  by  God  as  belong-
ing to  him.  It  is  worthy  of  observation  that  those  who  were  rewarded  for  these  deeds
of  charity  were  not  aware  that  in  doing  them  they  had  been  serving  Christ.  His
explanation  of  this  to  them  reminds  us  of  the  device  of  Eastern  princes  of  wandering
through  their  dominions  in  disguise,  that  they  may  learn  the  feeling  of  their  subjects.
So  does  Christ  even  now  dwell  incognito  among  his  own,  in  the  habit  oF  the  poor  and
sick  and  oppressed ;  and,  asking  help  from  one  and  another,  he  finds  who  they  are  who
have  listened  to  his  commandment  tliat  we  should  love  one  another,  and  who  they  are
who  are  fulfilling  his  work  of  mercy  upon  earth.  And  this  identification  of  himself
with  all  that  is  base  and  wretched  has  its  basis  in  the  substantial  facts  of  his  earthly
life.  His  life  was  spent  for  the  relief  of  men,  but  it  was  merely  part  of  the  fulfilment
of  an  eternal  purpose.  He  is  no  less  desirous  of  relieving  the  miseries  of  this  present
age  than  he  was  of  relieving  those  who  were  around  him  upon  earth.  And  as  we
would  think  gratefully  and  lovingly  of  one  who  in  our  absence  cared  for  some  brother
or  parent,  wife  or  child,  who  stood  in  need  of  help,  so  does  Christ  think  highly  of  him
who  considers  and  cares  for  any  weak  brother  of  his  for  whom  he  died,  and  whom
when  he  comes  he  will  claim  for  his  own.  Are  you  prepared  for  this  judgment?  We
are  not  asked  what  we  have  felt,  or  thought,  or  believed,  but  what  we  have  done.  It
is  conduct  which  shows  if  you  are  of  the  spirit  of  Christ,  capable  of  enjoying  what  he
counts  a  blessed  life.  His  aim  was  the  only  right  aim,  the  only  aim  which  in  the
judgment  will  be  taken  account  of.  Every  one  who  tries  this  finds  it  is  radical,  that
it  involves  regeneration,  that  ho  cannot  adopt  it  as  his  real  aim  in  life  without  giving
himself  up  to  God. — D.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  virgin*.     Amongit  the  great  truths  taught  b  this  psrabl«  w«

notice  these.


OH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  BoS

I.  Tha,t  belioion  admits  of  ko  keutbality.  1.  In  other  things  men  may  be
indifferent.  (1)  Thus  in  questions  of  science:  one  dogmatist  may  assert  that
gravitation  is  the  effect  of  attraction  as  a  -property  in  matter.  Another  may  hold
attraction  in  matter  to  be  a  mechanical  absurdity.  It  is  of  little  consequence  should
a  third  person  suspend  his  judgment.  The  cosmos  will  not  go  to  pieces  because  he  cannot
determine  how  its  elements  are  kept  together.  (2)  So  in  questions  of  politics :  some
may  stoutly  contend  that  a  liberal  policy  is  the  least  revolutionary  and  safest  for  the
commonwealth.  Others  may  as  stoutly  oppose  this  view.  A  third  party  may  see
difficulties  on  either  hand,  and  be  unable  to  come  to  any  conclusion.  The  world  will
not  wait  for  him"  to  make  up  his  mind.  2.  Sut  the  relations  of  existence  forbid  neutrality
in  religion.  (1)  Here  the  Divine  claims  upon  the  individual  are  urgent.  To  neglect
these  is  to  treat  the  Almighty  with  contempt.  Such  an  offence  is  the  reverse  of
trifling.  Negligence  here  is  damnable.  (2)  Here  also  are  urgent  human  claims.
Every  man  is  his  brother's  keeper,  responsible  to  God  for  his  influence  upon  his
brother.  (3)  We  are  responsible  also  to  ourselves.  Every  man  has  to  live  with  his
own  conscience.  His  eternal  happiness  or  misery  depends  upon  the  opinion  his
companion  has  of  him.  He  is  made  respectable  and  happy,  or  otherwise,  according  to
the  nature  of  his  relation  to  the  question  of  religion.  (4)  If  God  forsake  the  sinner,
Satan  will  compel  him.  Neutrality,  therefore,  is  out  of  the  question.  We  can  only
vanquish  Satan  by  the  help  of  God.  Our  possibilities  are  infinitely  grand  or  mean.
To  be  a  son  of  God,  what  more  glorious  !    To  be  a  serf  of  Satan,  what  more  despicable  1

II.  That  unbelief  is  the  pabalyzeb  or  bbligiods  bneeot.  1.  The  world
appeals  vividly  to  sense.  (1)  Hence  in  the  Bridegroom's  absence  there  is  a  disposition  to
slumber.  The  glitter  and  whirl  of  the  world's  excitement  drowns  and  stupefies  the
spiritual  sense.  (2)  Faith  is  the  counteractant.  It  acts  by  what  Dr.  Chalmers  calli
"  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection."  Realizing  vividly  the  superior  glories  of  the
spiritual  world,  we  gain  the  victory  over  the  world  of  sense.  2.  The  foolish  sleep
without  oil  in  their  vessels.  (1)  Some  foolish  ones  have  no  lamps,  no  profession  of
religion.  These  are  the  people  outside  the  Churches.  They  are  the  people  of  the
world.  Many  of  these  go  to  sleep  pluming  themselves  upon  being  "  better  than  many
of  those  who  do  profess."  (2)  Others  go  to  sleep  because  they  have  lamps — because
they  are  professors,  though  they  have  no  oil  in  their  vessels,  no  grace  of  God  in  their
hearts.  How  many  trust  for  salvation  to  their  Church-membership  rather  than  to
Christ  1  Useless  is  the  oil-less  lamp.  3.  Even  the  wise  are  foimd  sleeping.  (1)  Some
think  "sleep"  here  means  death.  This,  however,  scarcely  comports  with  the  grand
inference  and  application  of  the  argument,  "Watch."  The  exhortation  surely  comes
too  late  to  the  dead.  (2)  Is  there  not  a  sense  in  which  the  Churches  generally  are
asleep — the  wise  as  well  as  the  foolish  ?  Are  not  Christians,  taken  generally,  far  too
worldly?  How  little  of  holy  scorn  do  we  feel  for  the  pleasures  of  the  vain  and
frivolous!  Is  there  not  also  a  culpable  supineness  in  relation  to  the  condition  of  the
world  perishing  around  us?  What  excitement  would  there  be  in  a  ship's  crew  while
•  man  overboard  remained  unrescuedl  What  excitement  in  a  crowd  wliile  an  inmate
of  a  house  on  fire  remained  unsaved!  Where  is  our  faith  in  the  perishing  condition  of
the  world  of  sinners,  and  in  the  saving  efficacy  of  the  Bedeemer's  bluod  ?  Are  we  not
paralyzed  by  our  unbelief  ?

III.  That  eelioious  exoitbmbnt  kindles  as  the  world  fades.  1.  All  examine
themselves  at  the  Judgment.  (1)  That  will  be  the  "  midnight,"  viz.  of  the  world.  The
sun  shall  be  darkened.  (2)  Then  shall  the  midnight  "  cry  "  be  raised.  It  will  be
discerned  in  the  crash  of  the  thunders;  in  the  growling  of  the  earthquakes;  in  the
roar  of  the  fire  of  the  great  conflagration ;  in  the  ever-aggravating  vibrations  of  the
trump  of  God.  (3)  All  will  then  be  raised  from  their  graves.  "Then  all  those
virgins  arose."  The  unjust  as  well  as  the  just  will  respond  to  that  voice,  and  come
forth  from  their  graves.  2.  All  examine  themselves  in  dying.  (1)  The  hour  of  dying
is  the  midnight  of  life.  The  world  then  recedes  from  the  senses,  or,  which  is  the  same,
the  senses  art  closing  upon  the  world.  (2)  The  midnight  cry  is  then  heard  in  the
thunderings  of  the  Law  and  in  the  terrors  if  the  Lord.  The  echoes  are  awakened  in
the  conscience.  The  death-rattle  in  the  throat  is  a  solemn  alarm.  (3)  In  such  a
crisis  all  the  virgins  are  astir.  The  wise  are  excited  to  look  to  their  lamps  and  their
oil.    Happy  are  they  when  they  find  the  <zrace  that  can  sustain  and  noutidi  ths


504  THE  GOSPKL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1—46.

light  of  a  good  profession.    The  foolish  look  with  consternation  upon  their  oil-less
vessels.

TV.  That  bternity  exposes  the  eefuqes  or  jolly.  1.  Trtutmg  to  works  of
supererogation.  (1)  These  were  invented  ahout  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century.  It  is
founded  upon  what  the  papists  call  "  counsels  of  perfection,"  or  rules  which  do  not  bind
under  the  penalty  of  sin,  but  are  only  useful  in  carrying  men  to  a  greater  degree  of
perfection  than  is  necessary  to  salvation.  This  dogma  is  repugnant  to  Holy  Scripture
(cf.  ch.  V.  48 ;  Phil.  ii.  12).  In  due  time  the  popes,  to  give  colour  to  their  doctrine  of
indulgences,  claimed  to  have  the  custody  of  the  fund  of  the  superabundant  merits  of
Christ  and  of  his  saints,  and  enriched  their  coffers  by  the  sale  of  these.  (2)  Gould
there  be  a  prophetic  irony  in  the  advice  of  the  wise  virgins  to  the  foolish,  "Go  ye  to
them  that  sell "  ?  The  irony  is  terrible  when  taken  in  connection  with  the  sequel,  that
when  they  returned  with  the  oil  so  procured  it  availed  them  nothing.  2.  Trusting  to
the  infattible  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.  (1)  The  lamps  of  the  foolish  virgins  once
had  light,  else  they  could  not  have  "  gone  out.  (2)  Their  lamps  went  out  while  they
slept.  Imperceptibly  the  oil  of  grace  was  consumed,  while  no  effort  was  made  to
leplenish  the  store.  (3)  The  sequel  is  that  they  find  themselves  shut  out.  3.  Trusting
to  the  opportunities  of  the  future.  (1)  While  the  Bridegroom  tarried,  the  foolish  virgins
slept  without  making  any  provision  of  oil  for  their  lamps.  Lo  here  the  very  spirit  of
procrastination.  (2)  When  the  alarm  of  the  presence  of  the  Bridegroom  rouses  them,
they  make  a  desperate  rush  to  prepare  for  him;  but  all  now  is  unavailing.  The
procession  is  formed  without  them,  and  they  are  shut  out  in  the  darkness.  (3)
Importunity  now  comes  too  late.  It  was  all  over  with  the  antediluvian  procrastinatora
when  the  door  of  the  ark  was  shut.  (4)  The  moral,  then,  is — Watch.  Watch,  because
the  time  is  uncertain.     Watch,  because  the  event  is  sure. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  14 — 30. — The  talents.  This,  like  the  preceding  parable,  refers  immediately  to
the  professed  followers  of  Christ.  It  probably  has  a  special,  though  certainly  not
exclusive,  appliuation  to  ministers  and  those  distinguished  by  ofSce  in  the  Churches.
We  have  to  consider —

I.  The  talekts.  1.  These  are  not  the  natural  faculties.  (1)  In  the  possession  of
these  there  is  no  difference  of  "one,"  "two,"  and  "five."  Th<5  Caucasian  has  no
attribute  that  is  not  also  possessed  by  the  Hottentot.  The  premier  enjoys  no  attribute
that  is  not  also  enjoyed  by  the  peasant.  (2)  Were  the  talents  our  natural  faculties,
then  would  the  privation  of  them  amount  to  the  extinction  of  our  being.  But  the
unprofitable  servant  survives  his  privation  of  his  talent,  to  be  punished  for  his  sloth-
fulness.  (3)  The  talents  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  agents  to  whom  they  are
entrusted  lor  use.  But  the  natural  faculties  go  to  constitute  the  agents.  2.  They  are
the  gifts  of  grace  and  providence.  (1)  Foremost  amongst  these  is  the  royal  gift  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  The  lord  travelling  into  the  far  country  is  Christ  after  his  Passion
ascending  into  the  heavens.  Thence  he  sent  the  baptism  of  his  Spirit  (see  Eph.  iv.  8).
This  great  Gift  is  distributed  into  (a)  the  ordinary ;  (6)  the  extraordmary.  There  is  a
mauifestaliou  of  the  Spirit  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.  (2)  Whatever  in  the
order  of  Providence  may  increase  our  influence,  (o)  Property.  (6)  Social  status,
(c)  Education,  (d)  Patronnge.  (e)  Experience.  (3)  Opportunities,  (o)  Ordinances
of  the  gospel — Bibles,  sabbaths,  u/inisters.  (6)  Circumstances  of  Providence,  or
occurrences  called  accidents,  (c)  Relationships,  (d)  Time.  Every  moment  has  its
giace;  every  grace  has  its  employment;  every  employment  is  for  eternity.  Note:  A
talent  of  silver  is  worth  £350.  All  Christ's  gifts  are  rich  and  valuable.  They  are  the
purchase  of  his  precious  blood.

IL  TuEiB  CUSTODY.  1.  God  gives  them  diversely.  (1)  To  one  he  gives  "  five,"  to
another  "  two,"  to  another  "  one."  This  is  arbitrary,  of  his  own  spontaneity,  without
consulting  with  the  recipient.  This  he  has  an  absolute  right  to  do.  (2)  Yet  is  his
arbitrariness  guided  by  wisdom.  He  gives  "to  each  according  to  his  several  ability."
Ho  trusts  us  up  to  the  limit  of  our  own  ability.  Five  talents  would  be  too  much  for
this  man ;  one  would  be  too  little  for  this.  God,  who  distributes,  knows.  (3)  Justice
also  is  conspicuous  in  the  distribution.  No  one  is  pressed  beyond  his  powers.  Who
can  say  that  the  difference  between  the  greatest  and  the  least  in  the  matter  of
opportunity  is  more  than  five  to  one?     Plato,  in  bis  laws,  allowed  no  man  to  postest


OH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDIN(J  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  505

an  income  of  more  than  five  times  that  of  the  poorest.  This  might  be  feasible  with  an
adequate  levelling  up.  (i)  No  man  has  any  right  to  complain  that  he  has  more  or
less  than  another.  He  that  has  much  should  not  despise  him  that  has  little.  He  that
has  little  should  not  envy  him  that  has  more.  The  man  who  improves  his  gifts,  however
small,  will  surely  obtain  the  kingdom.  2.  He  gives  them  to  be  improved.  (1)  Every
gift  and  grace  of  God  is  capable  of  improvement,  (a)  To  the  comfort  and  salvation  of
the  recipient.  (6)  For  the  benefit  of  his  race,  (c)  For  the  glory  of  his  Maker.  (2)  No
talent  must  be  buried.  "  Money  is  like  manure,  good  for  nothing  in  the  heap ;  but  it
must  be  spread  "  (Bacon ;  see  also  Eccles.  vi.  1, 2  j  Jas.  v,  3).  That  many  0  h  ristians  are
too  slothful  to  be  useful  is  a  melancholy  fact.  So  perseveringly  should  we  serve  as  not
to  outlive  our  chaiacter  and  our  usefulness.  (3)  Much  more  must  no  talent  be  abused.
Yet  to  bury  is  to  abuse.  Ho  who  digs  to  hide  his  talent  puts  himself  to  more  trouble
to  abuse  God's  mercy  than  it  would  cost  him  to  improve  that  mercy  unto  his  salvation.
III.  Thb  eeckonino.  1,  The  diligent  are  rewarded.  (1)  I'hey  can  reuder  their
account  with  joy.  For  with  the  talents  they  had  received  "  they  went  and  traded."
Note:  A  true  Christiau  is  a  spiritual  tradesman  (see  Prov.  iii.  15;  ch.  iii.  45).  Those
who  diligently  improve  their  talents  will  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment  (see
1  John  ii.  28  ;  iv.  17).  (2)  Tliey  receive  commendation.  They  are  praised  for  their
goodness  and  faithfulness.  If  there  be  no  merit,  there  is  yet  a  rewardableness  in  our
good  deeds.  They  are  promised  a  promotion.  "  I  will  set  tbee  over  many  things."
If  the  few  things  be  "five  talents,"  what  must  be  the  "many  things,"  equivalent  to
«  five  cities,"  equivalent  to  "  an  hundredfold  "  1  The  servant  over  the  few  things  is  to
be  made  ruler  over  many  things.  Note :  Heaven  is  a  place  of  order  and  government.
(3)  They  receive  glory.  "  Enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  Christ,  for  the  joy  that
was  before  him,  endured  the  cross.  That  joy  was  the  glorification  nf  his  humanity,
both  bocly  and  soul.  It  is  also  the  glorification  of  the  members  of  his  Church,  which
is  his  mystical  body  and  soul.  This  joy  will  fill  the  capacity  of  every  member,
whether  he  be  a  man  of  five  talents  or  of  two.  Heightened  capacity  will  still  have
perfect  enjoyment.  Christ's  servants  are  all  princes.  The  crown  (2  Tim.  iv.  8),  the
throne  (Rev.  iii.  21),  the  kingdom  (ch.  xxv.  34).  2.  The  indolent  are  punished.  (1)
They  are  reproached.  "Wicked  and  slothful"  is  opposed  to  "good  and  faithful."
Faithfulness  rather  than  success  is  approved,  and  so  is  faithlessness  rather  than  failure
reproved.  Note  :  The  servant  who  had  least  entrusted  to  him  is  here  represented  as
the  unfaithful  one,  perhaps  to  impress  upon  us  that  we  must  not  make  the  smallness
of  our  gifts  a  pretext  for  indolence.  (2)  The  slothful  servant,  justifying  himself  on  the
ground  of  his  master's  severity,  expresses  the  views  of  the  Author  of  all  good  that  are
taken  by  carnal  minds.  How  awfully  depraved  is  he  that  can  charge  his  crimes  upon
his  Maker  1  Note :  The  parable  puts  a  weak  excuse  into  the  muuth  of  the  slothful
servant,  to  show  that  for  neglect  there  is  no  apology.  (3)  Hard  thoughts  of  God  beget
fear  (vers.  24,  25).  Note  the  spirit  of  the  slave.  By  refraining  tVom  expressing
displeasure  at  the  injustice  of  the  slothful  servant,  our  Lord  teaches  that  the  duty  of
serving  him  is  incumbent  even  on  the  natural  man.  (4)  The  indolent  are  deprived  of
their  gifts  and  graces.  "Take  the  talent  from  him."  From  the  faithless  minister,
from  the  faithless  Church-member.  "  For  from  him  that  hath  not  even  that  which  he
hath  shall  be  taken  away."  "  He  who  hath  this  or  that,  aud  makes  nu  use  of  it,  may
not  improperly  be  said  both  to  have  it  and  not  to  have  it "  (Aristotle).  Only  what
we  use  well  becomes  crystallized  into  a  good  character.  (5)  The  unprofitable  are
relegated  to  wrath  (ver.  30).  "  Unprofitableness  and  omission  of  duty  is  damnable ;
unfaithfulness  in  us,  who  are  but  stewards  and  servants.  To  do  no  harm  is  praise  fit
for  a  stone,  not  for  a  man"  (Baxter).  "Caat  ye  out  the  unprofitable  servant."  (a)
"into  outer  darkness."  All  outside  heaven  is  darkness  in  eternity.  (6)  "There  shall
be  weeping,"  etc.;  misery, — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  31 — 46. — The  great  assite.  It  has  been  well  observed  by  Dr.  Doddridge  that
our  Lord  here  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  great  day  of  retribution,  in  a  description  which
is  one  of  the  noblest  instances  of  the  true  sublime  anywhere  to  be  found.  Portions  of
the  description  are  undoubtedly  parabolic,  the  intention  evidently  being  to  give  promi-
nence to  certain  important  principles ;  but  otherwise  it  is  a  solemn  anticipation  of  what
will  one  day  bocome  history.    We  may  consider —


508  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [en.  xxv.  1— 46.

I.  The  abbangement  or  the  court.  And  conspicuous  here  is :  1.  The  appearand
of  the  Judge.  (1)  "  Tlie  Son  of  man."  Under  this  title  the  Lord  comes  to  us  as  the
Divine  Word  or  Truth  made  flesh,  and  so  accommodated  to  our  apprehension.  In  this
quality  God  reveals  himself  an  our  Redeemer  and  Saviour ;  and  in  this  quality  he  will
appear  as  our  Judge.  Accordingly,  we  learn, " Neither  hath  the  Father" — ^the  Godhead
as  distinct  from  the  manhood — "judged  any  man,  but  he  hath  given  all  judgment  unto
the  Son."  Again,  "  And  because  he  is  the  Son  of  man  "  (cf.  John  v.  22,  27 ;  Acts
xvii.  31 ;  Bom.  ii.  16).  (2)  But  it  is  the  "  Son  of  man  in  his  glory,"  He  came  to
redeem  us  in  his  humiliation.  In  his  second  advent  his  humanity  will  be  beatified.
This  was  anticipated  in  the  vision  of  the  Transfiguration  (see  John  i.  14).  The  Deity
of  the  Son  of  man  will  then  be  more  gloriously  visible.  (3)  "  And  all  his  angels  with
him."  Angels  rather  shade  than  enhance  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  They  are  the  "  clouds  "
in  which  elsewhere  the  Son  of  man  is  described  as  coming  (see  Dan.  vii.  13 ;  ch.  xxiv.
30 ;  xxvi.  64 ;  Rev.  i.  7).  They  come  to  moderate  the  effect  of  that  face,  the  fire  of
which  will  kindle  the  final  conflagration  (cf.  2  Pet.  iii.  7 ;  Rev.  xx.  11).  (4)  "  Then
shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory,"  or  "  glorious  throne."  Agreeably  to  this  he
speaks  as  "  the  King"  (ver.  34).  Burely  it  is  impossible, in  the  light  of  this  Scripture,
were  there  no  other,  to  doubt  the  proper  Deity  of  our  blessed  Lord.  2.  The  vast  assembly.
(1)  "  And  before  bim  were  gathered  all  the  nations."  Though  the  particular  illustra-
tion which  follows  has  reference  to  those  only  from  among  them  who  had  heard  the
gospel,  yet  these  words  imply  that  the  whole  human  race  will  congregate  there  (see
Acts  xvii.  31).  Witness,  then,  all  the  men  from  every  clime,  and  all  the  generations
of  the  ages.  (2)  Such  a  congregation  presupposes  a  general  resurrection.  Elsewhere
we  are  taught  that  this  will  take  place  (cf.  Dan.  xii.  2 ;  John  v.  28, 29).  So  the  dead,
small  and  great,  stand  before  the  throne  (Rev.  xx.  12).  (3)  Added  to  the  vast  aggre-
gate of  humanity,  "all  the  angels"  are  present.  This  doubtless  brings  prominently
before  us  the  holy  angels ;  but  their  presence  suggests  also  that  of  the  fallen.  And  we
read  further  on  of'  the  "  everlasting  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels "  (ver.  34).
They  were  probably  the  first  judged.  They  were  the  first  in  transgression,  the  first
cursed,  and  so  likewise  the  first  doomed  (see  Rev.  xx.  1 — 3).  3.  The  solemn  discrimi-
nation. (1)  All  nations  are  assembled  before  the  King  for  his  inspection.  The  proceu
of  the  inspection  is  not  here  described;  but  elsewhere  we  are  assured  that  "every  one
of  ua  shall  give  account  of  himself  unto  God  "  (Bom.  xiv.  12).  Neither  is  time  here
specified  which  the  inspection  may  occupy.  It  will  probably  extend  throughout  the
great  period  of  a  thousand  years  described  by  John  (see  Rev.  xx.).  (2)  The  discrimi-
nation eventuates  in  separation  (ver.  32).  The  sheep  is  the  symbol  of  peaceableness
and  innocency.  The  goat,  on  the  contrary,  a  quarrelsome,  lascivious,  and  ill-scentud
creature,  describes  the  impure.  The  sheep  pass  to  the  "right  hand,"  a  position  which,
according  to  the  rabbins,  expresses  approbation  and  eminence.  The  goats  pass  to  the
"  left,"  which,  they  say,  expresses  disapprobation  and  rejection.  The  Romans  recog-
nized a  similar  distinction  (see  *  ^n.,'  vi.  540).  (3)  The  angels  will  be  employed  as
instruments  in  this  great  service  (see  ch.  xiii.  30,  39 — 43).  Note  :  Men  who  can  agree
in  matters  of  worldly  business,  and  even  in  matters  of  morals,  will  yet  separate  when
they  come  to  the  higher  plane  of  religion.  The  spirituality  of  the  future  state  is  tha
touchstone.

II.  The  awabd  of  the  bighteous.  1,  They  are  commended.  (1)  Because  they
showed  kindness  to  the  disciples  of  Christ.  They  gave  meat  to  the  hungry ;  drink  to
the  thirsty ;  clothing  to  the  naked ;  hospitality  to  the  stranger;  attention  to  the  sick ;
encouragement  to  the  prisoner.  (2)  Because  they  did  all  this  from  the  pure  motive  of
love  to  Jesus.  So  he  takes  it  home.  "  /  was  hungry,"  etc. ;  "  ye  did  it  unto  me."
What  dignity  does  this  stamp  upon  the  lowliest  offices  and  acts  (see  Eph.  vi.  5 — 7 ;
Col.  iii.  17 ;  Heb.  vi.  10) !  (3)  Therefore  are  they  gi-eeted  as  "  blessed  of  the  Father."
Such  acts  of  kindness  evince  them  to  be  the  children  of  that  blessed  Father  who
"  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and
the  unjust "  (see  ch.  v.  43 — iS).  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive.''  It  is
more  God-like.  2.  They  are  promoted.  (1)  "Come,  ye  blessed  [children]  of  my  Father;"
come  nearer  to  me,  the  "  Son  of  man,"  the  "  King  "  of  glory.  "  My  brethren  "  (ver.  40).
Jesus  never  directly  calls  his  disciples  his  brethren  until  after  his  resurrection.  Jesus
glorified  is  more  nearly  related  to  the  men  regenerated  than  Jesus  unglorified  to  men


OH.  M'..  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  507

unregenerated.  It  is  when  the  Lord  is  glorified  in  us  that  we  become  truly  those  whom
he  acknowledges  as  his  brethren  (of.  ch.  ixviii.  10 ;  John  xiii.  1,  margin  Eevised
Version ;  xx.  17).  Yet  is  there  a  becoming  reverence  which  prevents  the  disciple  from
speaking  thus  familiarly  of  the  Lord.  Even  James  does  not  presume  to  call  himself
"  the  Lord's  brother,"  neither  does  Jude,  who  distinguishes  himself  rather  as  "  the
brother  of  James  "  (cf.  Jas.  i.  1 ;  Jude  1).  (2)  *'  Inherit  the  kingdom."  This  implies
the  crown  (2  Tim.  iv.  8);   the  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21);   the  sceptre  (Rev.  iu  26,  27).

(3)  "Prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  viz.  in  the  terms  of  the
everlasting  covenant  which  promises  rewards  to  the  obedience  of  faith.  "  For  yoii,"
viz,  who  have  done  the  works  which  prove  the  genuineness  of  faith.  Note :  The  dis-
avowal by  the  righteous  of  the  virtue  ascribed  to  them  is  designed  to  show  the  absence
of  all  idea  of  merit  from  true  righteousness.  The  good  do  good  for  its  own  sake — for
the  Lord's  sake  who  is  goodness  itself.  (4)  All  this  is  summed  up  as  "  eternal  life."
This  is  union  with  Christ,  who  is  that  Life  (see  1  John  v.  12,  20).

III.  The  doou  of  the  wicked.  1.  They  are  convicted.  (1)  They  are  impeached
with  want  of  sympathy  with  Christ.  "  Ye  gave  me  no  meat,"  etc.  They  would  not
consider  Christ  in  his  disciples.  (2)  Special  pleading  will  b«  of  no  avail  before  tlie
judgment-seat  of  Christ.  "  When  saw  we  thee,"  etc.  ?  Sinners  are  more  ready  to  lay
claim  to  virtues  to  which  they  have  no  right,  than  to  confess  the  evils  of  which  they
are  guilty.  But  they  will  get  their  answer.  "  Forasmuch,"  etc.  Note :  Virtue  can-
not receive  the  slightest  wound  of  which  Jesus  does  not  instantly  feel  the  smart  (see
Acts  ix.  4,  5).  (3)  The  offences  here  alleged  are  negative.  TMs  does  not  say  that
positive  wickedness  shall  escape.  The  murderer,  the  adulterer,  the  thief,  the  liar,  the
blasphemer, — every  sinner  will  have  his  sinfulness  brought  home  to  him.  2.  They  are
degraded,  (1)  "  Depart  from  me  " — from  your  last  hope  of  mercy  and  salvation.  "  Ye
cursed."  In  departing  from  me  whom  you  refused  to  accept  as  your  Curse-bearer  (ni^»<),
bear  now  your  own  deserved  execration.  (2)  Depart  "into  eternal  fire."  This  is  aftei-
wards  described  as  "  eternal  punishment."  Hell  is  that  horrid  centre  in  which  all  tho
lines  of  sin  and  misery  meet.  The  Greek  word  construed  "  eternal  "  is  to  be  under-
stood in  the  New  Testament,  not  so  much  in  the  light  of  its  etymolo.y  as  in  that  of
its  usage.  When  applied  to  the  world,  it  has  no  limit  except  the  duration  of  the  world
(see  Rom.  xvi.  25,  Eevised  Version ;  Jude  7).  When  applied  to  the  world  to  come,  it
iias  no  limit  (see Mark  ix.  43  ;  see  also  Isa.  xxxiii.  14  ;  Dan.  xii.  2  ;  2  Thess.  i.  9;  iicv.
xiv.  11 ;  XX.  10).  (3)  "  Prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Note :  There  is  a
ringleader  among  devils.  "  What  must  be  the  nature  and  misery  of  a  confinement
with  those  powerful,  active,  sagacious  beings,  whose  minds  are  all  malice,  fraud,  and
cruelty,  and  whose  endless  being  is  a  succession  of  rage,  revenge,  and  despair?  "  (Dwight).

(4)  "And  these  shall  go  away,"  etc.  Those  who  refused  to  accept  the  invitation  to
"come,"  will  have  to  obey  the  order  to  "go."  "Every  word  has  a  terror  in  it,  like
that  of  the  trumpet  of  Mount  Sinai,  waxing  louder  and  louder"  (Henry). — J.  A.  M.

Vor.  2. — Signs  of  wisdom  and  of  folly  in  the  Christian  life.  "And  five  of  them
were  wise,  and  five  were  foolish."  We  should  not  confuse  the  word  "  foolish "  with
the  word  "  wicked."  Some  were  thoughtless,  heedless  of  possibilities ;  they  lived  in
the  present,  and  could  not  anticipate.  Life  is  full  of  emergencies,  and  he  is  wise  who
prepares  for  all  that  he  can  imagine  may  come.  Our  Lord  frequently  impressed  the
importance  of  forethought  in  the  Christian  life.  He  had  immediately  before  been
counselling  his  disciples  to  be  "  always  ready."  It  is  that  p  liat  he  now  further  illus-
trates in  these  three  parables  of  the  chapter,  showing  that  the  true  readiness  includes
(1)  maintenance  of  the  personal  religious  life  ;  ('-i)  full  response  to  all  Christian  obli-
gations ;  and  (3)  kindly  relations  with  all  around  us.  In  the  parable  of  the  "  virgins,"
we  are  taught  that  the  wise  Christian  provides  for  the  maintenance  of  the  .soul's  life,
but  the  foolish  Christian  is  content  to  live  on  the  experiences  of  to-day.

I.  Wise  Chkistian  livino.  Strain  of  some  kind  is  sure  to  come  in  every  Christian
life.  It  may  take  forms  of  affliction,  persecution,  temptation ;  but  our  Lord  intimates
that  nothing  will  ever  really  test  and  try  us  so  much  as  "  mere  continuance."  This  is
his  point  in  the  teachings  of  the  last  time.  Everybody  was  anticipating  speedy  con-
summations. He  says,  "  tho  end  ii  not  yet."  The  bridegroom  is  certainly  coming,
but  there  may  be  long  waiting-times  before  he  comes.     Wise  disciples  provide  for  thu


503  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv,  1—46

strain  of  "patient  continuing  in  well-doing."  And  the  provision  tliey  make  is  soul-
nourishment.  They  keep  the  oil-stores  replenished ;  they  keep  the  soul's  light  brightly
shining,  and  then  they  are  ready  for  all  circumstances,  prepared  for  all  delay  and  for
all  strain.  That  is  the  secret  of  Christian  wisdom,  "  Keep  thy  soul  with  all  diligence ;
for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  What  are  the  soul-stores  from  which  the  soul's
light  may  he  kept  replenished,  should  be  fully  illustrated.

II.  Foolish  Cukistian  living.  There  is  both  a  wrong  and  a  right  concern  for  the
"  morrow."  It  is  wrong  to  luorry  over  it ;  it  is  right  to  anticipate  aod  prepare  for  it.
It  is  foolish  merely  to  enjoy  the  present.  Dods  says,  "  The  foolish  virgins  are  a  warn-
ing to  all  who  are  tempted  to  make  conversion  everything,  edification  nothing  ;  who
cultivate  religion  for  a  season,  and  then  think  they  have  done  enough ;  who  were
religious  once,  can  remember  the  time  when  they  had  very  serious  thoughts  and  very
solemn  resolutions,  but  who  have  made  no  earnest  effort,  and  are  making  none,  t«
maintaiu  within  themselves  the  life  they  once  began."  Christian  folly  is  neglecting
personal  soul-culture. — R.  T.

Ver.  4. — The  provision  for  Christian  emergencies.  "The  wise  took  oil  in  their
vessels  with  their  lamps."  Some  think  that  torches  of  tow,  steeped  in  oil,  and  fastened
to  the  end  of  sticks,  may  be  meant.  Wetstein  quotes  the  following  from  Babbi
Solomo :  "  It  was  the  custom  in  the  land  of  Ishmael  t«  bring  the  bride  from  the  house
of  her  father  to  that  of  her  husband  in  the  night-time ;  and  there  were  about  ten
staffs ;  upon  the  top  of  each  was  a  brazen  dish,  containing  rags,  oil,  and  pitch,  and
this  being  kindled  formed  blazing  torches,  which  were  carried  before  the  bride."  The
lights  were  intended  to  make  brightness  and  joyonsness  for  the  marriage  procession,
and  the  possession  of  a  lighted  lamp  was  a  sort  of  guarantee,  a  sort  of  ticket  of  admis-
sion to  the  feast.  Oil  from  the  store-vessel  poured  into  the  dish  would  revive  the
flame  when  the  cry  of  the  "  bridegroom  coming  "  was  heard.  "  Oil  in  the  vessel "  was
the  virgins'  provision  against  all  contingency.  Whatever  happened,  with  oil  in  the
vessel  with  the  lamp  they  could  keep  the  light  alive.  The  foolish  virgins  went  care-
lessly on  their  journey,  satisfied  with  this — their  lamps  were  burning,  and  not  troubling
themselves  to  think  how  long  they  would  burn,  and  what  they  would  do  when  the
flame  began  to  flicker.     It  is  not  enough  to  have  oil  in  the  lamp.

I.  The  "  on.  of  Divine  grace  "  is  the  provision  we  need.  That  figure  of  speech
gathers  up  several  things.  1.  A  personal  experience  of  dealing  with  God.  2.  Culti-
vated habits  of  communion  with  God.  3.  A  cherished  sense  of  dependence  on  God.
4.  Well-established  views  of  Divine  truth.  5.  Gathered  stores  of  Divine  promises
and  comt'ortings.  All  such  things  as  belong  to  the  personal  and  private  life  of  godli-
ness. But  this  is  only  the  one  side.  There  is  another  and  even  more  important  side.
The  "  oil  of  grace  "  really  represents  the  indwelling  Spirit,  who  is  ready  to  inspire  us
to  every  good  word  and  work.  That  Spirit  is  with  all  who  are  in  earnest  and
dependent.  When  his  grace  seems  exhausted,  he  "  giveth  more  grace,"  and  so  our
lamp  is  ever  supplied,  and  the  light  ever  kept  brightly  burning.

II.  The  "on.  of  grace"  can  be  obtaiked.  In  times  of  emergency  we  can  use
means — attend  services,  etc.,  and  in  a  way,  buy  and  obtain.  The  difBotilty  is  that  we
cannot  often  get  the  grace  in  time  for  the  emergency.

III.  The  "  OIL  OF  grace  "  should  be  a  constant  possession  ;  a  store  ever  being
replenished.  See  Zechariah's  figure  of  the  living  olive  branches  ever  dropping  fresh
oil  into  the  bowl. —  B.  T.

Ver.  10. —  The  warning  of  the  shut  door.  We  need  not  push  the  meaning  of  our
Lord's  figure  to  extremes.  The  shut  door  properly  belongs  to  the  picture  he  is  paint-
ing. It  is  just  what  actually  did  happen  in  such  cases.  Those  not  actually  in  the
procession  were  excluded  when  the  house  was  reached.  "  Those  virgins  had  failed  in
that  which  could  alone  give  them  a  claim  to  admission.  Professing  to  be  bridesmaids,
they  had  not  been  in  the  bridal  procession,  and  so,  in  truth  and  righteousness,  he  could
only  answer  from  within,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not."  This,  not  only
in  punishment,  but  in  the  right  order  of  things.  We  have  a  way  of  shifting  every-
thing awiy  to  the  mysterious  "  day  of  judgment."  But  our  Lord  is  not  thinking  of
that;  he  was  thinking  of  the  opportunities  that  come  to  men  in  the  course  of  Christian


CH.  XXV.  1—46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  609

living.  The  warning  is  a  general  one.  All  things  are  in  limitation.  Nothing  but
comes  to  an  ending.  That  ending  is  always  uncertain.  So  we  must  be  ready  for
everything,  and  take  full  advantage  of  it  while  we  have  it.  Yan  Lennep  explains  the
shutting  of  the  door  in  a  way  that  suggests  our  present  point:  "While  they  went  to
purchase  oil,  the  procession  moved  to  the  house  of  the  bridegroom.  The  door  was  then
shut,  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger  arising  from  violent  men,  who  might  make  an  irrup-
tion, rob,  and  carry  off  costly  garments,  jewellery,  and  even  the  bride  herself!  "

I.  There  is  the  "shut  doge"  of  beligiods  pbivilege.  Illustrate  by  special
times  of  "  mission  "  or  "  revival."  If  we  do  not  respond  while  the  mission  is  in  pro-
gress, presently  the  door  is  shut,  the  mission  is  closed,  and  we  are  left  out  in  the  cold.
Or  take  a  valued  and  honoured  ministry.  If  we  fail  to  yield  to  gracious  persuasions,
presently  the  lips  are  sealed  in  death — the  "  door  is  shut."

II.  There  is  the  "shut  doob"  of  beliqioos  discipline.  This  sets  the  truth  in
relation  to  Christian  professors.  Dispensations  of  providence  bring  Divine  correctings
and  chahtisings.  If  we  do  not  respond,  the  afQiction  passes,  the  door  of  disciplinary
opportunity  is  shut ;  and  we  are  left  outside,  unsanctified.

UI.  There  is  the  "  shut  doob  "  of  ebliqious  duties.  Christ  carries  on  his  work
of  grace  in  us,  partly,  by  the  duties  ho  calls  us-  to  perform.  They  are  duties  belonging
to  his  service,  but  they  are  also  agencies  used  in  carrying  on  his  work.  If  we  shrink
from  doing  them,  our  opportimity  is  taken  away,  given  to  others,  and,  for  us,  the
"doorisshut."— B.  T.

Ver.  15. — Chrisi's  relation  to  our  talent-trusti.  Eastern  workpeople  were  mostly
what  we  should  call  slaves.  They  were  provided  for  by  their  masters,  and  their  profit
belonged  to  their  master.

I.  Cheist'b  tales t-tbusts.  This  parable  is  true  of  ordinary  endowments;  the
common  gifts  and  abilities  of  men.  We  are  to  see  it  in  the  Christian  light.  All  our
gifts,  powers,  ana  possessions  are  trusts,  not  ours  to  hold,  only  ours  to  use ;  and  con-
corning  the  use  of  them  all  God  will  surely  inquire  one  day.  Fix  thought  on  the
special  gift  to  us.  Our  talent  is  the  one  thing  we  can  do  better  than  others.  It  is
the  precise  thing  that  we  are  sent  into  the  world  to  do.  No  servant  of  Christ  is  with-
out his  talent.  What  may  it  be  ?  Teach,  give,  sing,  pray,  write,  visit,  preach,  sympa-
thize. It  is  the  one  thing  in  relation  to  which  we  have  the  "  consciousness  of  power."
How  can  we  know  what  otir  talent-trust  is?  Let  us  put  ourselves  simply  into  God's
hands,  cherishing  a  loving  readiness  to  do  his  will;  then  let  us  take  and  do  the  duty
that  lies  before  us,  and  our  gift  and  power  will  surely  be  revealed  to  us.

II.  Cheibt's  appobtionmbnt  of  his  talent-teusts.  Masters  know  their  servants,
and  give  trusts  accordingly.  What  a  good  thing  for  us  it  is  that  we  have  not  to  choose
what  our  talent-trusts  shall  be  1  There  ate  two  things  for  him  who  apportions  our
trusts  to  decide.  1.  He  must  make  the  trust  match  the  capacity.  He  must  not  give
ten  where  there  is  only  capacity  for  dealing  with  five ;  cf  five  where  there  is  capacity
for  dealing  with  ten.  If  he  has  given  you  ten,  he  knows  you  can  put  the  ten  to  good
use,  and  you  must  try.  2.  The  various  trusts  must  cover  all  the  work  that  he  wants
done.  So  we  cannot  wonder  if  some  forms  of  service  are  lowly  forms — ^in  business,
home,  society,  or  Church.  Lowly  gifts  are  needful.  Lowly  offices  are  important.  The
use  of  Christ-entrusted  gifts,  anywhere,  or  in  anything,  makes  the  sphere  and  the  work
beautiful.  "One  talent"  represents  the  lowly  gifts.  Just  the  very  power  you  ha^e
Christ  wants  for  his  kingdom.  Men  may  call  your  gift  nothing,  and  so  may  you  in
dreary  times.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  never  undervalues  any  of  the  trusts  he  commits  to
his  people.     And  you  should  never  undervalue  your  trust  until  your  Master  does.

III.  Christ's  expectations  conoernino  his  talent-teusts.  He  looks  for  two
things,  as  gain  by  trading.  1.  Service  by  the  use  of  them.  We  are  to  benefit  others
by  the  use  of  our  gifts,  and  this  will  be  accounted  service  rendered  to  our  Lord.  2.
Culture  by  the  use  of  them.  We  are  to  get  personal  benefit,  as  putting  the  talents  to
use  develops  our  powers.  The  finest  and  best  moral  qualities,  the  most  sturdy  and
most  sensitive  spiritual  graces,  are  won  by  indirect  culture,  through  the  expenditure
and  use  of  our  faculties  and  gifts.  Work,  spend,  give,  thereby  you  shall  gain  power
for  hi"her  service ;  thereby  you  shall  "  meeten  for  the  inheritance."

IV "Christ's  judoment  of  those  who  eecbivk  his  talent-teusts.     1.   Fhi


610  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxv.  1— 46.

judgment  is  the  samo  for  all  trusts.  There  is  not  one  principle  of  judgment  for  the
ten-talent  man,  and  another  principle  for  the  one-talent  man.  2.  The  judgment  is
based  on  the  quality  of  the  work,  not  on  mere  results.  He  who  makes  his  one  talent
into  two  may  really  be  more  faithful  than  he  who  makes  his  five  talents  into  ten.  3.
The  judgment  is  severe  on  those  who  uever  tried  to  do  anything  with  their  talent.
Those  who  have  small  powers  are  tempted  to  despise  and  neglect  them.

V.  The  eewakds  Chbist  gives  abb  simply  other  and  lakqbb  tbusts.  I11u8«
trate  by  the  successful  general,  who  would  think  it  no  reward  to  be  pensioned  off.  The
only  honimr  he  cares  for  is  some  higher  and  nobler  trust.  We  should  cultivate  the
••bought  of  heaven  as  the  "  higher  service."  Doing  well  what  we  do,  we  shall  have
more  to  do  for  Christ ;  and  that  will  be  our  best  possible  reward.  Appeal :  Are  you
Christ's  servant?  Then  you  have  your  talent-trust.  What  are  you  doing  with
it?  What  will  you  say  to  him  when  he  comes  again?  And  what  will  he  say  to
you?— B.  T.

Ver.  15. — The  moral  value  of  our  responsibilities.  Several  distinct  lines  of  thought
open  out  from  this  parable.  1.  The  diversity  of  the  taleuts  with  which  men  are
entrusted.  2.  The  common  responsibility  of  all  before  God,  be  their  talents  few  or
many.  3.  The  certainty  found  in  the  very  nature  of  a  trust,  that  a  reckoning-day
must  come.  4.  The  true  appreliension  of  life  is  gained  by  treating  it  as  a  stewardship.
5.  Tlie  apparent  insignificance  of  a  man's  talent  can  never  excuse  its  neglect.  The
point  to  which  attention  is  now  more  especially  directed  is,  that  God  works  out  a
gracious  purpose  in  moral  character  by  putting  men  under  responsibilities.  In  the
case  our  Lord  brings  before  us,  no  doubt  the  lord  wanted  his  property  cared  for  during
his  absence ;  but,  beyond  and  above  that,  he  wanted  his  servants  tested  and  cultured,
by  meeting  responsibilities,  into  a  faithfulness  which'  he  could  recognize  and  reward
when  he  returned.

I.  OuB  BESPONSiBiLiTiBS.  Life  is  full  of  such  from  its  beginning  to  its  end.  Sea
the  Divine  idea  in  the  two  heads  of  the  human  race.  The  first  Adam  trusted  with  the
garden,  and  trusted  to  leave  alone  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  The  second
Adam  trusted  with  the  work  of  redemption.  Show  (1)  that  we  train  our  children  by
giving  them  responsibilities,  expecting  them  to  do  things.  (2)  Youth  begins  to  feel  the
gravity  of  life,  and,  laying  hold  of  life-responsibilities,  cultures  manhood.  (3)  The
progress  of  life  is  ever  developing  new  trusts,  through  business,  family,  social,  and
religious  relations.  Illustrate  by  a  few  special  cases,  such  as :  (1)  A  man  waking  suddenly
to  the  consciousness  of  some  particular  gift.  (2)  A  girl  changed  into  a  thoughtful,
self-controlled  woman  by  becoming  a  wife  and  a  mother.  (3)  A  man  fully  accepting
the  religious  life.  He  is  no  true  man — he  is  but  a  child  still — who  has  not  discovered
and  felt  his  life-burden.

II.  Odb  response  to  otJB  RESPONSIBILITIES.  This  our  Lord  so  skilfully  illustrates
In  three  specimen  instances.  We  can  properly  respond,  because  they  are  only  given
up  to  the  measure  of  our  ability.  We  should  be  crushed  if  they  were  too  much  for
our  strength.  We  can  respond  by  opening  our  whole  natures  to  accept  them,  as  the
flowers  open  to  the  sunshine.  It  is  a  beginning  of  good  thus  to  lift  ourselves  up  to
meet  re.=ponsibilities.  We  begin  to  feel  what  possibilities  are  in  us.  The  true  con-
ception.of  the  angel  is  not  with  folded  wings  standing,  but  with  poised  wing  ready  to
fly.  Waiting  to  meet  his  trust.  Prom  some  points  of  view  all  human  trusts  seem
little.  Estimate  their  moral  influence,  and  no  one  of  them  can  be  thought  little.
— B.T.

Ver.  24. — Complaining  of  others  when  we  ourselves  are  in  the  wrong.  This  is  familiar
enough  to  all  who  have  the  management  of  families.  The  child  in  a  temper  is  always
ready  to  complain  of  his  mother's  temper.  The  child  who  has  done  wrong  is  quick  to
make  out  that  somebody  else  wa»  in  fault.  The  same  thing  is  found  in  business  and
social  relations.  Servants  complain  of  masters.  One  class  of  society  complains  of
another  class.  More  than  half  the  sorrows  of  humanity  would  be  removed  if  men
would  only  look  at  home,  and  set  themselves  upon  the  correction  of  their  own  faults,
the  remedying  of  their  own  failings.  In  this  parable  nothing  can  be  plainer  than  the
fact  tbkt  this  man  with  one  talent  had  been  wilfully  neglecting  what  he  knew  to  b»


OH.  xxT.  1— 46.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  Bll

his  duty.  It  was  duty  he  could  do;  duty  he  ought  to  do.  But  when  the  day  of
reckoning  came,  he  tried  to  hide  his  shame  hy  complaining  of  his  master,  and  calling
him  hard  names.     How  that  excused  him  nohody  can  see.

I.  In  man  IB   AN  INVBTBEATE  DISPOSITION  TO  RESIST    THE  OONVIOTION   OF   SIN.      It

18  the  hardest  thing  we  ever  try  to  do,  to  say,  "  I  am  wrong."  It  is  the  hardest  thing
we  ever  undertake,  to  persuade  another  to  say  he  was  wrong.  A  man  will  set  himself
upon  all  sorts  of  guileful  schemes,  and  readily  yield  to  all  kinds  of  self-delusions,
rather  than  admit  himself  to  be  in  the  wrong.  The  man  who  has  the  quickest  and
keenest  sense  of  sin  in  others  is  often  utterly  dull  to  any  sense  of  his  own  sin.  1.  It
is  this  which  partly  explains  the  general  conception  of  the  devil.  He  is  a  convenient
"  other  one "  outside  ourselves,  on  whoni  we  can  shift  all  responsibility  for  the  sins
which  we  ourselves  plan  and  commit.  2.  It  is  this  that  accounts  for  the  gracious
promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  "  Convincer  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg-
ment." 3.  This  disposition  is  strengthened  by  every  successful  act  of  stifling  con-
viction. 4.  The  disposition  is  even  to  be  found  in  Christian  people,  and  may  be
illustrated  in  relation  to  specific  Chriatian  sins.  The  one-talent  man  represents  a
disciple.

II.  The  commonest  sign  of  besistance  is  oomplainiko  of  others.  1.  This
turns  our  thoughts  away  from  ourselves.  It  is  not  safe  for  a  wilful  man  to  have  his
eye  turned  inward.  He  shrinks  from  reading  over  his  own  story.  He  likes  to  hear
about  other  people's  faults ;  and  will  dwell  with  much  satisfaction  upon  his  disabilities
and  lack  of  opportunities.  Men  are  so  hard,  and  men  deal  so  hardly  by  him.  If  a
man  speaks  harshly  of  others,  it  is  well  to  suspect  him  of  being  guilty  of  the  fault  he
condemns.  2,  This  turns  other  people's  thoughts  away  from  us.  See  in  the  parable.
The  master  is  searching  out  the  wilfulness  of  the  one-talent  man.  But  he  seems  to
say,  "  Think  about  yourself,  and  then  you  will  leave  me  alone." — ^E.  T.

Ver.  29. — The  law  of  rewards.  Trust  comes  to  the  trustworthy.  Opportunities
are  taken  away  from  those  who  fail  to  use  them.  "  Men,  here  on  earth,  give  to  him
that  hath,  and  faithful  work  is  rewarded  by  openings  of  a  higher  kind."  "  Non-user
tends  to  invalidate  legal  right.  A  muscle  that  is  not  exercised  tends  to  degenerate
and  lose  its  power."  Dods  calls  this  verse,  "the  law  of  spiritual  capital."  "However
little  grace  we  seem  to  have  to  begin  with,  it  is  this  we  must  invest,  and  so  nurse  it
into  size  and  strength.  Each  time  we  use  the  grace  we  have,  by  responding  to  the
demands  made  upon  it,  it  returns  to  us  increased.  Our  capital  grows  by  an  inevitable
law."  "  The  unused  talent  passes  from  the  servant  who  would  not  use  it  to  the  man
who  will.  A  landlord  has  two  farms  lying  together :  the  one  is  admirably  managed,
the  other  is  left  almost  to  itself,  with  the  least  possible  management,  and  becomes  the
talk  of  the  whole  country  for  poor  crops  and  untidiness.  No  one  asks  what  the  land-
lord will  do  when  the  leases  are  out.  It  is  a  matter  of  course  that  he  dismisses  the
careless  tenant,  and  puts  his  farm  into  the  hands  of  the  skilful  and  diligent  fanner."
"  Give  it  unto  him  that  hath  ten  talents."

I.  The  reward  of  faithfulness  is  increased  trust.  We  need  to  correct  our
common  idea  that  reward  is  something  to  possess ;  the  truest  and  best  reward  ii  some-
thing to  use.  He  who  is  faithful  in  least  things  does  not  want  a  present;  his  reward
is  the  trust  of  higher  things.  Life  is  full  of  this  idea.  The  faithful  are  always  in
selection  for  the  higher  service,  and  are  finding  in  that  higher  service  their  satisfying
reward.  But  there  is  something  deeper  than  that.  He  who  is  faithful  gets  his  real
reward  in  that  development  of  power  which  fits  him  for  higher  trusts.  A  man's  reward
is  what  he  becomes,  not  merely  what  he  gets.  What,  then,  is  our  final  reward  in
heaven  ?  Not  possessions,  but  higher  service.  Think  deeper,  and  we  see  that  it  is  not
even  higher  service,  it  is  the  cultured  condition  which  fits  us  for  undertaking  the
higher  service.  Heaven  is  our  ennobled  selves,  and  the  work  QoA  finds  for  the
ennobled  to  do.

II.  The  bkwabd  of  faithlessness  ib  removed  trust.  And  that  this  is  distinctly
Divine  judgment  will  be  felt  by  all  who  estimate  the  honour  of  being  trusted  and  used.
God's  severest  judgment  on  the  unfaithful  is  his  taking  their  trusts  away.  He  will
not  honour  them  by  permitting  them  to  bear  responsibilities.  There  can  be  no  heaven
for  such  as  fail  to  put  their  earth-pounds  to  noble  uses.    For  God  to  say  to  a  niriii,


512  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxv.  1—46.

"  I  will  not  trust  you,"  is  far  worse  woe  than  to  apportion  him  the  "  outer  darkness,
the  weeping,  and  the  gnashing  of  teeth." — B.  T,

Ver.  31. — 27k«  Son  of  man  exercising  judgment.  The  advent  of  Messiah  was,  in  the
Jewish  mind,  associated  with  general  judgment.  The  people  looked  forward  with
dread  to  the  Messianic  era.  There  are  some  who  can  regard  the  passage  commencing
with  this  verse  as  descriptive.  Others  regard  it  as  parabolic,  with  the  scenery  taken
from  men's  ideas  of  the  after-life.  It  is  difficult  to  follow  the  passage  as  descriptive,
because  human  thought  and  human  language  are  incapable  of  dealing  with  actual
events  beyond  the  earthly  sphere.  What  we  may  find  in  it  is  an  indication  of  what
Christ  makes  the  basis  of  his  judgment  of  men.  There  are  two  things  which  may
reasonably  surprise  us.

I.  Ode  Judob  I8  thb  "Son  or  man."  It  may  be  said  that  God  is  our  Judge.
But  that  brings  in  the  element  of  fear.  It  seems  to  us  that  bo  must  have  an  absolute
and  awful  standard,  and  tested  by  it  there  will  bo  no  chance  at  all  for  any  of  us.  "If
thou  wert  strict  to  mark  iniquity,  who  should  stand  ?  "  But  the  God  who  judges  us
is  revealed  to  us  as  the  "  Son  of  man,"  and  then  confidence  takes  the  place  of  fear.
The  Son  of  man  is  one  of  us ;  he  has  passed  through  our  experience.  He  knows  us.
And  what  we  feel  is  that,  if  abstract  justice  needs  to  be  qualified  by  a  consideiation
of  circumstances,  he  can  safely  so  qualify  it.  This  point  may  be  illustrated  by  our
familiar  distinction  between  "justice"  and  "equity."  "Justice"  is  precisely  and
exactly  what  the  law  lays  down ;  and  that  is  what  we,  rightly  or  wrungly,  ezpect
from  God.  "  Equity  "  is  that  law  applied  with  due  consideration  of  relations  between
man  and  man,  or  of  special  human  infirmity.  And  that  is  what  we  expect  from  the
"  Son  of  man  " — from  One  "  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are."  Christ  in  no  sense
relieves  the  august  solemnity  of  judgment,  but  he  makes  us  fully,  freely,  lovingly,
willing  to  accept  his  appraisement.

IL  OUB  JuDCiE  USES  AN  UNEXPECTED  BASIS  OF  JXTOOUENT.  We  should  he  puzzled
with  it  if  the  parable  dealt  with  the  world  and  sinners.  It  pictures  the  judgment  of
Christ's  disciples.  Eastern  flocks  are  made  up  of  sheep  and  goats,  but  all  are  the
shepherd's  property  and  care.  Christ  seems  to  propose  judging  on  a  basis  of  mere
humanity  or  charitableness.  But  he  goes  deeper  than  that.  The  charity  of  which  he
speaks  is  the  most  satisfactory  revelation  of  character,  and  It  is  character,  not  action,
that  is  the  basis  of  his  judgment. — B.  T.

Ver.  40. — Ohrisfs  acceptance  of  vicarious  service.  What  Is  striking  and  suggestive
is,  that  our  Lord  should  make  no  reference  to  the  cultured  and  sanctified  personal  life
of  his  disciples,  but  fix  attention  on  their  service  to  others,  their  sympathies,
generosities,  and  charities.  At  first  it  may  seem  as  if  his  praise  rested  on  their  good
works;  but  soon  we  come  to  see  that  what  our  Lord  accepts  ia  the  best  indication
of  character,  and  precisely  of  Christly  character.  There  is  a  sort  of  goodness  which
is  only  sentimental.  That  goodness  is  always  self-centred  and  self-sphered.  That
goodness  Christ  neither  approves  nor  accepts.  That  goodness  is  essentially  un-Christly.
There  is  a  goodness  which  finds  expression  in  serving  others  for  Christ's  sake ;  serving
others  because  we  have  not  Christ  to  serve.  That  goodness  is  principle.  That  goodness
is  Christ-likeness.  "Even  Christ  pleased  not  himself;"  "  I  am  among  you  as  he  that
serveth."

I.  ViOAMOus  SEBVIOE  IS  SBBviNG  OTHEKS.  To  mutual  servicc  humanity  is  called.
To  the  special  service  of  all  distressed,  disabled,  and  suffering  ones,  the  Christian
humanity  is  called.  This  "serving  others"  becomes  an  absolutely  efficient  and
sufficient  test  of  the  Christ-spirit  in  us.  Christ  was  good;  but  we  know  it  because
he  "  went  about  doing  good."  Over  his  whole  life  shines  the  glory  of  something  done
to  relieve,  and  comfort,  and  raise,  and  save  his  fellow-men.

II.  VlOABIOUS   BBKVIOE   IS   BEEVINQ    ChRIST   THROUGH    8BEVINO   OTHERS.      It    is   nOt

mere  neighbourliness,  sympathy,  or  charity,  that  is  hero  commended.  These,  standing
alone,  are  not  the  conditions  of  acceptance  with  Christ.  He  was  speaking  to  his  own
disciples.  The  basis  of  acceptance  for  thom  was  their  love  to  him  and  trust  in  him.
But  they  could  not  show  such  love  directly  to  Jesus.  Perhaps  it  would  have  been
easier  for  them  if  they  could.     We  are  all  put  under  this  strain.     We  cannot  minister


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


613


to  Jeiius  himnelf ;  will  we  minister  to  him  vicariously,  through  his  safferiag  brethren  ?
When  he  comes  for  his  reckoning,  it  is  of  this  our  Lord  will  take  account ;  and  if  he
finds  we  have  been,  consciously,  vicarious  ministrants,  he  will  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye
did  it  unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  unto  me."  Charity, /or
Ohrlit'i  lake,  is  acceptable.

Ill,  Vicarious  bebviob  or  Christ,  throooh  the  sebtiob  op  pthirs,  proves  in
THE  END  TO  BE  THE  BEST  SBRViCB  OF  OURSELVES.  PoF  We  "enter  the  joy  of  our
Lord."  But  this  point  needs  to  be  presented  with  great  care,  lest  self-seeking  con-
siderations, entering  in,  should  spoil  the  Cbristly  service. — B.  T


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEE  XXVL


Oh.  xxvi. — ^xxviii.  20. — ^Thub  Jesub  enters
rpoN  HIS  Kingdom.

Before  attempting  to  exponnd  this  most
momentous  section  of  the  gospel  history,
we  must  make  up  our  minds  concerning
the  solution  of  the  difficulties  which  are
involved  in  some  details  in  the  acoount  of
the  last  Supper.  The  supposed  discrepancy
between  the  narrative  of  the  syuoptiBta  and
that  of  St.  John  has  exercised  the  minds  of
commentators  from  the  earliest  times  unto
the  present,  and  enormous  ingenuity  bag
been  expended  in  endeavouring  to  har-
monize what  are  regarded  as  conflicting
statements.

The  two  ohief  diffionlties  are  these :
According  to  the  synoptists,  as  generally
understood,  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  ate
the  Passover,  i.e.  the  Paschal  Iamb,  when
he  instituted  the  Holy  Communion ;  accord-
ing to  St.  John,  the  death  of  Christ  took
place  before  the  Passover  was  celebrated.
Hence  arise  the  questions — Was  the  last
Supper  the  regular  Paschal  meal?  Was
Christ  crucified  on  the  14th  of  Nisan
or  on  the  15th  7  In  the  time  of  our  Lord,
the  festival  commenced  on  the  evening
of  the  14th  of  Kisan,  originally  the  day
of  preparation,  but  now  considered  part
of  the  feast  "Between  the  evenings"  of
this  day — i.e.  from  the  time  of  the  gun's
decline  to  its  setting — the  lambs  were  killed
in  the  temple  courts.  The  1 5th,  commencing
on  the  evening  of  the  14th,  anrl  lasting  till
the  evening  of  the  15th,  wag  the  great  day
ot  the  feast.  All  the  accounts  agree  in
stating  that  our  Lord  was  crucified  on
Friday,  the  day  before  the  sabbath,  but  the
day  of  the  month  is  not  so  clearly  defined.
The  year  seems  to  be  settled  as  A.u.0.  783,
MATTHEW — II.


A.n.  80,  the  sixteenth  year  of  the  Emperor
Tiberius.  In  this  year,  astronomers  tell  us,
the  14th  of  Nisan  (equivalent  to  April  7)
fell  on  a  Friday  ;  and  as  for  typical  reasons
at  least  we  should  expect  that  Christ  would
die  at  the  hour  when  the  Paschal  lamb  was
slain,  we  at  once  see  the  fitness  of  tliis  date
and  day,  if  they  can  be  safely  maintained.
It  is  incredible  that  the  events  immediately
preceding  and  accompanying  the  execution
of  Christ  should  have  occurred  on  the
actual  feast-day ;  it  is  also  incredible  that,
as  some  critics  suppose,  the  Pharisees  altered
the  legal  day  in  order  that  they  might
be  free  to  'accomplish  their  wicked  design.
These  considerations  lead  us  unhesitatingly
to  adopt  the  account  given  by  St.  John
(himself  an  eye-witness,  and  certain  to  have
noted  and  remembered  the  exact  date  of
this  stupendous  event),  and  to  assume  that
Christ  was  crucified  on  the  14th  uf  Nisan,
dying  at  the  hour  when  the  lambs  were
legally  slain.  Ibe  notes  of  time  afibrded  by
St.  John  are  found  in  John  xiii.  1, 29;  xviii.
28 ;  xix.  14,  31.  Attention  to  these  passages
will  show  that,  according  to  the  Fourth
Gospel,  the  Passover  had  not  been  eaten
when  our  Lord  was  crucified,  and  that  in
that  year  the  Passover  coincided  with  the
sabbath.  To  meet  the  difficulty  of  the
synoptists'  assertion,  that  Jesus  ate  the
Passover  at  the  last  Supper,  two  sugt^estions
are  put  forth.  It  is  said  that  he  anticipated
the  legal  time  by  some  few  hours,  being
greater  than  the  Law,  as  he  had  often  shown
himself  greater  than  the  sabbath.  If  this
were  so,  how  was  the  lamb  procured  ?  The
Paschal  victims  were  not  legally  slain  till
the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  the  14th;
how  could  the  twelve  have  obtained  one
of  these  on  the  13tb  ?  This  question  is  met
by  the  assertion  that  the  lambs  (estimated

21.


5i4  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOUDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  I— 75.


at  gome  200,000)  could  not  have  been
sacrifioed  in  the  time  appointed,  and  that  a
large  proportion  of  tlie  animala  were  killed
and  eaten  both  before  and  after  the  etriotly
legal  time.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever
to  support  this  notion,  nor  can  we  imagine
timt  Ohrist,  who  came  to  fulfil  the  Law,
would  have  oonniTed  at  such  a  manifest
infringempnt  of  its  provisions.  Another
solution  is  that  the  meal  of  which  he  par-
took with  his  disciples  was  a  solemn  supper
in  anticipation  of  the  Feast  of  the  Passover,
but  without  the  lamb.  He  himself  was  the
true  Passover,  the  Lnmb  of  God,  and  in
instituting  at  that  time  the  Holy  Eucharist,
he  gave  himself  as  the  spiritual  food  of  his
followers.  This  new  festival  superseded
the  Jewish  solemnity,  and  it  is  possible
that,  in  oral  tradition,  the  two  were  con-
fused and  were  counted  as  occurring  to-
gether. This  solution  seems  more  probable
than  the  former,  ami  would  doubtless  be
confirmed  if  we  were  better  acquainted
with  many  details  well  known  in  the
apostolic  ages,  now  unhappily  obscured.
Some  of  the  difficulties  will,  we  hope,  be
seen  to  be  reconcilable,  as  we  proceed  in
our  Exposition.  How  the  perplexity  con-
cerning the  enormous  number  of  lambs  re-
quired for  the  teeming  population  gathered
together  was  met,  we  know  not.  Doubtless
time  and  circumstances  had  modified  the
rigorous  adherence  to  the  presciibed  ritual,
and  possibly  many  householders  (all  being
in  this  matter  priests  unto  God,  Exnd.  xix.
6  and  Kev.  i.  6)  slew  and  prepared  their
Passover  at  their  own  liouses  or  outside  the
sacred  precincts  on  the  legal  day  and  hour.
But  there  is  no  tradition  of  any  unauthorized
alteration  of  these  points  in  the  ordained
ceremonial,  and  we  cannot  doubt  that  the
Lord  would  not  by  his  own  practice  endorse
luch  laxity.

Vers,  1,  2. — FUud  announcement  of  the
approaching  Passion.  (Mark  xiv.  1 ;  Luke
xxii.  1.)

Ver.  1. — When  Jesus  had  fluishod  all
these  sayings;  j.e.  those  comprised  in  ohs.
xxii. — XXV.  This  was  the  close  of  his  public
teaching.  The  other  discourses  whioli  are
preserved  by  St.  John  (xiii.  31 — xviL  26)
were  addressed  to  the  chosen  apostles
Henceforward  the  narrative  sets  him  forth
M  Priest,  Yiotim,  Redeemer;  and  Christ


himself  now  distinctly  states  the  day  of
his  death  and  the  person  who  was  to  betray
him.

Ver.  2. — Te  know.  He  speaks  of  a  fact
well  known  to  his  hearers — ^the  day  of  the
Passover  Feast.  And  they  had  been  fore-
warned of  his  death  (see  ch.  xx.  17 — 19).
After  two  days;  /icrck  Sio  fiii4pas;  post
hiduum.  These  words  are  ambigfaous,  as  it
is  not  certain  how  the  time  is  reckoned —
whether  the  current  day  is  included  or  not.
If,  as  is  most  probable,  they  were  spoken
on  Wednesday,  tlie  phrase  means  the  next
day  but  one,  which  commenced  on  the
afternoon  of  Friday.  Jesus  appears  to  have
passed  this  day  in  peaceful  seclusion,  either
in  Bethany  or  its  neighlraurhood.  Is  the
Feast  of  the  Passover ;  t4  ndirxa  yherat :
tJte  Passover  cometh;  Pascha  fiet.  The
Iambs  were  slain  durinf<  the  first  evening
of  the  14th  of  Nisan,  and  were  eaten  wittiin
twelve  houri.  "The  word  Pa^tcha  is  the
Greek  form  of  the  Hebrew  Pasach,  denoting
"  the  passing  over  "  of  the  destroying  angel,
when  he  destroyed  tlie  Egyptians,  but  left
untouched  the  houses  of  the  Israelites,  on
whose  door-posts  was  sprinkled  the  blood  of
the  lamb  (Exod.  xii.).  Etymologically,  it
has  nothing  to  do  with  voax",  and  the  Latin
patior,  passio,  etc.,  thongli  pious  writers
have  seen  a  providential  arrangement  in
the  apparent  similarity  of  the  words  (see  the
possilile  paronomasia  in  Luke  xxii.  15).
Pascha  (^Pasach)  is  used  in  three  senses:
(1)  the  transit  of  the  angel;  (2)  the
Paschal  lamb ;  (3)  the  Feast  of  the  Pass-
over. It  is  in  this  last  signification  that
it  is  here  employed.  And  (equivalent  to
when)  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  (delivered
up,  Kevised  Version)  to  be  omoifled.  Christ
connects  his  own  death  with  the  Passover,
not  only  as  indicating  the  day  and  hour,
but  to  mark  the  typical  meaning  and
importance  of  this  solemnity,  when  he,  our
Passover,  should  bo  sacrificed  for  us.  The
present  tense,  "is  betrayed,"  denotes  the
imminence  and  certainty  of  the  event.  He
sees  the  event  as  actually  present.

Vers.  8 — 5. — Conspiracy  of  the  Jewish
rulers     (Mark  xiv.  1 ;  Luke  xxii.  2.)

Ver.  8. — Then.  While  Christ  was  an-
nouncing his  approaching  death,  the  rulers
were  plotting  its  accomplishment.  He  was
certain ;  they  were  in  doubt  and  perplexity
about  it.  The  chief  priests  (see  on  ch.  xvi.
21).  The  office  of  high  priest  had  originally
been  held  for  life ;  but  of  late  the  civil
power  had  often  deposed  one  and  appointed
another,  so  that  there  wore  at  times  many
who  had  held  the  post,  and  who,  as  well
as  their  deputies,  and  the  heads  of  the
courses,  claimed  the  title  of  chief  priest.
These  were  all  members  of  the  Sanh«drin


™.  xivi.  1— rs.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDlNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


615


And  tli«  leribes,  These  words  are  omitted
on  Tery  good  authority  by  many  modem
editors.  They  are  not  found  in  the  Vulgate,
though  they  occur  in  I  he  parallel  passages
in  the  other  synoptists.  If  genuine,  they,
in  connection  with  "  elders  "  and  "  priests,"
would  signify  that  all  the  elements  of  the
Sanhedriu  were  present  at  this  council.  The
palaoe  (au\j)i>)  of  the  high  priest.  This,  then,
was  not  a  formal  meeting,  or  it  would  have
been  held  in  the  hall  Gazith,  "  tlie  hall  of
hewn  stunes,"  on  the  south  side  of  the  court
of  the  priestij.  It  was  assembled  in  the  court
of  the  high  priest's  house,  because  it  com-
prised persons  who  were  not  Sanhedrists,
such  as  temple  ofScials,  and  connections  of  the
high  priest,  forming  what  was  known  as  the
priestly  council,  which  was  the  official
medium  between  the  Roman  authorities
and  the  people.  Who  was  called  Caiaphas.
Josephus  ('Ant.,'  xviii.  2.  2)  speaks  of  him
as  "  Joseph,  who  is  also  Caiaphas ;  "  hence
the  way  in  which  he  is  introduced  in  the
present  passage.  He  had  been  elevated
to  his  high  post  by  the  Bomans,  who  found
in  him  a  submissive  tooL  His  father-in-
law  Annas  bad  been' appointed  by  Quirinius,
but  after  nine  years  had  been  deposed ;  he
was  succeeded  in  turn  by  Ismac-1,  Eleazar
son  of  Annas,  Simon,  and  fourthly  by
Caiaphas,  who  superseded  his  immediate
predecessor  by  the  favour  of  tlie  procurator
Valerius  Gratus,  the  tenact  of  the  office
before  Pontius  Filate.  The  ex-high  priest,
Annas,  was  counted  still  by  some  rigorists
as  holding  the  oiSce,  and  he  appears  to
have  possessed  high  authority  (see  John
xviii.  13 ;  Acts  iv.  6).

Ver.  4. — By  subtilty.  They  had  decided
to  put  Jesus  to  death ;  the  question  was
how  to  get  possession  of  his  Person  when
there  would  be  no  attempt  at  a  rescue,  nor
any  tumult  in  his  favour.  The  original  is
literally.  They  took  counsel  in  order  tlial  they
might  take,  etc.  They  seem  scarcely  to  have
reckoned  on  any  legal  trial ;  once  they  had
him  quietly  in  their  hands,  they  would  find
means  to  dispose  of  him.

Ver.  5. — Not  on  the  feast  day ;  iy  rp  loprp  :
during  the  featt;  i.e.  during  the  eight  days
of  the  Passover  celebration.  The  assembled
multitudes  did  not  leave  the  city  until  the
close  of  the  octave,  so  the  danger  of  a  rising
was  not  removed  tUI  then.  The  rulers  well
knew  the  stern  temper  of  Pilate  the  pro-
curator, who  was  prepared  to  crush  any
popular  movement  with  the  strong  hand,
and  at  festival-times  had  always  his  soldiers
ready  to  hurl  upon  the  mob  at  the  slightest
provocation,  and  to  deal  indiscriminate
slaughter.  Hence  arose  ^hft^  plan  of  a
clandestine,  apprehension.  It  was,  indeed,
the  custom  to  execute  great  criminals  at
the  time  of  the  chief  festivals,  in  order  to


impress  the  spectacle  of  retribution  upcru
the  greatest  number ;  but  in  the  case  of
Jesus,  after  what  had  occurred  during  the
last  few  days,  and  when  Jerusalem  was
filled  with  Galilajans,  who  might  naturally
favour  their  countryman's  pretensions,  it
was  deemed  dangerous  to  make  any  open
attack.  Their  fears  were  relieved  in  the
most  unexpected  manner  i  y  the  appearance
of  Judas  among  them  (ver.  14).

Vers.  6 — 13. — The  anointing  at  Bethany.
(Mark  xiv.  3—9;  Joba  xiL  1—8.)  This
parenthetical  episode  is  introduced  by  the
two  synoptists  out  of  its  chronological  order,
with  the  view  of  indicating  the  immediate
cause  of  Judas's  resolution  to  betray  his
Master,  the  issue  of  which  they  procead  to
narrate  (see  on  ver.  14).  This  anointing
must  not  be  confounded  with  that  related
by  St.  Luke  (vii  87,  etc.),  where  the  scene,
the  time,  and  the  actor  were  different,  and
the  significance  was  of  a  Tery  inferior
nature.

Ver.  6.— When  Jesus  was  in  Bethany.
St.  John  tells  us  that  the  incident  took
place  six  days  before  the  Passover,  i.e.  on
the  Saturilay  preceding  Palm  Sunday.  It
is  St.  Matthew's  custom  to  describe  events
not  always  in  their  historical  sequence,  but
according  to  some  logical  or  spiritual  con-
nection which  in  his  mind  overrides  con-
siderations of  time  or  place.  tFor  Bethany,
seeonch.  xxi.  1.)  Simon  the  leper.  Not  that
he  was  a  leper  now,  but  either  the  appella-
tion was  hereditary,in  reference  to  some  such
malady  inflicted  on  his  family,  or  he  him-
self, having  been  cured  by  Christ,  retained
the  name  in  memory  of  his  cleansing.  So
St.  Matthew  is  called  "the  publican"  after
he  had  relinquished  his  obnoxious  business
(oh.  X.  3),  and  the  revived  man  is  termed
"  the  dead  "  (Luke  vll.  15).  The  frequency
of  the  name  Simon  among  the  Jews  rendered
the  addition  of  a  surname  expedient ;  thus
we  have  Simon  the  Canaanlte,  Simon  the
tanner,  Simon  Bar-jona,  etc.  Nothing
certain  is  known  about  this  person.  Tra-
dition makes  him  father  of  Lazarus  or  hus-
band of  Martha.  That  he  was  connected
with  the  holy  family  of  Bethany,  either  by
relationship  or  close  friendship,  seems  to
be  well  established.

Ver.  7. — A  woman.  St.  John  ident;i"(is
her ,  as  Mary  the  sister  of  Lazarus  and
Martha.  Why  the  synoptists  omit  her
name  is  not  known ;  it  is  equally  uncertain
why  St.  John  makes  no  mention  of  Simon.
None  of  the  synoptists  notice  Lazarus,
thougli  St.  Luke  names  Martha  and  Mary
(x.   38,  39).     It  may  have  been   at  th«


513


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75.


time  a  matter  of  prudence  or  delicacy  not
to  draw  attention  t^  them  by  name.  But
there  is  no  discrepancy.  One  narrative
supplements  the  other,  and  it  is  best  to  be
thankful  for  what  we  have,  and  not  to  be
over-curious  concerning  points  not  ex-
plained. An  alabaster  box  {ItXifiaarpov).
A  cruse  or  flask  made  of  alabaster,  which  is
a  white  caloareouii  spar  resembling  marble,
but  softer  and  more  easily  worked.  These
cruses  were  generally  round-shaped,  with  a
long  narrow  neck,  the  orifice  of  which  was
sealed.  It  may  bo  the  breaking  of  this
seal  to  which  St.  Hark  refers  in  his  account
(xiv.  S),  when  lie  says  that  "she  brake
the  box."  Very  predous  ointment  Qiipov).
St.  Mark  calls  it  "pidtio  nard,"  rendered
in  our  version  "  spikenard."  The  word  in
our  text  seems  to  be  used  for  any  salve  or
ointment  wliich  contained  myrrh  as  one  of
its  ingredients.  Nard  is  found  in  Syria,
the  Himalayas,  and  other  parts  of  India.
From  its  root  a  strong-scented  unguent
was  made,  which,  being  imported  from  a
long  distance,  was  very  costly.  Poured  it
on  Ms  head.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  the
original  there  is  no  "it  "after  "poured;"
so  there  is  nothing  to  imply  ttiat  the  whole
was  poured  upon  hia  head.  This  helps  to
reconcile  this  account  with  that  of  the
fourth  evangelist  (Morison).  St  John  tells
tliat  she  anointed  his  feet,  which  was
unusual;  she  first  anointed  his  head,  and
tlien  his  feet,  wiping  the  latter  with  her
long  flowing  hair.  Anointing  the  head  was
not  an  uncommon  way  of  honouring  dis-
tinguished guests;  but  Mary  had  another
thought  in  her  mind  which  the  Lord  dis-
cerned (ver.  12).  As  he  sat  at  meat ;  a*  he
reclined  at  table.  The  Jews  had  adopted
the  Eoman  mode  of  eating  (comp.  ch.  xzii.
10,  where  the  word  rendered  "guests"  is
' '  the  recumbent " ) .  St.  Matthew  does  not
mention  that  a  special  supper  was  arranged
for  him(  John  xii.l) ,  as  if  to  do  him  honour.
Ver.  8. — When  his  disciples  saw  it.  St.
John  states  that  the  objection  came  origin-
ally from  Judas.  Doubtless,  when  it  was
once madpmany  concurred  in  it,not,indeed,
from  Judas's  selfish  motive  (John  xii.  6),
l)ut  because  they  did  not  clearly  apprehend
tlie  Divinity  of  Christ,  nor  the  unspeakable
sacredness  of  that  body  which  was  about
to  be  the  instrument  of  man's  redemption.
To  what  purpose  is  this  waste  (•iT»)^ela^  ?
Wordsworth  notes  that  Judas  is  called  "'i>s
'  fluiAeias  (John  xvii.  12).  A  fitting  question
truly  lor  him  to  ask  I  The  objectors  saw
no  practical  usefulness  in  the  expenditure
of  this  costly  substance.  If  it  was  thought
proper  to  show  respect  to  tlieir  Master,  a
much  inferior  oil  would  liave  equally  effected
this  jiurpose,  or  a  few  drops  of  the  more
precious  unguent  wonld  have  sufficed.     So  |


nowadays  one  hears  complaints  of  money
being  expended  in  the  rich  decoration  ot
churches,  etc.,  vhen.  there  are  starring
multitudes  whom  it  would  have  relieved.
But  God  himself  has  sanctioned  the  use  of
precious  materialsand  of  exquisite  workman-
ship in  temples  built  in  his  honour,  and  in
the  accessories  of  his  public  worship;  the
interests  of  the  poor  are  not  overlooked  in
such  expenditure ;  they  who  give  of  theii
substance  for  snob  purposes  are  just  those
who  feel  all  their  responsibilities,  and  know
that  they  serve  Christ  in  ministering  to  bis
needy  members.

Ver.  9.— Might  have  been  sold  for  much.
Accordbig  to  St.  John,  Judas  had  accurately
estimated  the  value  of  the  ointment  at
300  denarii,  equal  to  about  £9  of  our  money.
When  we  remember  that  one  denarius
represented  the  daily  wages  of  a  labouring
man  (ch.  xx.  2),  we  see  that  the  cost  was
very  large.  Given  to  the  poor.  And  this
"much"  given  to  the  poor.  But  piety  is
not  shown  only  in  giving  alms ;  tlie  honour
of  (iod  has  a  superior  claim.  Arid  Mary  was
rich,  and  quite  able  to  afford  this  offering
without  neglecting  her  almsgiving.  "  How
often  does  charity  serve  as  a  cloak  for
covetousness  1  We  must  not  neglect  what
we  owe  to  Jesus  Christ  under  pretence  of
what  we  owe  bis  members.  Men  count  as
wasted  what  is  expended  in  the  outer
worship  of  God,  when  they  love  neither  God
nor  his  worship.  Jesus  Christ  authorizes  it
by  accepting  it  at  the  very  instant  ia  which
he  was  establishing  religion  by  a  worship
the  most  spiritual  and  inward  "  (Quesnel).

Ver.  10. — Understood  it.  Either  their
murmurs  reached  Christ's  ears,  or  ha
divined  their  thoughts,  and  proceeded  to
defend  Mary's  action  and  to  give  a  new
lesson.  Why  trouble  ye  the  woman  1  The
disciples,  observed  Bengel,  were  really
actiag  offensively  to  Jesus  in  thus  censuring
Mary ;  but  he  passes  over  this,  and  blames
tliem  only  in  respect  of  their  conduct
towards  her.  Doubtless,  their  remarks
had  reached  Mary's  ears,  and  anuoyed  and
embarrassed  her.  For  she  hath  wrought  a
good  work  upon  (cis)me.  A  work  tliat  proved
her  zeal,  reverence,  and  faith.  Mary  had
always  been  devout,  contemplative,  loving.
Slie  had  learned  much  at  the  grave  ot
Lazarus;  she  was  full  of  gratitude  at  the
wonderful  restoration  of  her  brother's  life ;
she  had  often  heard  Christ  speak  of  hia
decease,  and  knew  that  it  was  close  at  hand,
realizing  that  which  the  chosen  apostlei
were  still  slow  to  believe ;  so  she  was  minded
to  make  this  costly  offering.  And  Christ
saw  her  motive,  and  graciously  accepted  it.

Ver,  11. — Ye  have  the  poor  always  with
you,  St.  Mark  adds,  "  and  whensoever  ye
will  ye  may  do  them  good."    This  was  U


TO.  XXVI.  1—76.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


B17


itrict  aocordanoe  with  the  old  Law:  "The
poor  shall  never  oease  out  of  tlie  laud;
therefore  I  command  thee,  saying,  Thou
ibaltopen  thine  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother,
to  thy  poor,  and  to  thy  needy  in  thy  land  "
(Deut,  XV.  11).  The  existence  of  poor  gives
scope  for  the  exurcise  of  the  graces  of
charity,  benevolence,  and  self-denial;  and
such  opportunities  will  never  be  wanting
while  the  world  lasts.  SCe  ye  have  not
always ;  i.e.  in  bojily  presence.  When  he
■peaks  of  being  with  his  Church  always  to
the  end,  he  is  speaking  of  his  Divine
presence.  Uis  human  body,  bis  body  of
humiliation,  was  removed  from  tiie  sight
and  touch  of  men,  and  he  could  no  longer
be  received  and  welcomed  and  succoured  us
heretofore.  In  a  different  and  far  more
effectual  mode  be  would  visit  his  faitLiful
servants  by  a  spiritual  presence  which
should  never  fail  or  be  withdrawn.  To  the
objectois  he  would  say,  "  You  will  no  longer
have  opportunity  of  honouring  me  in  my
iiuman  form ;  why,  then,  do  yuu  grudge  the
homage  now  paid  me  for  the  last  time  ?  "

Ver.  12. — Oa  my  body,  she  did  it  for  my
burial  (jrpbs  rb  4yra<pid<rat  /le.to  prepare  me  for
burial).  This  doubtless  was  in  some  sort
her  intention  (see  on  ver  10).  She  desired
to  offer  what  slie  could  (Mark  xiv.  8)  of  the
ofSces  and  attentions  due  to  the  corpse  of  a
beloved  and  revered  Friend.  Christ  inter-
preted her  act,  and  gave  it  a  solemn  signifi-
cance. By  this  effusion  of  the  precious  un-
guent she  anticipated  the  embalming  of
tlie  Lord's  body ;  she  showed  her  reverence  •
for  thut  body  which  was  to  be  given  for  the
life  of  the  World  not  many  days  hence.
The  full  meaning  of  the  mystery  of  which
she  was  the  instrument  Mary  did  not
comprehend,  but  what  she  had  consciously
done  received  a  wonJerful  commendation
from  the  Lord,  wliich  has  no  parallel  in  the
Gospel  history.

Ver.  13.— Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall
be  preaehid.  This  weighty  promise  and
prediction  is  introduced  by  the  emphasizing
formula,  YerUy  I  say  unto  you.  The  gospel
is  the  story  of  the  incarnation  of  Jesus — his
life,  teaching,  death,  resurrection,  which
implies  written  documents  as  well  as  oral
exposition.  Our  Lord  had  already  (ch.
xxiv.  14)  intimated  that  the  gospel  of  the
kingdom  sliould  be  published  througliout
the  world ;  he  here  aihrms  that  Mary's
deed  shall  be  enshrined  tuerein  for  all  time.
There  shaU  also  this,  tUsX  this  woman  hath
done  (_\a\iiBi)<reTat  koi  i  4iroiri<r€v  <u1tti,  that
also  which  lhi$  woman  did)  ba  told  for  a
memorial  of  her.  The  history  which  records
the  grudging  remonstrance  of  the  disciples
contains  this  remarkable  approval  of  Mary's
act,  associating  her  for  ever  with  the  Passion
of  the  Lord.    We  may  here  quote  the  elo-


quent comment  of  Chrysostom,  who,  how-
ever, unreasonably  identiCes  Mary  with  the
siimer  who  previously  anointed  Jesus.
"  Wlio  then  proclaimed  it,  and  caused  it  to
be  spread  abroad?  It  was  the  power  of
him  who  is  speaking  these  words.  And
while  of  countless  kings  and  generals  the
noble  exploits,  even  of  those  nhose
memorials  remain,  Lave  sunk  into  silence ;
and  having  overtlirown  cities,  and  encom-
passed them  with  wails,  and  set  up  trophies,
and  enslaved  many  nations;,  they  are  not
known  so  much  as  by  hearsay,  nor  by  name,
though  they  have  both  set  up  statues,  and
established  laws;  yet  that  a  woman  who
was  a  harlot  poured  out  oU  in  the  house
of  some  leper,  in  the  presence  of  ten  men,
— this  all  men  celebrate  throughout  the
world ;  and  so  great  a  time  has  passed,  and
yet  the  memory  of  that  which  was  done
hath  not  faded  away,  but  alike  Persians  and
Indians,  Scythians  and  Thraeians,  and  Sar-
matiaus,  and  the  race  ot  the  Mours,  and
tjjey  t  at  inhabit  the  British  Islands,  spread
abroad  that  which  was  done  secretly  in  a
house  by  a  woman"  (*Hom.  Ixxx.  in  Matt.').

Vers.  14 — 16. — Compaet  of  Judas  with  the
Jewish  aathoritiet  to  betray  Jesus.  (Mark
xiv.  10, 11 ;  Luke  xxii.  3—6.)

Ver.  14. — Then.  The  time  referred  to  is
the  close  of  Ciirist's  addresses,  and  the
assembling  of  tlie  Jewish  authorities  men-
tioned at  tlie  beginning  of  the  chapter,  vers.
6^13  beiujj  parentheticaL  It  is  reasonable
to  suppose  that  the  loss  of  the  three  hundred
denarii,  ol  which  he  would  have  had  the
handling,  and  the  reproof  then  administered,
gave  the  final  impulse  to  the  treachery  of
Judas.  This  seems  to  be  signified  by  the
synoptists'  introduction  of  the  transaction
at  Bethany  immediLitely  before  the  account
of  Judas's  infamous  bargain  (see  preliminary
note  on  vers.  6—13).  One  of  the  twelve,
calied  Judas  Iscariot.  That  he  was  one  of
the  twelve,  the  chosen  companions  of  Olirist,
emphasizesbiscrime,  makes  it  more  amazing
and  more  heinous.  To  witness  the  daily
life  of  Christ,  to  behold  his  miracles  of
mercy,  to  listen  to  bis  heavenly  teaching,  to
hear  his  stern  denunciations  of  such  sins  as
covetoucness  and  hypocrisy,  and  in  spite  ot
all  to  bargain  with  bis  bitlerest  enemies  for
bis  betrayal,  reveals  a  depth  of  perverse
wickedness  which  is  simply  appalling.
■JTell  may  the  evangelist  say  that  Satan
entered  into  Judas  (Luke  xxii.  3) ;  it  was  the
devil's  work  he  was  doing ;  he  followed  this
evil  inspiration,  and  thought  not  whither
it  would  lead  him.  Went  onto  the  chief
priests.  Their  hoeiility  was  no  secret.
Judas  and  everybody  knew  of  their  hatred
of  Jesus,  and  of  their  attempts  to  get  him
into  their  power ;  he  saw  his  way  to  carry-


518         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDiNa  TO  ST.  MA.TTHEW.    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75.


ing  out  hU  parpoBe,  and  making  of  it  snme
pecuniary  gain.     We  are  uot  to  suppose
that  this  miserable  man  sank  ull  at  once  to
this  depth  of  iniquity.     Nemo  repente  fit
turpitiimut.    Though  the  descent  to  Aver-
nns  be  easy,  it  ia  gradual;  it  has  its  steps
and   pauses,  its   allurements  and  checks.
Modern  criticism  has  endeavoured  to  mini-
mize the  crime  of  Judas,  or  even  to  regard
him  as  a  hero  misunderstood  ;  but  the  faits
•re  entirely  in   favour   of  the   traditional
view.    We  can  trace   the  path  by  which
the  apostle  developed  into  tbe  traitor,  by
studying  the  hints  which  the  Gospels  afford.
He  was  probably  at  first  fairly  sincere  in
attaching   himself  .  to    Christ's    company.
Being  a  man  of  business  capacity  and  skill
in  the  management  of  money  matters,  he
was  appointed  treasurer  of  the  little  funds
et  the  disposal  of  Christ  and  his  followers.
Half-hearted  and  self-seeking,  his  under-
taking this  office  was  a  snare  to  which  he
easily  fell  a  victim.     He  began  by  petty
peculations,  which  were  not  d&soovered  by
his  comrades  (Jolin  xii.  6),  though  he  must
often  have  felt  an  uneasy  apprehension  that
•  his  Master  saw  Ihrough  him,and  that  many
of  his  warnings  were  directed  at  him  (see
John  vL  61,  70,  71).    This  feeling  lessened
the  love  for  Jesus,  though  it  did  not  drive
him  to  open  apostasy.   He  had  admitted  the
demon  of  covetousness  to  his  breast,  and  he
now  adhered  to  Christ  for  the  hope  of  satis-
fying greed  and  worldly  ambition.     The
teaching  and  miracles  of  Christ  had  no
marked  influence  on    such  a  disposition,
softened  not  his  hard   heart,  effected  no
change  in  his  evil  and  selfish  desires.    And
when  he  saw  his  hopes  disappointed,  when
he    heard  Christ's   announcement    of   his
speedy  death,  which  his  knowledge  of  the
rulers'  animosity  rendered  only  too  certain,
his  only  feeling  was  hatred  and  disgust.
The  transient  expectations  raised  by  the
triumphal  entry  were  not  fulfilled;  there
was   no   assumption   of   the   earthly  con-
queror's part,  there  were  no  rewards  for
Christ's  followers,  nothing  but  enmity  and
threatening  danger  on  every  side.    Judas,
seeing  all  this,  perceiving  that  no  worldly
advantage  would  be  gained  by  fidelity  to
the  losing  side,  determined  to  make  what
profit  he  could  under  present  circumstances.
Not  vpith    the    mistaken    idea  of   forcing
Christ  to  declare  himself,  and  to  put  him-
self at  the  head  of  a  popular  movement,  nor
with    any  notion  of  Christ   miraculously
■aving  himself  from  his  enemies'  hands,  but
simply  from  sonlid  love  of  gain,  he  made
his  infamous  offer  to  tho  oliief  priests.    It
was  jnit  when  they  were  in  perplexity,  and
had  determined  on  nothing  except  that  the
arrest  and  the  condemnation  were  not  to
take  place  during  the  feast,  tliat  Judas  was


introduced  Into  the  assembly.  No  wonder
"  they  were  glad  "  (Mark  xiv.  11) ;  here  was
a  solution  of  the  contemplated  difficulty;
they  need  have  no  fear  of  a  rising  in  favour
of  Christ;  if  among  his  chosen  followers
some  were  disaffected,  and  one  was  ready  to
betray  him,  tliey  might  work  their  will,
when  be  was  once  quietly  apprehended,
without  any  danger  of  rescue  and  disturb-
ance (see  on  ch.  xxvii.  3).

Ver.  15. — What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I
will  deliver  him  unto  youT    There  is  no
disguise  in  this  vile  question.    Judas  nn-
blushingiy' reveals  his  base  motive  in  offer-
ing such  a  bargain;   and  to  enhance  its
value  he,  as  it    rere,  forces  his  personality
into  prominen . j ;  asrii  he  had  said,  "  I  who
am  his  trusted  adherent,  I  who  know  all  his
haunts    and  habits,   will   do  this  thing."
They  covenanted  with  -him ;  larriaav  avr^  :
they  weighed  tmtohim.  The  verb  might  mean
"appointed;"  canslituerunt  ei   (Vulgate);
and  St.  Mark  has  "  promised,"  St.   Luke
"  covenanted ; "  but  there  is  no  doubt  that
some  money  was  at  once  paid  to  Judas,  as
he  seems  to  have  returned  it  (ch.  xxvii.  3)
without    any  further    interview  with  the
Sauhedrin,  though  they  may  have  given
him  a  portion  at  once,  and  sent  him  the
balance    on    the  success   of   his  attempt.
Thirty  pieces  of  silver;  TpiixovroL  apyipia.
Thirty  slifkels  of  the  sanctuary,  equivalent
to  £3  1 5s  of  our  money.  This  was  the  legal
price  of  a  slave  gored  by  an  ox  (Exod.  ixi.
32),  and  must  have  been  considered  by  tlie
•traitor  but  a  poor  reward  for  his  crime.    He
found  the  rulers  as  covetous  as  himself,  and
disposed  to  treat  both  him  and  his  Master
with  the  utmost  contempt.  Christ  had  taken
upon  him  the  form  of  a  bond-servant,  and
was  here  reckoned  as  such.  The  transaction
had  been  typically  shadowed  forth  when
another  Judas  sold  his  brother  Joseph  for
twenty  pieces  of  silver  (Gen.  xxxvii.  27, 28) ;
when    Ahithophel    gave    counsel    against
David,  bis  familiar  friend  (2  Sam.  xvi.) ;  and
when  ^eoliariah  wrote,  "  1  said  unto  them,
If  ye  think  good,  give  me  my  price ;  and  if
not,  forbear.    So  they   weighed   [to-Tijo-ai',
Septuagint]  for  my  price  thirty  pieces  of
silver  "  (Zech.  xi.  12).     St.  Matthew  alone
of  the  evangelists  mentions  the  exact  price
agreed  upon.     It  may  have  come  naturally
to  the  "  publican  "  to  observe  the  pecuniary
aspect  of  the  transaction.

Ver.  16.— From  that  time.  As  soon  as
he  had  made  his  bargain.  Opportnnity.
"  In  the  absence  of  the  multitude,"  St.  Luke
adds.  The  Sanhedrin  no  longer  thought
it  necessary  to  wait  for  the  termination  of
the  fi-Btival  (ver.  5).  Judas  would  enable
them  to  seize  Christ  in  liis  most  secret
retirement,  and  at  the  most  opportvj''
mom(  nt.


cH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  519


Vera.  17 — 19. — Preparation/or  the  Paschal
Supper.  (Hark  xiv.  12—16;  Luke  xxiL
7—13.)

Ver.  17.— The  first  day  of  the  Feast  of
Cnleavened  Bread;  literally,  on  the  first  day
of  Unleavened  Bread.  We  have  arrived  at
the  Thursday  in  the  Holy  Week,  Nisan
13.  Wednesday  had  been  spent  in  retire-
ment at  Bethauy,  and  no  acts  or  sayings  of
Christ  on  that  day  are  recorded.  The  fes-
tival actually  began  at  sunset  of  the  14th,
which  was  called  the  day  of  preparation,
because  the  lambs  for  the  feast  were  slain
in  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  preparatory  to
their  being  eaten  before  the  morning  of  the
15th.  Domestic  preparation,  involving  the
removal  of  all  leaven  from  houses  and  the
use  of  unleavened  bread,  began  on  the  18th ;
hence  this  was  considered  at  this  era  "  the
first  day  of  the  Unleavened."  Came  to
Jesas.  As  the  Master  of  the  family,  who  had
the  ordering  of  all  the  details  of  th6  Paschal
celebration.  They  did  not  know  the  mind
of  Jesus  on  the  subject,  and  desired  his
directions  as  in  former  years.  Bethauy  was
considered  as  Jerusalem  for  the  purposes  of
the  solemn  meal,  and  the  apostles  thought
that  preparation  was  to  be  made  at  some
house  in  that  village.  Prepare  for  thee  to
«at  the  Passover.  The  preparations  were
numerous  :  a  proper  room  had  to  be  found
and  swept  and  carefully  cleansed  from
every  particle  of  leaven ;  tables  and  couches
had  to  be  arranged,  lights  to  be  supplied,
the  lamb  and  all  other  necessaries  (e.g.
bread,  wine,  bitter  herbs)  provided.  All
these  preparations  took  much  time,  so  it
was  doubtless  in  the  early  morning  that  the
disciples  applied  to  our  Lord.  When  they
spoke  of  eating  the  Passover,  they  doubtless
supposed  that  Ohriiit  meant  in  due  course
to  celebrate  the  regular  Paschal  supper  on
the  appointed  day,  i.e.  on  the  evening  of
Friday.  But  his  intentions  were  different
from  what  they  expected.

Ver.  18. — The  city.  Jerusalem  Jesus
was  at  Bethany.  St.  Luke  says  that  he
gent  Peter  and  John,  now  first  joined  to-
gether without  James.  To  such  a  man
(irpis  fhv  Seica).  The  other  synoptists  men-
tion certain  signs  by  which  they  were  to
recognize  the  man.  At  the  entrance  of  the
city  they  would  meet  a  man  heariug  a
pitcher  of  water;  they  were  to  follow  him
to  the  house  whither  he  went,  and  then
give  their  message  to  the  master  of  the
house.  There  is  a  great  similarity  between
this  mission  and  that  concerning  the  ass
before  the  triumphal  entry.  The  foreknow-
ledge and  the  precision  in  directions  are
quite  analogous.  The  "good  man"  was
doubtless  a  disciple,  though  at  this  festival
»U  stmngeri  were  freely  received  by  any


householder  who  had  accommodation.  Dr.
Edersheim  supposes  that  he  was  father  of
Mark,  who  was  the  "  youug  man  "  arrested
by  the  company  that  took  Jesus  (Mark  xiv.
51).  The  secrecy  observed  in  the  above-
mentioned  arrangement  was  intended  to
keep  the  knowledge  from  Judas,  and  thus
to  secure  immunity  from  interruption  at  the
solemn  meal.  The  traitor  seems  to  have
sneaked  out  from  the  last  Supper,  and  dis-
closed Christ's  retreat  to  the  Jewish  autlio-
rities,  and  conducted  them  to  the  house ;
but,  finding  that  Jesus  had  left  the  room,
he  led  them  to  Qethsemane,  whither  he
knew  that  Jesus  often  resorted  (John  xviii.
1,  2).  The  Master.  A  disciple  would  know
who  was  meant  by  this  title  (o.imp.  ch.
xxiii.  8,  10;  John  xi.  28).  Whether  any
previous  arrangement  had  been  made  with
him,  we  cannot  tell ;  most  probably  Christ
speaks  from  prevision  and  his  providential
ordering  of  events.  My  time  is  at  hand.
The  time  of  my  suffering  and  death.  This
fact  would  make  the  request  more  impera-
tive. But  the  expression  was  mysterious
and  indefinite.  I  will  keep  (iroiw,  I  keep)
the  Passover  at  thy  house.  The  Passover
which  the  Lord  was  to  keep  was  not  the
usual  Paschal  meal,  as  the  lamb  could  not
be  legally  killed  till  the  14th,  but  a  com-
memorative anticipatory  feast  in  which  he
himself  was  the  Lamb — "  the  Lamb  of  God,
that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  Of
that  Lamb  the  apostles  did  mystically  eat
when  Christ  gave  them  the  bread  and  wine
with  the  words,  "  This  is  my  body ; "  "  This
is  my  blood."  This  Supper,  which  was
virtually  the  new  Passover,  seems  tradition-
ally to  have  become  confounded  with  the
usual  Paschal  soleumity ;  hence  the  language
of  the  synoptists  assumes  a  form  which
is  applicable  to  the  regular  Jewish  feast.
This  explanation,  if  it  seems  to  derogate
somewhat  from  the  precise  verbal  accuracy
of  the  evangelists,  would  probablx  be  con-
firmed if  we  were  better  acquainted  with  the
customs  then  prevalent,  and  with  the  current
meaning  of  the  language  employed.  The
ambiguity  in  the  accounts  may  be  divinely
intended  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that
the  last  Supper  was  not  the  Jewish  Passover,
but  the  Christian  Passover — ^not  the  sacrifice
on  the  cross,  but  an  anticipation  thereof.
We  may  observe  in  passing  that  there  is  no
mention  of  the  lamb  in  the  celebration ;
Peter  and  Jolm  were  not  enjoined  to  provide
one,  nor  are  they  said  to  halve  visited  the
temple — which,  indeed,  on  the  13th  would
have  l)een  useless :  and  yet  to  obtain  the
lamb  in  any  other  way  would  have  been  a
breach  of  the  Law,  which  we  cannot  sup-
pose Christ  would  sanction.  We  may  alsa
notice  that  the  word  "feast"  (lopT/J)  ia
nowhere  applied  to  the  last  Supper,  thougk


520  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xxvi  1—75.


it  ii  always  employed  in  Teferenoe  to
the  Jewish  solemnity.  St.  Paul,  in  liis
account  of  the  institution  of  the  Holy  Oom-
munion  (1  Oor.  xi.)  makes  no  mention  of
any  Fasohal  solemnities  or  associations,  but
merely  states  that  it  was  appointed  on  the
night  in  which  Jesus  was  betrayed.  With
my  disciples ;  i.e.  the  twelve  apostles;  none
bnt  these,  not  even  the  master  of  the  house,
were  present  at  this  solemn  scene.

Ver.  19.— Made  ready  the  Passover  (see
on  ver.  17).  They  got  the  room  ready,  pro-
vided unfermented  bread,  wine,  bitter  herbs,
sauoe,  and  some  dishes  necessary  for  the
feast.  They  would  not  eat  the  Paschal
lamb  at  the  legal  time  to-morrow,  so  the
Lord  ordained  a  commemorative  and  antici-
patory solemnity,  in  which  he  appointed  a
rite  which  should  take  the  place  of  the
Jewish  ceremony.  We  learn  from  the  other
synoptists  that  the  householder  was  not
satisfied  with  offering  Christ  and  his  friends
the  use  of  the  common  hall,  which  they
(Tould  have  had  to  ihare  probably  with  other
guests;  but  he  assigned  to  them  his  best
ind  most  honourable  chamber,  "a  large
upper  room,"  already  properly  arranged  and
furnished  for  the  feast.  Tradition  has  main-
tained that  this  apartment  was  that  after-
wards used  by  the  apostles  as  a  place  of
assembling,  and  where  they  received  the
effusion  of  the  Holy  Ohost  on  the  Day  of
Pentecost.

Vers.  20 — 25.  —  The  latt  Supper.  Jesus
announces  his  betrayer.  (Mark  xiv.  17 — 21 ;
Luke  xxii.  14,  21—23 ;  John  xiii.  21—30.)

Ver.  20. — When  the  even  was  come ;  i.e.  ac-
cording to  Jewish  reckoning,  the  beginning
of  the  14th  of  Nisan ;  with  us,  the  Thurs-
day evening — the  eve  of  Good  Friday.  He
sat  down ;  lie  was  reelining  at  table.  Origin-
ally, the  Passover  was  ordered  to  be  eaten
standing,  in  reference  to  the  circumstances
of  its  first  institution  (Exod.  xii.  1 1) ;  but
after  the  isettlement  in  Canaan  the  posture
had  been  changed  to  that  of  reclining  in
token  of  rest  after  a  weary  pilgrimage.  The
rule  that  obtained  concerning  the  number
in  one  company  of  partakers  of  the  Paschal
feast  was  that  it  never  .should  be  less  than
ten,  nor  more  than  the  lamb  would  euilice
to  feed,  thougli  a  morsel  of  the  flesh  wus
considered  to  satisfy  all  requirements.

Ver.  21. — As  they  did  eat.  The  details
of  the  Paschal  feast  are  expounded  by  rab-
binical authors,  though  theru  is  little  in  St.
Matthew's  account  to  lead  us  to  conclude
that  our  Lord  observed  them  on  this  occa-
sion. The  ceremonial  usually  practised
was  as  follows  :  The  head  of  the  family,  sit-
ting iu  the  place  of  honour,  took  a  cup  of
wine  and  water  mixed  ("the  first  cup"),
pronounced   a  thanksgiving  over  it,  and,


having  tasted  it,  paBsed  it  round  to  the
guests;  the  master  washed  his  bauds,  the
others  performing  their  ablutions  at  a  later
part  of  the  service ;  the  dishes  were  placed
on  the  table;  after  a  special  beuediotiou
had  been  spoken  over  the  bitter  herbs,  the
master  and  the  rest  of  the  company  took
a  bunch  of  these,  dipped  it  in  the  ap-
pointed sauce,  and  ate  Jt ;  .^n  unleavened
oake  was  broken  and  elevated  with  a  pre-
scribed formula ;  the  second  cup  was  filled,
tlie  history  of  the  festival  was  proclaimed,
Ps.  cxiii, — cxviii.  were  recited,  and  the  cup
was  drunk.  Now  began  the  proper  Paschal
meal  with  a  general  washing  of  hands ;  the
lamb  was  out  into  pieces,  and  a  portion

fiven  to  each,  with  a  bit  of  the  unleavened
read  and  bitter  herbs  dipped  in  the  sauce,
called  by  St.  John  (xiii.  26)  "  the  sop."  At
the  end  of  the  meal,  which  was  supple-
mented by  other  viands  (which,  however,
were  probably  eaten  before  the  lamb),  the
third  cup,  named  by  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  x.  16)
"  the  cup  of  blessing,"  was  drunk,  and  the
solemn  grace  after  meat  was  uttered.  It
would  be  necessary  to  examine  St.  John's
Gospel  to  see  how  the  ritual  fitted  into  tlie
actual  details  of  the  last  Supper ;  we  have
to  deal  with  St.  Matthew's  account.  Verily
I  say  unto  yon.  Christ  tlius  prepares  the
apostles  for  the  incredible  statement  which
he  is  about  to  make.  One  of  yon ;  ets  e{
iliwv.  One  out  of  your  number,  my  chosen
companions.  He  had  before  spoken  vaguely
of  his  betrayal  (see  oh.  xvii.  22 ;  xx.  18';
xxvi.  2).  By  thus  sliowing  liis  knowledge
of  the  coming  treacliery,  and  yet  declining
to  denounce  the  traitor  by  name,  he  may
have  given  Judas  a  latit  cljance  of  repentance
before  the  final  act,  St  Matthew  omits  the
washing  of  the  disciples'  feet,  and  the  strife
about  pre-eminence.

Ver.  22. — Exceeding  sorrowful.  Such  an
announcement  filled  them  with  amazement
and  grief;  they  scarcely  dared  suspect  one
another,  but  began  to  doubt  their  own  con-
stancy, though  at  the  time  conscious  of  their
integrity.  Is  it  1 1  mi)Tiiy<li  6i>i,-  Nwmquid
ego  sum  ?  It  is  not  I,is  itt  where  the  nega-
tive answer  is  expected.  It  is  remarkable
that  the  real  character  of  Judas  had  never
been  discovered  by  the  fellow-disciples  who
for  three  years  had  mixed  with  him  in
closest  companionship.  Either  he  was  a
consummate  hypocrite,  or  the  other  apostles
were  too  simple-minded,  good,  and  charitable
to  think  evil  of  any  one.  Thus  his  pecula-
tions passed  unnoticed,  and  the  greed  and
avarice  which  wrecked  his  spiritual  life
were  entirely  unsuspected.

Ver.  23.— He  that  dippeth  (dipped)  his
hand  with  me  iu  the  dish.  Even  now  Jesus
does  not  identify  the  traitor.  Many  had
put  their  hands  into  the  dish  along   with


on.  XXVI.  1—76.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDlNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         621


Christ.  Jndaa  waa  one  of  those  vrho  had
done  80.  The  fact  of  eating  together  made,
in  the  Easterns'  Tiew,  the  treachery  more
monstrous.  "  Mine  own  familiar  friend,  in
whom  I  trusted,  which  did  eat  of  my  biead,
hath  lifted  up  his  heel  against  me "  (Fs.
xli.  9).  The  dish  was  one  of  large  dimen-
sions, from  which  each  guest  took  his  por-
tion witli  his  fingers.  It  was  truly  a  cojnmon
meal  in  which  all  shared.  Our  Lord'd  words
were  spoken  in  answer  to  John's  question,
"Lord,  who  is  it? "'(John  xiii.  25).  The
beloved  apostle's  position  at  table,  "  lying
on  Jesus'  breast,"  enabled  him  to  ask  this
without  being  overheard.  There  is  a  mis-
tiil<e  commonly  made  concerning  the  shape
ot  tl]e  talkie  used  on  such  occasions.  It  was
not  of  a  horseshoe  form,  but  oblong.  The
couches  were  arranged  round  three  of  its
sides,  and  it  extended  a  little  way  beyond
the  divans.  The  Master's  seat  was  not  at
the  top  or  middle  couch,  but  at  the  side;
and  from  wliat  occurred  we  should  infer
that  John  siit  on  the  right  of  Jesus  at  the
end  of  the  ooucli,  and  Juilas  on  the  left  of
Jesne,  the  strife  about  precedency  having
been  thus  settled.  (The  correct  shape  of
tlie  table,  and  tlie  places  of  Jesus,  John,
Judas,  and  Peter,  are  delineated  in  Bder-
sheim's  work,  vol.  ii.  p.  49i.)

Ver.  24.. — The  Son  of  man  goeth  (imdyft,
departeth).  It  is  thus  that  Christ  alludes
to  his  approaching  denth  (John  vii.  33 ;  viii.
21,  22;  xiii.  3,  etc.),  declaring  thus  the
voluntary  nature  of  his  sufferings.  As  it  is
written  of  him.  Every  minute  detail  of
Christ's  Passion  sntfnciated  by  the  propliets
was  fulfilled.  "The  prescience  of  God,"
says  Ohrybostom,  "  is  not  the  cause  of  men's
wickedness,  nor  does  it  involve  any  neces-
sity of  it ;  Judas  was  not  a  traitot  because
God  foresaw  it,  but  he  foresaw  it  because
Judas  would  be  so."  Woe  unto  that  man  by
(^through)  whom  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed !
TrapaSiSoTai,  is  being  hetrayed.  Judas  could
hear  this  and  the  following  sentence,  and
yet  retain  his  iniquitous  purpose  1  It  had
been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been
bom ;  literally,  it  were  good  for  Mm  if  that
man  had  not  Veen  bom.  Jesus  says  this,
knowing  what  the  fate  of  Judas  would  be  iu
the  other  world.  There  ia  no  hope  here
held  out  of  alleviation  or  end  of  suifering,
or  of  ultimate  restoration.  It  is  a  rayless
darkness  of  despair.  Had  there  been  any
expectation  of  relief  or  of  recovery  of  God's
favour,  exiotence  would  be  a  blessing  even
to  the  worst  of  sinners ;  for  |hey  would  have
eternity  still  before  them  in  which  to  enjoy
their  pardon  and  purification ;  and  in  such
case  it  could  not  be  said  of  them  that  it
were  better  for  them  never  to  have  been
bom.  On  one  side  of  the  mysterious  pro-
blem connected  with  Judiis  mid  such-like


sinners  we  may  again  quote  St.  Chrysostom
('Hom.  Ixxxi.  in  Matt.'), " '  What,  then,'  one
may  say, '  though  Judas  bad  not  betrayed
him,  would  not  another  have  betrayed  him  ?
.  .  .  Because  if  Christ  must  needs  be  cruci-
fied, it  must  be  by  the  means  of  some  one,
and  if  by  some  one,  surely  by  suoli  a  person
as  this.  But  if  all  had  been  good,  the  dis-
pensation iu  ouriiehalf  had  been  impeded.'
Not  so.  For  the  AUwise  knows  how  he  shall
bring  about  our  benefits,  even  had  this
happened.  For  his  wisdom  is  rich  in  con-
trivance, and  incomprehensible.  So  for  this
reason,  that  no  one  might  suppose  that  Judas
had  become  a  minister  of  the  dispensation,
he  declares  the  wretchedness  of  that  man.
But  some  one  will  say  again, '  And  if  it  had
been  good  if  he  had  never  been  born,  where-
fore did  he  sutt'er  both  this  man  and  all  the
wicked  to  come  into  the  world  ? '  When
thou  oughtest  to  blame  the  wicked,  for  that,
having  the  power  not  to  become  such  as
they  are,  they  have  become  wicked,  thou
leavest  this,  and  busiest  thyself  and  art
curious  about  the  things  of  God,  although
knowing  that  it  is  not  by  necessity  that  any
one  is  wicked."

Ver.  25. — Answered  and  said,  master,  U  it
I }  M^Ti  iyd  eifu ;  It  it  not  I,  in  it  1  as  ver.
22.  Judas  probably  had  not  been  one  of
those  who  put  this  question  before,  and  uow,
availing  himself  of  his  proximity  to  Jesus
(see  on  ver.  23),  he  has  the  inconceiTuble
elfrontery  to  make  this  inquiry  privately,
as  if  to  assure  himself  whether  Christ  was
conscious  of  his  treachery  or  not.  It  is  re-
marked that  he  does  not  call  Jesus  "Lord,"
as  the  other  apostles,  but  "Eabbi,"  a  coldly
ceiemonious  title  (so  in  the  garden,  ver.  49)
The  gentle  Jesus  repioaohes  him  not,  but
auswers  him  in  low  tones  unheard  by  the
rest  (John  xiii.  28,  29).  Ihon  hast  said.  A
common  formula,  equivalent  to  "  yes."  So
ver.  64.

Vers.  26— 29.— The  institution  of  the  Lord's
Supper.  (Mark  xiv.  22  -25;  Luke  xxii.  15—
20;  1  Cor.  xi.  23—25.)  The  endless  con-
troversies which  have  gathered  round  the
Holy  Eucharist,  for  opposite  views  of  the
meaning  and  purpose  of  which  men  have
fearlessly  met  death,  render  it  a  difScult
matter  to  expound  the  text  succinctly  and
yet  with  due  regard  to  clearness  and  pre-
cision. If  I  do  not  expatiate  upon  the
diverse  opinions  which  have  been  held  on
this  momentous  subject,  it  is  not  because  I
have  neglected  to  weigh  and  examine  them,
but  because  it  is  more  conducive  to  edifica-
tion to  have  a  plain  statement  of  what  ap-
pears to  the  writer  to  be  the  truth,  than  bi


522


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75.


confuse  ft  reader  with  a  multitude  of  inter-
pretations which  in  the  end  have  virtually
to  be  surrendered.  The  points  to  be  specially
remembered  before  trying  to  expound  the
section  are  these :  1.  He  who  institutes  the
ordinance  is  Almighty  God  made  man,  who
is  able  to  set  asiile  one  observance  and  to
substitute  another  in  its  place.  2.  The  new
ordinance  had  an  analogy  with  that  which
it  superseded.  3.  It  was  intended  to  bo  the
one  great  service  and  means  of  grace  for  all
Christians.  4.  The  interpretation  is  to  be
connected  with  the  great  discourse  of  Jesus
in  the  sixth  chapter  of  St.  John,  where  Clirist
speaks  of  himself  as  the  Bread  of  life  that
came  down  from  heaven,  and  his  flesh  and
blood  as  the  nourishment  of  his  people. '

Ver.  26. — ^As  they  were  eating.  Before
the  supper  was  quite  ended,  and  before  (he
third  cup  of  wine  (see  on  ver.  21)  was  drunk.
Jesus  took  bread  (rhv  Uprov,  the  bread,  ac-
cording to  the  Eeceived  Text).  The  Bpecial
unleavened  cake  prepared  for  the  Paschal
meal.  The  four  accounts  agree  in  this
detail,  and  seem  to  indicate  a  formal  action
or  elevation,  like  the  wave  offering  in  the
old  Law.  We  see  here  the  "  High  Priest
alter  the  order  of  Melchizedek  "  bringing
forth  bread  and  wine  like  his  great  proto-
type (Pb.  ex.  4),  and  by  anticipation  offering
himself  as  victim.  And  blessed  it.  Tlie
Keoeived  Text  here  and  in  St.  Mark  has
evKoyhaas,  which  in  some  manuscripts  has
been  altered  to  eftx""'"''''^'^''''"!  ii  conformity
with  the  wording  in  St.  Luke's  and  St.  Paul's
accounts.  We  find  a  similar  interchange  of
the  words  in  the  miracles  of  the  loaves  (see
oh.  xiv.  19 ;  xv.  36 ;  Mark  viii.  6,  etc.).
Virtually,  the  two  expressions  are  identical ;
the  thanksgiving  is  a  blessing,  the  blessing
is  a  thanksgiving.  The  usual  blessing
uttered  by  the  master  over  the  unleavened
cake  is  said  to  have  been, "  Blessed  be  he
who  giveth  the  bread  of  earth."  From  this
benediction  on  the  elements,  and  the  thank-
ful remembrance  of  Christ's  death  and  the
benefits  thereof  herein  connoted,  the  Holy
Communion  has  from  the  earliest  times  been
called  the  Holy  Eucharist.  And  brake  it.
The  fraction  of  the  bread  was  so  important
and  essential  a  part  of  the  institution,  that
it  gave  its  name  to  the  whole  rite,  and
"breaking  of  bread"  represented  the  cele-
bration of  the  Holy  Eucharist,  the  sacrifice
of  praise  and  thanksgiving  (see  Acts  ii.
42, 46 ;  1  Cor.  x.  16,  etc.).  Under  the  old  Law
the  fraction  represented  the  sufferings  en-
dured by  the  chosen  people  ;  in  Christ's  new
institution  it  symbolized  his  death,  when
hie  fe@t  and  hands  were  pierced  with  the


nails  and  his  side  with  the  spear.  Oave  it
(^SiSov,  wai  giving)  to  the  disciples.  He
gave  to  each  of  tbem  a  portion  of  the  cake
in  their  hand.  If  they  had  risen  from  their
couches  at  the  solemn  benediction,  as  we
may  well  suppose  they  did,  they  were  still
standing  when  the  Lord  distributed  the
consecrated  bread.  That  they  received  it
reclining  in  an  easy  posture  seems  unlikely.
Take  (ye),  eat  (ye).  The  (wo  words  are  given
on  ly  in  our  Gospel ;  St.  Mark  has  "  take  ye  "
(i/jayere  being  there  an  interpolation).  St.
Luke  and  St.  Paul  omit  them  altogether.
We  should  infer  that  Christ  did  not  himself
partake  of  the  bread  or  wine  (which  would
have  confused  the  deep  significance  ct
the  ordinance),  but  gave  it  to  big  apostles,
that  by  such  participation  they  might  be
identified  with  the  sacrifice  represented
by  the  broken  bread,  thus  transforming
the  Levitical  rite  into  a  new  sacrament
which  did  not  merely  commemorate  his
death,  but  conveyed  its  benefits  to  faithful
receivers.  This  is  my  body.  "  This  "  in  the
Greek  is  neuter  (toCto),  and  therefore  is  not
in  agreement  with  "  bread  "  (SpTos),  which
is  masculine.  It  is  to  be  explained  as
"  This  which  I  give  you,  this  which  ye  re-
ceive." The  copula  "  is  "  would  not  be  ex-
pressed in  the  Aramaic,  which  Christ  spoke  f
and  yet  what  a  world  of  controversy  has
hung  on  this  iitTi  I  Some  take  it  as  abso-
lutely identifying  subject  and  predicate;
others  regard  it  as  equivalent  to  "repre-
sents;" others,  again,  would  modify  it  in
some  manner,  so  that  it  should  not  logically
express  the  agreement  of  the  two  terms  of
the  proposition.  It  was  doubtless  a  start-
ling statement  to  those  who  then  heard  it
for  the  first  time,  but  it  came  upon  them  not
wholly  unprepared.  In  his  momentous  dis-
course on  the  Bread  of  life,  after  the  feeding
of  the  five  tho'nsand,  Jesus  had  spoken  of
himself  as  the  Food  of  his  people,  and  then
proceeded  to  make  the  amazing  assertion,
"  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,
and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you  "
(John  vi.  53).  The  meaning  of  this  mys-
terious warning  was  not  further  explained.
Now  as  the  Lord  distributed  to  the  apostles
the  blessed  morsels  with  those  solemn  words,
they  learned  what  he  meant  by  eating  his
flesh  and  drinking  his  blood,  how  he  put  it
in  his  servants'  power  to  fulfil  the  injunc-
tion. In  what  sense  could  "this"  be  his
body  ?  He  was  there  before  their  eyes  in
human  form,  perfect  Man ;  and  yet  he  gives
something  else,  not  that  which  was  standing
before  them,  asTiis  body.  Stupendous  mys-
tery, past  finding  out  I  There  is  no  room
here  for  metaphor  or  figure.  He  is  not
figuratively  describing  himself  or  his  oflBce
or  his  work,  as  when  he  calls  himself  the
good    Shepherd,  the  Door,  the  Vine,  the


CH.  xxTi.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  623


Waj :  be  (Urects  attention  to  one  part  of  hia
natnie,  his  body,  and  that  as  food  to  be
eaten.  He  sbowi  the  mode  by  which  we  may
be  participators  of  this  his  losver  nature,
that  as,  joined  to  Adam,  we  die,  so  thus
united  to  Christ,  we  live.  We  must,  as  be-
fore observed,  remember  that  he  who  said
these  words  was  God  incarnate,  aod  that  he
designed  to  give  his  Church  a  means  of  real-
izing and  receiving  those  stupendous  bless-
ings set  forth  in  his  Eucharistic  diiicourse  as
depending  upon  due  reception  of  his  body
and  blood.  It  is  obvious  tliat  the  apostles
could  not  understand  the  terms  literally,
but,  believing  in  hia  Godhead,  believing
that  he  could  bring  to  pass  that  which  he
said,  they  apprehended  them  in  a  super-
natural, mystical  sense;  they  hail  f<itli  to
know  that  in  these  holy  elements,  blessed  by
their  Lord,  they  received  him,  ate  his  flesh
and  blood,  to  their  soul's  health.  Thio  was
no  mere  commemorative  rite,  not  simply  a
way  of  remembering  Christ's  death  and
Passion,  but  it  was  a  sacrament,  an  outward
sign  of  an  inward  reality,  something  from
withont  entering  the  recipients  and  impart-
ing to  them  that  which  before  they  had  not.
How  the  outward  and  inward  are  joined  to-
gether we  cannot  tell.  It  i8,and  will  always
remain,  an  unfathomable  mystery.  The
presence  of  Christ's  humanity  in  the  Holy
Communion  is  beyond,  above,  the  ordinary
,  conditions  of  man'*  nature;  it  is  supernatural,
miraculous,  even  as  was  bis  incarnation,
which  joined  manhood  and  Deity.  The  sub-
stance, indeed,  of  the  elements  remains  as
before,  their  nature  is  not  changed,  but  they
have  a  new  relation  and  use  and  office ;  they
serve  as  a  means  of  communicating  Christ's
body  and  blood,  and  they  are  so  called  before
reception,  so  that  the  receiver's  faith  does
not  make  them  to  be  such,  but  Christ's  own
word  with  power.  Attempts  to  explain  this
Divine  matter  hopelessly  fail.  Hence  the
Bomanist  with  his  transubstantiation,  or
change  of  substance ;  the  Lutheran  with  his
consubstantiation,  or  confusion  of  substance ;
the  Zuinglian  with  his  irreverent  virtualism,
alike  fall  into  error  and  depart  from  pure
doctrine.  The  only  right  attitude  is  to  leave
all  such  efforts  alone,  to  believe  Christ's
word  simply  but  wholly,  and  to  use  tlie
sacrament  in  full  faith,  that  by  and  through
it  to  the  faithful  recipient  are  imparted  in-
calculable benefits.  To  the  words,  "  This  is
my  body,"  St.  Luke  adds,  "  which  is  being
given  (SiSif/iEvov)  for  you ; "  and  St.  Paul,
"  which  is  [broken ;  ?  genuine]  for  you."
Thus  tlie  Lord,  before  he  actually  suffered,
offered  himself  as  a  Victim  voluntarily  under-
going death,  and  showed  it  forth  by  the
broken  bread  amd  the  poured  wine.  We
are  told  that  the  master  of  the  household,
wbeo  he  dintribnted  the  pieces  of  the  lamb,


said  solemnly,"  Tliis  is  the  body  of  the  Pas-
chal lamb."  Christ  transformed  this  formula
to  a  new  use,  but  in  neither  case  did  it  intro-
duce a  mere  symbol  of  something  absent.

Ver.  27. — He  took  the  cup.  Many  good
manuBoripts  have  "  a  cup,"  and  Bome  modern
editors  omit  the  article ;  but  this  cup  was
the  only  one  on  the  table  at  tlje  time ;  so  the
reading  matters  not  This  was  prc^ably
the  third  cup  at  the  close  of  the  Paschal
meal  (see  on  ver.  21).  The  wine  of  the
country  is  what  we  call  a  red  wine  (compare
"the  blood  of  grapes,"  Gen.  xlix.  11);  it
was  mixed  with  a  little  water  when  used  ult
the  table.  This  third  cup  was  termed  "  tha
cup  of  blessing"  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  16),  because
over  it  was  spoken  a  special  benediction,
and  it  was  regarded  as  the  principal  cup,
following,  as  it  did,  the  eating  oF  the  lamb.
Gave  thanks  {(bxaptfrr-liaat).  The  thanks-
giving was  a  blessing  (see  on  ver.  26).  The
celebration  of  Glirist'sdeath  and  tlieremem-
brance  of  the  incalculable  blessings  obtained
thereby  may  well  be  termed  the  Holy
Eucharist,  the  great  sacrifice  of  praise  and
thanksgiving.  Gave  (iSa>Kev)  it  to  them.
i  The  aorist  here  used  would  imply  strictly
that  he  gave  the  cup  once  for  all,  herein
differentiating  the  action  from  that  employed
in  distributing  the  bread.  St.  Luke's  ex-
pression, "  Titke  this,  and  divide  it  among
yourselves,"  refers  to  an  earlier  stage  of  the
supper.  lu  the  present  connection  he  nearly
agrees  with  the  other  synoptists.  It  is
possible  that  the  cup  was  passed  from  hand
to  hand  alter  it  had  been  blessed  by  Christ.
Drink  ye  all  of  it.  St  Mark  adds,  "  And
they  all  drank  of  it."  Strange  it  is  that,  with
these  words  written  in  the  Scripture,  any
Church  should  have  the  hardihood  to  deny
the  cup  to  any  qualified  Christian.  Tlie
Romanist's  assertion  that  the  cup  is  for
priests  alone,  as  it  was  given  to  the  apostles
only,  and  was  destined  for  them  ami  their
sacerdotal  successors,  would  apply  equnlly
to  the  consecrated  bread,  and  then  what
becomes  of  the  general  use  of  the  ordinance  ?
If  we  would  have  life  in  us,  we  must  not  only
eat  Christ's  flesh,  but  drink  his  blood.  We
need  to  be  refreshed  as  well  as  btrengthened
in  the  battle  of  life,  and  it  may  well  be  that
the  mutilation  of  the  sacrament  orries  with
it  spiritual  effects  that  impede  the  soul's
health.

Ver.  28.— For.  Yes,  drink  ye  all  hereof,
for  it  is  unspeakably  precious.  This  (to  Eto,
as  before,  ver.  26)  is  my  blood.  This  which
I  here  give  you.  The  blood  separated  from
the  body  represents  Christ's  death  by
violence ;  it  was  also  the  sign  of  the  ratifica-
tion of  a  covenant.  Of  the  new  testament ;
Si.aSi]Ki)s:  covenant.  The  adjective  "new"  is
omitted  by  some  good  manuscripts  and
modern  editors,  but  it  gives  the  sense  in-


n24  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxti.  1 -75


tended.  Tbe  Vulgate  has,  novi  testamenU.
The  old  ooTenant  between  God  and  hiB
people  had  been  ratified  at  Sinai  by  the
blood  of  many  viotims  (Exod.  xxiv.  5—8 ;
Heb.  viii.  8—13;  ix.  15,  etc.);  the  blood  of
Ohrist  shed  upon  the  oruBS  ratifies  "  the  new
or  Christian  covenant  to  tbe  world  and  the
Ohnrch,  and  the  same  blood  saciamentally
applied  ratifies  the  covenant  iudlvidually  to
each  Christian  "  (Sadler).  The  evangelical
covenant  supersedes  the  Judaic,  even  as  the
sacrifice  of  Olirist  fulfils  and  supersedes  the
Levitioal  sacrificeB.  Which  is  shed  (is  being
shed)  tot  many.  The  Vulgate  has  ejfan(fet«r,
in  reference  to  the  crucifixion  of  the  morrow ;
but  tliis  is  tampering  with  the  text.  Bather,
by  using  th  e  present  tense,  the  Lord  siguifles
that  his  death  is  certain — that  the  sacrifice
has  already  begun,  that  the  "  Lamb  slain
from  the  foundation  of  the  world  "  (Bev.  xiii.
8)  was  now  ofiering  the  eternal  sacrifice.
The  whole  ordinance  is  significant  of  the
completion  of  the  atonement.  "  Many  "  here
is  equivalent  to  "all."  Redemption  is  uni-
versal, though  all  men  do  not  accept  the  offer
(see  on  oh.  ix.  28).  Even  Calvin  says, "  Non
partem  mundi  tantum  designat,  sed  totum
humanum  genus."  For  the  remission  of  sins.
"For  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  re-
mission" (Heb.  ix.  22);  "The  blood  of  Jesus
Christ,  his  Son,  oleanseth  us  from  all  sin "
(1  John  L  7).  The  sacrifices  of  the  Law,  the
blood  of  bulls  and  goats,  could  not  take
away  sin;  at  most  they  gave  a  ritual  and
ceremonial  purification.  But  what  the
Mosaic  Law  could  not  effect  was  accom-
plished by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  who
offered  himself  a  spotless  and  perfect  Victim
unto  God.  This  is  our  Lord's  most  com-
plete announcement  of  the  propitiatory
nature  of  his  sacrifice,  which  is  appropriated
by  faith  in  the  reception  of  his  precious
blood.  St.  Paul  adds,  "  This  do  ye  (toSto
iroieire),  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remem-
brance of  me  [f IS  rijv  e'^V  avd/iviiaiy,  '  for
my  commemoration']."  These  were,  of
course,  Christ's  words  spoken  at  the  time,
and  are  of  most  important  bearing  on  what
is  called  the  sacrificial  aspect  of  the  Holy
Eucharist.

Ver.  29.— I  wUl  not  drink  henceforth  (iir"
SpTi)  of  this  fruit  (yew^j/taros)  of  the  vine.
He  is  about  to  die.  From  this  moment
forward  he  tastes  not  the  cup.  It  does  not
follow  that  he  bad  partaken  of  the  con-
secrated wine  which  be  gave  his  apoBllea.
Probability  is  against  his  having  done  so  (see
on  ver.  26).  He  used  the  same  words  with  the
first  cup  at  the  commencement  of  the  supper
(Luke  xxii.  1 8).  Of  thi<  he  probably  partook,
but  not  of  the  latter.  The  offspring  of  tlie
vine  is  a  poetical  way  of  describing  wine  (of.
Deut.  xxii  9 ;  Isa.  xxxii.  12,  etc.).  It  is
absurd  to  find  in  this  term  an  argument  for


nnalooholio  grape-jnloe.  Wine,  to  be  wine,
must  Undergo  fermentation,  and  if  it  is  not
to  putrefy  or  to  become  vinegar,  it  miist  de-
Telop  alcohol.  When  I  drink  it  new  (Kaivdv)
with  you  in  my  Father's  kingdom.  This
mysterious  announcement  has  been  variously
interpreted,  and  its  meaning  muut  rema)in
unccitain.  Some  refer  it  to  Christ's  inter-
course with  his  disciples  after  he  rose  from
the  dead,  when  e.g.  he  partook  of  food  with
them  (Luke  xxiv.  SO,  42, 13 ;  John  xzi  12 ;
Acts  1.  4 ;  X.  41).  But  this  seems  hardly
to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  text,  though
it  has  the  support  of  Chrysostom,  who  writes,
"Because  be  had  discoursed  with  them
concerning  Passion  and  cross,  he  again
introduces  what  he  has  to  say  of  his  resnr-
rectiun,  having  made  mention  of  a  kingdom
before  them,  and  by  this  term  calling  his
own  resurrection.  Ami  wlierefore  did  he
drink  after  he  was  risen  again  7  Lest  the
grosser  sort  might  suppose  that  the  resurrec-
tion was  a  phantasy. ...  To  show,  therefore,
that  they  should  see  him  manifestly  risen
again,  and  that  he  should  be  with  them  once
more,  and  that  they  themselves  shall  be
witness  to  the  things  that  are  done,  both  by
sight  and  by  act,  be  saith,  '  until  I  drink  it
new  with  you,'  you  bearing  witness.  But
what  is  '  new '  ?  In  a  new,  that  is,  in  a
strange  manner,  not  having  a  passible  body,
but  now  immortal  ami  incorruptible,  and  not
needing  food."  Some  explain  it  of  the  Pass-
over, of  which  be  then  partook  for  the  last
time,  the  type  being  fulfilled  in  him.  Tlie
solution  does  not  explain  the  new  participa-
tion in  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  seems,  on  the
whole,  best  to  understand  it  as  a  prophecy  of
the  great  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb,  and
the  joys  that  await  the  faithful  in  the  new
heavens  and  the  new  earth.  The  wine  is  the
token  of  the  felioities  of  this  dispensation,
and  it  ii  called  "  new  "  in  contrast  with  the
obsolete  character  of  that  which  it  super-
seded. "  Novitatem  dioit  plane  singularem  "
(Bengel).

Vers.  30 — 35, — Jestu  announeea  the  deser-
tion of  the  apottlea,  and  the  denial  of  Peter.
(Mark  xiv.  26—31 ;  Luke  xxii.  34;  John  xiii.
86—38.)

Ver.  30. — When  they  had  sung  an  hymn.
This  was  probably  the  second  portion  of  tlie
Httllel(Pss.  cxv. — oxTiii.,or,if  the  then  ritnal
was  the  Hame  as  the  later,  Ps.  oxxxvi.).
Before  this,  however,  the  Lord  spake  the
discourses  and  the  prayer  recorded  so
lovingly  and  carefully  by  St.  John  (John
xiv.— ivii.).  They  went  out.  Which  they
conld  not  lawfully  have  done  had  they  been
celebrating  the  nsnal  Jewisli  Passover  (see
Exod.  xii.  22).  Though  it  is  possible  that
many  modilioatious  of  the  original  ritual


DH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


525


had  been  gradnallr  intiodnced,  yet  Christ
10  strictly  obserTed  the  Law  that  he  would
doubtlesB  haye  obeyed  iti  injunotioa  in  this
particular  if  he  had  been  keeping  the  legal
solemnity.  The  Uonnt  of  Olives.  Hither  lie
had  resorted  every  night  during  the  week
(Luke  xzi.  37 :  xxii.  39).

Yer.  31. — ^Ihen  saith  Jesns.  The  warning,
according  to  the  other  evangelists,  was  given
in  the  upper  chamber,  unless,  as  is  very  un-
likely, it  was  twice  repeated  (see  Luke
xxii.  31—34;  John  xiii  36—38).  The  "then"
of  St.  Matthew  must  not  be  taken  strictly  as
denoting  exact  chronological  sequence,  but
as  marking  a  change  of  scene  or  a  new  in-
cident. All  ye  shall  be  offended  because  of
me  (,h  i/ioi,  in  me).  There  is  an  emphasis
on  "  all  ye ;"  even  ye  eleven,  who  have  been
steadfast  hitherto.  One,  Judas,  had  already
departed ;  but  Christ  warns  the  eleven  that
they  too  shall  for  a  time  lose  their  faith  in
him,  and  sin  by  forsaking  their  Lord.  His
apprehension  and  trial  would  prove  a  rook
of  offence  to  them.  It  is  written.  In  Zech.
xiii,  7,  where  the  prophet's  words  are,
"  Awake,  O  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  and
against  the  Man  that  is  my  Fellow,  saith  the
Lord  of  hosts;  smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the
sheep  shall  be  scattered."  It  is  here  shown
that  all  that  happened  took  place  according
to  "  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknow-
ledge of  God."  That  Christ  may  be  the
Saviour  he  must  be  a  sacrifice.  In  Zechariah
the  Lord  gives  the  command  to  the  sword ;
hence  Christ  can  say,  I  will  smite.  The
Shepherd  is  Christ,  the  sheep  are  the  dis-
ciples, -  who,  at  the  eight  of  the  officers
coming  to  seize  him,  "  all  forsook  him,  and
fled  "  (ver.  56).  The  prophecy  in  Zechariah
is  remarkably  full  of  references  to  Christ,
his  nature  and  his  position.

Ver.  32.— After  I  am  risen  again.  He
comforts  his  followers  now,  as  always,  with
the  anuouncement  that  after  his  Passion  and
death  he  would  rise  again  and  meet  them.
So  in  the  prophet's  words  succeeding  the
quotation  there  is  a  similar  encouragement,
"  I  will  turn  mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones ; "
i.e.  I  will  cover  and  protect  the  humble  and
meek,  even  after  they  fled  and  were  scat-
tered. -I  will  go  before  you  (irpoii^ai  6/ias)
into  Galilee  (oh.  xxviii  7).  The  verb  ii  of
pastoral  signification,  as  in  the  East  the
shepherd  does  not  drive  his  sheep,  but  leads
them  (John  x.  4).  The  apostles,  or  many  of
them,  after  the  Eesurrectiou,  returned  to  their
old  homes  in  Galilee,  but  Christ  preceded
them,  and  they  found  him  there  before  them
(Mark  xvi.  7;  John  xxi, ;  Acts  i.  3;  1  Cor.
XV.  6).  He  again  gathered  around  him  his
little  flock  lately  scattered.  True,  he  had
then  already  appeared  to  them  at  Jerusalem
more  than  once;  but  this  was,  as  it  were,
fortuitously  and  unexpectedly.  The  meeting


in  Galilee  was  by  appointment,  and  of  most
solemn  import,  Christ  then  reuniting  the
apostolic  body,  and  renewing  the  apostolic
commission  (ch.  xxviii.  18 — 20).

Ver.  83. — Feter  answered  and  said  nnto
him.  This  self-confident  answer  seems  to
have  been  made  after  he  had  received  the
warning  recorded  by  St.  Luke  (xxii.  81),
"  Simon,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  asked  to  have
you,  that  he  might  sift  you  as  wheat ;  but  I
made  supplication  for  thee,  that  thy  faith
fail  not."  He  cannot  believe  that  he,  the
rock-man,  can  be  guilty  of  such  defection.
Though  all  [men]  shall  be  offended  becanse
of  (eV,  ver.  31)  thee,  The  addition  of  "  men  "
in  the  Authorized  Version  alters  the  in-
tended meaning.  Feter  contrasts  himself
with  his  fellow-disciples.  Though  they  all
sliould  fall  away,  he,  at  any  rate,  would  re-
main steadfast.  He  could  not  endure  to  be
included  in  the  "  all  ye  "  of  Jesus'  warning
(ver.  31);  and  as  for  failing  "this  night,"  ho
will  never  at  any  time  (ouSeirore)  be  offended
in  Christ.  Commenting  on  liis  offence,  St.
Chrysostom  says,  "  The  matters  of  blame
were  two:  both  that  he  gainsaid  Christ,
and  that  he  set  himself  betbre  others ;  or,
rather,  a  third,  too,  namely,  that  he  attri-
buted all  to  himself."

Ver.  34. — Peter's  boast  elicits  a  crushing
reply  from  his  Lord,  foretelling  the  special
gin  of  which  he  would  be  guilty,  and  the
very  time  of  the  night  when  it  should  be
committed.  This  night,  before  the  cock
crow.  The  word  "cook"  is  without  the
article,  so  the  meaning  may  be  "  before  a
cock  crow  ;  "  i.e.  probably  before  midnight.
Cocks  were  unclean  birds,  and  not  kept  by
strict  Jews,  and  their  voice  was  not  much
heard  in  Jerusalem ;  though  it  is  quite  dif-
ferent now,  where  barn-door  fowls  swarm
round  every  house.  One  of  the  night
watches,  that  about  3  a.m.,  was  known  as
"  cook-crow  "  (see  Mark  xiii.  35).  Some  think
this  is  what  is  meant  here.  Thou  shalt  deny
me  thrioe.  What  Peter  denied  was  that  he
knew  anything  of  Christ,  or  had  ever  been
his  follower  (see  vers.  69 — 75 ;  Luke  xxii.
34).

Ver.  35. — Though  I  should  die  with  thee
(k&i'  5e77  /IE  a-br  (rol  airo6aVelr,even  if  I  must  die
with  thee).  Christ's  explanation  of  his  mean-
ing only  drew  from  Peter  a  more  energetic
asseveration  of  his  constancy  even  nnto  death.
"  He  thouglit  he  was  able,"  says  St.  Augus-
tine, "  because  he  felt  that  he  wished."  The
other  apostles  made  a  similar  assertion,  and
Jesus  said  no  more,  leaving  time  to  prove
the  truth  of  his  sad  foreboding.

Vers.  36 — 46. — The  agony  of  Jesus  in  the
garden  of  Oethiemam.  (Mark  xiv.  32 — 42;
Luke  xxii,  39 — 46 ;  John  xviii,  1,)

Ver.  36, — Gethiemane  (equivalent  to  "  oil-


52«


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch,  xxvi.  1—75,


press").  Jeeos  retired  thither  for  privacy
and  for  prayer  in  anticipation  of  what  was
coming.  St.  John  explains,  "  Where  was  a
garden,  into  the  which  he  entered,  and  his
disciples."  This  so-called  garden  was
situated  a  short  distance  from  the  bridge
over  the  Eedron,  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount
of  Olives.  It  was  a  plantation  of  olives ;  and
there  are  many  of  these  trees,  some  of  great
age,  still  growing  in  the  neighbourhood.
The  fanciful  idea  that  some  of  these  wit-
nessed the  agony  of  our  Lord  has  no  support
whatever.  In  the  first  place,  olive  trees  do
not  live  two  thousand  years ;  and,  secondly,
it  is  certain  that  in  the  sieges  of  Jerusalem
all  surrounding  trees  were  ruthlessly  de-
stroyed ;  and  lastly,  the  exact  site  of  this
terrible  scene  is  unknown,  though  tradition
has  fixed  upon  a  certain  spot  now  enclosed
with  walls,  and  containing  a  building
known  by  the  name  of  "  The  Chapel  of  the
Sweat"  The  disciples.  Eight  of  them —
Judas  having  long  ago  departed — ^and  three
Jesus  took  with  hitn  deeper  into  the  dim
recesses  of  the  wood.  Sit  ye  here.  Remain
here,  at  the  entrance  to  the  olive-yard.
These  might  not  behold  even  the  beginning
of  his  desolation.  Their  present  faith  and
love  were  not  equal  to  the  strain.  Go  and
pray  yonder.  One  is  reminded  of  Abraham
at  Mount  Moriah,  when  he  says  to  the
attendants,  "  Abide  ye  here,  and  I  and  the
lad  will  go  yonder  and  worship,  and  come
again  to  you "  (Gen.  xxii.  5).  When  the
1::^  says  "here"  and  "yonder,"  he  points
to  the  spots  indicated.  He  always  retired
to  pray,  even  as  he  tells  his  followers  to
enter  into  their  closets  wlien  they  put  up
their  supplications  to  their  Father  in
heaven.

Ver.  37. — Peter  and  the  two  sons  of
Zehedee.  These  three  had  been  privileged
to  behold  his  transfiguration,  and  that
glimpse  of  his  glory  strengthened  them  to
bear  the  partial  sight  of  tlieir  dear  Lord's
sufferings.  Did  his  liuman  heart  crave  for
sympathy,  and  did  he  desire  not  to  be  utterly
alone  at  this  awful  crisis?  We  may  well
suppose  so,  ai  he  was  true  Man,  with  all
man's  feelings  and  sensibilities.  Began  to  be
lorrowful  and  very  heavy  (^aSrinoveTv,  to  be
tore  dismayed).  This  word  seems  to  be
used  of  the  dismay  that  comes  with  an  un-
expected calamity.  St.  Mark  tells  us  that
Christ  was  "  sore  amazed "  (^/tfla/u/Scio-eai).
It  is  as  though  the  prospect  of  what  was
coming  suddenly  opened  to  liis  vision  and
overwhelmed  him.  He  now  set  before  him-
self, i.e.  his  human  consciousness,  the  suffer-
ings which  he  bad  to  undergo,  with  all  that
led  to  them,  and  all  that  would  follow,  and
the  burden  was  crushing.

Ver.  38. — My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,
•yen  unto  death  (Jonah  iv.  9).   Christ  speaks


here  of  the  mental  agony  which  he  is  en-
during ;  he  hides  not  &om  the  faithful  three
that  which  weighs  upon  his  heart,  so  ex-
cessive a  strain  that  human  nature  must
fail  to  endure  it.  We  cannot  gauge  the
anguish;  we  may  suggest  some  of  the
causes  of  this  sorrow.  It  was  not  merely
the  thought  of  bodily  pain,  though  that
would  be  long  and  excessive;  there  were
other  elements  which  made  his  sorrow  like
to  no  other  eorro'w.  He  thought  of  all  the
circumstances  that  led  to  his  Passion ;  all
that  would  accompany  it;  all  that  would
succeed  it — the  malice  and  perversity  of  the
Jews,  the  grievous  wickedness  that  brought
about  his  death,  the  treachery  of  Judas,  the
desertion  of  his  friends,  the  denial  of  Peter,
his  unjust  condemnation  at  the  hands  of  tlie
rulers  of  the  chosen  nation,  the  pusillani-
mity of  Pilate,  the  guilt  of  the  actors  in
the  tragedy,  the  wilful  iniquity  of  those
whom  he  came  to  redeem,  the  ruin  which
they  brought  on  themselves,  their  city  and
nation — such  considerations  formed  one  in-
gredient in  the  bitter  cup  which  he  had  to
drain.  And  then  the  thought  of  death  was
unspeakably  terrible  to  the  all-holy  Son  of
God.  We  men  become  accustomed  to  the
thought  of  denth.  It  accompanies  us  through
all  our  life;  it  looms  before  us  always.  But
man  was  created  immortal  (Wisd.  ii.  23),
his  nature  shrinks  from  the  dissolution  of
soul  and  body  ;  and  to  the  sinless,  untallen
Man  this  experience  was  wholly  unknown
and  awful.  Here  was  the  incarnate  God,
the  God-Man,  submitting  himself  to  the
punishment  of  sin,  tasting  death  for  every
man,  bearing  in  his  own  Person  the  inex-
pressible bitterness  of  this  penal  humilia-
tion. Added  to  all  this  was  the  incalcul-
able fact  that  "the  Lord,  had  laid  on  him
the  iniquity  of  us  all."  The  burden  of  the
sins  of  all  mankind  he  bore  on  his  sacred
shoulders.  "Him  who  knew  no  sin  God
made  to  be  sin  on  our  behalf  "  (2  Cor.  T.  21)-
What  this  mysterious  imputation,  so  to
speak,  involved,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  to  a
being  perfectly  pure  and  holy  it  must  have
been  anguish  unspeakable.  Tarry  ye  here.
As  ver.  36,  "  Sit  ye  here."  And  watch  with
me.  In  his  dark  hour  his  human  soul
yearned  for  the  comfort  of  a  friendly  pre-
sence; even  though  these  chosen  three
might  not  witness  the  extremity  of  his
agony,  their  proximity  and  sympathy  and
prayers  were  a  support.  But  he  bade  them
watch  for  their  own  sake  also.  Their  great
trial  was  close  at  hand ;  they  were  about  to
be  tempted  to  deny  and  forsake  him ;  they
could  resist  only  by  prayer  and  watchful-
ness (ver.  41).

Ver.  39. — He  went  a  little  further.  Deeper
into  the  wood,  beneath  the  gloomy  shadow
of  t'le  (J^Jt*  trees,  yet  so  ai  not  to  feel  abso


CH.  XXVI.  1-75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


527


lutely  alone.  St.  Luke  names  the  distance,
"  He  was  withdrawn  from  them  about  a
stone's  oast."  By  gome  clerical  error  the
genuine  reading,  irpoeXdiiy,  "having  gone
forward,"  has  been  altered  in  most  of  the
best  manuscripts  into  irpoathdiiv,  "having
approached."  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
this  latter  reading  is  erroneous;  and  it  is
well,  as  occasion  bids,  to  call  attention  to
possible  mistakes  in  the  most  important
uncials.  I'ell  on  his  face,  and  prayed.  He
prostrated  himself  on  tlie  ground  in  utter
abasement  and  desolation,  yet  in  submission
withal.  In  this  terrible  crisis  there  is  no
resource  but  prayer.  The  shadow  of  death
enytloped  him,  wave  and  storm  rolled  over
his  soul ;  yet  out  of  the  deep  he  called  unto
the  Lord.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
(v.  7,  8)  some  affecting  details  are  added,
"  who  in  the  days  of  his  flesli,  when  he  had
offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with
strong  crying  and  tears  unto  him  that  was
able  to  save  him  from  death,  and  having
been  heard  for  his  godly  fear,  though  he  was
a  Son,  yet  learned  obedience  by  tlie  things
which  he  suffered."  0  my  Father  (Udrep
fiov).  The  personal  pronoun  is  omitted  in
some  manuscripts,  but  it  has  high  authority.
Only  on  this  occasion  and  in  his  great
prayer  (John  xvii.)  does  Oiirist  so  address
the  Father,  his  human  nature  in  the  depth
of  suffering  retaining  still  the  sense  of  this
paternity.  St.  Mark  has,  "  Abba,  Father,"
as  if  he  spake  for  the  Hebrew  race  and  the
Grentile  world.  If  it  be  possible ;  i.e.  if  there
is  any  other  way  in  which  man  may  be
saved  and  thou  be  glorified;  if  there  is
any  other  mode  of  redemption.  It  is  the
cry  of  humanity,  yet  conditioned  by  perfect
submission.  Let  this  cup  pass  from  me.
The  "  cup  "  is  the  bitter  agony  of  his  Pas-
non  and  death,  with  all  their  grievous  ac-
companiments (see  ch.  xx.  22,  and  note
there).  All  heroism  and  manly  endurance  in
the  face  of  pain  and  death  Christ  exhibited
to  the  full ;  but  the  elements  of  suffering  in
his  case  were  different,  and  fraught  with
exquisite  torture  (see  above,  on  ver.  28).
Such  was  the  anguish  that  it  would  liave
then  separated  soul  and  body — of  such  rigour
that  "his  sweat  became  as  it  were  great
drops  of  blood  falling  down  upon  the
ground  " — had  not  an  angel  appeared  from
heaven  to  strengthen  and  support  the  faint-
ing human  life  (Luke  xxii.  43,  44).  Never-
theless not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt.  In
this  prayer  are  shown  the  two  wills  of  Christ,
the  human  and  Divine.  The  natural  shrink-
ing of  the  human  soul  from  ignominy  and
torture  is  overborne  by  entire  submission  to
and  compliance  with  the  Divine  purpose.
So  it  is  said  that  the  Captain  of  our  salva-
tion wag  made  perfect  through  sufferings,
learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  he


suffered  (Heb.  ii.  10 ;  v.  8).  By  this  passage
the  Monophysite  and  Monothelite  heresies
are  clearly  refuted,  the  two  natures  and  two
wills  of  Christ  beingplainly  displayed.  The
three  apostles  saw  only  some  part  of  th^r
Master's  intense  agony,  and  heard  only
some  broken  utterances  of  his  supplication ;
hence  there  are  some  slight  variations  in  the
synoptical  accounts.  St.  Mark  doubtless  de-
rived his  accouutimmediately  from  St  Peter;
the  other  synoptists  from  some  other  source.

Ver.  40. — He  oometh  unto  the  disciples.
He  rose  from  prayer  and  returned  to  his
three  apostles,  seeking  their  sympathy  and
the  comfort  of  their  presence  in  his  lonely
desolation.  Findeth  them  asleep ;  Bleeping.
The  comfort  which  his  man's  nature  craved
was  denied  him.  St.  Luke,  the  physician,
says  that  the  disciples  were  "  sleeping  for
Burrow."  Some  great  mental  shock,  some
poignant  distress,  often  produces  a  bodily
stupor  and  sleep;  but  this  is  scarcely  a
valid  excuse  for  such  insensibility  at  this
terrible  crisis,  especially  as  the  Lord  had
urged  them  to  watch  (ver.  38).  Th<y  had
had  a  very  trying  day;  Peter  and  John
had  undergone  much  bodily  fatigue  in
preparing  the  last  Supper;  they  were  all
weary,  full  of  grief,  and  welghfd  down  by
foreboding;  it  was  no  wonder  that  they
succumbed  to  these  influences,  though  we
might  have  expected  that  such  as  they
would  have  risen  superior  to  them.  "The
simple  law,  that  extraordinary  tension
raises  the  highly  developed  spiritual  life,
while  it  stupefies  the  less  developed,  finds
here  its  strongest  illustration  in  the  almost
absolute  contrast  of  spiritual  watchfulness
and  sleep"  (Lauge).  Saith  unto  Peter,
Peter  had  been  most  forward  In  profession
(vers.  33,  35) ;  so  Christ  addresses  him  first.
The  other  two,  James  and  John,  had  boldly
asserted  that  they  were  able  to  drink  of
Christ's  cup  of  suffering  (ch.  xx.  22);  go
they  are  included  in  the  tender  reproach.
What  (oStms),  oould  ye  not  watch  with  me?
So,  could  ye  not,  etc.  ?  Is  it  so  that  ?  Are
ye  unable  to  do  even  this  little  thing  for
me?  Truly  a  pathetic  reproof  I  One  hour.
It  may  be  that  this  first  stiige  of  the  agony
had  lasted  for  an  hour,  but  the  term  ig  more
probably  indefinite ;  or  it  may  refer  to  the
whole  time  of  trial.

Ver.  41. — Watch  (j/e)  and  pray.  A  sum-
mary of  Christian  duty.  Watchfulness  sees
temptation  coming;  prayer  gives  strength
to  withstand  it.  The  apostles  needed  the
injunction  at  this  moment ;  for  their  great
trial  was  close  at  hand.  That  ye  enter  not
(in  Older  that  ye  may  not  enter)  into  tempta-
tion. The  phrase  is  usually  interpreted  to
mean  either  to  fall  into  temptation,  to  be
tempted,  or  to  run  wilfully  into  temptation;
but  it  seems  to  be  better,  with  Grotius,  to


528


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,     [on.  xxvl  1—75.


take  it  in  the  lenfse  of  sucoambing  to,  falling
under,  beings  vanquished  by  temptation,
like  i/jiKhretv  in  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  "  immergi  et
euoeumber*."  That  Peter  and  the  rest
V7ere  now  to  bo  tempted  was  certain  (Luke
xxii.  31,  32),  and  it  was  too  late  to  depre-
cate the  trial;  bat  it  was  right  and  ex-
pedient to  aak  of  Qod  grace  to  withstand
in  the  evil  hour.  The  spirit  (TrycC/ia)  indeed
is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak.  This  was
an  added  motive  for  vigilance  and  prayer.
The  apostles  had  shown  a  certain  readiness
of  spirit  when  they  offered  to  die  with
Christ  (ver.  35) ;  but  the  flesh,  the  material
and  lower  nature,  represses  the  higher
impulse,  checks  the  will,  and  prevents  it
from  carrying  oat  that  which  it  is  prompted
to  poi'f'urm  (see  the  action  of  these  con-
trariant  forces  noticed  by  St.  Paul,  Rom.  vii.).
"  For  tlie  corruptible  body  presseth  down
the  soul,  and  tlie  earthy  tabernacle  weigheth
down  the  mind  that  museth  upon  many
things"  (Wisd.  ii.  15).  Our  Lord  at
this  very  time  was  experiencing  and  ex-
emplifying the  truth  of  his  saying,  though
in  his  case  Ihe  WLakness  of  the  flesh  was
entirely  overmastered  by  the  willing  spirit.
It  is  noted  that  Polycarp  quotes  this  maxim
of  Christ  in  his  '  Epistle  to  the  Philippiaiis,'
ch.  7.

Ver.  42. — Again  the  second  time.  A
pleonastic  expression,  as  in  John  iv.  51;
%xi.  16,  etc.,  Ciilling  especial  attention  to
"  the  numerical  re-repetition  of  the  Saviour's
prayer  "  (Morison).  St.  Matthew  alone  gives
the  words  of  this  second  prayer,  which  differs
in  some  respects  from  the  first.  The  possi-
bility of  tlie  cup  passing  away  was  con-
sidered no  longer ;  the  continuance  of  the
trial  showed  that  it  was  not  to  be.  If  this
cup  may  (can)  not  pass  away  from  me  .  .  .
thy  will  be  done.  He  accepts  the  cup ;  his
human  will  coincides  with  the  Divine  will ;
he  acquiesces  with  peifeot  self-resigiiation.
The  cup,  relatively  to  the  circumstances,
could  not  pass  away  from  the  Saviour.

Ver.  43.  —He  came  and  found  them  asleep
(sleeping)  again.  In  the  best  manuscripts
"  again"  is  counectud  with  the  verb  "came."
This  was  his  second  visit;  he  was  still
craving  for  their  sympathy,  stiU  desirous
of  their  safety  under  temptation.  Heavy
(Bi^ap-n/ihoi).  Weighed  down  with  drowsi-
ness; St.  Mark  adds,  "Neither  wist  they
what  to  answer  him."  He  partially  aroused
them,  but  they  were  too  overcome  with
sleep  to  enter  fully  into  the  situation  or
to  attend  to  the  obvious  duty  before  them.

Ver.  44. — Saying  the  same  words  (\6yov,
word,  i.e.  prayer).  Three  times  he  prayed,
and  his  prayer  was  always  of  the  same
import — teaching  us  by  example  to  be
urgent,  instant,  in  supplication,  and,  though
the  special  request   be  denied,  to  be  sure


that  we  are  heard  and  that  an  answer  will
be  given ;  even  as  Christ  obtained  not  the
withdrawal  of  the  cup,  but  strength  to
submit,  endure,  and  conquer.  We  must
compare  this  threefold  prayer  and  contest
with  the  threefold  temptation  at  the  begin-
ning of  our  Lord's  ministry.

Ver.  45. — Cometh  he.  St.  HUary  com-
ments on  these  three  visits :  "  On  his  first
return  he  reproves,  on  the  second  he  holds
his  peace,  on  the  third  he  bids  to  rest."
The  contest  was  over;  the  human  will  was
now  entirely  one  with  the  Divine  will.
Sleep  on  now  (rb  A.o«r((i',  lienceforwaroC),  and
take  your  rest.  This  is  probably  to  be
understood  literally.  There  was  a  short
interval  still  before  the  apprehension  and
the  subsequent  events;  as  they  could  not
watch,  they  might  use  this  in  finishing
their  sleep,  and  recruiting  their  wearied
bodies  in  preparation  lor  the  coming  trial.
Many  expositors  find  an  irony  in  Christ's
words,  taken  in  connection  with  those  that
follow,  as  if  he  meant, "  In  a  few  minutes
I  shall  be  seized ;  sleep  on  if  you  can ;  you
will  soon  be  miserably  awakened,  make
the  most  of  the  present."  But  at  this
moment  the  tender  Jesus  would  surely
never  have  oondesceuded  to  address  his
friends  in  such  a  style.  All  his  words  and
actions  were  animated  with  the  deepest
love  for  them  and  anxiety  on  their  account.
A  change  to  irony  is  really  inconceivable
under  the  circumstances.  Nor  is  there  any
reason  to  take  the  sentence  interrogatively,
"  Sleep  ye  at  such  a  moment  1 "  It  is  more
simple  to  regard  the  words  as  said  bona
fide,  with  no  mental  reservation  and  no
implied  censure.  We  may  suppose  that  a
pause  ensued  before  the  utterance  of  the
next  clause,  and  that  the  Lord  allowed  his
fatigued  followers  to  sleep  on  till  the  last
moment.  Behold,  the  hour  is  at  hand,  and
(fcai,  equivalent  to  when)  the  Son  of  man  is
betrayed  (irapuSiSoTai,  i»  being  betrayed)
into  the  hands  of  sinners.  He  calls  all
sinners  who  take  part  in  his  apprehension,
trial,  and  death — not  the  Eomans  only  (as
Acts  ii.  23),  but  priests,  elders,  multitude,
who  joined  in  the  crowd  and  incurred  the
guilt.  There  is  now  no  sign  of  wavering ;
he  is  ready,  yea,  eager  to  meet  the  Buffer-
ings which  he  foresees.

Ver.  46. — Else,  let  us  be  going.  He  will
meet,  and  he  wishes  his  disciples  to  meet,
the  coming  attack  with  alacrity  and  readi-
ness. So  with  them  he  goes  towards  the
entrance  of  the  garden  wuere  he  had  left
the  eight.  Behold.  Judas  and  his  com-
panions come  in  sight.

Vers.  47 — 56. — Betrayal  and  apprehenaion
of  Jesus.  (Mark  xiv.  43—52 ;  Luke  xxii.
47—53;  John  xviu.  2—11.)


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


629


Ver.  47. — Jndas,  one  of  the  twelva.  So
called  by  all  the  gynoptiatB,  as  if  to  enhnnoa
his  guilt — one  of  Christ's  own  familiar
friends,  who  had  eaten  biead  with  him.
Came.  St.  Luke  tells  ua  that  he  led  the
way  to  Qethaemane.  He  well  knew  the
place  as  a  favourite  resort  of  Christ  (John
xviii.  2);  he  knew,  too,  that  Jesus  was
alone  there  with  his  apostles,  and  he  had
gone  with  oonfldenoe  to  inform  the  authori-
ties where  they  could  find  him,  and  to
demand  a  force  sufficient  to  make  the
arrest.  A  great  multitude.  Consisting
of  soma  of  the  Levitical  guard,  Eoman
soldiers,  Banhodrists,  and  elders.  The
soldiers  carried  swords,  the  fanatical  herd
bore  staves,  to  overcome  any  opposition
which,  after  the  demonstration  at  the
triumphal  entry,  might  be  naturally  ex-
pected. St.  John  adds  that  tliey  brought
with  them  lanterns  and  torches  in  Order  to
search  the  recesses  of  tlie  grove,  should
Christ  have  hidden  himself  there.

Ver.  48. — A  sign.  As  they  approached,
Judas  gave  them  a  sign  which  would  point
out  the  person  whom  they  were  to  seize.
Probably  these  did  not  know  Jesus  by
sight ;  at  any  rate,  amid  the  crowd  he  might
easily  escape  detection ;  it  was  also  night,
and  even  the  Paschal  moon  might  not
enable  the  guards  to  distinguish  faces
under  the  shade  of  the  dark  olive  grove.
Whomsoever  I  shall  kiss.  In  the  East  such
salutation  was  common  among  friends,
masters,  and  pupils ;  and  it  would  awaken
no  surprise  to  see  Judas  thus  salute  his
Teacher.  Perhaps  he  desired  to  save  ap-
pearances in  the  eyes  of  his  fellow-diseiples.
We  marvel  at  the  audacit^y  and  obduracy
of  one  who  could  employ  this  mark  of
affection  and  respect  to  signal  an  act  of  the
blackest  treachery.  That  same  is  he  whom
you  have  to  arrest.  Hold  him  fast.  As  if
he  feared  an  attempt  at  rescue,  or  that
Jesus  might,  as  before  (Luke  iv.  30 ;  John
viii.  59),  use  his  miraculous  power  to  effect
his  escape.

Ver.  49.— Forthwith.  The  blood-money
was  to  become  due  on  the  accomplishment
of  the  betrayal;  so  Judas,  now  that  tlie
opportunity  liad  arrived,  lost  no  time  in
completing  his  part  of  the  bargain.  Kissed
him  (jianipiKTtafv,  a  strong  word,  Icisied  him
eagerly,  or,  kissed  him  nraoh).  Judas  was
more  than  usually  demonstrative  in  his
salutation.  "  The  words  of  his  mouth  were
smoother  than  butter,  bui  war  was  in  his
heart;  his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet
were  they  drawn  swords  "  (Ps.  Iv.  21).  So
Joab  treated  Amasa  before  he  murdered
him  (2  Sam.  xi.  9,  10).  What  infinite
patience  for  the  Lord  to  submit  to  this
hypocritical  caress  1  It  ii  a  type  of  the
wonderful  goodness   »ud  long-suffering  of

MATTHfiW-^lI.


God  towards  sinners,  how  he  maketh  his
sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good.

Ver.  50. — Friend;  eTa7ps:  companion  (iee
oh.  XI.  13 ;  xiit  12).  The  word  seems,  in  the
New  Testament,  to  be  always  addressed  to
the  evil,  though  in  itself  au  expression  of
affection.  Here  Christ  uses  no  reproae^ ;
to  the  last  he  endeavours  by  kindness  and
love  to  win  the  traitor  to  a  better  mind.
St.  Luke  narrates  that  Jesus  called  him
by  name,  saying,  "  Judas,  betrayest  thou
the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss  ?  "  Wherefore
art  thou  come  ?  'E<t>'  *  irdpei.  The  Received
Text  gives  i<j>'  ^,  which  has  very  inferior
authority.  There  is  great  difficulty  in
giving  an  exact  interpretation  of  this  clause.
The  Authorized  Version,  as  the  Vulgate
(^Ad  quid  venieti  ?),  takes  it  interrogatively ;
but  such  a  use  of  the  relative  is  is  unknown.
If  it  is  interrogative,  we  must  understand,
"  Is  it  this  for  which  thou  art  come  ?  "  But
Christ  knew  too  well  the  purport  of  Judas't
arrival  to  put  such  an  unnecessary  ques-
tion. Others  explain,  "  Do  that,  or,  I  know
that  for  which  thou  art  come."  Alford,
Farrar,  and  others  consider  the  sentence
as  unfinished,  the  concluding  member  being
suppressed  by  an  aposiopesis  consequent
on  the  agitation  of  the  Speaker,  "  That
errand  on  which  thou  hast  come — complete."
More  probably  the  clause  is  an  exulama-
tion,  %  being  equivalent  to  ofoi',  as  in  later
Greek,  "  For  what  a  purpose  art  thou  here  1 "
It  is,  indeed,  a  last  remonstrance  and  appeal
to  the  conscience  of  the  traitor.  Took  him.
They  seized  him  with  tlieir  hands,  but
did  not  bind  him  till  afterwards  (John
iviii.  2).  Whether  Judas  had  any  latent
hope  or  expeutation  that  Jesus  at  this
su^^reme  moment  would  assert  and  justify
his  Messialiship,  we  know  not.  The  histories
give  no  hint  of  any  such  idea,  and  it  is
most  improbable  that  the  apostate  was  thus
influenced  (see  on  ver.  14).  We  must  here
introduce  the  incident  recorded  by  St.  John
(xviii.  4—9).

Ver.  51. — One  of  them  whioh  were  with
Jesus.  St.  John  names  Peter  as  the  ageut
in  the  attack  on  the  high  priest's  servant ;
he  also  alone  gives  the  name  of  the  servant,
Malchus.  Of  the  circumstances  which  led
to  the  subsequent  miracle  all  the  evangelists
give  an  account;  the  miracle  itself  is  related
only  by  St.  Luke.  Conjecture  has  attempted
to  give  reasons  for  these  deficiencies  in
some  of  the  narratives,  and  the  comple-
mentary details  in  others ;  but  it  is  wisest
to  say  that  thus  it  lias  seemed  good  to
tlio  Holy  Ghost  who  guided  the  writers,
and  there  to  leave  the  subject.  Drew  his
sword.  The  apostles  had  evidently  mis-
understood the  Lord's  words  uttered  a  little
while  before  (Luke  xxii.  36—38),  "  He  that
hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his  oloke,  and

2  M


530


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [oh.  xxti.  1—75.


buy  one."  Twoof  them  had  then  exhibited
tlie  weapons  with  which  they  had  armed
themselves,  as  if  ready  to  repel  violence.
And  now  one  of  these,  thinking  that  the
hour  was  arrived  for  striking  a  blow  in
his  Master's  defence,  resorted  to  violence.
Physical  courage,  indeed,  Peter  possessed,
as  was  proved  by  his  attitude  in  the  face  of
fearful  odds,  but  of  moral  courage  he  and
his  comrades  exhibited  little  evidence,  when,
as  soon  as  their  Master  was  apprehended
and  led  away,  they  "  all  forsook  him,  and
fled "  (ver.  56).  Struok  a  (the)  servant  of
the  high  priest's.  The  man  was  the  high
priest's  servant  in  a  special  way — what  we
should  call  his  body-servaut ;  he  had
evidently  made  himself  conspicuous  in  the
arrest,  and  Peter  struck  fiercely  at  his  head
as  the  foremost  of  the  aggressors.  St.  John,
who  was  acquainted  with  the  high  priest
and  his  household,  gives  his  name  as
Malchus,  a  Syriac  word,  meaning  "Counsel-
lor" Smote  off  his  ear.  The  blow  fell
short,  but  inflicted  a  serious  wound.  How
the  mischief  was  repaired  by  the  healing
touch  of  Christ  is  mentioned  alone  by  Luke
the  physician,  for  whom  the  incident  would
have  special  interest.  We  may  note,  in
passing,  that  this  miracle  (the  last  which
Christ  worked  before  his  death)  was  wholly
unsolicited  and  unexpected  on  the  part  of
the  recipient,  and  was  performed  upon  an
enemy  actually  engaged  in  hostility.  What
more  striking  proof  of  the  Lord'^  mercy
and  forgiveness  could  have  been  given?
What  better  way  could  there  be  of  demon-
strating the  nature  of  the  kingdom  which
he  came  to  establish?  Thus  he  displayed
his  superhuman  power  even  while  surrender-
ing himself  to  captivity  and  death.  By
this  immediate  action  too  he  secured  his
followers  from  reprisal,  so  that  they  were
allowed  to  retire  unmolested,  and  Peter,
though  recognized  to  have  been  one  of  those
in  the  garden  (John  xviii.  26),  was  not
punished  for  his  part  in  the  transaction.

Ver.  52. — Put  up  again  thy  sword  into
his  (its)  place.  Christ  orders  Peter  to
sheathe  his  sword ;  but  the  wording  is
peouliar,  Turn  away  (SmdaTpexjioii)  thy  sword;
as  if  Christ  would  say,  "  The  sword  is  none
of  mine ;  the  arm  of  flesh  and  the  carnal
weapon  are  thine ;  turn  off  thy  sword  from
the  use  which  thou  art  maldns:  of  it  to  its
proper  destination,  to  be  wielded  only  at
God's  command."  Then  he  gives  a  motive
for  this  injunction.  For  all  they  that  take
(oi  \a$6vT€s')  the  sword  shall  perish  with
the  sword.  Tiiere  is  a  stress  on  the  word
"  take,"  and  there  is  an  imperative  force
iu  the  future,  "shall  perish."  The  Lord
is  speaking  of  those  who  arbitrarily  and
presumptuously  resort  to  violence ;  and  he
gays,  "Let  them  feel  the  sword."    The  word


was  of  wide  application,  and  contained  a
universal  truth ;  it  was,  in  fact,  a  re-enact-
ment of  the  primsBval  law  touching  the
sacredness  of  human  life,  and  the  penalty
that  ensues  on  its  infringement  (Gen.  ix.
5,  6).  It  enforced  also  the  general  lesson
that  violence  and  revenge .  effect  no  good
end,  and  bring  their  own  punishment.  There
is  no  prophecy  here  (as  some  suppose)  of
the  destruction  of  the  Jews  at  the  hands
of  the  Romans;  nor  is  Christ  intent  on
■ootliing  Peter  by  the  thought  of  the  future
retribution  which  awaited  the  enemies  whom
he  was  so  eager  to  chastise.  Such  sugges-
tions are  arbitrary  and  unwarranted  by  the
context.

Ver.  53. — Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot
now  (SpTi)  pray  to  (irapoKoXeirai,  heseeeK)
my  Father  1  Jesus  proceeds  to  show  that
he  needs  not  Peter's  puny  assistance.  *H
SoKiis ;  An  putas  ?  Or  thinJieet  thou  f  The
particle,  neglected  by  the  Authorized  Ver-
sion, marks  the  transition  to  a  new  motive.
The  verb  irapafcaAeivhasthe  special  meaning
of  "to  summon  with  authority,"  "to  call
upon  as  an  ally."  Peter  neeiled  still  to
learn  the  lesson  of  Christ's  Divinity,  his
oneness  with  the  Father;  and  this  is
furnished  by  the  right  interpretation  of  this
word,  which  was  not,  as  our  version  seems
to  make  it,  the  cry  of  an  inferior  to  one
mightier  than  himself,  but  the  summons  of
an  equal  to  his  great  Ally  in  heaven.  So
Jesus  virtually  says,  "Have  I  not  power
through  my  own  Godhead  to  summon  my
Father  to  support  me?"  (Se well, 'Microscope
of  the  New  Testament ').  Shall  presently
give  me  (Trapoo-r^irei  /iot  SpTi).  Tlie  Autho-
rized Version  seems  to  have  read  Spn  twice,
"now  .  .  .  presently."  The  manuscripts
show  it  only  once,  but  vary  its  position.
It  most  probably  belongs  to  the  first  clause.
The  verb  rendered  "give"  has  a  more
pregnant  meaning.  It  is  a  military  term
meaning  "to  place  by  tlie  side,"  "to  post
on  one's  flank."  Hence  the  Lord  implies
that  at  a  word  the  serried  ranks  of  angels
would  range  themselves  at  his  side,  true
flank-comrades,  to  defend  and  support  him.
Twelve  legions  of  angels.  Not  a  dozen  weak
men.  He  employs  the  Roman  term  "  legion  "
with  intention.  He  had  been  arrested  by
a  cohort  (John  xviii.  3,  12,  o-TreTpa),  the
tenth  part  of  the  legion,  which  numbered
six  thousand  men;  he  could,  if  he  chose,
call  to  his  aid  twelve  times  six  thousand
angels,  who  would  deliver  their  Lord  from
his  enemies.  If  there  was  to  be  an  appeal
to  force,  whioh  Peter's  rash  assault  sug-
gested, what  could  withstand  his  angelic
allies,  the  heavenly  hosts,  infinitely  more
numerous,  better  disciplined,  more  effectively
ofHoered,  prompt  and  happy  to  do  the  wiU
of  the  great  Commander  ?


CH.  XXVI.  1—75.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  631


.  Ver.  54.— But  how  then  (oiv,  i.e.  if  I  now
resist)  shall  the  Soriptures  be  fulfilled,  that
thus  it  must  be  1  There  is  no  "  but "  in  the
original.  In  what  way,  Christ  asks,  shall
God's  determined  counsel  be  accomplished,
if  you  turn  to  the  arm  of  the  flesh,  or  if  I  use
my  Divine  power  to  save  myself?  The  will
of  God,  as  declared  in  Scripture,  was  that
Jesus  should  be  betrayed,  seized,  should
suffer  and  die.  Christ's  will  was  one  with
the  Father's  and  one  with  the  Spirit's  who
inspired  the  Scripture,  and  therefore  he
must  pass  through  eaoli  stage,  undergo  each
detail,  which  the  sacred  volume  specified.
It  was  not  merely  that  events  were  so
arranged  that  they  thus  befell ;  nor  merely
that  prophets  of  old  foretold  them;  but
there  was  some  special  moral  duty  and
obligation  in  fulfilling  them,  which  Christ,
as  one  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,
was  minded  to  carry  out  in  all  perfection.
Here  was  a  ray  of  comfort  for  Peter  and  the
other  apostles.  All  was  foreordained ;  its
announcement  in  God's  book  proved  it  came
from  God,  was  under  his  control  and  order-
ing. Patienoe,  therefore,  and  silent  acqui-
escence were  the  duties  now  incumbent.
"  Be  still,  then,  and  know  that  I  am  God."

Ver.  55. — The  multitudes.  St.  Luke  says
that  Christ  addressed  "the  chief  priests,
and  captains  of  the  temple,  and  elders,  which
were  come  against  him."  He  submitted  to
indignities,  but  he  felt  them  deeply;  he
allowed  himself  to  be  treated  as  a  male-
factor, but  was  not  insensible  to  the  shame
of  being  supposed  to  have  been  capable  of
acting  as  such.  Athief;aro&&er.  One  at  the
head  of  a  band  of  lawless  ruffians,  who  would
resist  you  with  arms  in  their  bands — a
sicarius,  a  cut-throat,  who  lurked  in  secret
places  to  murder  the  innocent.  I  sat  daily
with  yon  (irphs  vfias,  probably  an  interpola-
tion from  Mark).  All  the  past  week,  at
any  rate,  Christ  had  taught  quietly  and
openly  in  the  temple.  He  had  none  of  the
habits  of  the  robber ;  he  had  not  courted
secrecy;  he  had  no  company  of  armed  men
to  defend  him;  why  did  they  not  arrest  him
then?  According  to  St.  Luke,  Christ  adds,
"  Bnt  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of
darlsness."

Ver.  56  --AH  this  was  done  ^hath  come  to
past),  etc.  This  is  most  probably  part  of
Christ's  speech,  not  a  remark  of  the  evan-
gelist. He  repeats  to  the  multitude  what
he  had  said  to  Peter  (ver.  54,  where  see
note),  and  what  he  bad  already  intimated  at
the  last  Supper  (vers.  24, 31).  To  quote  the
words  of  Stier,  "Again  and  again  lie  de-
clares that  one  thing  which,  nevertheless,
Christian  theology  perpetually  refuses  to
learn  from  the  supreme  Teacher  ami  Doctor.
He  holds  firmly  to  the  Scripture,  whether
speaking  to  the  exasperated  Jews  or  the


docile  disciples ;  he  puts  those  to  shame  in
their  folly  by  proofs  from  Scripture,  and
strengthens  these  in  their  despondency  by  its
consolatory  promises.  He  appeals  to  Scrip-
ture in  his  vehement  disputation  with  men,
as  he  does  in  his  solemn  way  of  suffering  to
die  for  them ;  he  confronts  Satan  with  '  It  is
written,'  aud  prays  to  the  Father — that  the
Scripture  may  be  fulfilled."  If  Christ  had
been  taken  prematurely  in  the  temple,  aud
put  to  death  by  a  tumultuary  stoning,  pro-
phecy would  not  have  been  fulfilled,  and  his
death  would  not  have  been  the  appointed
sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  Poisook  him,
andfiad.  As  he  had  foretold  (ver.  31).  They
saw  their  Master  bound  and  helpless ;  they
recognized  that  he  would  not  deliver  him-
*elf  by  heavenly  aid,  and,  fearing  to  share
his  fate,  they  looked  to  their  own  safety  and
basely  abandoned  him  in  his  hour  of  danger.
Now  occurred  the  incident  mentioned  only
bv  St.  Mark  (liv.  51),  which  is  explained
rightly  by  Edersheim  (ii.  485,  544).  Only
Peter  and  John  followed  the  oflJcers  to  the
high  priest's  palace.

Vers.  57 — 68. — Jatu  hefore  Oaiaphai,  in-
formally condemned  to  death.  (Mark  xiv.
63—65 ;  Luke  xxii.  54,  63—65 ;  John  xviii.
24.)

Ver.  57. — led  him  away  to  Caiaphas.  The
synoptists  omit  all  mention  of  the  pre-
liminary inquiry  before  Annas  (John  xviii.
13,  19 — 24).  His  palace  was  nearest  to  the
place  of  capture,  and  the  soldiers  appear  to
have  received  orders  to  conduct  the  Prisoner
thither,  Annas  having  vast  influence  with
the  Eomans,  and  being  the  principal  mover
in  the  matter.  What  passed  before  him  is
not  recorded,  none  of  the  disciples  being
present  at  the  examination.  The  synoptists
take  up  the  account  when  Jesus  was  sent
bound  to  Caiaphas,  who  St.  John  (xviii.
14)  notes  was  the  one  who  for  political
reasons  had  urged  the  judicial  murder  of
Jesns.  Where  (i.e.  in  whose  house)  the
scribes  and  the  elders  were  assembled.  This
seems  to  have  been  an  informal  meeting  of
the  leading  Sanhedrists,  hastily  convened,
not  in  their  usual  place  of  meeting,  but  in  a
chamber  of  Caiaphas's  palace.  Some  years
before  this  time  the  right  of  pronouncing
capital  sentences  had  been  removed  from
the  council;  and  hence  the  necessity  of
assembling  in  the  hall  Gazith  (where  only
such  sentences  coidd  be  delivered)  existed
no  longer.

Ver.  58.— Afar  oft  Peter  had  fled  at  first
with  the  others ;  but  his  afTei  tion  drew  him
back  to  see  what  befell  his  beloved  Master.
He  followed  the  cr^wd  at  »  safe  distance,
and,  joiued  afterwards  by  John, reached  the
palace  of  Caiaphas.     Went  in.    St.  Jotui


532  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi,  1— 75.


appears  lo  have  entered  the  court  witli  the
guard  that  held  the  Prisoner;  but  Peter
remained  without  till  introduced  by  hia
fellow-apoBtle,  who  was  known  to  the  servant
who  kept  the  door  (Jo) in  xyiii.  16).  With
the  servants.  These  were  the  officers  of  the
Sanhedrin,  and  the  high  priest's  servants.
They  retired  from  the  preBsnce-chamberto
the  open  court,  and  sat  round  a  charcoal  fire
which  they  made  there.  Peter  at  one  time
sat  with  them,  at  another  moved  restlessly
about,  endeavouring  to  show  indifference,
but  really  betraying  himself.  The  end.  The
result  of  the  examination.  This  verse  is
parenthetical,  interrupting  the  course  of  the
narrative  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for
tlie  account  of  Peter's  denial  (vers.  69—75).

Ver.  59.— The  chief  priests,  [and  elders,]
and  all  the  council.  Tlie  words  in  brackets
are  probably  spurious ;  they  are  omitted  by
the  best  uncials  and  the  Vulgate.  The
words  cannot  imply  strictly  that  the  whole
Sanhedrin  was  present  and  consenting  to
the  present  proceedings ;  for  we  know  that
such  members  as  Nicodemug  and  Joseph  of
Arimathaia  did  not  consent  to  the  infamous
deeds  of  the  rest  (Luke  xxiii.  51 ;  John  xix.
39).  Sought  (_i0iTovv,  were  teelcing)  false
Mntness.  The  Sanhedrlsts  had  decided  on
Christ's  death;  it  only  remained  to  find
such  a  charge  against  him  as  would  compel
the  Bomau  authorities  to  deal  summarily
with  him.  For  their  purpose  the  truth  of
the  accusation  was  immaterial,  so  long  as  it
was  established,  according  to  Law  (Deut.
xvii.  6 ;  xix.  15),  by  two  or  three  witnesses
examined  apart.  They  knew  well  that
Christ  could  be  condemned  on  no  true
testimony,  hence  they  scrupled  tiot  to  seek
false.  If  they  had  meant  to  deal  fairly,
they  would  have  allowed  some  who  knew
him  to  speak  in  his  favour;  but  this  was
the  very  last  thing  which  they  desired  or
would  have  sanctioned.

Ver.  60. — ^Fonnd  none.  Eepeated  twice
(according  to  the  Received  Text),  show-
ing the  earnestness  of  the  pursuit  and  the
absolute  failure  of  the  attempt.  What  was
offered  was  insufficient  for  the  purpose,  or
inconsistent  (Mark  xiv.  56).  The  second
"found  none"  is  thought  by  many  modern
editors  to  be  not  genuine,  and  is  accordingly
expunged.  It  does  not  occur  in  the  Vulgate.
At  the  last  came  two  false  witnesses.  When
the  case  seemed  hopeless  and  on  the  point
of  breaking  down,  some  of  the  Sanhedrists'
own  creatures  came  forward  with  a  distorted
account  of  Christ's  words  spoken  long  before.
They  brought  no  accusation  founded  on  any
of  his  late  utterances  in  the  temple,  or
when  he  was  charged  with  blasphemy  and
threatened  with  stoning  (John  x.  33) ;  they
remembered  keenly  how  he  had  discom-
fited them   on   such  occasions,  and  they


feared  to  elicit  one  of  hii  crushing  replies
or  unanswerable  questions.  They  were  glad
to  fall  back  upon  something  else,  which
especially  concerned  Annas  and  Oaiaphas,
and  their  gainful  trading  in  the  sacred
courts  (see  the  next  note).

Ver.  61. — This  fellow  (oItos).  Contemptu-
ously, displaying  their  animosity  by  the
disrespectful  use  of  the  pronoun.  I  am
able  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  to
build  it  in  three  days.  This  la  a  distorted
account  of  what  our  Lord  said  at  his  first
purgation  of  the  temple,  when  asked  to  give
a  sign  in  proof  of  hia  authority.  Speaking
metaphorically  of  his  body,  he  had  made
this  announcement,  "  Destroy  ye  this  temple,
and  in  tliree  days  I  will  raise  it  up  "  (John
ii.  19).  At  the  time  the  Jews  had  not
understood  the  words,  and  they  nosv  pervert
them  into  a  criminal  accusation,  which  might
take  the  form  of  charging  liim  with  being
either  an  impious  fbmenter  of  disturbance,
or  a  pretender  to  superhuman  powers,
Divine  or  Satanic.  In  either  case,  the  charge
would  bring  him  into  collision  with  the
Eoman  authorities,  which  was  the  real  object
of  this  preliminary  inquiry.  We  must  not
forget  that  Christ  had  twice  interfered  wilii
the  traffic  in  the  temple,  which  was  carried
on  to  the  great  profit  of  the  avaricious  family
of  Annas,  and  that  tiie  malice  of  the  high
priests  wag  on  this  account  greatly  em-
bittered.

Ver.  62. — The  high  priest  [Caiaphas]
arose.  As  if  in  indignation  at  the  outrage
offered  by  this  vaunt  to  Jehovah  and  the
sanctuary.  But  the  indignation  was  asaumed
and  theatrical;  for  even  this  charge  had
broken  down,  owing  to  the  disagreement
of  the  two  witnesses  (Mark  xiv.  59).  Some-
thing more  definite  must  be  secured  before
any  formal  appeal  could  be  made  to  the
Sanhedrin  or  the  procurator.  Answerest
thou  nothing?  The  angry  president  en-
deavours to  browbeat  the  Prisoner,  and  to
make  him  criminate  himself  by  intemperate
language  or  indiscreet  admission.  What
is  it  which  these  witness  against  thee  1
The  Eeceived  Text  (followed  here  by  West-
cott  and  Hort)  divides  the  high  priest's
words  into  two  questions,  as  in  the  Authorized
Version.  The  Vulgate  unites  the  two  into
one,  Nihil  respondes  ad  ea  qux  isti  adversum
te  testificantur  1  Alford,  'Tischendorf,  etc.,
print,  OttS^i/  airoKplvTi  rl  otroi  ffov  KarafLap-
rvpova-iv ;  "Answerest  thou  not  what  it
is  which  these  witness  against  tliee?"
Caiaphas  professes  a  desire  to  hear  Christ's
explanation  of  the  words  juat  alleged
against  him.

Ver.  63. — Jesus  held  his  peace;  icrtiiira:
eontinued  silent  (of.  oh.  xxvii.  12 — 14).
"He  was  oppressed,  and  he  was  afflicted,
yet  lie  opened  not  his  mouth,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


533


7 ,  cf.  Ps.  xxxviii.  13, 14).  He  knew  it  waa
of  DO  use,  and  was  not  the  moment,  to
explain  the  mystery  of  the  words  which
he  had  used.  Indeed,  it  was  unfair  to  a»k
him  to  explain  the  discrepanoieB  in  the
alleged  testimony.  "Attempts  at  defence
were  unprofitable,  no  man  hearing.  For  thi»
was  a  show  only  of  a  court  of  justice,  but  in
truth  an  onset  of  robbers,  assailing  him
without  cause,  ai  in  a  cave  or  on  the  road  "
(St.  ChjBOstom,  in  Zoo.).  The  case  was  best
met  by  a  majestic  silence.  Answered.
Puzzled  and  embiirrassed  by  Christ's  per-
sistent lilence,  Caiaphas  at  last  proceeds  to
put  to  him  a  question  which  he  must
answer,  and  which  must  lead  to  some
definite  result.  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living
Ood.  The  high  priest  now  addresses  Jesus
officially  as  the  minister  of  Jehovah,  and
puts  him  under  an  oath  to  make  an  answer.
To  Buch  an  adjuration  a  reply  was  abso-
lutely necessary,  and  the  Law  held  a  man
guilty  wlio  kept  silence  under  such  circum-
stances (Lev.  T.  1).  The  Christ,  the  Son  of
God.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Caiaphas
by  these  words  intended  to  imply  that
Messiah  was  one  with  God,  of  one  nature,
power,  and  eternity.  It  is  not  likely  tliat
he  had  risen  above  the  popular  Jewish  con-
ception of  Messiah,  which  was  of  one
inferior  to  God,  though  invested  with  certain
Divine  attributes.  But  he  had  beard  that
Jesus  had  more  than  once  claimed  God  as
his  Father,  so  he  now,  as  he  hopes,  will
force  a  confession  from  the  Prisoner's  lips,
which  ■will  set  the  question  at  rest  one  way
or  the  other.and  give  him  ground  for  decisive
action,  and  enable  him  to  denounce  Christ
either  as  an  acknowledged  impostor  or  a
blasphemer.  His  language  is,  perhaps,
based  on  the  second  psalm,  vers.  2,  6,  etc.

Ver.  64. — ^Thou  hast  said;  a-b  eTiras  (ver.
25) ;  in  St.  Mark,  iyti  elfii.  This  is  a  strong
affirmative  asseveration,  and  on  Christ's
lips  carries  with  it  the  full  meaning  of  the
words  used  by  Caiaphas,  "I  am  the
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  One,  God
of  God,  of  one  substance  with  the  Father."
Kevertheless  (itaV);  ••«•  w  spite  of  your
incredulity.  But  there  is  no  direct  opposi-
tion intended  between  the  previous  and  the
following  statements;  so  vX^v  would  be
better  translated,  T)ut  moreover,  or  what  ii
more.  Hereafter ;  Sirapri.  From  this  moment,
beginning  from  now,  from  my  Passion,  my
triumph  and  my  reign  are  inaugurated.
Shall  ye  see.  Ye,  the  representatives  of
Israel,  shall  see  the  events  about  to  be  con-
summated, the  preludes  of  the  great  assize,
and  the  coming  of  Messiah's  kingdom.  The
Son  of  man.  God  and  yet  man  ;  man  now
in  weakness  and  humility,  about  to  display
and  give  incontestable  proofs  of  his  Godhead.
Right  hand  of  power.    Of  Omnipotence,  of


Almighty  God.  Coming  in  the  clouds  of
heaven  (ch.  xxiv.  30).  Christ  thus  dis-
tinctly asserts  his  Divinity,  and  claims  to
apply  to  himself  the  utterance  in  Ps.  ex.  1,
and  the  great  prophecy  of  Daniel  (vii.  13,
14).  This  was  the  plainest  and  most  Bpei3ific
declaration  of  his  real  nature,  power,  and
attributeB,  made  with  calm  majesty,  though
he  knew  it  was  to  seal  his  condemnation,
and  open  the  immediate  way  to  his  death.

Ver.  65. — The  high  priest  rent  his  clothes
(jk  t/iiria)..  His  outer  garments,  not  his
pontifical  vestment,  which  he  would  not
wear  on  this  occasion.  St.  Mark  notes  that
he  rent  his  under  clothes,  his  tunic;  so
probebly  lie  tore  both  outer  and  inner  gar-
ments. This  was  done  in  assumed  horror
at  Christ's  blasphemy  (cf.  2  Kings  xviii.  37 ;
xix.  1),  rabbinical  injunctions  requiring
such  an  action,  and  prescribing  the  nature,
extent,  and  direction  of  the  scissure.  "  This
he  did,"  says  Chrysostom,  "  to  add  force  to
the  accusation,  and  to  increase  the  weight
of  his  words  by  the  act."  His  assessors,
though  fully  agreeing  with  him,  appear  not
to  have  followed  his  example  in  this  par-
ticular, taking  the  high  priest's  action  as
typical  and  sufficiently  expressive  of  the
general  sentiment.  Tlie  Fathers  see  in  it
a  symbol  of  the  rending  and  destruction  of
the  Jewish  priesthood  (of.  1  Sam.  xv.  27,
28 ;  1  Kings  xi.  30,  31).  He  hath  spoken
blasphemy.  In  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of
God,  not  in  a  theocratic  sense,  but  by  nature,
making  himself  one  with  Jehovah.  This
was  what  Caiaphas  had  been  desiring.  No
more  discussion  was  needed;  Christ  was
self-convicted.  What  further  need  have  we
of  witnesses  1  He  was  doubtless  relieved  to
find  that  the  Prisoner  had  saved  him  from
the  trouble  of  seeking,  suborning,  and
examining  any  more  witnesses.  Ye  have
heard ;  ye  heard  just  now.  All  the  assembly
could  now  testify  to  the  truth  of  the  alle-
gation.

Ver.  66. — What  think  ye  t  He  wishes  to
get  a  vote  by  acclamation,  not  in  a  formal
way,  as  to  the  guilt  of  Christ  and  the
punishment  which  he  deserved.  He  is  guilty
of  (ecoxoS)  imorthy  of,  liable  to)  death.  This
was  the  punishment  pronounced  by  the  Law
on  blasphemy  (Lev.  xxiv.  16) ;  the  death
was,  however,  to  be  by  stoning  (Acts  vii.
58).  This  detail,  as  they  considered  it,  waa
now  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  the  Romans.
We  see  that  this  meeting,  which  virtually
doomed  Christ  to  death,  was  not  a  regular
council  of  the  Sanhedrin ;  for  it  waa  not  held
in  the  appointed  chamber,and  was  conducted
at  night,  when  criminal  processes  were  for-
bidden. The  meeting  next  morning  (ch.
xxvii.  1 )  was  convened  for  the  purpose  of
considering  how  this  informal  sentence
shonlil  be  executed.


53i  THE  GOSPEL  AGCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [ch.  xxvi.  1—75.


Ver.  67. — The  Boene  that  ensued  upon  the
verdict  being  pronounced  is  beyond  measure
hideous  and  unexampled.  When  the  meet-
ing broke  up,  Jesus  was  for  a  time  left  to
the  brutal  cruelty  and  ttiennbridled  insolence
of  the  guards  and  servants.  Involuntarily,
by  their  i.rofanity  ai^d  coarseness,  they  ful-
filled the  words  of  the  prophet,  speaking  in
the  Person  of  Messiah,  "  I  gave  my  back
to  the  smiteiB,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that
plucked  off  the  hair;  I  hid  not  my  face
from  shame  and  spitting  "  (Isa.  1.  6).  Did
they  spit  in  his  face.  A  monstrous  Indignity,
BO  regarded  by  all  people  at  all  times  (Numb.
xii.  14;  Deut.  xxv.  9;  Job  xxx.  10).
BnfEeted  Mm  (^iico\ii(t>i<rav  airhv) ;  struck  Mm
with  fists.  Smote  him  with  the  palms  of  their
hands  (m>il.Tn(rav).  There  is  some  doulit
whether  the  verb  here  means  "  to  smite  with
a  rod  "  or  "Jo  slap  in  the  face  with  the  open
hand ;  "  but  as  we  have  already  had  mention
of  striking  with  the  hands,  it  is  probable
that  beating  with  a  stick  is  here  intended.

Ver.  68. — Prophesy ;  divine,  guens.  They
had  previously  blindfolded  him  (Mark  xiv.
65 ;  Luke  xxii.  64),  and  now  in  derision  of
his  supernatural  powers  they  mockingly  bid
him  to  name  the  person  who  struck  him.
Thou  Christ.  They  use  the  term  sarcasti-
cally. "  You  call  yourself  Christ,  the  Prophet
of  God;  well,  then,  divine  miraculously,
without  seeing,  who  is  he  that  smote  thee."

Vei«.  69— 75.— 27te  three  denials  of  St.
POer.  (Mark  xiv.  66—72 ;  Luke  xxii.  55—
62;  John  xviii.  17, 18,  25—27.)

Ver.  69. — Tliere  is  much  apparent  discre-
pancy in  the  four  accounts  of  Peter's  denials,
both  as  regards  the  scene,  the  persons,
and  the  words  used.  St.  Matthew  groups
them  all  together  in  one  view  without  special
regard  to  time  and  place.  The  fact  doubt-
less is  this — that  Peter  did  not  distinctly
three  times,  in  three  separate  utterances,
deny  Christ,  but  that  on  three  occasions,
and  under  different  circumstances,  and  in
many  different  words,  he  committed  this
sin.  There  are,  as  it  were,  three  groups  of
questions  and  replies,  and  the  evangelists
have  recorded  such  portions  of  these  details
as  seemed  good  to  them,  or  such  as  they
wore  best  acquainted  with.  Peter  sat  (was
silting)  without  in  the  palace  (t^  ah\^).
We  have  seen  (ver.  48)  that  Peter  was  intro-
duced by  John  into  the  open  court  round
wliich  the  palace  was  built,  and  on  one
side  of  which  was  the  chamber  in  which  the
examination  of  Jesus  was  going  ou.  He
was  within  the  palace  enclosure,  but  outside
the  principal  apartment;  hence  he  is  said
in  the  text  to  liave  been  without.  Admis-
sion to  the  courtyard  was  gained  by  a
passage  through  the  side  of  a  house,  which


formed  the  vestibule  or  porch;  this  was
closed  towards  the  street  by  a  heavy  gate,
having  in  it  a  small  wicket  for  the  use  of
visitors,  kept  by  a  porter  or  other  servant.
A  damsel.  This  was  the  female  purleress
who  kept  the  wicket  by  which  Peter  was
admitted.  She  appears  to  have  had  some
suspicion  of  him  from  the  first,  and  to  have
followed  him  with  her  remarks  from  the
gate,  and  to  have  continued  them  when
he  sat  down  with  the  servants  at  the  fire
kindled  in  the  open  court.  Thou  also  wast
with  Jesus  of  Galilee.  She  says,  "Thou
also  "  in  reference  to  John,  whom  she  had
first  admitted,  and  who  seems  to  have  been
in  no  danger,  though  Peter  had  great  fears
for  his  own  safety.  Though  the  porteress
probably  had  no  personal  knowledge  of  the
apostle,  yet  scanning  his  features  by  the
light  of  the  fire,  noting  his  perturbed  aspect
and  his  restless  actinns,  and  reflecting  on
his  companionship  with  John,  she  con-
jectured that  he  was  a  disciple  of  Christ,
and  more  than  once  liazarded  the  assertion
with  the  view  of  eliciting  a  definite  answer.

Ver.  70. — ^He  denied  before  them  all.  This
was  the  first  batch  of  accusations  and  denials.
The  equivocal  denial  was  made  vehemently
and  openly,  so  that  all  around  heard  it.  It
does  not  seem  that  he  would  have  incun-ed
any  danger  if  he  had  boldly  confessed  his
discipleship,  so  that  this  renunciation  was
gratuitous  and  unnecessary.  I  know  not
what  thou  sayest.  This  is  virtually  a
denial  of  the  allegation  made,  though  in  an
indirect  and  evasive  form,  implying,  "I  do
not  know  what  you  are  alluding  to."
'  Ver.  71. — The  porch ;  riv  irvXiava.  The
passage  between  the  street  and  the  court.
Peter  liad  walked  towards  the  gate,  either
in  unmeaning  restlessness,  or  with  some
notion  of  escaping  further  questioning.
Another  maid  saw  him.  We  gather  from
the  other  accounts  that  both  the  porteress
and  some  other  domestics  assailed  him  at
this  time.  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Clirist  was
popularly  so  known  (see  ch.  xxi.  11).

Ver.  72. — With  an  oath.  Assailed  on  all
sides,  and  fearing  that  his  simple  word
would  not  be  taken,  Peter  now  to  one  and
all  makes  a  curt  denial,  accompanying  it
with  an  oath.  He  was  thoroughly  deter-
mined not  to  compromise  himself,  and  to
silence  all  suspicion.  This  was  the  second
stage  of  his  fall.  I  do  not  know  the  man.
I  have  no  knowledge  of  this  Jesus  of  whom
you  are  speaking.  He  calls  his  beloved
Master  « the  man  "  1

Ver.  73. — After  a  while;  /lera /unphv :  after
a  Utile  interval.  About  an  hour,  according
to  St.  Luke.  Meantime  had  occurred  the
examination  and  informal  condemnatijn  of
Christ,  followed  by  tlie  brutalities  of  the
attendants,  an  1  the  I/ord's  temporary  owi-


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


535


signment  to  some  chamber  or  gallery  that
overlooked  the  couityard.  The  excitement
ol  the  trial  and  its  ■accompaniments  having
somewhat  subsided,  attention  was  again
turned  upon  Peter,  who,  in  his  nervous
trepidation,  could  not  remain  quiet  and
silent,  but  aroused  observation  by  his  in-
discreet movements  and  garrulity.  They
that  stood  by.  Among  whom,  as  St.  John
notes,  was  a  kinsman  of  Malchus,  who  indis-
tinctly remembered  having  seen  Peter  at
Gethsemane.  Probably  by  this  time  some
rumour  of  the  presence  of  a  disciple  of  Jesus
had  spread  among  the  crowd,  and  tliere
arose  an  eager  desire  to  discover  him.  If
Peter  had  not  talked,  he  might  have  escaped
further  notice.  Thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee ;
makes  thee  known.  His  dialect  (for  doubt-
less he  spoke  Aramaic)  showed  tliat  he
was  n  Galilsean,  and  as  most  of  Christ's
adherents  came  from  that  region,  they  in-
ferred that  he  was  one  of  Cliriat's  disciples.
The  language  and  pronunciation  of  the
northern  district  differed  materially  from
the  polished  dialect  of  Judsaa  and  Jerusa-
lem, and  its  provincialisms  were  readily
detected.  The  Galilseans,  we  are  told,  could
not  properly  pronounce  the  guttural  letters,
aleph,  kheth,  and  ayin,  and  used  tau  for
shin,  pe  for  beih,  etc. ;  they  also  often  omitted
syllables  in  words,  occasioning  equivocal
mistakes,  which  afforded  much  amusement
to  the  better  instructed.

Ver.  74. — To  curse  and  to  swear.  Peter
fortifies  this,  his  tliird  denial,  by  imprecating
curses  on  himself  (icaTaflf/iaTiffij')  if  he  spake
not  the  truth,  and  again  (ver.  72)  confirming
his  assertion  by  a  solemn  oath  There  is  a
certain  gradation  in  his  denials:  he  first


simply  asserts ;  he  then  asserts  with  an
oath;  lastly,  he  adds  curses  to  his  oath.
"  One  temptation  unresisted  seldom  fails  to
be  followed  by  another ;  a  second  and  greater
infidelity  is  the  punishment  of  the  first,  and
often  the  cause  of  a  third.  Peter  joins  per-
jury to  infidelity.  Deplorable  progress  of
infidelity  and  blindness  in  an  apostle  in  so
short  a  time,  only  out  of  fear  of  some  under-
servants,  and  in  respect  of  a  Master  whom
he  had  acknowledged  very  God.  He  might
possibly  have  proceeded  even  as  far  as
Judas,  had  God  left  him  any  longer  to  him-
self" (Quesnel).  Immediately  the  cook
crew.  This  was  the  second  crowing  (Mark
xiv.  72);  the  first  had  been  heard  at  the
first  denial  (Mark  xiv.  68).

Ver.  75. — Peter  remembered  the  word  of
JesuB.  Simultaneously  with  the  crowing  of
the  cock,  the  Lord  turned  round,  and  from
the  chamber  facing  the  court  looked  upon
Peter  (Luke  xxii.  61),  singled  him  out  from
all  the  crowd,  showed  that  amid  all  his  own
Bufferings  and  sorrows  be  had  not  forgotten
his  weak  apostle.  What  that  look  did  for
Peter  we  learn  by  succeeding  events ;  it  is
for  the  homilist  to  expatiate  thereon.  Christ
had  prayed  for  him,  and  the  effect  of  that
prayer  was  now  felt.  He  went  out.  From
the  portico  where  the  denial  had  taken
place;  he  rushed  from  that  evil  company
into  the  night,  a  broken-hearted  man,  that
no  human  eye  might  witness  his  anguish,
that  alone  with  his  conscience  and  God  ho
might  wrestle  out  repentance.  Wept  bit-
terly. Tradition  asserts  that  all  his  life
long  Peter  hereafter  never  could  hear  a
cock  crow  without  falling  on  his  knees  and
weeping.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 5. —  The  shadow  of  the  cross.  L  The  pkophbct.  1.  TTie  end  of  the  Lord's
public  teaching.  "Jesus  had  finished  all  these  sayings."  There  was  precious  teaching
yet  to  come ;  but  that  would  he  private,  in  the  upper  room,  addressed  to  the  little
circle  of  the  twelve.  This  Tuesday  was  the  last  day  of  the  Lord's  public  teaching.
Now  he  had  finished  all  these  sayings — the  controversies  with  scribes  and  Pharisees
and  Sadducees,  the  great  discourse  delivered  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  the  parables  of
judgment,  the  awful  prophecy  in  which  he  describes  himself  as  the  great  King,  who
shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  glory,  who  shall  judge  all  the  nations  of  the  world.  Now
he  passes  from  the  prophetic  to  the  priestly  office.  The  work  of  public  teaching  is
ended ;  the  work  of  atonement  is  beginning.  We  are  approaching  that  tremendous
sacrifice,  the  one  most  awful  scene  in  the  whole  history  of  the  world,  when  the  high
Son  of  God,  who  for  our  salvation's  sake  became  the  Son  of  man,  offered  up  himself  the
one  sufficient  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  It  becomes  us  to  draw  near
with  reverence  and  godly  fear,  with  deep  self-abasement  and  adoring  love.  2.  The
near  approach  of  his  death.  "  Alter  two  days,"  he  said,  "  is  the  Passover,  and  the  Son
of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  crucified."  It  was  his  second  clear  announcement  of  the  form
of  death  which  he  was  to  sufi'er.  It  was  to  be  the  death  of  the  cross,  of  all  deaths  the
most  horrible.  He  would  indeed  sit  on  the  throne  of  glory  with  all  the  holy  angels
round  him  ;  but  the  cross  must  come  first.     He  knew  it ;  he  knew  the  day  and  the


536  THE  GOSPEL  AOCOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi,,  1— '«6

hour;  he  looks  forward  with  sweet,  holy  calmness  to  that  cruel  death.  "The  Soq  oI
man  is  delivered  up,"  he  said — is  beiog  delivered;  even  while  he-was  speaking  the
treason  was  being  planned ;  it  would  soon  be  consummated.  The  greatest  festival  of
the  Jewish  year  would  be  desecrated  by  the  foulest  crime  which  the  world  has  evei
seen ;  but  that  crime  would,  by  God's  overruling  providence,  bring  about  the  great
sacrifice  of  which  the  Passover  was  the  type.  "  Christ,  our  Passover,  is  sacrificed  foi
us."  Mark  the  quiet  composure  with  which  the  Lord  spoke  of  his  coming  Passion,  and
learn  of  him  to  contemplate  the  approach  of  death  with  calmness  and  tranquillity.

IL  Thb  beginning  op  the  fulfilment.  1.  The  assembly  in  the  house  of  Caiaphas.
Caiaphas  was,  by  the  appointment  of  the  Eoman  governor,  high  priest  that  year  He
had  already  (John  xi.  50)  urged  the  Sanhedrin  to  seek  the  death  of  Christ,  prophegying
unconsciously  "  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that  nation  ;  and  not  for  that  nation  only,
but  that  also  he  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that  were  scattered
abroad."  Now  the  chief  priests  and  elders  assembled  in  the  court  of  his  house  to  take
counsel  as  to  the  best  means  for  carrying  out  their  wicked  purpose.  2.  Their  fears.
The  Lord's  words  and  actions  had  made  a  great  impression  upon  the  people ;  they  had
observed  his  victories  over  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees;  they  had  listened  to  his
preaching  with  interest,  and  were  very  attentive  to  hear  him.  Many  of  them  had
taken  part  in  the  triumphal  procession  which  had  escorted  him  into  Jerusalem,  and
had  recognized  him  with  "Hosannasl"  as  the  King  Messiah.  The  leading  Jews  dared
not  attempt  to  take  him  openly  by  force ;  they  feared  lest  the  people  shoiJd  rise  in  his
favour,  especially  as  large  numbers  of  Galileans  always  came  to  the  Passover.  They
consulted,  therefore,  that  they  might  take  him  by  subtilty ;  but  they  determined  to
defer  the  execution  of  their  design  till  after  the  feast-day.  It  was  not  from  reverence
for  the  sanctity  of  the  Passover  season ;  they  did  not  shrink  from  desecrating  it,  when
the  treachery  of  Judas  enabled  them  to  do  so  without  danger.  They  feared  the  multi-
tude. There  was  an  immense  concourse  in  the  city.  The  people,  always  inflammable,
were  more  so  than  ever  at  the  Passover,  partly  through  the  excitement  of  numbers,
partly  through  the  national  spirit  aroused  by  the  festival.  They  might,  the  chiet
priests  thought,  side  with  Jesus;  they  might  support  bis  claims  to  the  Messianic
dignity.  The  attempt  to  seize  him  might  evoke  a  burst  of  popular  sympathy,  and
lead  him  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  multitude.  So  they  determined  to  defer
their  guilty  design.

Lessons.  1.  The  Lord  had  finished  his  public  teaching ;  the  Pharisees  and  chief
priests  had  heard  it;  it  had  increased  their  condemnation.  Take  heed  how  ye  hear.
2.  The  Lord  was  about  to  die.  We  must  die  soon.  Let  us  learn  to  think  and  speak
of  our  death  calmly  as  he  did.  3.  The  chief  priests  feared  danger ;  they  did  not  fear
the  wrath  of  God.  Let  us  learn  of  Christ  to  fear  not  death,  but  him  who  is  able  to
cast  both  soul  and  body  into  hell.

^  Vers.  6 — 16. — The  supper  at  Bethany.  I.  The  anointing.  1.  The  house  of  Simon
the  leper.  The  Lord  was  alwaj's  welcome  there.  It  may  be  that  he  had  healed  Simon
of  bis  leprosy.  He  had  raised  Lazarus  from  the  dead;  he  was  regarded  with  the
utmost  reverence  and  affection  by  Martha  and  Mary.  St.  John  tells  us  that  Jesus,
six  days  before  the  Passover,  came  to  Bethany.  "  There  they  made  him  a  supper ;
and  Martha  served :  but  Lazarus  was  one  of  them  that  sat  at  the  table  with  him."
St,  Matthew  is  evidently  relating  the  same  events,  but,  like  St,  Mark,  he  gives  no  note
of  time,  and  apparently  neglects  the  chronological  order.  Very  possibly  the  two
evangelists  may  have  had  some  reason  for  omitting  the  names  of  Lazarus  and  his
sisters  which  did  not  exist  when  St.  John  wrote.  It  was  a  memorable  supper.  One
sat  there  who  had  been  dead,  who  had  known  those  awful  secrets  which  we  shall  one
day  know — those  secrets  so  full  of  deep  mysterious  interest,  so  attractive,  but  so
inscrutable.  And  One  was  there  who  is  the  very  Life,  without  whom  there  is  no  life,
who  had  again  and  again  given  life  to  the  dead,  who  one  day  will  call  all  the  dead  from
their  graves  as  he  had  a  short  time  before  called  Lazarus  from  his  ;  who,  though  he  is
the  Life  and  hath  life  in  himself,  was  yet  about  to  die,  to  lay  down  his  life  of  himself,
that  the  dead  in  sin  might  live  through  him  who  by  death  abolished  death,  and  brought
life  and  immortality  to  light.  He  sat  there  at  supper  in  his  infinite  condescension,  as
now  he  deigns  to  sup  with  those  whom  he  hath  raised  Irom  the  death  of  sin  unto  the


OH.  iXTi.  1— 75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  537

life  of  righteousness  (Rev.  iii.  20).  2.  Mary.  The  two  sisters  were  at  the  supper.
Martha  served,  as  she  had  done  before ;  Mar j  could  think  only  of  the  Lord,  and  of  hia
late  wondrous  mercy  vouchsafed  unto  the  family.

"  Her  eyes  are  homes  of  silent  prayer,
Nor  other  thought  her  mind  admits
But,  he  was  dead,  and  there  he  sits.
And  he  that  brought  him  back  is  there."

She  showed  her  thankful  devotion.  She  brought  an  alabaster  box  of  very  precious
ointment,  and  poured  it  first  (it  seems)  on  his  head,  afterwards  on  his  feet,  as  he  sat  at
meat.  li  was  a  very  costly  gift,  but  it  was  not  waste,  for  it  was  an  act  of  worship.  It
signified  the  exceeding  sacredness  of  the  holy  body  uf  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  That
body  was,  in  the  truest  sense,  the  temple  of  the  most  high  God;  it  was  the
tabernacle  wherein  abode  the  Word  of  God,  God  the  Son,  One  greater  than  the  temple
at  Jerusalem,  the  most  Holy  One  for  whose  worship  that  temple  was  built.  That
temple  was  rightly  held  in  reverence ;  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  was  zealous  for  its
honour.  How  much  greater  reverence  was  due  to  that  holy  body  in  which  he  bad
manifested  himself  I  That  anointing  was  a  solemn  act  of  worship,  a  pure  unbidden
rite  of  adoration.

IL  The  mubmurlnqb  of  the  disciples.  1.  JTieir  complaint.  It  was  a  waste,
they  said;  "the  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for  much,  and  given  to  the  poor."
St.  John  gives  us  to  understand  that  it  was  Judas  who  had  excited  this  dissatisfaction.
Not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor ;  his  talk  about  the  poor  was  mere  pretence  to  hide  his
dishonest  avarice.  So  people  often  talk  now  when  they  blame  acts  of  generous
liberality  which  seem  to  condemn  their  own  selfishness  and  want  of  charity.  In  their
narrow  avaricious  temper  they  cannot  understand  the  free  generous  love  which  prompts
faithful  men  to  give  largely  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  they  impute  unworthy  motives.
The  murmurings  of  Judas  seem  to  have  led  astray,  for  a  time,  several  of  the  other
disciples.  Men  are  too  ready  to  listen  to  disparaging  criticisms,  too  ready  to  form
unfavourable  views  of  their  neighbours.  Let  us  judge  carefully  our  own  motives,  and
learn  to  believe  the  best  of  others.  2.  The  Lord's  reproof.  "  Why  trouble  ye  the
woman?"  Judas  was  rude,  unmannerly;  he  and  the  other  disciples  had  vexed
the  gentle,  shrinking  Mary  by  their  criticisms  of  her  conduct.  But,  indeed,  her  act
was  not  a  waste ;  it  was  a  beautiful  deed  of  unselfish  generosity.  It  is  good  to  help
the  poor ;  those  who  blamed  Mary  would  always  have  opportunities  of  doing  that,  if
they  were  so  minded.  But  there  are  other  ways  in  which  Christian  love  will  show
itself.  It  was  good  to  honour  the  sacred  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  it  is  good  to  give
freely,  largely,  to  church-building  and  other  such  objects,  if  the  end  in  view  is  the
true  Christian  motive — the  glory  of  God.  Such  was  Mary's  motive,  and  it  was  an
especially  fitting  time  to  show  her  love  to  Christ,  for  he  was  about  to  depart.  His
death  was  very  near  at  hand.  He  had  told  the  disciples;  they  knew  it;  probably
Mary  knew  it;  she  had  loved  to  sit  at  his  feet  and  hear  his  word.  The  gifts  which'
the  Wise  Men  from  the  East  offered  at  the  Saviour's  cradle  are  thought  to  have
a  mystic  meaning;  the  myrrh  had  a  reference  to  his  death.  Mary's  gift  of  the
precious  ointment,  offered  just  before  that  death,  spoke  yet  more  distinctly  of  death
aud  burial.  She  may  have  been  unconscious,  or  only  dinaly  conscious,  of  the  meaning
of  her  act.  But  certainly  it  was  an  act  of  loving  adoring  worship,  and  it  should  have
its  reward ;  it  should  be  told  throughout  the  world  as  a  memorial  of  her.  Christ  knew
that  "  this  gospel,"  the  good  tidings  of  his  death  and  resurrection,  would  be  preached
in  all  the  whole  world.  He  who  was  despised  and  rejected  of  Pharisees  and  Sadducees
looked  forward  to  a  world-wide  empire  over  the  hearts  of  men.  Wide  as  the  gospel
would  spread,  so  widely  should  this  good  work  of  Mary  be  made  known.  There  is  no
fame  like  that  which  the  gospel  gives ;  the  fame  of  monarch,  warrior,  statesman,  poet,
is  not  to  be  compared  with  the  honour  granted  to  the  lowly  Mary.  She  sought  only
the  praise  which  cometh  from  God.  She  hath  also  the  praise  of  all  faithful  Christians.
Her  conduct  is  an  example  to  us;  it  teaches  us  that  acts  of  generous,  self-forgetting
love  are  beautiful  and  noble,  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  odour  of  the  ointment
which  filled  the  house  at  Bethany  (John  xiL  3)  has  spread  through  the  great  Christian


538  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1—75.

Church,  keeping  alive  the  sweet  memory  of  Mary,  urging  countless  Christian  men  and
women  to  follow  her  examplf.

III.  The  bbtbatal.  1.  Judas.  There  was  one  to  whom  the  fragrance  of  that
perfume  was  a  savour  of  rltath  unto  death.  He  bore  an  honoured  name,  a  name  of
religious  significance.  "Now  will  I  praise  the  Lord,"  said  Leah,  when  she  gave  that
name  to  her  fourth  son.  And  he  was  one  of  the  twelve,  as  all  the  evangelists  tell
us,  to  mark  the  strangeness,  the  exceeding  guilt,  of  his  sin.  Yet  we  suppose  he
nust  have  been  like  the  others  when  the  Lord  first  chose  him  to  be  near  unto  himself.
He  must  have  been,  we  thiuk,  full  of  bria;ht  promise.  Certainly  he,  like  the  rest
of  the  apostles,  forsook  all  and  followed  Christ  (ch.  xix.  27).  The  good  seed  had
been  sown  in  his  heart,  and  it  soon  sprang  up;  but  there  were  thorn-roots  there
too;  and  they,  alas!  shot  up  into  evil  luxuriance,  and  choked  the  good  seed,  and
dominated  the  whole  life.  Probably  he  had  been  fesoinated  by  those  dreams  of  earthly
splendour  and  an  earthly  kingdom  which  the  apostles  entertained  so  long.  He  had
hoped,  like  James  and  John,  for  some  high  place  near  the  King;  but  his  ambition  was
more  selfish  than  theiis.  And  when  the  Lord  would  not  claim  the  throne  of  David,
when  he  would  not  allow  the  enthusiastic  multitudes  to  make  him  a  King,  when  he
spoke  of  seeming  failure,  of  impending  death,  and  that  the  death  of  the  cross,  Judas
was  hurt,  offended,  disgusted  with  the  service  which  he  had  chosen.  And,  St.  John
tells  us,  there  was  one  ruling  sin  in  his  heart — the  degrading  vice  of  avarice.  Judas
had  shown,  perhaps,  an  aptitude  for  business ;  he  had  been  entrusted  with  the  bag
which  contained  the  alms  of  those  who  ministered  to  the  Lord  of  their  substance.
Perhaps  he  had  sought  the  office  of  purse-bearer;  and,  alas!  it  was  a  snare  to  him,  for  he
was  a  thief.  Probably  he  had  been  long  brooding  over  disappointments,  fancied
vexations,  covetous  hopes ;  for  no  one  becomes  utterly  base  in  a  moment.  A  year  ago
the  Lord  had  spoken  of  him  in  words  of  awful  warning  (John  vi.  70).  He  did  not
heed  the  Master's  voice ;  probably  he  went  on  in  his  evil  ways,  feeding  his  secret  vice
by  acts  of  petty  dishonesty,  till  it  became  a  tyrant  passion  ruling  the  whole  man,
debasing  the  whole  character.  He  had  yielded  himself  little  by  little  to  the  power  of
Satan ;  at  last  he  had  become  his  captive ;  now  any  little  temptation  would  be  suffi-
cient to  lure  him  to  his  doom.  The  offering  of  Mary  proved  to  be  that  last  temptation.
Satan,  in  his  malice,  brings  evil  out  of  good.  Judas  blamed  her  generosity.  It  was
wasteful  profusion,  he  said ;  that  large  sum  ought  to  have  been  better  spent.  He
wanted  it,  not  really  for  the  poor,  but  for  the  bag  which  he  carried ;  he  would  have
appropriated  it,  in  part  at  least,  to  his  own  use.  The  Lord's  reproof  chafed  him  still
more.  His  mention  of  his  approaching  burial  crushed  the  last  hopes,  if  any  hopes
remained,  of  an  earthly  kingdom.  Judas  determined  to  forsake  his  Master.  Nothing,
he  thought,  could  be  gained  by  faithfulness ;  something  might  be  gained  by  treachery.
What  an  awful  picture  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  especially  of  that  soul-destroying
sin  of  avarice !  2.  Eia  agreement  with  the  chief  priests.  He  went  to  them  as  soon  as
he  could,  perhaps  four  days  after  the  supper  at  Bethany  ;  his  disappointment  had  been
rankling  in  his  mind  ever  since.  He  was  ready  now  to  deliver  his  Master  to  death,
*and  that  for  money.  "  What  will  ye  give  me?"  he  said,  openly  manifesting  that
miserable  vice  which  he  had  hidden  under  the  cloke  of  care  for  the  poor.  Alas !  that
one  of  the  chosen  twelve  could  say  such  words,  could  think  such  thoughts!  He  had
heard  the  Lord's  solemn  question,  "  What  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole
world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?"
And  now  he  was  going  to  sell  his  soul  for  a  paltry  bribe.  They  weighed  tmto  him
thirty  pieces  of  silver;  the  price  which  God,  speaking  by  the  Prophet  Zechariah
(li.  13),  denounces  as  "a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prised  at  of  them."  Probably
they  did  not  think  of  the  prophet's  words,  or  they  would  not  have  become  the  instru-
ments of  fulfilling  them.  It  was  the  price  of  a  slave  (see  Exod.  xxi.  32),  far  less  than
the  value  of  the  offering  of  Mary,  which  had  been  the  occasion,  not  the  cause,  of  this
awful  treachery.  For  this  poor  bribe  he  sold  his  Master,  "  and  from  that  time  he
sought  opportunity  to  betray  him."

Lessons.  1.  No  offering  is  too  costly  for  the  Lord's  service.  Let  us  imitate  Mary  in
her  loving  gifts.  2.  Men  will  scoff  at  Christian  generosity.  Let  us  seek  only  the  praise
which  cometh  from  God.  3.  One  of  the  twelve  fell  into  deadly  sin;  Let  none  presume
upon  their  spiritual  privileges.  4.  "The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  Let
ub  learn  to  love  't  not.


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.   MATTHEW,  639

Vers.  17-^30. — ITie  last  Supper.  I.  The  peepabation,  1.  7%e  question  of  the
disciples.  It  was  now  the  first  day  of  Unleavened  Bread,  "  when  the  Passover  must  be
killed"  (Luke  xxii.  7  ;  Mark  xii.  12);  apparently,  therefore,  the  fourteenth  of  Nisan,
which  seems  to  have  been  som(4imes  recrarded  as  the  beginning  of  the  feast  (see
Josephus, '  Wars  of  the  Jews,'  v.  3. 1),  though  the  fifteenth  was  legally  the  first  day.
It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  the  disciples  may  have  come  to  our  Lord  at  the  beginning
of  the  fourteenth,  according  to  the  Jewish  reckoning,  that  is,  after  sunset  on  the  evening
of  the  thirteenth ;  and  thus  tfie  last  Supper  may  have  taken  place  a  day  before  the
legal  time  for  the  Passover.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  most  probable  explanation  of  the
apparent  ilfferenoes  between  St.  John  and  the  first  three  evangelists.  The  disciples
asked  the  Lord  where  he  would  have  the  Passover  prepared ;  they  may  have  thought
that  he  would  keep  it  at  Bethany,  which  was  reckoned  within  the  limits  of  Jerusalem
for  the  purposes  of  the  feast.  2.  The  Lord's  directions.  He  sent  Peter  and  John  to
Jerusalem,  giving  them  a  sign  whereby  to  find  the  house  which  he  had  chosen.  They
were  to  say  to  the  good  man  of  the  house,  "  The  Master  saith.  My  time  is  at  hand ;
I  keep  the  Passover  at  thy  house  with  my  disciples."  There  was  a  mysterious  power
in  the  Lord's  message ;  the  house  was  freely  lent  now,  as  the  ass  had  been  lent  on  the
previous  Sunday.  There  was  a  mysterious  meaning  in  the  words,  "The  Master  saith.
My  time  is  at  hand  " — a  meaning  into  which  neither  the  disciples  nor  the  householder
could  enter.  Possibly,  also,  those  words  may  imply  that  the  Lord  would  keep  the
Passover  before  the  appointed  day,  for  his  time  was  at  hand — the  time  when  he  must
depart  unto  the  Father.

II.  The  conversation  at  the  Suppbe.  1.  The  Lords  prophecy  of  the  betrayal.
"  When  the  even  was  come,  he  sat  down  with  the  twelve."  The  Lord  showed  his  holy
lowliness ;  the  twelve  showed  the  workings  of  human  pride  even  at  that  solemn  hour.
He  washed  the  disciples'  feet ;  but  among  them  there  was  a  strife,  which  of  them
should  be  accounted  the  greatest.  Strange  that  these  petty  jealousies  could  have
found  room  in  apostles'  hearts  at  such  a  time,  in  such  a  presence,  after  such  warnings
of  the  coming  cross.  Pride  is  one  of  our  deadliest  spiritual  enemies ;  it  has  wrought
sad  evil  in  the  Christian  Church.  We  feel  its  power  in  our  own  hearts ;  we  must
crush  it  down  if  we  would  follow  Christ.  He  taught  them  the  blessedness  of  humility
by  word  and  by  example ;  and  then,  as  if  to  humble  them  still  further,  he  told  them
the  sad  truth,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray  me."  It  may  be  that  the  words  were  spoken,
not  only  in  sorrow,  but  also  in  love;  it  may  be  that  even  now  the  Lord  would  have
called  Judas  to  repentance,  as  he  would  have  gathered  the  hard-hearted  Jews  unto
himself,  but  they  would  not ;  and  now  Judas  would  not.  He  had  yielded  himself  to
the  tempter ;  Satan  had  entered  into  him  (Luke  xxii.  3),  and  there  was  hope  no  longer.
The  Lord's  holy  soul  was  filled  with  the  deepest  sorrow ;  this  awful  treachery  wounded
his  holy  human  heart  with  the  acutest  pangs ;  in  the  mysterious  union  of  the  human
and  Divine  he  knew  its  dreadful  issues.  2.  T/ie  questions  of  the  disciples.  The  Lord's
sorrow. communicated  itself  to  the  disciples;  they  were  exceeding  sorry.  Sorrow  has
a  humbling  effect.  The  disciples  felt  now  the  influence  of  the  Lord's  holy  sorrow.
They  did  not  answer,  like  St.  Peter  afterwards,  with  passionate  assertions  of  their
faithfulness;  but  they  whispered  each  one,  even  Peter,  it  seems,  with  trembling  anxiety
and  self-distrust,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  Not,  let  us  observe,  "  Is  it  this  man  or  that  man  ?  "
but,  "  Is  it  1  y  "  The  Lord  did  not  answer  at  first  with  that  distinct  intimation
which  he  gave  shortly  afterwards  to  St.  John  (John  xiii.  26).  He  said  in  general
terms  that  the  traitor  was  one  of  those  nearest  to  him — one  who  sat  at  the  same  meal,
was  using  the  same  dish.  Perhaps  it  was  said  in  tenderness ;  he  would  even  now,
if  it  were  possible,  win  that  guilty  soul  to  a  sense  of  sin,  to  sorrow  and  repentance.
Therefore  he  continued,  in  tones  of  deeper  awfulness,  to  speak  of  the  impending
treachery.  "  The  Son  of  man  gueth ; "  so  it  was  written  in  the  Scriptures ;  so  it  was
determined  in  the  eternal  purpose  of  God.  But  God's  foieknowledge  is  not  inconsistent
with  the  free-will  of  man.  The  man  does  what  must  be,  for  it  was  foreordained;
yet  hi,5  will  is  not  forced.  The  will  of  man  is  sacred,  it  is  free ;  we  feel  the  truth
of  this  in  our  hearts,  though  we  cannot  see  through  the  veil  of  awful  mystery  which
hangs  aroand.  "  Woe  unto  that  man ! "  It  is  an  utterance  of  sorrow,  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  19,
not  an  imprecation.  "  Woe  unto  that  man  through  whom  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  ! "
It  was  through  Judas;   he  had  sold  himself  to  Satan.     Christ  saw  that  evil  figure


540  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 7^.

behind  him,  prompting  him  to  his  hellish  crime.  He  would  have  warned  him  even
now ;  he  tells  him  of  the  dreadful  consequences  of  the  sin  which  was  in  his  thoughts.
"  Good  wore  it  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  bom ! "  How  it  must  have  rent  the
loving  heart  of  the  most  merciful  Saviour  to  say  those  awful  words  I  But  the  stern-
ness was  the  sternness  of  love ;  he  gave  the  traitor  a  glimpse  of  the  tremendous  future,
to  save  him,  if  it  were  possible,  in  spite  of  himself ;  to  save  others  from  the  like  fearful
doom.  But  Judas  would  not  heed ;  he  had  not  yet  joined  in  the  questions  of  the
disciples.  But  now  he  too  said,  "  Master,  is  it  I  ?  "  Perhaps  he  felt  forced  to  do  so ;
to  say  nothing,  while  all  the  rest  weie  asking  the  question,  seemed  to  separate  him  from
the  others ;  it  might  look  like  an  acknowledgment  of  guilt.  Perhaps  it  was  said  in
wantonness,  or  hitter  scorn,  or  in  that  desperation  which  is  the  last  stage  in  atrocious
guilt.  The  Lord  answered  simply,  "  Thou  hast  said."  It  was  an  ordinary  form  of
affirmation,  yet  it  seems  to  refer  the  traitor  to  his  own  evil  heart — he  would  find  th§
answer  to  his  question  there.

III.  The  institution  of  the  Holt  Communion.  1.  The  bread.  The  Lord  passes
from  the  old  covenant  to  the  new,  from  the  Passover  to  the  Holy  Communion.  He
did  BO  "  as  they  were  eaiing,"  during  the  protracted  ceremonies  of  the  Paschal  supper,
while  they  were  thinking  of  God's  great  deliverance  vouchsafed  to  their  forefathers.
He  announced  himself  as  the  true  Lamb  of  God,  the  one  Sacrifice  of  which  all  the
sacrifices  of  the  Law  were  hut  figures.  He  took  bread,  and  blessed.  He  gave  thanks
for  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  as  was  customary  at  the  Passover.  He  blessed  God  the
Father  who  giveth  our  daily  bread,  who  giveth  the  Bread  of  Ufe ;  he  blessed  bread  and
wine,  consecrating  them  by  his  words  for  this  new  sacred  use  (comp.  1  Cor.  x.  16,
"  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless ").  He  gave  thanks  (St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul),
and  by  that  thanksgiving  made  the  Holy  Communion  to  be  a  Eucharist — a  service  of
thanksgiving.  He  brake  the  bread,  and  himself  "  gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said.
Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body."  He  had  prepared  them  to  receive  these  wonderful  words.
A  year  ago  in  the  synagogue  at  Capernaum  he  had  announced  the  great  truth  that  the
food  of  the  Christian  soul  is  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ.  Then  he  had  promised
that  spiritual  food  ("  The  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh,  which  I  wiU  give  for  the
life  of  the  world");  now  he  gives  it.  "This,"  hesaid — "this  which  I  give  you,  is  my  body."
He  stood  before  them,  his  natural  body  yet  unhroken,  his  flesh  and  hlood  not  yet
separated,  as  he  gave  them  the  holy  food.  He  had  ta'uglit  them  in  that  great  sermon
which  had  offended  so  many  of  his  disciples,  that  "  it  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  ;
the  flesh  profiteth  nothing."  He  had  told  them,  "  He  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never
hunger;  and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  They  would  understand
that  "  the  body  of  Christ  is  given,  taken,  and  eaten  in  the  Supper,  only  after  a  heavenly
and  spiritual  manner.  And  the  mean  whereby  the  body  of  Christ  is  received  and
eaten  in  the  Supper  is  faith."  They  would  understand  as  much  as  is  given  to  us  men
to  understand  of  that  which  must  ever  remain  a  sacred  mystery.  It  was  God  incarnate
who  spake  those  holy  words.  His  words,  his  actions,  must  have  a  deep,  wide-reaching
mysterious  meaning,  passing  our  poor  intellect.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  and
believe  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  verily  and  indeed  taken  and  received  hy
the  faithful  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  2.  The  cup.  Afterwards  the  Lord  took  the  cup,
the  third  probably  of  the  four  cups  which,  at  that  time,  were  drunk  at  the  Paschal
supper ;  that  third  cup  was  called  "  the  cup  of  blessing  "  (comp.  1  Cor.  x.  16).  Again
he  gave  thanks,  making  it  a  Eucharist,  and  bade  them  all  drink  of  it :  "  For  this,"  he
said,  "  is  my  blood  of  the  new  covenant."  "  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,"  says
St.  Paul,  "  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  bhjod  of  Christ  ?  "  "  To  such  as  rightly,
worthily,  and  with  faith  receive  the  same,  the  bread  which  we  break  is  a  partaking  of
the  body  of  Christ ;  and  likewise  the  cup  of  blessing  is  a  partaking  of  the  blood  of
Christ."  The  old  covenant  made  between  God  and  his  chosen  people  was  ratified  and
inaugurated  by  the  blood  of  sacrifices.  "Moses  took  the  blood,  and  sprinkled  it  on
the  people,  and  said,  Behold,  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  which  the  Lord  hath  made  with
you"  (Bxod.  xxiv.  8).  It  was  necessary  that  the  new  covenant  which  the  Lord  had
promised  by  his  prophet  (Jer.  xxxi,  31)  should  be  inaugurated  with  blood,  for  "  with-
out shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Mediator  of  the  new
covenant,  being  both  Priest  and  Victim ;  his  blood  is  the  hlood  of  sprinkling,  which
can  purge  the  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God.     It  is  the  blood  of


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  541

the  new  covenant — the  blood  with  which  the  covenant  of  grace  was  inaugurated.  The
partaking  of  that  cup  in  repentance,  faith,  and  love  brings  home  the  blessings  of  the
new  covenant  to  each  believing  soul.  That  blood  was  now  being  shed,  the  Lord  said  ;
the  hour  of  his  death  was  so  near  at  hand'  that  he  regarded  it  as  already  present.  He
gave  himself  now  in  solemn  purpose,  in  voluntary  self-sacrifice,  to  die  for  men,  as  ho
gave  his  body  and  blood  to  be  for  ever  the  spiritual  food  of  the  Christian  souL  It  is
shed  ^^far  many,"  ahmit  them,  with  reference  to  their  needs ;  for  all  in  a  true  sense,  for
"he  died  for  all,"  he  is  the  Propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world;  for  many,  in
a  deeper,  holier;^ense — ^many,  not  all,  alas  I  wash  their  robes,  and  make  them  white  in
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  And  it  is  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins ;  for  that  blood
purgeth  the  conscience,  that  blood  cleanseth  from  all  sin,  that  blood  is  accepted  as  a
full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
woirld.  Then  with  what  grateful  love,  with  what  fervent  hope,  ought  all  Christiaa
people  to  come  to  the  Holy  Eucharist !  for  the  bread  and  wine  which  the  Lord  hath
commanded  to  be  received  become  by  his  ordinance  the  means  whereby  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ  are  received  after  a  heavenly  and  spiritual  manner  by  the  faithful.
And  that  body  is  the  bread  of  life,  and  that  blood  is  the  blood  of  the  new  covenant,
sealing  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  of  grace  to  those  who  in  faith  partake  of  that  holy
food.  Thus  coming,  may  we  experience  in  our  inmost  souls  the  truth  of  the  well-
known  words,  "  0  my  God,  thou  art  true ;  0  my  soul,  thou  art  happy  "  (see  Hooker,
'  Eccl.  Pol.,'  oh.  Ixvii.  sec.  12).  3.  Tht  new  wine  of  tJie  kingdom.  The  Holy
Eucharist  looks  not  only  backward,  to  the  death  of  Christ,  but  forward  also,  to  the
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  For  the  Lord  said  that  he  would  drink  no  more  of  that
fruit  of  the  vine,  till  that  day  when  he  shall  drink  it  new  with  his  chosen  in  the  king-
dom of  his  Father.  Then  the  wine  shall  be  new,  not  the  new  wine  of  this  world,  but
a  fountain  of  gladness  and  rapture  such  as  hath  never  entered  into  human  heart.  The
Lord  shall  share  that  gladness  with  his  redeemed.  He  rejoiceth  in  their  salvation ;
they  rejoice  in  his  most  precious  love.  "  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  unto  the
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  4.  3%e  depcurture.  The  last  Supper  was  over.  They
sang  a  hymn,  the  conclusion,  probably,  of  the  Hallel.  The  Lord  and  his  disciples
chanted  the  praise  of  God  in  those  precious  psalms,  which,  from  the  time  of  David
onward,  have  ever  been  the  Church's  treasury  of  devotion.  They  sang  of  that  cup  of
salvation  which,  in  a  Christian  sense,  they  had  just  received.  They  sang  (and  surely
they  must  have  felt  that  those  sacred  words  had  now  a  deeper  meaning  than  ever)  how
"  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints."  They  sang  of  the  Stone
which  the  builders  refused,  soon  to  become  the  Head-stone  of  the  corner.  They
repeated  the  "  Hosanna ! "  of  Palm  Sunday,  and  ended  their  high  chant  of  praise  with  the
solemn  refrain,  "  0  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord ;  for  he  is  good :  for  his  mercy  endureth
for  ever."  As  the  Lord  was  with  his  disciples  then,  singing  with  them,  so  may  he  be
with  us,  in  our  hearts,  singing  with  us,  when  we  chant  the  praises  of  God  in  the
sanctuary.  His  presence,  his  inspiration,  make  praise  and  prayer  acceptable.  And
now  the  last  psalm  was  sung,  and  they  went  forth  into  the  night.  So  should  the
Christian  soul,  strengthened  and  refreshed  by  the  holy  sacrament,  go  forth  to  meet
the  Lord.

Lessons.  1.  Hate  pride ;  remember  your  sins ;  earnestly  seek  the  grace  of  lowli-
ness. 2.  Say,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  Do  not  think  of  your  neighbours'  sins,  but  of  your  own.
3.  Come  often  to  the  Holy  Communion.  Come ;  for  it  is  the  Lord's  commandment.
Come ;  for  it  is  the  food  of  the  souL  4.  Seek  to  realize  the  presence  of  the  Lord  in
prayer  and  praise.

Vers.  31 — i6. — 2%e  Mount  of  Olives,  I,  The  conveesation  bt  the  way.  1.  The
Lord's  prediction  that  all  should  forsake  him.  Partly  in  the  upper  room,  partly  on  the
way,  the  Lord  had  uttered  those  most  sacred  and  precious  words  which  St.  John  was
led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  preserve  in  those  chapters  which  have  well  been  called  the
holiest  of  the  holy.  St.  Matthew  relates  only  one  thing  which  passed  as  they  went
in  the  late  evening,  in  the  solemn  light  of  the  Paschal  moon,  their  hearts,  we  may  be
sure,  filled  with  awful  forebodings  and  strange  mysterious  anticipations,  to  the  well-
known  spot.  Tlie  Lord  had  said  long  ago,  "  Blessed  is  he,  whosoever  shall  not  be
ofieuded  in  me."    The  people  of  Nazareth  had  been  so  offended  (ch.  xiii.  57)  j  now,  he


542  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cii  xxvi.  1— 75.

said,  his  chosen  disciples  would  be  offended,  and  on  that  very  night.  He  who  should
become  the  Head-stone  of  the  comer  would  be  for  a  time  even  to  them  a  stone  of
stumbling  and  a  rock  of  ofience.  It  must  be  so,  the  Lord  said,  for  so  it  had  been
written,  applying  to  himself  tliat  prophecy  of  Zechariah  which  has  so  many  mysterious
allusions  to  the  Passion,  "  I  will  smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  of  the  flock  shall
be  scattered  abroad."  The  disciples  would  remember  afterwards  that  that  Shepherd
in  the  prophecy  is  called  by  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  the  Man  that  is  my  fellow ;  "  and
they  would  feel  that  those  words  could  be  true  only  of  One  who,  "  being  in  the  form  ol
God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God."  That  very  night  the  sheep  would
be  scattered,  but  only  for  a  short  time  ;  for  it  is  written  in  the  same  place,  "  I  will  turn
mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones."  The  Lord  would  rise  again.  He  would  gather  together
his  little  flock ;  he  would  go  before  them,  as  a  shepherd  goeth  before  his  sheep.  They
should  see  him  again  in  Galilee.  2.  Peter's  assertion  of  his  fidelity.  Peter,  self-
confident  as  ever,  asserted  his  unshaken  loyalty;  he,  at  least,  would  never  be  offended.
And  when  the  Lord  repeated  his  warning,  showing  his  knowledge  of  the  future  even
in  its  minute  details,  he  became  more  earnest  and  excited,  "  Though  I  should  die  with
thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny  thee."  "  Likewise  also  said  all  the  disciples."  Let  us  learn
to  distrust  ourselves.     When  we  are  weak,  then  we  are  strong.

IL  Gethsemanb.  1.  The  agony.  The  Lord,  in  the  full  knowledge  of  his  coming
Passion,  sought  a  place  for  solitary  prayer.  He  came  to  the  well-known  garden
whither  he  "  ofttimes  resorted."  He  took  with  him  the  three  best  beloved  of  the
apostles,  bidding  the  others  rest.  Then  came  that  awful  and  mysterious  agony  :  "  He
began  to  be  sorrowful  and  sore  troubled."  He  bade  the  disciples  remain  at  a  distance ;
even  the  three  chosen  ones,  whose  companionship  and  sympathy  he  desired,  might  not
draw  too  near  to  the  Lord  in  his  anguish.  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even
unto  death :  tarry  ye  here,  and  watch  with  me."  Where  apostles  might  not  walk,  we
may  not  presume  to  intrude.  We  cannot  comprehend  the  full  meaning  of  that  most
awful  agony.  We  are  sure  that  it  was  not  the  mere  fear  of  death  which  so  crushed
the  holy  Saviour's  soul.  He  shared,  doubtless,  perfect  Man  as  he  was,  our  human
horror  of  death  ;  and  in  him,  we  must  remember,  that  hoiror  would  be  increased  by
his  complete  foreknowledge  of  all  the  circumstances  of  that  bitter  Passion  which  was
now  so  close  at  hand.  Again,  the  shrinking  from  death  seems  to  stand  in  some  rela-
tion to  the  sense  of  life ;  the  feebler  that  sense  of  life,  the  less  men  fear  to  die.  But
the  Lord  was  not  only  in  the  full  strength  of  early  manhood,  with  a  bodily  frame  which
had  never  been  weakened  by  sickness;  but  he  was  the  Life, the  essential,  self-existent
Life  ;  he  had  life  in  himself,  therefore  it  seems  the  conflict  with  death  must  have  been
in  him  far  more  terrible  than  in  ordinary  men.  Moreover,  death  must  have  had  an
awful  aspect  in  the  sight  of  Christ,  because  it  is  the  wages,  the  consequence  of  sin ;  and
this  close  connection  with  sin  must  have  invested  death  with  a  horrible  character  to
the  All-holy  One.  But  it  was  not  the  fear  of  death  which  caused  that  bloody  sweat,
that  utter  anguish.  Saints  and  martyrs,  and  even  ungodly  men,  have  met  death  with-
out flinching ;  and  we  know  with  what  calm  majestic  fortitude  the  Lord  endured  the
cross.  On  Palm  Sunday  the  impenitence  of  Jerusalem  had  wrung  from  him  a  burst  of
holy  tears;  and  now,  when  the  intense  wickedness  of  men,  the  wickedness  of  his  own
apostles,  of  the  leaders  of  his  own  chosen  people,  was  gathering  round  him,  he  may  well
have  recoiled  in  horror  from  that  dark  and  wretched  prospect.  He  hud  loved  those
unhappy  men,  even  Judas,  even  Caiaphas.  He  had  come  down  from  heaven  to  save
them,  and  they  were  rushing  into  deadly  sin,  into  utter  ruin.  They  had  rejected  his
love  and  mercy.  Alas  1  thousands  more  would  do  the  like,  would  crucify  the  Lord
afresh,  would  sin  wilfully  against  knowledge  and  against  light,  and  would  die  in  their
sins.  He  knew  it  would  be  so,  and  he  was  "  exceeding  sorrowful,  even.unto  death."  And
he  saw,  behind  Judas  and  Caiaphas  and  the  rest,  the  awful  form  of  the  evil  one.  Satan
had  entered  into  them.  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh,"  he  had  said.  Satan  had
nothing  in  Christ,  no  hold  upon  that  pure  and  spotless  innocence ;  but  all  around  he
exercised  his  terrible  power  with  fiendish  malignity,  by  the  agency  of  those  wicked
men  whom  he  had  ensnared  to  their  ruin.  It  may  well  be  that  the  nearness  and
activity  of  the  evil  spirit  helpi  d  to  bring  that  shuddering  horror  over  the  Saviour's
•oul.  But,  once  more,  "  lie  was  made  sin  for  us,  though  he  was  without  sin."  We
cannot  penetrate  into  the  awful  mysteries  which  those  words  seem  to  imply.    We


CH.  XXVI.  1—75,]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  543

know  that  "  the  Lord  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  We  know  that  he  "  hare
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  and  we  believe  that  it  was  that  terrible  burden
of  sin — the  fin  of  the  whole  world — that  crushed  him  to  the  earth.  Sin  was  to  his  pure
soul  most  utterly  loathsome,  most  horrible ;  and,  in  some  mysterious  way,  it  now  came
close  around  him,  enveloping  him  with  its  hateful  nearness :  all  the  sins  of  the  whole
world,  from  the  first  sin  of  Adam  to  the  last  sin  with  which  the  last  of  living  men  will
pollute  the  creation  of  God,  all  came  in  one  burden  of  accumulated  horror  upon  "  the
Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  [beareth]  the  sins  of  the  world."  It  was  a  burden
which  only  he  could  bear.  Only  the  Sinless  One,  only  he  who,  though  he  became
perfect  Man,  was  in  the  truth  of  his  being,  perfect  God,  could  put  away  sin  by  the
sacrifice  of  himself.  Only  he  could  bear  that  crushing  burden ;  but  it  caused  him  the
most  intense  suffering,  unutterable  anguish.  It  was  not  good  for  most  of  the  apostles
to  witness  that  agony ;  they  could  not  bear  it.  He  left  them  at  the  entrance  of  the
garden.  He  took  the  three  with  him.  They  had  seen  the  gloiy  of  the  Transfiguration ;
the  recollections  of  that  effulgent  brightness,  of  those  glimpses  of  the  Godhead,  might
strengthen  them  in  the  presence  of  this  more  than  human  sorrow.  It  seems  that  the
sympathy  of  these  loved  and  trusted  friends,  even  their  very  nearness,  was  some
relief  to  the  suffering  Lord,  as  it  is  with  us  in  our  own  hour  of  deep  distress.  Dying
men  love  to  have  their  dearest  friends  present  with  them,  watching  with  them,  though
they  can  give  no  help  beyond  that  sympathizing  presence.  So  it  was  with  Christ  the
Lord,  so  true  was  his  humanity.  But  the  extremest  anguish  he  must  bear  alone ;  the
prayer  of  completest  self-sacrifice  he  must  pray  alone.  Only  the  Father  and  the  blessed
angels  might  behold  that  bloody  sweat  and  hear  that  most  earnest  prayer.  Not  even
the  three  might  follow  him  now.  He  would  have  them  near ;  he  came  to  them  again
and  again,  as  if  for  sympathy ;  but  the  most  dread  struggle  he  must  face  alone.  He
went  a  little  further  into  the  garden.  "  He  was  withdrawn  from  them,"  St.  Luke  says,
"  about  a  stone's  cast."  The  evangelist  uses  a  strong  word — he  tore  himself  from  them.
It  seems  as  if  the  dear  Lord  could  scarcely  endure  that  awful  loneliness,  and  yet  he
must  be  alone.  That  bitter  anguish  reveals  to  us  the  greatness  of  his  blessed  love.
2.  The  threefold  prayer.  (1)  The  first  prayer.  The  Lord  kneeled  down  upon  tlie
ground ;  then  he  fell  upon  his  face  in  the  intensity  of  his  supplication.  "  0  my  Father,"
he  said,  "if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me:  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but
as  thou  wilt."  The  Lord  is  an  example  to  us  in  all  things.  In  this  overpowering
agony  he  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  Pain  and
trouble  bring  the  Christian  to  his  God.  The  greater  the  pain,  the  more  heartrending
the  trouble,  the  more  earnestly  he  will  pray.  The  Lord  prayed  that  the  cup  of
anguish  might  pass  from  him,  if  it  were  possible.  The  other  evangelists  give  a
slightly  different  report  of  his  words :  "  Father,  if  thou  be  willing,  remove  this  cup
from  me "  (St.  Luke) ;  "  Abba,  Father,  all  things  are  possible  unto  thee ;  take  away
this  cup  from  me  "  (St.  Mark).  With  God  all  things  are  possible.  But  it  was  not
possible  to  take  away  that  cup  of  woe  if  men  were  to  be  saved,  as  God  willed  them  to
be  saved,  through  the  cross  and  Passion  of  the  Lord.  It  was  not  possible,  for  the  cup
passed  not  away.  There  were,  it  seems,  inscrutable  reasons  which  made  that  tremen-
dous sacrifice  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  man  and  the  glory  of  God.  God  will  not
always  take  the  cup  of  suffering  from  us.  It  may  be  necessary  that  we  should  suffer,
for  our  own  good  or  for  the  good  of  others;  our  sufferings  may  be  contained  iu  God's
eternal  purpose.  Yet  we  may  pray  for  their  removal ;  we  may  ask  God  to  spare  us
this  or  that  trial,  which  seems  too  great  for  us  to  bear.  Only  we  must  pray  all  the
Lord's  prayer,  not  part  only.  His  perfect  human  nature  involved  a  human  will.  That
will  was  distinct  from  the  Divine  will  j  il  was  *  pure,  holy,  human  will ;  but,  like  our
will,  it  shrank  from  pain  and  death.  The  Lord  yielded  it  up  in  entire  submission  to
his  Father's  will :  "Not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  He  who  is  learning  to  pray  that
prayer  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart  is  very  near  to  Christ.  (2)  The  return  to  the
three  apostles.  There  is  a  restlessness  in  intense  grief  which,  like  other  sinless  human
weaknesses,  was  experienced  by  our  Lord,  He  came  to  the  disciples  as  if  seeking  for
their  sympathy,  their  affection,  in  his  loneliness  and  exceeding  sorrow.  But  they  were
asleep.  The  same  three  had  slept  upon  the  Mount  of  the  Transfiguration.  It  seems
Tery  strange.  But  we  must  remember  that  it  was  now  very  late  at  night,  and  the
spiritual  strain  upon  the  apustlea  during  that  Thursday  evening  had  been  immense.


544  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 7&

They  had  heard  the  Lord  speak  again  and  again,  clearly  and  certainly,  of  hia  own
approaching  death ;  they  had  heard  of  the  treachery  of  one  of  their  own  number.  They
had  listened,  it  must  have  been  in  rapt  awe-stricken  attention,  to  those  wondrous
utterances  of  exhortation,  comfort,  instruction,  recorded  in  St.  John's  Gospel.  Now
the  three  were  left  alone,  in  the  silence  of  the  night ;  they  were  worn  out  with  excite-
ment, sorrow,  watching ;  and  they  slept.  It  must  have  been  a  perturbed  sleep,  like
the  deep  sleep  of  Abram,  when  the  horror  of  grtat  darkness  fell  upon  him.  The  Lord
came  to  them ;  he  found  them  sleeping,  just  when  his  holy  human  nature,  sorely
tried,  needed  the  afifectionate  sympathy  of  human  friends.  He  addressed  the  one  who  a
short  time  before  had  expressed  his  love  so  strongly.  "  What!"  he  said  to  Peter,  "could
you  not  watch  with  me  one  hour?"  The  words  imply  a  lengthened  prayer.  The
evangelist  has  recorded  only  the  essence,  the  central  petition,  of  that  long  prayer  of
agony.  The  Lord  had  prayed  already  for  a  full  hour.  They  imply  too  that  the  Lord,
in  his  perfect  humanity,  telt  some  comfort,  some  stay,  in  the  thought  that  those  earthly
friends  who  were  dearest  to  him  were  not  only  near  at  hand,  but  awake,  watching;
as  men  in  extreme  sickness,  in  great  suffering,  like  to  feel  that  those  who  watch  in
the  sick-chamber  are  awake,  conscious  of  their  state,  even  though  unable  to  help  them.
But  the  good  Lord  thought  not  only  of  himself,  as  we  too  often  do  in  sickness ;  he
thought  of  his  disciples.  Temptation  was  close  at  hand.  They  needed  watchfulness ;
they  needed  prayer.  They  must  keep  all  their  faculties  awake ;  they  must  be  thought-
ful, vigilant,  prepared  for  the  hour  of  danger.  And  they  must  pray.  True  prayer
implies  the  vigorous  exercise  of  all  the  highest  faculties.  It  is  not  easy,  but  often  very
difficult;  it  requires  effort,  thought,  sustained  attention.  It  needs  the  constant  aid  oi
God  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  great  Teacher  of  prayer.  The  apostles  needed  now  all  the
help  of  prayer  and  watchfulness,  lest  they  should  enter  into  temptation.  The  tempta-
tion must  come ;  nay,  it  was  already  at  hand.  But  they  must  pray  not  to  enter  into
it,  not  to  yield  themselves  to  it,  not  to  enter  with  their  own  will  and  consent  into  the
snare  which  Satan  was  laying  for  them.  The  mere  fact  of  temptation  does  not  imply
sin.  The  Lord  himself  was  tempted.  The  sin  lies  in  entering  into  it  with  our  eyes
open,  with  the  consent  of  our  will.  And  the  remedy  is  watchfulness  and  prayer ;  a
man  cannot  enter  into  temptation  in  this  sense  while  he  prays,  if  only  his  prayer  is
the  waking,  thoughtful,  earnest  prayer  of  faith.  "  At  once  to  pray  and  to  sin,"  says
Stier,  "  is  impossible.  Who  could  with  a  wakeful  and  recollected  spirit  say  unto  God,
'  Not  as  thou  wilt '?  Who,  when  the  word  of  Jesus  bids  us  wat«h,  aud  the  Spirit  of
Jesus  teaches  ns  to  pray,  may  answer  him  and  say,  '  Lord,  but  I  cannot,  1  am  too
weak'?"  The  Lord  adds  the  reason  which  makes  watchfulness  and  prayer  so  neces-
sary— the  weakness  of  the  flesh.  It  was  weak  even  in  himself,  though  in  him  that  flesh
which  he  had  j^raciously  assumed  that  he  might  save  us,  was  without  sin  ;  he  had
come  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh ;  "  but  in  him  the  flesh  was  only  weak,  it  was  not
sinfuL  It  was  weak ;  it  shrank  from  pain  and  death.  Even  he,  in  the  days  of  his
flesh,  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  How  much
more  necessary  are  prayer  and  watchfulness  for  us,  whose  flesh  is  not  only  weak,  but
also  sinful,  defiled  by  many  sins?  The  spirit  is  willing.  In  him  it  was  more  than
willing;  it  was  ready,  zealous.  It  will  be  so  with  his  saints  in  proportion  as  the
spirit,  the  highest  part  of  our  composite  human  nature,  which  was  breathed  into  man
by  God  himself,  realizes  its  powers  and  its  privileges,  offering  up  itself  to  be  dwelt  in
and  purified  by  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Holy  (Spirit  of  God,  and,  by  means  of  that
gracious  indwelling,  living  in  that  fellowship  which  is  with  God  the  Father,  and  with
his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  But  with  us  the  spirit  is  not  always  willing.  The  flesh  lusteth
against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh ;  and,  alasl  we  are  not  always  led
by  the  spirit,  but  often  by  that  sinful  flesh  of  ours.  And  even  when  in  some  sense
the  spirit  is  willing,  when  "to  will  is  present  \vith  me,"  how  often  do  we  find  in  our
hearts  that  conflict  so  wonderfully  described  in  Eom.  vii.,  "how  to  perform  that  which
is  good  I  find  not ; "  "  for  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not ;  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I "  I
Then  what  need  have  we,  whose  flesh  is  not  only  weak,  but  exceeding  sinful,  to  obey
Christ's  commandment,  to  follow  Christ's  example:  "  Watch  and  pray  "  1  (3)  The
second  prayer.  The  Lord  found  no  help  in  human  sympathy ;  a;;ain  he  sought  it  in
communion  with  his  Father.  His  second  prayer  was  calmer.  The  angel,  of  whom
St.  Luke  tells  us,  appeared,  perhaps,  after  the  first  prayer,  strengthening  him.     "  Ha


CH.  xxvu  1— 75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  645

was  heard  in  that  he  feaved  "  (Heh.  v.  7).  As  the  angels  ministered  to  him,  the
Almighty  Son  of  God,  after  his  temptation,  so  now  in  his  agony  one  angel  comforted
him,  the  Comforter  of  all.  He  suhmitted  to  receive  strength  and  comfort  from  his
angels.  They  will  calm  our  spirits  in  our  death-agony  if  we  are  truly  his.  The  Lord
offered  up  the  prayer  of  holy  resignation,  "0  my  Father,  if  this  cup  may  not  pass
away  from  me,  except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done."  Perfect  pt  ace  can  be  found  only
in  perfect  resignation  to  the  blessed  will  of  God.  Again  he  came  to  the  three  disciples,
seeking  their  sympathy,  and  doubtless  seeking  to  prepare  them  against  the  coming
temptation.  But  again  they  were  asleep,  for  their  eyes  were  heavy.  God  can  comfort ;
his  angels  can  by  his  appointment  succour  and  defend  us ;  roan  can  do  little  for  us  in
the  hour  of  death.  (4)  The  third  prayer.  "  He  went  away  again,  and  prayed  the  third
time,  saying  the  same  words."  His  people  often  follow  his  example.  They  are  conscious
of  great  poverty  of  thought ;  they  find  it  hard  to  express  the  yearnings  of  their  souls
in  words,  especially  in  times  of  deep  afaiction.  Often  they  can  only  repeat  again  and
again  the  same  simple  ejaculation.  It  is  enough.  God  regards  not  the  form  of
words,  but  the  earnestness  of  the  supplication.  Again,  for  the  last  time,  the  Lord
returned  to  the  three  apostles.  "  Sleep  on  now,"  he  sairl,  "  and  take  your  rest."  He
needed  their  sympathy  no  longer;  the  time  for  watching  with  him  was  past.  His
hour  was  come,  and  he  was  ready.  He  had  schooled  his  huaian  will  by  a  mighty  effort
into  complete  resignation,  into  absolute  harmony  with  the  Father's  w;ll.  The  struggle
was  over ;  he  had  "  trodden  the  winepress  alone ; "  he  was  calm  in  perfect  self-mastery.
The  disciples  could  help  him  no  more,  even  by  sympathy ;  they  might  take  their  rest
while  they  could.  The  Lord,  in  his  tenderness,  had  compassion  on  their  weakness.
Possibly  there  may  have  been  a  certain  interval  of  time  between  those  words  and  the
appearance  of  the  traitor.  The  Lord,  perhaps,  stood  or  sat  watching  his  sleeping
apostles,  and  awaiting  the  approaching  band.  When  he  saw  them  near  he  roused
the  sleepers ;  " Else,"  he  said,  "let  us  bo  going ; "  and  he  went  forward  in  majestic
calmness  to  meet  the  danger.

Lessons.  1.  The  Lord's  dread  agony  calls  upon  us  for  deep  and  reverent  sympathy.
2.  It  calls  upon  us  for  confession  and  hatred  of  those  sins  which  added  to  his  burden  of
woe.  3.  It  calls  upon  us  for  resignation  and  submission  of  our  earthly  will  to  the  holy
will  of  God.  4.  It  teaches  us  in  oiu'  extremest  sufferings  always  to  pray — to  pray  more
earnestly.

Vers.  47 — 56. — The  apprehension  of  our  Lord.  I.  The  betrayal.  1.  7%e  approach
of  Judas.  The  three  evangelists  describe  him  as  "one  of  the  twelve."  They  add  this
description,  not  for  the  sake  of  accurate  identification,  for  his  treachery  had  been  already
mentioned,  but  to  set  forth  the  blackness  of  his  guilt.  Holy  Scripture  commonly  uses
a  certain  stern  simplicity  in  speaking  of  great  offences.  There  is  a  depth  of  meaning  in
those  few  simple  words,  "  one  of  the  twelve."  He  was  the  most  conspicuous  person
among  the  advancing  group;  his  sin  was  the  deadliest.  He  knew  the  perfect  holiness
of  the  blessed  Master ;  he  had  been  admitted  into  his  friendship ;  he  had  listened  to
his  words  of  heavenly  wisdom,  and  seen  his  works  of  almighty  power  and  love;  he  had
lived  for  two  years  and  more  in  the  immediate  presence  of  that  life  of  wondrous  purity
and  beauty.  And  now  he  is  to  teach  us  the  solemn  lesson  that  the  heart  of  man  is
indeed  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked;  that  it  can  continue  hard
and  selfish  and  impenitent  in  spite  of  the  greatest  possible  religious  privileges.  He
came,  and  with  him  a  great  multitude — Roman  soldiers,  officers  of  the  temple,  servants
of  the  chief  priests.  It  may  be  they  feared  resistance  from  the  Galilseans  or  other
adherents  of  the  Lord ;  it  may  be  they  feared  him.  Many  of  them  had  heard  of  his
miracles;  Judas  knew  that  he  had  stilled  the  tempest,  that  he  had  raised  the  deid.
He  tru  ted,  it  seems,  to  numbers,  to  earthly  weapons.  Strange  folly,  almost  incredible
in  one  who  had  known  so  much  of  Christ;  but  he  was  blinded  by  Satan,  to  whom  he
had  sold  himself.  2.  The  traitor's  kiss.  He  gave  them  a  sign.  The  Roman  soldiers,
perhaps  others  also,  did  not  know  the  Person  of  the  Lord.  The  sign  was  to  be  a  kiss.
The  traitor  had  known  the  Lord  intimately ;  he  had  been,  it  seems,  on  the  same  footing
of  affectionate  friendship  with  him  as  the  rest  of  the  twelve.  He  would  kiss  him  now
for  the  last  time ;  but  that  last  kiss  would  be,  not  the  kiss  of  peace,  but  the  deadly
breath  of  hellish  treachery,  the  cold,  wicked  kiss  of  hypocrisy — the  kiss  of  death.     He

MATTHEW — n.  2  K


546  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [on.  xxvu  1—76.

eame ;  he  said,  "  Hail,  Master  1 "  and  he  dared  to  pollute  the  face  of  the  Lord  with  his
unholy  kiss.  He  kissed  him.  The  Greek  word  seems  to  imply  that  he  did  it  with  an
affectation  of  earnestnesg,  with  much  warmth  of  manner,  perhaps  out  of  excitement,
perhaps  in  fear ;  perhaps  he  thought,  in  his  madness  and  folly,  that  he  might  be  able
to  conceal  his  sin.  Christ  and  the  afiostles  might  think  that  he  was  coming  simply  to
join  them,  and  might  not  discover  his  connection  with  the  band  tliat  followed.  But
the  Lord  went  forth,  "  knowing  all  things  that  should  come  upon  him."  He  knew  the
evil  heart  of  Judas.  "Companion,"  he  said — ^he  could  not  call  him  ".<riend;"  and
the  Greek  word  has  something  of  sternness  in  it,  as  in  ch.  xx.  13  and  xxii.  12 — "  is  it
this  for  which  thou  art  come  ?  "  "  Judas,  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss  ?  "
He  showed  his  Divine  knowledge  ;  he  showed  his  almighty  power.  At  the  words,  "  I
am  he,"  "  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  ground."  But  then  he  meekly  yielded
himself  to  suffer  and  to  die.  One  word  of  wrath  would  have  swept  his  assailants  into
utter  death.  Ho  would  not  speak  it ;  for  he  came  to  lay  down  his  life  for  his  sheep.
"Then  came  they,  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus,  and  took  him."

IL  The  bword  or  Petee.  1.  The  blow.  Two  of  the  disciples  were  armed  with
•words  (Luke  xxii.  38).  Tbey  thought  for  a  moment  of  resistance ;  "  Lord,"  they  said,
"shall  we  smite  with  the  sword?"  Peter,  always  impetuous,  did  not  wait  for  an
answer,  but  at  once  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  priest's,  and  smote  off  his  ear.  2.  The
Lord's  reproof.  Mark  his  majestic  collectedness,  his  thoughtfulness  for  others ;  in  the
immediate  presence  of  danger  and  death  he  cared  for  the  wounded  man,  he  cared  for
the  erring  apostle.  "  Put  up  thy  sword  into  his  place,"  he  said,  as  Peter  stood  with  his
drawn  weapon, ready  to  repeat  the  blow;  "for  all  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish
with  the  sword."  The  kiss  of  Judas  and  the  sword-stroke  of  Peter  stand  in  diametrical
opposition;  the  one  was  the  act  of  cold,  selfish,  hateful  treachery;  the  other,  of  bold,
ardent,  self-forgetting  zeal.  Both  were  wrong,  though  in  widely  different  degrees.
The  one  was  the  act  of  a  devil  (John  vi.  70) ;  the  other,  the  act  of  a  saint,  though  not
a  saint-like  act.  Christians  may  not  use  the  sword  for  the  defence  or  for  the  propaga-
tion of  the  gospel.  Sometimes  mistaken  zeal,  sometimes  more  unholy  motives,  have
led  to  persecutions  and  to  so-called  religious  wars.  The  Lord  distinctly  condemns  the
use  of  force ;  he  himself  refrained  from  the  exercise  of  his  power,  iie  was  King  of
kings  and  Lord  of  lords ;  he  could  have  subjugated  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  at
once,  by  one  act  of  omnipotence;  he  might  have  had  around  him  now,  not  eleven
disciples,  but  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels.  But  how  then  should  the  Scriptures
be  fulfilled  ?  The  salvation  of  man  was  to  be  brought  about,  not  by  force,  not  by  a
display  of  power,  but  by  holy  teaching,  by  holy  example,  by  suffering,  by  self-sacrifice,
by  the  cross.  The  forces  to  be  employed  were  not  physical,  but  moral  and  spiritual.
Christ  would  not  terrify  men  into  obedience.  What  he  seeks  is  not  the  forced  service  of
slaves,  but  the  willing  obedience  of  love.  And  love  cannot  be  forced ;  it  can  be  gained
only  by  love.  It  is  tbe  love  of  Christ  manifested  in  his  incarnation,  in  his  holy  life,
In  his  precious  death,  which  constrains  his  faithful  followers  to  live  no  longer  unto
themselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  them,  and  rose  again.  The  Lord  asked  not
for  the  twelve  legions  of  angels ;  his  followers  must  not  use  the  sword  to  propagate  the
goipeL

111.  Thk  Lord's  address  to  the  multitude.  1.  The  needlesn  display  of  force.
There  was  much  hesitation  in  the  action  of  the  soldiers.  They  had  felt  the  Lord's
power  (John  xviii.  6);  evidently  they  regarded  him  with  some  awe,  with  some
indefinite  terror.  Hence  he  had  time  to  heal  the  wound  of  Malchus,  to  speak  to  Judas,
to  Peter,  to  the  multitude.  He  asked  them  now  why  they  had  come  out  as  against
a  robber  ?  He  had  long  sat  quietly  teaching  in  the  temple ;  ho  had  not  sought  to
escape.  But  they  did  not  seize  him  then ;  they  did  not  interfere  with  his  teaching.
Why  did  they  now  seem  to  regard  him  as  a  dangerous  robber  ?  Why  these  swords
and  staves?  The  good  Lord  felt  the  cruelty  of  their  conduct,  the  indignity  with
which  they  were  treating  him.  2.  The  real  cause  of  the  Lord's  sufferings.  The  Lord
knew,  they  did  not  know,  the  deep  necessities  which  lay  under  all  this  show  of  human
violence.  The  Scriptures  of  the  prophets  must  be  fulfilled.  Those  wicked  men  were
ignorantly  working  out  the  eternal  puipose  of  God,  They  were  guilty,  all  of  them,
more  or  less ;  their  will  was  free.  But  yet,  in  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  foreknow-
ledge and  the  overruling  providoDce  of  God,  which  is  so  iufiuitely  above  our  reacts.


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  547

they  were  bringing  to  pass  the  utterances  of  God  through  the  prophets.  The  Scriptures
must  be  fulfilled.  St.  Matthew  dwells  reverently  upon  that  great  truth.  He  recurs
to  it  again  and  again.  Let  us  remember  it,  and  treasure  it  in  our  hearts  for  warning
and  for  encouragement.  3.  The  flight  of  the  disdplea.  They  had  looked,  perhaps,  for
some  exertion  of  power.  But  the  Lord  did  not  resist ;  he  meekly  yielded  himself  to
die.  And  their  heart  sank  within  them.  Fear  became  stronger  than  love.  "  They  all
forsook  him,  and  fled."  Even  Peter,  who  had  just  drawn  the  sword  in  his  defence;  even
John  and  James,  the  sons  of  thunder — all  fled.  Alas  !  for  human  nature ;  how  much
weakness  and  cowardice  and  selfishness  there  is  even  in  the  best  of  usl  Let  us
learn  to  distrust  ourselves,  to  recognize  our  own  weakness,  to  trust  in  him  whose
strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness.

Lessons.  1.  Many  knew  Christ  after  the  flesh ;  and  yet  they  were  not  saved.  Let
us  pray  to  know  him  by  faith  through  the  presence  of  his  Spirit.  2.  The  kiss  of  Judas
could  not  hide  his  treason.  Outward  reverence  will  not  conceal  a  selfish,  wicked  heart.
3.  We  must  use  gentle  means  to  win  hearts  to  God.  4.  Apostles  fled.  Let  us  beware
of  self-confidence ;  let  us  watch  and  pray.

Yers.  57 — 75. — The  palace  of  Oaiaphaa.  1.  The  pbeliminakt  tkiaIi.  1.  7^
meeting  of  the  Sanhedrin.  St.  John  tells  us  that  our  Lord  was  led  first  before  Annas,
for  a  hasty  informal  examination.  Perhaps  it  was  thought  that  the  astute  Annas,
with  that  snakelike  cunning  which  was  attributed  to  him,  might  elicit  something
which  might  tell  against  the  Prisoner.  But  the  craft  of  the  old  high  priest  and  the
brutality  of  his  othcers  were  alike  unavailing ;  and  the  Lord  was  sent  to  Caiaphas.
The  Sanhedrin  had  assembled  at  his  house.  In  their  haste  and  malice  they  violated
the  rules  of  their  court.  They  met  in  the  night ;  they  assigned  no  counsel  to  the
Prisoner ;  they  called  no  witnesses  in  his  favour ;  they  passed  judgment  of  death  at
once.  2.  The  witnesses.  In  their  intense  wickedness  they  deliberately  sought  false
witness  to  destroy  the  Innocent ;  they  could  not  find  it.  Even  the  perversion  of  the
Lord's  words,  "Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up,"  could  not  be
sustained.  "Neither  so,"  says  St.  Mark,  "did  their  witness  agree  together."  The
Lord  preserved  a  calm  and  holy  silence  amid  this  falsehood  and  calumny.  We  flash
into  indignation  when  we  are  unjustly  accused.     Let  us  learn  meekness  of  our  Lord.

II.  The  intervention  of  Caiaphas.  1.  Bis  questions.  He  started  up  in  fierce
excitement.  He  urged  the  Lord  to  speak.  And  when  Christ  still  answered  nothing,
he  put  him  upon  his  oath,  and  addressed  to  him  directly  the  awful  question,  "  Art
thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed?  "  It  was  a  flagrant  violation  of  all  the  rules
of  judicial  procedure.  The  judge  constitutes  himself  the  accuser;  he  tries  to  force  the
Accused  to  acknowledge  the  charge.  He  had,  at  a  previous  meeting  of  the  Sanhedrin
(John  xi.  49 — 52),  maintained  the  necessity  of  putting  Jesus  to  death.  Did  he  think
that  Jesus  was  indeed  the  Christ ;  and,  thinking  this,  did  he  seek  to  slay  him  ?  Was
his  guilt  like  the  guilt  of  Herod,  who  sought  to  destroy  the  young  Child  that  was  born
King  of  the  Jews?  Certainly  Caiaphas  had  "  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that
nation."  But  probably  that  prophecy  was  unconscious ;  probably  he  did  not  under-
stand the  full  meaning  of  his  words.  If  he  understood  it,  his  guilt  would  be  too  awful
to  contemplate;  it  would  be  beyond  the  limits  of  human  guilt;  it  would  be  hellish,
Satanic.  2.  The  Lord's  answer.  When  he  was  adjured  by  the  living  God,  put  upon
his  oath  solemnly  by  the  high  priest,  the  Lord  kept  silence  no  longer.  "  Jesus  saith
unto  him,  Thou  hast  said;"  or,  in  the  equivalent  words  of  St.  Mark,  "Jesus  said,  1
am."  Standing  bound  before  his  judge,  knowing  that  he  was  pronouncing  his  own
death-warrant,  he  asserted  in  simple  majesty  the  tremendous  truth.  He  was  the  Son
of  God.  Caiaphas  should  one  day  know  it — in  that  day  when  "he  cometh  with  clouds;
und  every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  him."  Caiaphas  should  see
him  then,  the  Son  of  God,  but  manifested  as  the  Son  of  man  (for  it  is  as  the  Son  of  man
that  he  shall  execute  judgment,  ch.  ixv.  31 ;  John  v.  27;  Dan.  vii.  13),  "  sitting  on
the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."  3.  27je  condemnation.
Caiaphas  had  gained  his  point  now.  He  rent  his  clothes  (an  action  forbidden  to  the
high  priest,  Lev.  xii.  10)  in  affectation  of  horror.  There  was  no  further  need  of
witnesses,  he  said ;  for  the  Sanhedrin  had  heard  the  awful  words — awful  words,  which
he  called  blasphemy ;  which  vve  know  were  the  truth  of  God.    Caiaphas  at  once  put


548         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75.


the  question  to  the  council ;  and  at  once,  without  hesitation,  and,  it  appears  from
St.  Mark,  unanimously,  they  condemned  him  to  be  guilty  of  death.  He  was  condemned
to  death  who  is  the  Lord  of  life — the  Life  of  the  wurld.  He  was  condemned  who  is  the
All-holy  One,  who  knew  no  sin.  He  was  judged  who  is  the  Judge  of  all ;  before  whose
judgment-seat  quick  and  dead  must  one  day  stand;  who  shall  say  to  some,  "Oome,  ye
blessed ; "  and,  alas  !  to  others,  "  Depart  from  me."  4.  The  mocking.  They  spat  on
his  face ;  they  buffeted  him;  they  derided  his  sacred  ofBoe ;  they  bade  him  prophesy;
they  called  him  •'  Christ "  in  bitter  mockery.  Fearful  guilt,  horrible  brutality,  Satanic
oraelty.  We  shudder  as  we  read  the  words ;  we  feel  shame  for  our  fellow-creatures,  for
our  common  human  nature.  They  covered  that  face  which  is  the  light  of  the  world;
they  spat  upon  him  whom  all  the  angels  of  God  worship ;  they  buffeted  him  who  had
gone  about  doing  good ;  they  scoffed  at  him  whose  holy  soul  was  filled  with  sacred
love,  who  had  come  down  from  heaven  for  them,  who  was  ready  to  die  for  them  that
they  might  live.  What  a  contrast! — their  rough,_  savage  brutality,  and  his  sweet,
heavenly  dignity ;  their  violence,  and  his  meekness ;'  their  noisy  clamour,  and  his  calm
holv  silence.  May  we  learn  of  him  the  lesson  which  he  taught,  "  Blessed  are  the
meek"!

III.  The  denials  of  St.  Peteb.  1.  The  first  denial.  He  had  followed  afar  ofl
when  the  disciples  fled.  He  had  been  vehement,  as  usual,  in  his  protestations  ol
fidelity  and  steadfastness.  For  a  time  he  had  stood  true  to  his  words ;  he  only  had
attempted  resistance ;  he  only  had  drawn  the  sword,  and  struck  a  bold  blow  in  defence
of  his  Lord.  It  was  a  daring  action.  Resistance  was  evidently  useless.  The  Lord
interfered ;  he  saved  his  apostle  from  the  consequences  of  his  rashness.  But  he  yielded
himself  to  his  enemies.  And  then  at  once  St.  Peter's  courage  failed  him.  He  shared
the  panic  fear  of  the  disciples ;  he  fled  like  the  rest.  But  he  soon  turned  from  his
flight.  He  deeply  loved  the  Lord,  and  he  was  full  of  anxiety  for  him ;  he  followed
afar  oflf.  St,  John,  it  seems,  was  able  to  procure  his  admission  into  the  hall  of  the  high
priest's  palace.  He  sat  there  with  the  servants,  warming  himself  at  the  fire  (small
details  like  this  give  a  human  interest  to  the  narrative,  and  evince  its  simple  truthful-
ness), anxious  to  see  the  end.  He  had  thrown  himself  into  danger,  as  he  had  done
once  before  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee ;  and  again  the  event  proved  that  he  had  miscalculated
his  courage,  his  endurance.  A  damsel  came  to  him,  saying,  "  Thou  also  wast  with
Jesus  of  Galilee."  It  was  not  a  soldier,  only  a  damsel ;  and  she  seems  to  have
addressed  him  out  of  curiosity.  Ho  was  in  no  more  danger  than  St.  John,  whom,  it
seems,  the  damsel  knew  as  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  But  at  once  he  lost  courage.  He  denied
before  them  all,  saying,  "  I  know  not  what  thou  sayest."  Uis  first  words,  as  reported
by  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark,  are  not  a  direct  falsehood.  He  begins  by  equivocating,
shufSing,  pretending  not  to  understand  words  which  were  plain  to  any  one.  His  fall
shows  us  how  dangerous  it  is  to  tamper  with  the  truth ;  an  evasion  soon  leads  to  false-
hood, to  a  wicked  oath;  it  shows  us  the  need  of  watchfulness  and  prayer,  the  danger
of  self-confidence.  It  is  a  sad  picture  of  vacillation,  cowardice,  falsehood.  Very
strange  too  it  would  be,  were  i^  not  that  we  find  the  like  instability  in  our  own  weak,
wavering,  sinful  hearts.  It  was  sad  for  Peter  that  he  over-estimated  his  firmness,  and
went  into  the  high  priest's  palace ;  but  his  weakness  has  turned  to  the  good  of  the
Church.  This  precious  episode  is  full  of  sacred  lessons.  It  tells  us  of  our  utter  weak-
ness, of  the  need  of  constant  watchfulness  and  constant  prayer.  And  it  tells  of  the
blessed  love  of  Christ,  of  the  constraining  power  of  his  loving,  mournful  look  fixed  upon
the  faithless  disciple.  2.  The  second  denial.  Peter  went  into  the  porch ;  he  feared  to
linger  among  the  crowd  of  servants  round  the  fire ;  he  was  anxious  to  escape  from  those
inquiring  eyes,  from  those  busy  tongues.  But  he  had  thrust  himself  into  temptation,
and  the  temptation  thickened  around  him.  He  was  not  left  alone  in  the  porch.
Another  maid  saw  him,  and  said  unto  them  that  were  there,  "  This  fellow  was
also  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth."  And  now  he  sinned  more  deeply  than  before.  He
denied  with  an  oath,  "  I  do  not  know  the  Man."  And  this  was  Peter,  the  rock-like
apostle,  to  whom  the  Lord  had  entrusted  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  Peter,
who  a  few  hours  before  had  said,  "Though  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny
thee ; "  Peter,  who  had  drawn  the  sword  in  his  Lord's  defence  I  The  trembling  self-
distrustful  question,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  is  more  becoming  in  a  Christian  than  that  proud
•elf-confidence  which  so  often  goes  before  a  fall.    3.  The  third  denial.    Satan  had


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOIIDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  649


desired  to  have  him,  and  Satan  would  not  easily  let  him  go.  He  still  lingered  about
the  door.  He  had  sinned  exceedingly,  but  his  sin  had  not  wholly  driven  his  love  for
his  Master  out  of  his  heart.  He  trembled  for  his  life;  and  yet  a  strange  fascination
kept  him  in  that  dangerous  place.  An  hour  longer,  St.  Luke  tells  us,  he  remained
there — a  most  miserable  hour  it  must  have  been.  But  he  was  to  fall  more  deeply  yet.
He  talked,  it  seems,  to  hide  his  terror.  His  provincial  accent  showed  the  Galilsean.
"  Surely  thon  also  art  one  of  them,"  they  said  again ;  "  for  thy  speech  bewrayeth  thee."
Then,  alas  1  for  our  poor  human  nature,  Peter  "  began  to  curse  and  to  swear,  saying,
I  know  not  the  Man."  This  was  the  climax  of  his  guilt — first  the  evasion,  then  the
false  oath,  then  this  awful  result  of  the  first  equivocation,  cursing  and  swearing.
4.  Eis  repentance,  Peter  swore,  "I  know  not  the  Man."  But  the  Lord  knoweth
them  that  are  his;  he  knew  his  sinful  follower  still.  "The  Lord  turned  and  looked
upon  Peter."  We  may  well  be  thankful  to  the  Evangelist  St.  Luke  for  having
recorded,  by  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  touching  fact.  The  Lord  was  in  the
Imnds  of  his  enemies,  condemned  to  death,  mocked,  buflfeted;  but  he  thought  of  hii
Mpogtle.  He  h»J  saved  him  from  the  swords  of  the  soldiers ;  now  he  saved  him  from
SiUan.  That  Wy,  loving,  mournful  look  went  straight  to  Peter's  heart.  The  crowing
of  the  cock,  heard  at  the  same  time,  brought  to  his  remembrance  the  warning  words  of
Glirist;  "  and  he  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly."  Oh  that  we  might  have  faith  to  know
and  feel  that  that  loving,  mournful  look  is  now  fixed  upon  us  1  Still  the  Lord  looks
round  about  upon  all  things.  He  reads  the  hearts.  How  often  does  he  even  now  see
sins  like  St.  Peter's — cowardice,  falseliood,  blasphemy — and  that  among  men  who  are
called  by  his  Name,  who  have  been  baptized  into  his  Church  1  How  often  do  men  even
now  deny  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  sometimes  in  words,  still  more  commonly  by
their  life  and  conduct  1  He  sees  us  out  of  heaven.  Oh  that  we  could  realize  that  look
of  mournful  tenderness,  of  yearning,  compassionate  love !  The  consciousness  that  that
look  is  seeking  us  out,  that  it  has  found  us,  that  it  is  fixed  upon  us  in  longing  affection,
must  surely  bring  us  to  our  knees,  to  true  repentance,  to  those  blessed  tears  which  are
precious  in  the  sight  of  the  angels  of  God ;  for  they  tell  of  a  sinner  that  repentoth.
"The  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon  Peter."  Look  on  us,  0  Lord;  and  by  the  power  of
that  holy  look  win  our  souls  from  sin  unto  God,  from  selfishness  to  thine  own  most
blessed  love.

Lessons.  1.  "  Bend  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments."  Caiaphas  rent  his  clothes ;
it  was  mere  affectation.  Let  us  come  to  God  with  a  penitent  heart,  confessing  our  sin.
2.  The  Lord  was  cruelly  mocked  and  derided'.  Let  us  learn  of  him  the  blessedness  of
Christian  meekness.  3.  Peter  denied  the  Lord,  and  that  thrice.  "Let  him  that  thinketb
he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  6 — 13. — "  Ointment  poured  forth."  This  incident  has  a  unique  honow  set
upon  it  by  our  Lord,  who  promises  it  worldwide  and  lasting  fame.  Thus  accentuated,
it  claims  our  closest  attention.  Why  does  Christ  desire  honour  to  be  given  to  the
memory  of  so  simple  a  deed  as  is  here  recorded  ?

I.  One  who  teult  loves  Christ  will  reckon  no  gift  too  costlt  to  be  offered
TO  HIM.  Mary's  adoration  was  prompted  by  adequate  motives.  She  had  often  sat  at  the
feet  of  Jesus,  and  she  had  learned  to  appreciate  his  goodness  as  far  as  any  human  being
could  do  so.  Her  brother  had  just  been  restored  to  her  from  the  grave  by  this
wonderful  Friend.  Jesus  had  dropped  dark  hints  of  his  approaching  departure.  Then
all  her  love  and  adoration  were  gathered  up  in  an  enthusiasm  of  devotion  for  this  last
typical  act.  The  reason  why  the  incident  is  so  exceptional  is  that  the  Marys  of
Bethany  are  rare.  The  real  wonder  is  that  the  Church  of  Christ  should  be  so  slow  to
pour  out  her  treasures  at  his  feet,  that  calculating  economy  and  grudging  mean-.iess.
should  cripple  the  efforts  of  any  Christian  people  in  sacrificing  themselves  and  giving
their  offerings  for  the  glory  of  their  Lord.

XL  Jbsub  Chbist  accepts  costly  offerings  given  to  himself.  Ihe  hypocritical
objection  of  Judas  was  cleverly  invented.  The  traitor  knew  the  simplicity  and
unselfishness  of  his  Master,  and  he  knew  that  the  heart  of  Jesus  was  always  with  the


550  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxti.  1—75.

needy.  Why,  then,  did  not  our  Lord  take  the  same  view  of  his  enthusiastic  disciple's
action  ?  Because  he  would  not  hurt  the  feelings  of  Mary,  would  not  grieve  her  love.
Still,  even  that  painful  course  must  have  been  taken  if  her  conduct  had  been  unac-
ceptable to  Christ  on  account  of  any  blameworthy  extravagance.  It  is  plain  that  he
did  accept  adoration.  This  was  seen  on  Palm  Sunday,  when  he  received  the  "Hosannas! "
of  the  multitude,  and  defended  the  children  from  the  rebukes  of  the  interfering  Jews.
It  is  riuht  to  give  honour  to  Christ,  for  he  is  good  and  great ;  but  above  his  human
excellence  his  Divine  glory  makes  tliia  homage  supremely  fitting.

HL  We  shall  best  serve  cub  fellow-men  when  we  ake  most  devoted  to
Christ.  He  was  not  robbing  the  poor  in  order  to  accept  a  luxury  for  himself,  as  Judas
rudely  insinuated.  We  must  set  this  incident  over  against  our  Lord's  recently  spoken
words  about  the  kindness  shown  to  others  being  really  given  to  himself  (ch.  xxv.  40).
There  is  no  rivalry  between  the  two  kinds  of  gifts.  Mary  would  not  be  the  less
charitable  to  her  neighbours  because  of  her  expenditure  on  her  Master.  It  is  more
likely  that  her  heart  would  flow  out  in  richer  kindness  towards  them.  Devotion  to  Christ
is  the  greatest  inspiration  for  sympathy  with  suffering  fellow-men.  What  is  spent  on
the  cause  of  religion  does  not  detract  from  the  help  of  the  poor.  The  reason  is  that
the  fund  of  possible  generosity  is  never  exhausted.  We  have  not  such  a  limited  amount
to  give  away.  Few  contribute  a  tithe  of  what  they  ought  to  give.  But  when  the  heart
is  moved  to  offer  directly  to  Christ,  its  new  warmth  of  love  will  prompt  it  to  be  more
liberal  in  giving  to  all  other  good  objects.  It  is  not  a  fact  that,  for  the  most  part,  those
people  who  refuse  to  help  religious  objects  are  the  most  generous  in  charity  to  their
neighbours.  The  poor  would  not  be  grateful  to  be  handed  over  to  the  tender  mercies
of  the  Judases.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  those  men  who  are  foremost  in
supporting  the  cause  of  Christ  are  most  earnest  in  human  charity.  The  very  people
who  maintain  foreign  missions  do  most  for  the  suffering  poor  at  home. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  22. — The  betrayal  of  Olirist.  This  is  one  of  the  saddest  scenes  in  the  life  of  the
Man  of  sorrows.  Leonardo  di  Vinci  has  commemorated  it  pictorially,  although  his  famous
fresco  is  fast  fading  Irom  the  walls  of  the  refectory  of  the  monastery  at  Milan.  Familiar
copies  of  this  wonderful  picture  must  have  impressed  the  scene  upon  all  our  memories.
It  is  alive  with  heart-searching  lessons  for  all  time.

I.  It  is  possible  foe  a  disciple  of  Christ  to  betray  his  Master.  We  might
have  thought  that  the  spell  of  Clirist's  presence  would  have  effectually  prevented  such
a  fall.    Ttiat  there  should  be  a  Judas  in  the  college  of  the  apostles  is  a  startling  fact.

1.  Jesus  does  not  hold  any  hy  force.  This  is  not  a  case  for  considering  the  scope  of
omnipotence.  Here  we  trench  on  the  awl'ul  region  of  the  human  will.  God  does  not
override  that  mysterious  power.  If  he  did,  he  would  destroy  the  man  himself;  he
would  crush  the  personality  in  which  alcae  true  service  can  be  rendered  to  God.

2.  It  is  possible  to  know  mtKh  of  Christ,  and  yet  to  escape  from  hii  influence,  Judas
appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  great  intelligence.  He  had  heard  the  wonderful
teachings  of  One  who  "  spake  as  never  man  spake,"  yet  they  had  made  no  final
impression  on  his  character.  We  are  not  saved  by  our  knowledge  of  Christ.  We  may
be  disciples  without  being  Christians ;  scholars  in  the  school  of  Jesus,  and  yet  not
saints  in  his  household.

II.  No  Christian  can  be  sure  that  he  will  never  betray  his  Master.  It  is
pathetic  to  see  these  humble  men  each  putting  the  anxious  question,  "  Is  it  I,  Lord  ?  "
But  the  very  utterance  of  the  question  suggests  the  wisdom  ol  those  vvlio  breathed  it.
We  do  not  know  ourselves.  There  are  volcanic  depths  which  may  reveal  themselves
in  sudden  explosions,  fires  that  slumber  far  beneath  the  green  fields  and  the  flowery
gardens.  The  rose  and  the  lily  bloom  on  the  surface ;  but  who  shall  say  what  will
happen  when  the  eruption  takes  place?  No  one  has  fathomed  the  depth  of  the  hidden
possibilities  of  evil  in  his  own  heart ;  and  no  one  can  tell  what  force  of  temptations  he
will  be  called  upon  to  face.  For  aught  we  know,  any  one  of  us  might  become  a
Judns.

HI.  The  okly  security  against  betraying  Christ  is  to  be  found  in  a  humblb
T«DST  IN  HIS  GRACE.  The  disciiiles  acted  wisely  in  uttering  their  anxious  question.
This  was  the  best  way  to  get  a  negative  answer.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth
take  heed,  lest  he  falL"    The  very  fear  of  falling  will  be  a  help  against  falling,  by


0.1.  xxvi.  i— T6.j    TUE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING   TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  551

inducing  a  spirit  of  watchfulness.  1.  We  need  to  he  on  oy,r  guard  against  unfaithfulne3s.
The  danger  comes  when  it  is  least  expected.  He  who  is  anxious  lest  he  shall  betray
his  Master  will  bo  the  first  to  detect  the  temptation  that  points  the  way  of  treason.
2.  Chriit  can  keep  hii  people  faithful.  We  are  not  left  to  be  the  victims  of  chance,
nor  are  we  entirely  committed  to  the  charge  of  our  own  wayward  wills.  Christ  will
not  keep  any  from  falling  by  force,  apart  from  the  concurrence  of  their  own  will.  But
he  can  and  he  does  preserve  those  who  seek  bis  grace  and  trust  his  aid.  He  \a  able
to  keep  such  from  falling  (Jude  24). — W,  F.  A.

Vert.  26 — 29. —  The  lord's  Supper,  We  must  never  forget  that  this  central  ordi-
Uiince  of  our  Christian  worship  was  instituted  by  our  Lord  himself.  It  is  an  indication
of  his  foresight  and  forbearance ;  for  it  shows  first  that  he  saw  we  should  need  to  be
repeatedly  reminded  of  what  he  is  to  us,  and  then  that  he  condescended  to  help  the
infirmity  of  our  wandering  natures  by  providing  the  most  impressive  means  for  con-
tinually presenting  the  great  central  facts  of  his  work  before  our  minds  and  hearts.  He
enlists  the  services  of  the  three  senses  of  sight,  taste,  and  touch,  to  aid  the  sense  of
hearing  in  bringing  before  us  the  vital  truths  of  his  gospel.

L  Thk  Christian  feeds  itpon  Christ.  1.  Ohriet  himsdf.  These  elements  do
not  represent  abstract  doctrines  or  moral  precepts;  the  tlieory  of  redemption  or  the
ethics  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  They  represent  Jesus.  He  is  our  Life.  2.  Christ
received  as  food.  We  eat  the  bread  and  drink  the  wine.  Clirist  is  the  Bread  of  life.
We  must  personally  participate  in  Christ,  and  receive  him  into  our  lives,  in  order  to
profit  by  his  grace.  3.  Christ  a»  every-day  food.  Jesus  chose  the  common  bread  and
wine  of  tiie  country,  such  as  were  always  at  hand.  He  does  not  wish  to  be  a  rare
luxury  for  wedding  feasts  and  kings'  banquets.  He  will  be  the  poor  man's  bread,  and
his  daily  bread.  Yet  this  is  what  is  most  essential.  Some  people  look  for  rare  deli-
cacies in  Christ,  but  they  will  not  make  him  their  daily  Bread.  Then  they  will  starve.
We  must  lire  upon  Christ.

n.  Christ  becomes  as  food  to  oub  bouls  in  his  incarnation.  These  elements
do  not  represent  the  soul  of  Jesus.  They  stand  for  his  body  and  his  blood.  Strange
speculations  have  risen  around  this  fact,  and  some  have  imagined  that  the  properties
of  the  spiritual,  of  the  Divine  nature  itself,  were  transferred  to  the  body  of  our
Lord.  It  is  straining  the  words  of  Jesus,  and  putting  an  unnatural  meaning  on  his
language,  to  suppose  any  such  miraculous  transformation  of  his  body  to  have  taken
place.  In  a  simpler  way  we  may  understand  that  it  is  through  his  incarnatiou  that
he  becomes  our  food.  Food  must  be  in  some  way  like  what  feeds  on  it  in  order  that
it  may  be  fully  assimilated  and  absorbed.  Christ  becomes  one  with  us  in  his  incarna-
tion. We  can  come  near  to  him  in  his  earthly  life.  We  can  touch  him,  and  sym-
pathize with  him,  and  understand  him  in  some  degree.  Thus  we  feed  on  his  body  and
blood,  and  so  receive  him.

III.  Christ  gives  himself  to  us  in  his  death.  The  bread  is  broken  ;  the  wine  is
poured  out ;  and  these  two  elements  are  taken  separately.  Thus  our  Lord  sets  before
us  the  thought  of  his  death.  He  could  not  be  our  Life  if  he  had  not  given  up  his  own
life.  It  is  not  the  body  of  Christ  in  his  earthly  ministry,  it  is  the  body  on  the  cross,
that  feeds  us.  It  is  not  the  blood  in  the  veins,  it  is  the  blood  shed,  that  saves  us.  The
Lord's  Slipper  was  instituted  on  the  night  before  Jesus  was  betrayed.  It  pointed  on
to  the  cross.     It  is  now  the  great  memorial  of  Christ  in  his  saoriflce  for  us.

In  conclusion,  let  us  consider  how  we  may  approach  this  sacred  fi  ast.  We  cannot
eat  and  drink  "  worthily  "  it'  we  are  to  be  worthy  of  Christ  or  free  from  all  sin  before
we  come.  This  is  impossible,  and  it  is  not  required  of  us ;  for  Christ  is  himself  the
Saviour  from  sin.  What  we  want  is  to  recognize  him  as  our  Life,  to  trust  in  him  as
our  Saviour,  to  surrender  to  him  as  our  Lord.  Then  we  can  come  to  his  table  at  his
own  invitation,  and  refresh  our  souls  with  his  grace. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  28. — "  The  hlood  of  the  new  covenant."  This  verse  is  intensely  interesting,  because
it  contains  one  of  our  Lord's  rare  sayings  about  the  purpose  of  his  death.  For  the  most
part  the  New  Testament  teachings  on  that  great  theme  come  from  the  aposths,  who
reflected  on  the  event  alter  it  had  passed  into  history,  and  with  the  light  of  the  Kesur-
rection  upon  it.   Still,  it  ia  not  just  to  lay  that  the  apostles  originated  the  doctrine  of  th«


652  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1—75.

atonement.  Not  only  is  that  doctrine  foreshadowed  in  Isa.  liii. ;  in  the  institution  ol
his  Su|  per  our  Lord  distinctly  sets  it  forth.  Before  this  he  spoke  of  his  life  being  given
as  a  ransom  for  many  (ab.  xx.  23),  and  he  called  himself  the  good  Shepherd  who  lays
down  his  life  for  the  sheep  (John  x.  15).

I.  Jebub  bpbakb  with  bteange  emphasis  of  hib  blood..  In  the  present  day  some
people  shrink  from  all  refeiBenoe  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  They  are  disgusted  with  the
coarse  and  unmeaning  language  of  a  certain  class  of  preachers  to  whom  the  mere
physical  image  seems  to  be  more  than  the  truth  typified.  But  our  Lord  himself
directs  us  to  the  subject  in  the  wine  of  the  Commnnion.  We  must  interpret  his
meaning  in  the  light  of  Jewish  ideas.  The  Jew  taught  that  the  blood  was  the
life  (Lev.  xvii.  11).  Then  Christ  gives  us  his  essential  life.  The  blood  was  shed  in
the  sacrifice  of  the  victim  at  the  altar.  Christ  is  the  great  Sacrifice  for  our  sins,  and
as  such  he  sheds  his  blood ;  i.e,  the  blood  signifies  Christ  dying  for  us ;  and  then,  beyond
the  mere  act  of  dying,  it  signifies  the  preciousness  of  his  life  given  to  u«.

II.  The  blood  of  Christ  sbalb  hib  new  covenant.  He  was  instituting  a  new
order,  a  fresh  relationship  between  man  and  God.  The  old  covenant  of  the  Jewish
Law  was  obsolete.  Men  had  outgrown  it,  and  were  ready  to  receive  something  larger
and  more  spiritual.  Jesus  himself  teaches  that  he  institutes  the  fresh  relation.  As
a  covenant  signifies  certain  terms  and  arrangements,  this  new  covenant  of  Christ's  has
its  new  conditions.  His  whole  teaching  about  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  expository
:>f  his  covenant.  Preparations  in  prophecy  (e.g.  Jer.  xxxi.  31)  and  explanations
in  apostolic  writings  help  us  further  to  understand  it.  1.  It  is  for  all  nations,  not
only  for  Jews.  2.  It  is  of  grace,  not  of  law.  3.  It  it  tpirittial,  not  of  "  carnal
ordinances."

III.  This  new  covenant  brings  remission  of  sins.  1.  Christ  forgives  sini.  By
exercising  his  right  to  do  so  our  Lord  roused  rarly  antagonism  among  the  defenders
of  the  old  religion.  But  the  world  has  since  seen  that  here  lay  the  very  root  and  core
of  his  work.  Here  is  the  essence  of  the  gospel  for  us  to-day — it  promises  forgiveness  of
sins.  2.  This  forgiveness  springs  from  the  death  of  Christ,  We  may  find  it  difficult
to  truce  the  connection ;  but  it  is  not  an  invention  of  human  speculation,  for  we  find
our  Lord  himself  speaking  of  it.  It  is  Christ's  own  teaching  that  our  sins  are  forgiven
through  the  shedding  of  his  blood.

IV.  The  remission  or  bins  is  or  wide  application.  Jesus  says  it  is  "  for  many.''
He  did  not  die  merely  to  save  an  elect  few.  He  had  large  aims,  and  he  will  not  "  see
of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be  satisfied "  until  he  has  brought  many  souls  out  of
darkness  into  light.  Therefore  the  very  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  an  encour-
agement for  the  penitent  to  seek  the  pardon  which  Christ  is  so  bountiful  in  bestowing.
— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  38. — The  Man  of  sorrows.  Although  this  name  Ib  found  in  Messianic  prophecy
(Isa.  liii.  3),  it  would  be  wrong  to  suppose  that  there  was  no  gladness  in  the  life  of
Christ.  He  spoke  of  his  joy  (John  xv.  11),  and  he  delighted  to  do  the  will  of  God  (Ps.
xl.  8).  So  pure  a  life  spent  in  doing  good  to  men  must  have  had  a  gladness  which  no
earthly  pleasure  could  bestow.  Yet  Jesus  had  sorrows  which  no  man  can  measure.
It  is  easier  to  understand  the  glory  of  the  Transfiguration  than  the  agony  of  the  garden.

I.  The  greatness  of  the  sorrows.  Many  bitter  ingredients  entered  into  the  cup
of  anguish  which  it  was  the  Father's  will  that  Jesus  should  drink.  1.  The  horror  of
death.  Jesus  was  young  and  in  health ;  it  was  natural  for  him  to  shrink  from  a  pre-
matvu:e  and  violent  death.  2.  The  dread  of  shame.  Jesus  was  of  the  most  refined  and
sensitive  nature ;  in  his  Passion  he  was  to  face  insult  and  ignominy.  3.  Apparent
failure.  He  came  to  set  up  his  kingdom,  to  redeem  Israel,  to  save  the  world;  and  his
mission  was  rejected.  Instead  of  the  throne,  he  was  to  have  the  cross.  All  his  efforts
seemed  to  bo  ending  in  darkness.  This  was  the  earthly  aspect  of  them.  During  his
humiliation  he  must  have  felt  it.  4.  The  faithlessness  of  friends.  One  had  betrayed
him;  another  was  about  to  deny  him;  nearly  all  would  flee  in  selfish  cowardice.  5.
Spiritual  depression.    At  last  Jesus  seemed  to  be  deserted  by  God.

II.  The  source  of  the  sorrows.  We  must  look  deeper  than  these  immediate
occasions  of  the  grief  of  Christ.  The  fundamental  source  is  beneath  and  behind  all
of  them.     1.  The  worWt  sin.    They  all  result  from  sin.     The  world's  sin  rose  up


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST   MATTHEW.  653

against  God'g  Holy  One,  and  smote  him  with  all  its  fury.  It  was  the  dark  cloud  of
this  mass  of  sin  that  hid  from  him  the  vision  of  God.  Jesus  waa  bearing  the  load
of  sin,  and  it  was  breaking  his  heart.  2.  The  goodness  of  Christ.  Bad  men  do  net  feel
the  world's  sin  very  acutely.  (1)  The  holiness  of  Jesus  was  horrified  at  its  black  and
hideous  enormity.  (2)  The  love  of  Christ  was  grieved  at  its  shocking  cruelty  towards
himself,  and  at  its  own  fatal  and  suicidal  influence  in  the  world.  He  saw  it  as  the
cause  of  misery  and  ruin  and  death.

III.  The  endubanob  of  the  sobbows.  How  did  Jesus  meet  them?  1.  With
natural  shrinking.  He  was  no  fanatical  lover  of  martyrdom.  He  proved  his  humanity
by  feeling  acutely  and  desiring  to  escape.  Therefore  he  can  sympathize  with  sufferers.
2.  With  prayer.  The  Gethsemane  of  agony  is  Christ's  most  sacred  oratory.  He
teaches  us  to  bring  our  griefs  to  God.  His  example  shows  that  prayer  is  the  soul's
consolation  in  trouble.    3.  With  trustful  submission.    He  desired  God's  will  to  be  done,

.  whatever  that  might  be.  He  prayed  for  deliverance,  but  lie  never  complained,  much
less  did  he  rebel.  Here  he  is  the  example  for  us  whose  greatest  sorrows  never  approacb
the  tragic  terror  of  his.

IV.  The  fbuit  of  tub  borrows.  1.  Christ's  victory.  He  triumphed  by  submis-
sion. In  obedience  to  God,  he  attained  to  the  desire  of  his  heart.  Through  his  Passion
and  crucifixion  he  won  the  "  Name  which  is  above  every  name."  His-  sorrows  led  to
his  glory.  By  the  via  dolorosa  lie  reached  his  throne.  2.  The  world's  salvation.  No
selfish  motive  of  personal  gain  inspired  our  Lord's  endurance.  His  very  reward  was
to  see  the  world  saved.  His  suffering  was  all  for  others ;  if  the  world  may  rejoice
in  hope,  this  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  Jesus  suffered  in  the  darl:ness  of  a  dreadful
death.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  52. — The  curse  of  the  sword.  It  was  natural  that  the  impetuous  disciple  should
try  to  defend  his  beloved  Master.  But  his  action  was  a  pipce  of  madness,  and,  if  per-
sisted in,  it  must  have  led  to  a  needless  slaughter  of  the  followers  of  Christ.  It  was
not  on  this  account  only, however,  that  our  Lord  promptly  ihecked  it,  although  doubt-
less his  keen  perception  and  wise  judgment  detected  the  strategic  weakness  of  the
situation.  A  much  deeper  thought  flashes  out  from  his  words,  and  sheds  a  light  on  the
character  of  his  kingdom  and  the  method  of  his  work.

I.  The  cause  of  Chmst  cannot  be  advanced  bt  the  swobd.  Mohammedanism
is  its  very  opposite  in  this  respect.  Charles  the  Great  made  a  fatal  blunder  when  he
drove  the  Saxons  into  the  water  of  baptism  by  a  charge  of  his  Keice  warriors.  1.  Christ
aims  at  inward  conviction.  A  religion  of  external  observances  may  be  imposed  by
force ;  but  you  cannot  compel  a  man  to  believe  as  you  wisli.  The  persuasion  of  force
may  induce  a  particular  course  of  action  to  be  followed ;  it  will  never  spread  the  idea
it  champions.  2.  Christ  desires  to  win  love.  He  has  not  conquered  a  soul  if  he  has
only  brought  it  to  silent  submission.  He  seeks  much  more.  He  would  have  the  hearts
of  his  people.  But  the  use  of  force  is  directly  opposed  to  any  such  results.  You  cannot
make  a  man  love  you  by  half  killing  him  with  sword-thrusts.  This  method  might
advance  a  superstition  of  fear ;  it  could  never  aid  a  gospel  of  love.

II.  The  rights  of  Christ  oann(jt  be  defended  bv  the  swokd.  At  first  sight
it  might  seem  to  be  reasonable  to  defend  Christian  truths  and  institutions  by  force,
even  although  tliey  could  not  be  planted  in  this  way.  Constantino  thought  so,  when
he  brought  the  whole  uiaohinery  of  the  state  to  support  the  Nicene  party  in  its  opposi-
tion to  the  Arians.  But  the  subsequent  change  of  his  own  policy,  and  the  long  triumph
and  tyranny  of  Arianism,  proved  that  he  was  mistaken.  Here  is  the  fatal  error  ot  the
persecutor  in  all  ages.  Nothmg  is  so  injurious  to  a  religious  cause  as  the  forcible
suppression  of  its  enemies.  The  religion  that  persecutes  exchanges  the  love  and
devotion  with  which  it  may  once  have  been  regarded  for  horror  and  aversion.  The
dreadful  Marian  persecutions  did  more  to  destroy  the  power  of  the  pope  iu  England
than  all  the  assaults  of  the  Protestants.  The  same  fate  would  follow  the  same  policy
if  it  were  pursued  in  defence  of  the  purest  form  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.

III.  The  world  at  large  suffers  immensblt  fbom  the  bwobd.  Occasionally
there  is  a  righteous  war,  as  that  which  resulted  in  the  suppression  of  slavery  in  America.
But  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  a  war  is  an  almost  unmitigated  evil  to  all  who  are
engaged  in  it.    It  causes  immeasurable  sufferings,  and  it  encoiiragt's  the  worst  passions.


664  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  ixvl  1— 75.

The  irorda  of  Christ  are  trne  in  •  deeper  senss  than  superficial  readers  discover.  Not
only  is  the  fighting  man  liable  to  be  killed  in  battle.  His  behaviour  endangers  his
better  nature.  The  spirit  of  hate  and  revenge  is  fatal  to  all  that  is  good  in  him.
Thus  he  perishes  by  the  sword — not  alone  by  the  sword  of  his  antagonist,  which  ha
provokes,  but  by  the  sword  which  he  wields  in  his  own  hand.  He  ia  •  suicide.  In
defending  his  body,  too  often  he  kUls  his  own  souL — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  63 — 65. — Christ  and  Caiaphat.  Jesus  now  stands  face  to  face  with  the  head
of  the  old  Jewish  religion.  The  official  leader  of  the  nation  is  for  the  first  time  con-
fronted by  the  Man  who  claims  to  be  its  true  King.  Caiaphas  could  not  but  look  upon
Christ  with  the  jealousy  a  selfish  man  in  power  feels  for  his  rival.  But  Jesus  was
more  than  a  rival  of  the  high  priest.  He  laid  claim  to  a  rank  which  Caiaphas  never
dreamed  of  assuming.  We  do  not  wonder  that  ths  ecclesiastical  judge  examined  his
Prisoner  with  bitter  prejudice.

I.  Thb  adjubation.  Caiaphas  charged  Jesus,  on  oath,  to  declare  whether  he  was
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  1.  It  it  most  imporUint  to  know  what  Jesus  Christ  daims
to  be.  We  have  an  interest  in  the  high  priest's  question  quite  apart  from  the  judicial
process.  Our  religion  is  centred  in  Christ.  It  is  more  than  an  outgrowth  of  his  life
and  teaching.  It  rests  upon  his  Person ;  it  lives  in  him ;  it  is  what  he  is.  We  cannot
wholly  disregard  him  without  abandoning  Christianity  itself.  An  imperfect  knowledge
of  Christ  may  be  found  with  a  true  and  saving  faith  in  him.  Still,  the  faith  must  be
in  him,  and  therefore  we  must  know  enough  of  him  to  trust  him.  2.  The  greatest
question  about  Christ  is  as  to  his  Divinity  and  Messiahship.  (1)  Is  he  the  Christ?  If
he  is,  he  is  able  to  save ;  if  he  is,  he  has  a  right  to  claim  a  loyal  following.  (2)  Is  he
the  Son  of  God  ?  If  he  is,  he  comes  to  us  clad  with  Divine  power.  Then  we  may
trust  that  ha  cannot  fail,  and  wa  have  the  best  of  all  reasons  for  submitting  to  his
kingly  rule.  Such  questions  as  these  about  his  nature  and  authority  cannot  be  set
aside  as  of  merely  speculative  interest.

II.  Thb  bsflt.  Jesus  did  not  usually  assert  his  Messiahship ;  much  less  did  he
directly  confess  his  Divine  nature,  except  on  certain  rare  occasions.  But  he  was  now
at  the  end  of  his  life,  and  therefore  his  revelation  of  his  nature  and  office  could  not
hinder  his  work.  Moreover,  the  high  priest  had  a  legal  right  to  test  his  claims,  and
Jesus  never  opposed  the  execution  of  tha  law.  1.  Jesua  accepted  the  highest  names
ascribed  to  him.  Could  he  do  this  if  he  did  not  know  they  were  his  by  right  ?  He
was  calm  and  reasonable,  simple  and  humble,  generous  and  unselfish.  Yet  he  consented
to  be  called  "  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God."  2.  Jesus  foresaw  and  predicted  his  oiun
second  advent.  It  is  wonderful  that  a  peasant  from  Galilee  should  speak  thus  before
the  greatest  dignitary  of  his  nation,  amid  all  tha  pomp  and  splendour  of  the  high
priest's  palace,  and  in  view  of  his  own  rejection  and  death.

III.  The  result.  Caiaphas  took  the  words  of  Christ  as  if  they  were  blasphemy
and  on  this  account  pronounced  him  to  be  worthy  of  death.  1.  Sis  conduct  was  deter-
mined by  an  unjust  prejudice.  He  assumed  that  the  claims  of  Christ  could  not  be
true,  and  therefore  he  judged  them  to  be  blasphemous.  Thus  he  approached  Christ
with  a  closed  mind.  If  we  have  already  made  up  our  minds  adversely  to  the  claims
of  Christ,  it  is  useless  for  us  to  examine  them.  But  the  only  fair  method  is  to  approach
him  with  an  open  mind,  ready  to  weigh  all  he  teaches,  ready  to  accept  all  that  he  may
give  us  good  warrant  for  believing.  2.  On  his  own  asswnption  he  was  right.  If  the
high  claims  of  Christ  were  false,  he  was  guilty  of  blasphemy.  Caiaphas  was  more
consistent  than  those  people  are  who  reject  the  Divine  claims  of  Ohrist,  and  yet  honour
bim  as  the  best  of  men. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  69 — 75. — St.  Peter  denying  hit  Lord.  It  says  much  for  the  veracity  of  the
Gospel  narratives  that  the  evangelists  have  not  shrunk  from  recording  an  incident  which
is  to  the  shame  of  the  chief  of  the  apostles.  And  yet  we  may  be  sure  that  the  charity
which  covers  a  multitude  of  sins  would  have  buried  this  sad  story  In  eternal  oblivion
if  it  had  not  been  full  of  important  lessons  for  all  ages.  These  things  are  not  written
for  Peter's  shame,  but  for  our  instruction.  No  doubt  the  first  record  of  the  story
was  derived  from  the  confession  of  the  penitent  apostle's  own  lips.

L  It  IS  fObiiULB  FOB  OKB  WHO  LOVES  Cbbibt  TO  DBVi  HiH.    In  th«  case  of  Judas


OH.  XXVI.  1—76.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  655

we  have  aeen  that  knowledge  does  not  prevent  treason ;  here  we  see  that  love  does  not
secure  one  against  the  weakness  of  denial.  The  disciple  betrayed  his  great  Teacher ;
the  friend  denied  his  beloved  Saviour.  The  offences  were  utterly  different.  Yet
St.  Peter's  is  distressing  because  it  overcame  the  loyalty  of  love.  The  emotional  and
impetuous  are  in  an  especial  danger  of  falling  before  sudden  temptations.

II.  Self-conpidbnoe  invites  temptation.  We  pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation.?'
Yet  St,  Peter  boldly  walked  into  it.  His  love  for  his  Master  kept  him  near  to  Jesus.
While  almost  all  the  r«t  of  the  disciples — all  but  St.  John — had  fled,  Peter  hung
on  to  the  outskirts  of  the  procession  as  Jesus  was  carried  off  under  arrest  to  Jerusalem.
For  this  we  admire  him.  He  was  braver  than  the  apostles  who  had  not  a  chance
of  denying  their  Lord,  because  they  had  escaped  from  the  dangerous  scenes.  It  is
not  just,  therefore,  to  say  that  he  wilfully  put  himself  in  the  way  of  danger.  But  if
his  heart  drew  him  near  to  Christ,  his  humility  and  self-distrust  should  have  warned
him  to  be  on  his  guard.  Our  loyalty  to  Christ  may  call  us  into  difficult  places ;  but
then  we  should  recognize  that  they  are  difficult,  and  pray  ibr  grace  that  we  may  walk
circumspectly  in  them.

III.  COURAOE    IN    BXOITINO    DANQEBS    IS    OFTEN    FOLLOWED    BY   COWARDICE    UNDKB

QUIETBB  ciBCDMSTANOES.  In  the  garden  St.  Peter  was  brave  as  a  lion,  slashing  at  the
high  priest's  servant  with  his  sword.  In  the  palace  court-yaid  he  cowers  before  a
waiting-maid's  joke.  It  is  a  great  man's  house,  and  St.  Peter  is  an  uncouth  fisherman ;
Christ  has  been  seized,  and  his  cause  is  apparently  lost ;  the  watch  is  long,  the  night
chill,  the  disciple  weary.  All  these  things  tend  to  undermine  courage.  But  it  is
among  such  circumstances  that  we  most  need  to  be  on  our  guard.  Then  there  is  no
excitement  of  the  battle  to  sustain  us.    In  the  hour  of  depression  our  danger  is  great.

IV.  Onk  fall  leads  to  anotheb.  If  St.  Peter  can  deny  his  Master  once,  it  is  not
at  all  wonderful  that  he  should  deny  him  thrice.  The  descent  to  evil  is  an  inclined
plane,  which  grows  steeper  as  we  proceed  along  it.  Therefore  it  is  most  needful  to
resist  the  tempter  at  his  first  onslaught.  Like  St.  Peter,  Christ  was  thrice  attacked
by  the  tempter.  But  unlike  his  servant,  he  worsted  the  foe  at  the  first  attack,  and
met  him  with  the  added  strength  of  victory  at  the  subsequent  assaults.

V.  The  tbtje  Chbistian  will  bepent  of  his  unfaithfdlness.  The  crowing  cock
reminds  St.  Peter  of  his  Master's  warning.  Then  his  repentance  is  sudden  and  bitter.
Christ's  servant  cannot  sin  without  suffering.  But  his  tears  are  healing.  Though  he
fall,  he  shall  rise  again. — ^W.  F.  A.

Vers.  14 — 25,  47 — 50. — Judas.  By  piecing  together  what  the  various  Gospels  tell
us  about  Judas,  we  can  see  the  process  by  which  our  Lord  separated  him  from  the  rest.
1.  Our  Lord  indicated  that  among  the  disciples  there  was  a  traitor.  Unable  to  detect
the  conscious  look  of  guilt  in  the  face  of  any  of  his  companions,  each,  conscious  of  the
deep,  unfathomed  capacity  for  evil  in  his  own  heart,  can  but  frankly  ask  the  Master,
"Lord,  is  it  I?"  But  there  was  one  of  them  who  did  not  join  in  the  question.  2.
Jesus  answered,  "  He  that  dippeth  his  hand  with  me  in  the  dish,  the  same  shall
betray  me."  The  circle  of  suspicion  is  thus  narrowed.  3,  Almost  simultaneously
with  this  Peter  beckons  to  John,  who  puts  at  last,  in  a  whisper,  the  definite
question,  "Who  is  it?  "  and  Jesus,  in  the  ear  of  the  beloved  disciple,  whispers  the  reply,
"  He  it  is,"  etc.  (John  xiii.  26).  The  look  that  accompanies  the  giving  of  the  sop,  as
well  as  the  act  itself,  shows  Judas  that  his  treachery  is  discovered.  He  therefore
inechauically  takes  up,  in  a  somewhat  colder  form,  the  question  of  the  rest  and  says,
"  Master,  is  it  I?"  His  fear  subdues  his  voice  to  a  whisper,  heard  only  by  John  and'
the  Lord,  and  the  answer,  "  Thou  hast  swd.  That  thou  doest  do  quickly,"  is  equally
unobserved  by  the  rest.  The  sin  of  Judas  presents  us  with  one  of  the  most  perplexed
problems  of  life  and  character.  Let  ns,  first  of  all,  look  at  the  connection  of  this
betrayal  with  the  life  of  Christ,  Why  might  Jesus  not  have  been  taken  without  the
help  of  a  traitor  ?  Possibly  the  reason  was  that  it  was  needful  that  Jesus  should  be
made  perfect  through  suffering,  that  so  he  might  be  a  merciful  High  Priest.  He  had
already  suffered  in  a  variety  of  ways  in  body  and  mind ;  but  till  he  was  brought  into
close  contact  with  a  man  who  could  accept  his  love,  eat  his  bread,  press  his  hand  with
assurance  of  fidelity,  and  then  sell  him,  he  did  not  know  the  misery  that  one  human
being  can  inflict  on  another.    In  OQUJecturing  the  character  of  Judas,  w«  must  ctart


556  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75,

from  the  idea  that  with  extraordinary  capacity  for  wickedness  ho  had  also  more  than
ordinary  leanings  to  what  was  good.  He  was  an  apostle,  and  had  been  called  to  that
office  by  Christ.  He  was  himself  so  impressed  with  Christ  as  to  follow  him.  It  is
possible  he  may  have  hoped  to  receive  wealth  and  honour  in  the  new  kingdom,  but
this  motive  mingled  with  the  attachment  to  Christ's  Person  which  all  the  apostles  had.
That  Judas  was  trusted  by  the  other  apostles  is  manifest.  Even  to  the  end  he  u
unsuspected  by  tliem,  and  to  the  end  he  has  an  active  conscience.  He  is  overwhelmed
with  remorse  and  shame;  his  sense  of  guilt  is  stronger  even  than  the  love  of  money
that  had  hitherto  been  bis  strongest  passion:  he  judges  himself  fairly,  sees  what  he
iias  become,  and  goes  to  "his  own  place."  If  we  ask  what  precisely  it  was  in  the  crime
of  Judas  that  makes  us  so  abhor  it,  manifestly  its  most  hateful  ingredient  was  its
treachery.  It  is  also  invested  with  a  howor  altogether  its  own  by  the  fact  that  this
Person  whom  he  betrayed  was  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world — the  best
beloved  of  God  and  every  man's  Friend.  After  three  years'  acquaintanceship  and
observation  of  the  various  ways  in  which  Christ  could  bless  people,  this  was  all  he
could  get  from  him.  And  there  are  still  such  men — men  who  can  find  nothing  in
Christ  that  they  sincerely  care  for,  though  calling  themselves  his  followers.

I.  The  sin  of  Judas  teaches  us  the  great  power  and  danger  of  the  love  of  money.
It  infallibly  eats  out  of  the  soul  every  generous  emotion  and  high  aim.  It  can  be  so
easily  and  continuously  gratified,  and  it  is  notoriously  difficult  to  extirpate.  Covetous-
uess  is  more  a  sin  of  the  will  than  sins  of  the  flesh  or  of  a  passionate  nature.  There  is
more  choice  in  it,  and  therefore  it  above  all  others  is  called  idolatry,  because  it  above
all  others  proves  that  the  man  is  in  his  heart  choosing  the  world  and  not  God.

II.  Disappointment  in  Christ  is  not  an  unknown  thing  among  ourselves.  Men
attach  themselves  to  Christ  in  a  loose,  conventional  way.  They  are  not  wholly  and
heartily  his,  but  merely  seek  to  derive  some  influences  from  him.  The  result  is  that
they  one  day  find  that  through  all  their  religious  profession  and  apparently  Christian
life  their  characteristic  sin  has  actually  been  gaining  strength.  And  finding  this,
they  become  aware  that  they  have  lost  both  this  world  and  the  next.  They  find  that
the  reward  of  double-mindedness  is  the  most  absolute  perdition.

UI.  The  most  comprehensive  lesson  is  the  rapidity  of  sin's  growth,  and  the  enormous
proportions  it  attains  when  the  sinner  is  sinni^  against  light.  The  position  Judas
enjoyed  and  by  which  he  might  have  been  for  ever  enrolled  among  the  foremost  of
mankind,  one  of  the  twelve  foundations  of  the  eternal  city,  he  so  skilfully  misused  that
the  greatest  sinner  feels  glad  that  he  has  yet  not  been  left  to  commit  the  sin  of  Judas.

We  may,  then,  walk  with  Christ,  and  yet  be  no  Christians  after  all.  Frequently  we
think  and  act  as  if  the  knowledge  of  our  duty  and  the  occasional  good  feelings  and
impulses  that  we  enjoy  were  themselves  saving,  whereas  it  is  this  that  makes  our
sin  and  our  danger  so  much  the  greater.  It  is  possible  that  the  only  result  of  our
knowing  Christ  may  be  that  we  betray  him. — D.

Vers.  14 — 25. — The  crime  of  Judas.  L  Chabacteb  of  Jddab.  Though  Judas
had  extraordinary  capacity  for  crime,  he  must  also  have  had  more  than  ordinary
leanings  to  what  was  good.  He  was  an  apostle.  This  implies  on  Christ's  part  discern-
ment of  some  qualities  in  Judas  likely  to  make  him  useful  to  the  Church.  It  implies
on  Judas's  part  a  willingness  at  least  to  put  himself  in  the  way  of  what  was  good.  It
is  true  he  might  follow  Jesus  as  a  speculation,  expecting  advancement  and  wealth  as
the  result.  But  this  motive  mingled  to  some  extent  in  the  discipleship  of  all  the
o  apostles.  And  probably  along  with  this  unworthy  motive  there  was  in  him,  as  in  them,
some  mixture  of  higher  purpose.  He  may  have  felt  the  elevating  influence  of  Christ's
fellowship,  and  may  have  wished  to  feel  it  more.  And  it  is  something  in  his  favour
that  he  remained  so  long  in  Christ's  company.  Yet  this  man,  with  his  intelligence,
his  occasional  good  impulses,  his  feeling  of  affection  for  Christ,  his  favouring  circum-
stances, committed  the  greatest  crime  it  has  been  possible  for  any  to  commit.

II.  Heinousnesb  of  his  obime.  The  most  hateful  element  ia  the  crime  is  iti
treachery.  Ctesar  defended  himself  till  struck  by  the  dagger  of  a  friend;  then  he
covered  his  face,  and  accepted  his  fate.  One  can  forgive  the  open  blow  of  a  declared
enemy,  but  the  man  who  lives  with  you  on  terms  of  intimacy,  and  thus  learns  your
past  histury,  your  ways  and  habits,  and  the  state  of  your  affairs,  the  man  you  so  con-


OH.  xivi.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTUEW.  657

fide  in  that  you  communicate  to  him  what  you  keep  hidden  from  others,  and  who,
while  you  still  think  well  of  him,  uses  his  knowledge  of  you  to  blacken  your  character,
damage  your  prospects,  and  ruin  your  family, — this  man  is  a  criminal  of  a  different  dye.
So  Judas  used  his  knowledge  of  Ciirist's  habits — his  hour  and  place  of  prayer,  etc.
The  circumstance,  too,  that  he  made  money  by  his  treachery  is  an  aggjavHtion.  The
best  use  he  could  think  of  to  put  Jesus  to  was  to  sell  him  for  five  pounds.  After  all
he  had  seen  and  known  of  Jesus,  this  was  all  the  benefit  he  thought  he  could  derive
from  him.

III.  Attempted  palliations  of  his  chimb.  So  diabolical  does  the  crime  seem,  so
diflScult  is  it  to  believe  that  any  one  who  had  known  and  lived  with  Jesus  could  find
it  in  his  heart  to  give  him  up  to  his  enemies,  that  attempts  have  been  made  to  account
for  the  act  on  less  damning  motives.  Especially  it  has  been  urged  that  it  was  the
purpose  of  Judas  merely  to  force  the  hand  of  Jesus — to  compel  him  to  resort  to  force  in
self-defence,  and  erect  the  standard  of  the  new  kingdom.  He  was  weary  of  the  inac-
tivity of  Jesus,  and  sought  to  bring  matters  to  a  crisis.  Some  plausibility  is  given  to
this  view  by  the  subsequent  remorse  and  suicide  of  Judas.  This,  it  is  said,  proves  that
he  did  not  intend  the  death  of  his  Master.  But  to  argue  thus  is  to  forget  that  in  all
cases  sin  committed  looks  very  different  from  sin  in  prospect.  Doubtless  Judas  did
not  clearly  foresee  the  terrible  guilt  of  giving  up  his  Master  to  death ;  but  this  does
not  imply  that  he  did  not  intend  to  give  him  up  to  death.  Before  we  sin,  it  is  the
gain  we  see ;  after  we  sin,  the  guilt.

IV.  Sources  of  the  crime.  His  discipleship  had  put  him  in  the  way  of  tempta-
tion. He  had  carried  the  bag  of  the  small  community.  His  covetousness  had  increased
upon  him.  And  now  he  saw  clearly  that  no  great  scope  for  money-making  was  to  be
found  in  the  company  of  Jesus.  He  was  a  disappointed,  embittered  man.  He  felt  he
must  break  with  Christ,  but  in  doing  so  would  win  what  he  could,  and  would  revenge
himself  on  those  who  had  kept  him  poor,  and  at  the  same  time,  by  exploding  the
society  and  annihilating  it,  would  justify  his  own  conduct  in  deserting  the  cause.

Infer :  1.  The  power  and  danger  of  the  love  of  money.  All  that  we  do  in  the  world
day  by  day  has  a  more  or  less  direct  reference  to  money.  This  passion  of  covetousness
is  therefore  always  appealed  to.  Other  evil  propensities  allow  intervals  of  freedom,
periods  of  repentance  and  amendment ;  but  this  is  constant.  Judas's  fingers  were
always  in  the  bag ;  it  jingled  as  he  walked ;  it  lay  under  his  pillow  as  he  slept.  2.  The
enormous  growth  a  sin  makes  when  committed  against  light.  Everything  in  Judas's
position  iD  win  him  from  worldliness.  But  the  unworldliness  of  his  company  only  led
him  to  take  greater  advantage,  and  did  not  infect  him  with  generosity.  Had  he  passed
his  days  as  a  small  trader  in  Kerioth,  he  could  only  have  reached  the  minor  guilt  of
adulterating  his  goods  and  giving  them  out  in  false  measures ;  hut  in  Christ's  company
his  sin  acquired  abnormal  proportions.  Inducements  to  righteousness  and  opportunities
of  good  provoke  in  the  sinner  a  strong  and  determined  bent  to  sin. — D.

Vers.  46 — 56. — The  arrest.  The  words,  "  Eise,  let  us  be  going,"  are  not  inconsistent
with  those  just  uttered,  "  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  your  rest."  These  latter  words  had
rather  a  moral  significance  than  a  physical.  They  meant,  "I  have  no  longer  any  need
ot  your  watching."  But  just  as  he  utters  them,  he  catches  the  gleam  of  arms  through
the  trees,  and  exclaims, "  Eise."  Describe  the  scene — the  measured  tread  of  the  Boman
cohort ;  the  glare  of  torches  and  lanterns,  and  the  swarming  rabble  come  out  to  see  an
arrest  and  take  part  in  a  riot ;  the  traitor  in  front,  guiding  the  party  to  the  well-known
retirement  of  Jesus ;  the  kiss  indicating  the  Person  of  the  Lord,  lest  he  should  escape
or  lest  some  of  the  disciples  should  give  themselves  up  in  his  stead ;  the  reply  of  the
Lord,  the  emphasis  being  on  the  words, "  Betrayest  thou  t "  the  sudden  panic  among  the
captors ;  and  the  violence  of  Peter.

1,  This  arrest  is  the  eesult  of  Christ's  efforts  to  do  good.  His  conduct  had
been  conciliatory  to  the  point  of  meekness.  He  had  been  wise,  gentle,  patient,  and
persistently  beneficent.  And  this  is  the  result.  And  every  one  who  has  new  truth  to
declare,  new  methods  to  employ,  reforms  to  introduce,  should  recognize  that  he  will
be  opposed  by  the  combined  forces  of  ignorance, -pride,  self-interest,  and  sloth.  It  is
the  consolation  and  encouragement  of  those  who  endeavour  to  improve  matters  around
them,  and  meet  with  contempt  and  ill-treatment  for  doing  so,  that  they  share  the  lot


558  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1—75.

of  him  whose  reward  for  Beeking  to  bless  mankind  was  that  he  was  arrested  as  a
common  felon.

II.  The  magnanimitt  of  Christ  under  akhest,  as  shown  by  his  healing  Malohus
and  shielding  his  disciples.  When  efforts  to  help  other  men  have  only  brought
calamity  on  one's  self,  there  is  strong  provocation  to  resentment  and  bitterness.  It
is  only  the  few  who,  when  misinterpreted  and  ill  used  by  ignorance  and  malignity,  can
retain  any  loving  care  for  others.

III.  Observe  how  the  various  elements  of  the  bocteinb  op  the  atonement  find  an
actual  place  in  the  life  of  Christ.  1.  His  substitution  is  pictured  in  his  now  giving
himself  up  and  shielding  his  disciples.  The  .Jews  clearly  understood  that  he  was  the
head  of  the  movement.  Peter's  obtrusive  violence  did  not  divert  their  attention  for  a
moment.  He  was  not  the  kind  of  man  to  lead  a  great  movement.  Jesus  was  the
dangerous  Person.  And  on  his  side  Jesus  acknowledged  they  were  right.  It  was  he  who
had  gathered  these  men  together.  But  for  him,  they  would  have  been  dreaming  at  their
nets  on  the  Sea  (if  Galilee.  Jesus  therefore  steps  to  the  front,  and  takes  upon  himself
all  the  responsibility.  And  in  this  the  disciples  see  a  picture  of  his  whole  work  of
substitution.  This  night  in  the  garden  represents  to  them  the  hour  of  darkness ;  and
always  in  every  hour  of  darkness  they  see  Jesus  stepping  to  the  front,  and  saying,  "If
ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way."  2.  The  voluntariness  of  his  sacrifice  is  also
brought  out.  It  was  at  this  point  it  was  especially  brought  out  whether  or  not  he  was
willing  to  die,  whether  he  would  flee,  hide,  fight,  or  surrender  himself.  Everything  is
proof  of  his  willingness — his  going  that  night  as  usual  to  the  garden,  his  definite  resig-
nation to  God's  will,  his  meeting  his  captors,  his  avowal  that  he  was  the  Person  they
sought,  his  refusal  to  allow  Peter  to  defend  him.  Voluntariness  was  an  essential
element  in  his  work  of  atonement.  In  order  to  atone  for  our  sin,  he  had  to  submit
himself  to  the  penalty  of  sin,  io  accept  as  righteously  inflicted  what  was  due  to  sin.
Obviously  it  was  needful  that  he  should  be  a  perfectly  free  agent  in  doing  so.  Had
his  death  been  compulsory,  we  could  not  know  whether  he  was  accepting  it  as
righteously  inflicted  or  not. — D.

Vers.  57 — 68. — Christ  he/ore  Caiaphai.  The  key  to  the  examination  of  our  Lord  by
Caiaphas  is  found  in  the  fact  that  Oaiaphas  was  the  person  who  had  declared  it  to  be
expedient  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  people.  This,  reduced  from  the  high-sound-
ing phraseology  of  an  abstract  maxim  to  its  practical  significance  as  a  policy,  meant
that  justice  to  individuals  must  not  be  too  scrupulously  cared  for  if  the  good  of  the
state  seems  to  require  injustice ;  that  at  any  cost  of  injustice  to  an  individual  the
Jewish  people  must  ingratiate  themselves  with  Rome.  If  any  bewildered  counsellors
disliked  the  idea  of  putting  an  innocent  man  to  death,  Caiaphas  had  his  answer  ready,
"  Te  know  not  anything ;  could  we  have  a  better  opportunity  of  showing  our  zeal  for
Rome  than  by  sacrificing  a  Person  who  claims  to  be  King  of  the  Jews?  What  though
he  be  innocent?  He  is  a  poor  Galilaean,  whose  death  is  of  no  consequencef.  He  is
connected  with  no  good  family  which  can  expose  us.  By  his  execution  we  shall  merit
the  confidence  of  Rome."  Thus  Jesus  was  made  a  scape-goat,  on  whom  might  be  laid
much  treachery  and  infidelity  of  which  the  Romans  justly  suspected  the  Jews.  An
examination  begim  from  this  point  of  view  wag  of  no  significance  as  a  means  of  evincing
truth.  Jesus  was  prejudged.  His  death  was  a  much-desired  boon  to  the  community.
But  some  show  of  legal  form  must  be  gone  through.  Cite  the  legal  process  in  capital
cases,  and  show  how  it  was  transgressed,  and  in  what  points  adhered  to.  Significance
of  the  silence  of  Jesus.  It  is  beneath  him  to  reply  to  questions  put  under  pretext  ol
examining,  but  really  for  the  purpose  of  betraying  the  accused  into  some  expression
which  might  condemn  him.  The  false  man  is  best  replied  to  by  silence.  His  con-
science is  moie  likely  to  be  stirred.  Such  seems  to  have  been  the  result  in  Caiaphas's
case.  At  least  there  is  an  appearance  of  sincerity  in  the  words,  "I  adjure  thee,"  eio.
(ver.  63).  He  seems  to  have  been  impressed  by  the  manner  of  Christ.  He  had  pro-
bably never  before  had  an  opportunity  of  studying  him,  and  he  has  discernment
enough  to  see  that  this  is  no  ordinary  fanatic  nor  demagogue.  To  this  appeal  Jeaus  at
once  replies.  And  on  this  reply,  on-  his  own  confession,  and  not  on  anything  witnessed
against  him,  he  is  condemmd.  Jesus'  confession,  that  he  is  the  Christ,  the  Soji  of  God.
Nothing  could  exceed  the  solemnity  of  the  circumstances  in  which  the  confession  wa?


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  559

made.  There  is  no  doubt  that  Jesus  laid  claim  to  superhuman  dignity ;  to  a  dignity
which  it  was  blasphemy  for  any  mere  man  to  claim.  It  was  for  this  he  was  con-
demned (see  Liddon's  '  Bampton  Lectures,'  288).  Comparing  the  conduct  of  the  high
priest  with  that  of  the  servants  who  mocked  and  abused  Christ,  we  gather  two  sugges-
tions for  practical  teaching.  1.  How  much  wrong  we  may  inflict  upon  Christ  by  resist-
ing conviction.  2.  How  much  wrong  we  may  do  him  in  ignorance — by  adopting  the
judgments  passed  upon  him  by  others,  and  declining  the  duty  of  considering  his  claims
ourselves. — ^D.

Vers.  69 — 75. — Peter's  denial  of  Jesus.  Describe  the  scene — the  arrangement  of  the
palace,  which  admitted  of  Jesus  in  the  judgment-hall  seeing  what  was  passing  in  the
court,  the  rooms  being  built  round  a  court  open  to  the  sky.  Describe  also  the  three
denials.

L  Sins  abisb  fbom  unsuspected  qualities  in  us.  Peter,  the  bold,  venturesome,
straightforward  disciple,  fell  by  cowardice  and  lying ;  as  Moses  the  meek  by  auger,  and
Solomon  the  wise  by  folly.  Often  our  most  flagrant  transgressions  arise  from  parts  of
our  character  we  have  not  inspected.  We  have  thought  ourselves  truthful  and  honest,
and  we  are  betrayed  into  prevarication  and  double-dealing.  We  thought  ourselves
staunch  friends,  and  have  fallen  into  selfish  and  inconsiderate  actions.  We  considered
ourselves  cool,  almost  phlegmatic,  but  some  mastering  combination  of  circumstances
arrived,  and  we  spoke  the  word  or  wrote  the  letter  which  has  broken  our  life  past
mending.    -

IL  Sin  must  bxpbess  itself  in  oedeb  to  its  ebadication.  These  sins  that  so
distress  and  perplex  us  disclose  untliought-of  evils,  and  put  us  on  our  guard.  Peter  was
to  become  a  leader  in  the  Church,  but  he  would  have  misled  the  Church  had  he  not  had
this  self-confidence  rooted  Out.  His  self-confidence  is  here  allowed  to  betray  him,  to
bring  him  to  what  is  most  fitted  to  destroy  it,  to  shame  and  a  sense  of  weakness.

III.  Ceitioal  condition  of  the  sinneb  thus  betbatbd.  All  depends  on  the
course  we  adopt  when  we  are  thus  betrayed  into  imexpeoted  sin.  All  men  are  so
betrayed  at  one  time  or  other;  the  difiference  arises  in  the  manner  in  which  we  deal
with  ourselves  after  such  sin.  As  John  Morley  has  said,  with  characteristic  wisdom,
"  The  deepest  part  of  us  shows  in  the  manner  of  accepting  consequences."  Can  we
accept  the  situation ;  can  we  humbly  own  that  since  evil  has  appeared  in  our  life  it
must  first  have  been  in  ourselves  ?  "I  did  not  think  I  was  capable  of  such  wickedness ;
but  now  I  see  what  I  am."  Can  we  thus  go  out  with  Peter  and  weep  bitterly  ?  Thus  to
face  the  truth  is  the  beginning  of  all  good.  Without  this  we  can  come  to  no  good.
We  must  start  here,  with  a  clear  acknowledgment  of  our  actual  character.  To  blind
ourselves  to  our  true  character  is  not  to  alter  it.

IV.  Difficulty  of  thus  humbling  oueselves.  We  say  to  ourselves,  "  We  have
been  deceived  by  circumstances" — "betrayed  into  sin."  Peter  would  say,  "  Why  did  not
Jesus  look  at  me  before  I  sinned,  and  so  prevent  it  ?  Why  had  I  no  inkling  of  the
enormity  of  the  sin  till  it  was  committed  ?  My  reputation  is  now  gone.  May  I  not
as  well  go  back  to  my  fishing  and  renounce  all  these  perplexing  spiritualities?"  But
Peter  was  man  enough  to  reject  these  fancies.  He  saw  that  he  was  a  sinner,  and  that
he  must  not  run  away  from  his  sin,  but  face  it  and  defeat  it.

V.  Pbteb's  special  sin  was  moeal  cowABDiCB.  A  weakness  rather  than  a  sin,
and  yet  it  is  probably  as  prolific  of  great  crime  as  any  of  the  more  vigorous  passions  of
our  nature.  The  natures  it  is  found  in  are  often  in  other  respects  admirable — sensitive,
sympathetic,  intelligent,  inoffensive,  kindly.  The  circumstances  it  is  displayed  in :
man  in  business  finds  his  expenditure  exceeding  his  income,  but  is  unable  to  bear  the
shame  of  frankly  knowing  his  position  and  curtailing  his  expenses,  and  so,  to  keep  up
appearances,  is  led  into  dishonest  practices  ;  or  a  minister,  finding  his  faith  diverging:
from  the  Creed  he  has  subscribed,  is  yet  unable  to  proclaim  this  change  of  opinion,
because  he  cannot  face  the  public  astonishment,  the  severe  denunciation  of  one  party,
and  the  equally  distasteful  because  ignorant  and  canting  sympathy  of  the  other ;  oi
a  parent  cannot  bear  to  lose  the  good  will  of  his  child,  and  refrains  from  punishing
him  as  he  ought ;  or  the  schoolboy,  afraid  to  be  thought  soft  and  unmanly,  stands
by  and  sees  cruelty,  or  lying,  or  wickedness  perpetrated  without  a  word  of  manly
rebuke. — D.


560  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  ixw.  1—75.

Vein.  1 — 5. — OocCt  plans  and  man^t  plott.  The  "  sayings,"  "  words,"  or  diocoursei
if  Jesus  here  "  finished,"  were  hegan  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  (see  ch.  xxiv.  1),  and
continued  till  he  came  to  Bethany  (see  ver.  6).  They  were  spoken,  it  would  seem,
publicly,  while  the  sentence  following  was  privately  spoken  "  unto  his  disciples  "  (ver.
2).  The  matter  of  this  sentence  is  intrinsically  intensely  interesting,  and  it  is  interest-
ing also  from  its  relation  to  the  consultation  of  the  Sanhedrin  next  mentioned  (vers,
3 — 5).     The  subject  remarkably  illustrates  two  things,  viz.-^

I.  That  God's  plans  abb  wise  and  beneficent.  1.  Here  vote  the  preieience  of
Jesus.  (1)  He  clearkgr  and  circumstantially  foretells  his  death.  Mark  the  contrast  in
his  revelations :  "  The  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory  "  (ch.  xxv.  31) ;  "  The  Son
of  man  is  delivered  up  to  be  crucified."  The  literal  fulfilment  of  the  latter  pledges  the
certain t3'  of  the  former.  (2)  He  had  already  very  particularly  foretold  his  death  (see
ch.  xvi.  21 ;  XX.  17  J  Mark  x.  32 — 34\  Now  he  precisely  indicates  the  time :  "  After
two  days,"  ».«.  on  the  third  day,  or  with  one  full  day  intervening  (of.  Hos.  vi.  2).  This
was  Wednesday;  on  Thursday  night  he  was  betrayed  by  Judas;  Friday  morning  be
was  condemned  by  the  Sanhedrin,  and  two  hours  later  crucified  by  FUate.  (3)  The
calmness  with  which  Jesus  anticipated  the  horrors  so  soon  to  be  experienced  is  truly
admirable.  It  is  explained  by  the  prescience  which  carried  him  further  (cf.  ch.  xxv.
31 ;  Heb.  xii.  2).  2.  This  prescience  is  clearly  Divine.  (1)  The  chief  priests  and  rulers
had  for  some  time  meditated  his  death,  and  it  was  within  the  range  of  probability  that
they  might  accomplish  their  purpose.  But  what  human  forecast  could  have  seen  the
circumstances  and  the  time  of  the  event?  (2)  These  particulars,  as  he  anticipated
them,  were  against  human  probability.  The  plot  was  to  destroy  Jesus  secretly,  and
therefore  the  execution  of  the  purpose  was  to  be  deferred  untU  after  the  feast  (ver.  6).
Then  the  multitude  would  have  dispersed,  and  the  GalilEeans  in  particular  would  have
returned  to  their  homes.  (3)  It  was  not  until  Judas  made  his  overture  that  the
plotters  altered  their  plans,  and  resolved  to  risk  the  "  tumult  among  the  people."  But
the  treachery  of  Iscariot  was  fully  within  the  prescience  of  Jesus  (see  vers.  21 — 25).
3.  It  is  the  prescience  of  wisdom  and  lenejicence.  (1)  Jesus  was  sacrificed  at  the  Feast
of  the  Passover  as  the  antitype  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  (o)  This  God  distinguishes  as
especially  his :  "  My  sacrifice  "  (see  Exod.  xxiii.  18),  viz.  because  it  was  instituted  by
him  to  be  a  special  type  of  "  the  Lamb  of  God  that  beareth  away  the  sin  of  the  world  "
(see  1  Cor.  v.  7).  (6)  The  Paschal  lamb  was  "  a  male  of  the  first  year,"  the  symbol  of
excellence  in  its  prime.  So  was  Jesus,  in  the  prime  of  his  peerless  manhood,  when
offered  up.  (c)  It  was  "  without  blemish."  He  was  immaculate  in  his  birth,  and  in
his  life  and  death  he  fulfilled  all  righteousness.  (2)  Wisdom  is  also  seen  in  the  time,  (a)
The  word  here  construed  "  betrayed  "  is  in  the  New  Version  rendered  "  delivered  up,"
the  reference  being  to  the  setting  apart  of  the  lamb  rather  than  to  the  treachery  of
Judas.  It  refers  to  something  accomplished.  The  lamb  was  taken  on  the  tenth  day
of  the  first  month  (see  Exod.  xii.  1 — 3) ;  and  on  this  day  Jesus  entered  Jerusalem  (see
John  xii.  1, 12, 13).  (6)  The  lamb  was  then  to  be  kept  "  until  the  fourteenth  day  of
the  same  month  "  (see  Exod.  xii.  6).  On  this  day  the  true  Paschal  Lamb  was  sacri-
ficed. There  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  this  case,  two  days  were  kept,  and  the
right  day  was  that  upon  which  Jesus  was  offered  up.  (c)  The  time  of  the  day  also
was  exact,  viz.  "between  the  two  evenings"  (see  Exod.  xii.  6,  margin),  i.e.  between
the  sun's  declining  west,  at  noon,  and  his  setting,  at  about  six  in  the  afternoon.  Jesus
was  crucified  at  noon,  and  expired  three  hours  later,  exactly  between  the  evenings  (see
ch.  xxvii.  46 — 50).  (3)  The  beneficence  of  this  wisdom  is  seen  in  the  purposes.  As
the  blood  of  the  Paschal  lamb  redeemed  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  redeemed  bis  firstborn
from  the  sword  of  the  destroyer,  so  are  we  redeemed  from  sin  and  death  by  the  sacri-
ficial blood  of  Christ.

II.  That  he  makes  man's  plots  subservibnt  to  them.  1.  We  see  Ood^e purposes  in
the  assenibly,  (1)  Who  are  they  ?  "  The  chief  priests  . . .  and  the  elders  of  the  people."
Little  did  they  think  that  they  were  giving  effect  to  the  truth  of  prophecy ;  for  it  is
written  that "  the  rulers  take  counsel  together  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Christ "
(see  Ps.  ii.  2 ;  xii.  7).  It  is  also  specified  that  the  Paschal  lamb  should  be  offered  by
the  whole  congregation  :  "  The  whole  assembly  of  the  congregation  shall  kill  it "
(Exod.  xii.  6).  Here  was  the  very  Sanhedrin.  (2)  What  a  lesson  of  human  depravity
is  here  I    "The  chief  priests,"  and  probably  Caiaphas  the  high  priest  at  the  head  of


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  661

them.  Sacredneas  of  office  if  no  security  against  rascality.  "  The  ruleri,"  who  were
members  of  the  great  Sanbedrin  because  of  their  influence,  whether  of  wealth,  or
birth,  or  abilities.  Men  the  most  reputable  as  seen  by  their  fellows,  may  be  the  most
odious  as  seen  by  God.  2.  W«  iee  OocCt  purposes  in  their  measures.  (1)  Their
policy  is  to  haye  Jesus  secretly  killed.  This  was  manifestly  from  the  deyil,  who  would
give  sceptics  the  pretext  to  say,  "  This  thing  waa  done  in  a  corner."  The  Sanhedrin
feared  the  uproar  of  the  people.  (2)  But  the  deyil  outwits  himself.  Iscariot  appears
upon  the  scene,  and  his  proposals  induce  them  to  hazard  the  bolder  policy.  It  was
customary  at  festivals  to  execute  malefactors  publicly,  "  that  all  Israel  might  see  and
fear  "  (see  Deut.  xvii.  13 ;  Acts  xii.  4),  (3)  Thus,  then,  the  Passion  of  Christ  became
a  matter  of  the  utmost  celebrity.  He  suffers  openly  amidst  thousands  of  witnesses.
His  death  was  notorious,  which  gave  emphasis  to  the  notoriety  of  the  subsequent  event  of
the  glorious  resurrection  from  the  dead.  (4)  Thoughts  of  the  suffering  Christ  sustain
the  suffering  Christian,  suffering  for  him  and  with  him.  And  "  if  we  suffer  with  him,
we  shall  be  also  glorified  together." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  6 — 16. — Troviblers  of  the  good.  Jesus  and  his  apostles  wore  entertained  at
Bethany  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper.  Simon  probably  had  once  been  a  leper,  and
was  miraculously  healed  by  Jesus  (see  ch,  xi.  5),  and  became  a  disciple  of  the  great
Physician.  Bishop  Newcome  has  admirably  harmonized  the  accounts  of  the  anointing
at  Bethany  given  by  the  evangelists  Matthew,  Mark,  and  John.  This  Simon  prepared
i,  supper,  to  which  he  invited  Lazarus,  his  neighbour  if  not  also  his  relative,  who  by  the
same  glorious  Worker  had  been  raised  from  the  dead.  The  sisters  of  Lazarus  also
were  present  (John  xii.  2,  3).

I.  Mart  riQUREs  ih  this  hibtobt  as  a  beautifto  ttpb  of  ooodness.  1.  In
her  love  to  Christ.  (1)  It  was  love  to  him  as  a  personal  Friend.  He  had  been  intimate
in  the  house  of  her  brother  (see  John  xi.  1 — 44).  Blessed  is  that  family  in  whose  home
Jesus  is  a  familiar,  welcome,  and  beloved  Guest?  Love  to  a  Person.  Let  us  beware  of
sinking  the  personal  Jesus  in  abstractions,  however  admirable.  His  Personality  is  not
the  leas  real  because  he  is  invisible  to  us  and  in  the  heavens  (see  John  xx.  29 ;  1  Pet.
i.  8).  (2)  It  was  love  overflowing  with  gratitude.  Her  heart  was  especially  bound  to
him  by  that  miracle  of  grace  in  which  he  restored  to  her  family  circle  her  estimable
brother  alive  from  the  tomb  (see  John  xi.  2 — 5),  Pure  and  beautiful  is  the  love  of  a
grateful  heart.  (3)  It  was  love  exalted  by  reverence.  She  had  precious  opportunities
of  estimating  his  wonderful  character,  every  human  attribute  of  which  was  radiated  by
the  splendours,  and  exalted  and  intensified  by  the  tenderness,  of  the  Divine.  We  also
have  our  precious  opportunities.  He  is  with  us  in  his  Word  and  in  his  Spirit.  Mary,
in  her  improvement  of  her  opportunities,  is  an  example  to  us.  2.  In  the  expression  of
that  love.  (1)  She  had  a  pound  of  ointment  of  spikenard,  very  precious,  contained  in
an  alabaster  cruso  or  flask.  This  vessel  she  brake  or  opened,  and  poured  the  contents
upon  her  gracious  Lord,  first  anointing  his  head  and  then  his  feet,  wiping  them  with
her  hair,  the  odour  of  the  ointment  filling  the  house.  (2)  Note  here  the  unselfish
profuseness  of  heart-love  to  Christ.  Nothing  is  too  precious  to  be  expended  upon  the
Blessed  One  who  has  shed  his  most  precious  blood  for  us.  In  Mary's  just  appreciation
of  his  infinite  worthiness,  there  was  no  place  for  the  cold  and  nice  calculations  as  to
what  good  might  otherwise  be  done  with  this  costly  nard.

"Were  the  whole  realm  of  nature  mine,
That  were  a  present  far  too  small ;
Lore  so  amazing,  so  Divine,
Demands  my  life,  my  soul,  my  all."

(3)  Note  also  the  indefinable  spiritual  insight  and  foresight  or  presentiment  which
works  in  an  exalted  love  to  Christ.  Jesus  himself  brings  this  out,  as  his  own  Holy
Spirit  works  it  in  :  "  Against  the  day  of  my  burying  hath  she  kept  this  "  (John  xii.
7);  "  She  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body  to  the  burying  "  (Mark  xiv.  8) ;  "  In
that  she  poured  this  ointment  upon  my  body,  she  did  it  to  prepare  me  for  burial ; "
"  None  of  the  wicked  shall  understand ;  but  the  wise  shall  understand  "  (Dan.  xii.  10).
8.  In  the  influence  of  that  love.  (1)  The  fragrance  of  Mary's  love  filled  more  than  the
house  of  Simon.     Deeds  of  love  to  Christ  come  into  every  godly  family  as  a  delightful

MATTHEW — II.  2  O


562         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvl  1—76.

odour.  So  likewise  do  they  come  into  the  Churches,  or  brotherhoods  of  the  saints.
"  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall  be  preached  in  the  whole  world,
there  this  that  this  woman  hath  done  shall  be  told."  So  far-reaching  is  the  perfect
love.  (2)  "  Shall  be  told  for  a  memorial  of  her,"  The  loving  are  immortalized  by  their
intimate  association  with  the  immortal  Christ  of  God.  (3)  Note  here  a  manifestation
of  the  Divinity  of  oiu"  Lord.  We  see  it :  (o)  In  his  prescience  of  the  wide  notoriety  of
this  action  of  Mary,  (b)  In  the  providence  which  ensured  it.  (c)  In  the  inspiration
which  moved  the  evangelists  to  record  it.

II.  Yet  bee  gncountebed  troublebs  kvek  in  the  membebseip  of  the  apostolic
Ghuboh.  1.  Foremost  amongst  these  was  Judas  Isca/riot,  (1)  To  him  the  fragrance
of  Mary's  spikenard  was  nauseous.  All  the  virtue  he  could  discover  in  it  was  its  com-
mercial value,  "  Three  hundred  pence ! "  As  a  typical  Jew,  he  knew  the  price.  "  To
what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  "  So  lightly  did  he  value  the  Son  of  Goa,  that  be  could
bargain  away  his  life  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  or  about  £4  10*. — the  miserable  price  of
a  slave.  (2)  This  man  of  commerce  had  no  heart  to  see  what  Mary  saw  so  clearly,
viz.  that  nothing  can  be  "  waste  "  that  is  lovingly  done  to  the  honour  of  the  gracious
Saviour  of  mankind.  Any  demur  to  this  great  truth  came  as  a  trouble  to  her  noble
heart.  It  is  ever  a  pain  to  a  generous  soul  to  be  denied  the  opportunity  of  doing  good,
or  when  a  proffered  kindness  is  refused.  (3)  Judas  had  no  eyes  to  see — which  perhaps
Mary  in  her  modesty  had  not  thought  of,  but  which  Jesus  saw  so  clearly — that  this
action  of  hen  had  a  moral  significance  which  made  it  worthy  of  the  attention  of  the
universe  and  of  the  ages.  The  material  commercialist  is  blind  to  spiritual  values.  His
arithmetic  cannot  weigh  the  soul  against  the  world  (see  ch.  xvi.  26).  (4)  Judas  set
up  the  general  claims  of  the  poor  in  opposition  to  the  personal  claims  of  Christ,  ss
though  these  claims  were  inimical.  Who  has  done  most  for  the  poor — Judai  or  Jesus  ?
Is  not  Jesus,  even  in  his  absence,  ever  present  representatively  in  the  poor  ?  Are  not
the  poor  cared  for  by  his  true  disciples  for  their  Lord's  sake  ?  (5)  But  this  plea  for  the
poor  was  •  cover  for  covetousness,  "  This  said  he,  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor ;  but
because  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the  bag,  and  bare  what  was  put  therein  "  (John  xii.  6).
How  commonly  do  the  covetous  evade  appeals,  say  for  foreign  missions,  by  suggesting
the  counter-claims  of  the  "  heathen  at  home,"  or  of  "  poor  relations,"  or  vaguely  "  so
many  calls,"  none  of  which  are,  in  fact,  considered  1  How  Judas-like !  2.  With  Iscariot
were  others  who  came  under  his  evil  influence.  (1)  Some  think  that  Judas  was  the
sole  troubler  of  Mary,  They  contend  that  the  plural  ia  in  this  narrative  to  be  taken
as  singular,  according  to  a  Hebraistic  usage  (cf.  oh.  iivii.  44,  where  "  the  thieves
also"  is  put  for  one  thief;  mnd  ch.  xiviii.  17,  where  "some  doubted"  means  one —
Thomas).  So  "  when  his  disciples  saw  it,  they  had  indignation,"  is  taken  to  mean  one
of  them— Judas.  (2)  No  doubt  Judas  was  the  chief  offender.  .Hence  John  speaks  of
Judas  only  as  troubling  Mary,  which  was  sufficient  for  his  purpose ;  but  it  must  be
noted  that,  in  quoting  the  words  of  Jesus  in  the  sequel,  the  plural  is  used  as  in  the
other  evangelists.  (3)  The  persistent  use  of  the  plural  througliout  the  narrative  in
Matthew  and  in  Mark  can  scarcely  be  explained  away  upon  the  principle  of  an  enallagi,
as  the  rhetoricians  call  this  substitution  of  the  plural  for  the  singular.  (4)  While,  then,
it  may  well  be  doubted  that  the  whole  college  of  the  apostles  were  compromised  in  this
unenviable  distinction  of  being  troublers  of  the  gentle  and  loving  Mary — John,  at  the
least,  may  he  excepted — ^yet  that  some  of  them  so  came  under  the  evil  influence  of
Judas  as  to  share  with  him  in  Christ's  rebuke  is  evident.  Are  there  not  still  in  our
Churches  many  too  easily  imposed  upon  by  representatives  of  the  covetous  traitor,  who
artfully  plead  specious  pretexts  of  charity  to  the  grieving  and  troubling  of  the  spiritual
kindred  of  Mary  ?  (5)  There  is  this  great  difference,  however,  between  Judas  and  those
apostles  who  sided  with  him,  viz.  they  were  moved  by  a  real  though  misplaced  con-
cern for  the  poor,  while  his  only  concern  was  to  gratify  the  greed  of  his  thievish  heart.
Let  us  beware  how  we  listen  to  those  who  affect  to  set  up  philanthropy  to  the  dis-
paragement of  religion.  Let  us  beware  how  we  depreciate  or  discredit  the  services  of
the  people  of  God  whose  methods  may  differ  from  our  own. — J.  A,  M.

Ver*.  17 — 30. — The  Lord's  Supper.  The  institution  of  the  Holy  Supper  was  in
connection  with  the  eating  of  the  Passover.  The  occasion  was  most  appropriate  and
significant ;  for  the  Jewish  feait  had  been  instituted  to  foreshadow  what  the  Christian


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  663

festival  was  founded  to  commemorate  (see  1  Cor.  v.  6 — 8).  The  two  sacraments  of
Chiistianity  express  all  that  was  expressed  in  the  entire  circle  of  the  ceremonial  law,
and  more.  All  the  washings  are  embodied  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism;  all  the
sacrifices  and  feasts  in  the  Eucharist.     Consider —

I.  The  Jewish  Passoveb.  1.  27ie  lamb  typified  Chrift.  (1)  It  was  a  male  of  the
first  year,  to  set  forth  the  excellence  and  the  maturity  of  his  humanity.  He  was  "  the
Son  of  David,"  viz.  that  Son  in  comparison  with  whom  the  other  sons  of  David  are
nowhere.  He  was  "  the  Son  of  man,"  viz.  in  comparison  with  whom  no  other  son  of
Adam  may  be  named.  (2)  It  was  "without  blemish."  He  was  in  his  birth  immacu-
late, in  his  life  and  death  perfectly  righteous.  In  aU  points  unique  in  purity,  wisdom,
and  goodness.  (3)  It  was  taken  from  the  flock,  to  show  that  the  humanity  of  Christ
was  to  be  real.  It  was  accordingly  no  phantom.  He  was  "bone  of  our  bone."  2.  lU
sacrifice  foreshadowed  his  Passion.  (1)  "  Taken  from  tlie  flock "  in  order  to  be
sacrificed,  it  became  a  vicarious  victim.  It  became  the  substitute  for  those  that  were
spared  in  consequence  of  its  selection.  So  Christ,  having  identified  himself  with  our
race,  was  "  taken  "  as  our  Substitute.  (2)  In  the  original  institution  th«  blood  of  the
lamb  sacrificed,  and  sprinkled  in  faith  upon  the  door-posts  and  lintels  of  the  houses,
protected  the  inmates  from  the  sword  of  the  destroyer.  So  is  there  life  and  salvation
where  by  a  sure  faith  the  blood  of  the  Lamb-  of  God  is  sprinkled.  (3)  The  place  of  the
sacrifice  was  ordained  to  be  that  which  the  Lord  should  choose.  Jerusalem  was  that
chosen  place.  (4)  The  time  was  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  Abib  (cf.  Ezod.  lii.
6 — 10 ;  John  xviii.  28).  "  Between  the  two  evenings,"  viz.  the  "  ninth  hour,"  when
Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice  and  gave  up  the  Ghost.  (5)  Even  the  direction  respecting
the  preservation  of  the  bones  of  the  lamb  from  fracture  had  its  prophetic  meaning  (cf.
Exod.  xii.  46 ;  John  xix.  36).  3.  The  feast  anticipated  his  eommunien.  (1)  The
Egyptian  had  no  right  to  the  Passover.  It  was  not  for  the  idolater,  but  for  the
believer.  So  neither  are  the  blessings  of  redemption  in  Christ  designed  for  the  obsti-
nate sinner,  but  for  the  humble  believer.  (2)  It  was  to  be  eaten  with  unleavened
bread.  Leaven,  being  a  kind  of  corruption,  was  an  emblem  of  insincerity  and  falsehood.
The  faith  which  saves  is  not  that  of  the  hypocrite,  but  that  of  the  true  man  (see  1  Cor.
V.  8).  (3)  It  was  to  be  eaten  "  with  bitter  herbs."  The  unleavened  bread  and  bitter
herbs  together  made  the  "  bread  of  affliction."  So  if  the  sinner  would  commune  with
Christ,  he  must  come  with  contrition  and  repentance.

II.  The  Christian  inbtitutb.  1.  ITie  elementt  of  iht  sacrament.  (1)  Bread.
This  was  to  represent,  signify,  or  be  an  emblem  of  the  body  of  Christ,  (o)  It  was  not
his  very  body,  "  This  is  "  equivalent  to  a  common  Hebrew  idiom  (of.  Gen.  il.  12 ;  xli.
26;  Dan.  vii.  23;  viii.  21;  1  Cor.  x.  4;  Gal.  iv.  24).  (6)  Bread  signifies  all  food
which  supports  the  life  of  the  body.  So  is  the  body  of  Christ,  discerned  by  faith,  the
sufticient  and  necessary  food  of  the  spirit.  (2)  Wine.  This  was  to  represent  his
blood,  (a)  "  This  is  "  cannot  be  literally  taken.  For  in  Luke  (xxii.  20)  the  words
are,  "  This  cup  is  the  new  covenant  in  my  blood,"  which  it  will  not  be  contended  is  to
be  literally  taken.  The  drinking  of  literal  sacrificial  blood  was  a  custom  amongst
idolaters.  But  this  was  never  practised  in  the  service  of  Jehovah  (see  Ps.  xvi.  4).  (6)
Blood,  viz.  of  the  vegetable  kind  is  chosen  to  set  forth  the  life  of  the  resurrection  of
Christ,  which  is  that  in  which  the  true  Christian  has  communion  with  him.  2.  The
treatment  of  the  elements.  (1)  The  blessing.  This  was  observed  both  in  respect  to  the
bread  and  the  wine.  This  was  no  miracle  of  transubstantiation.  It  was,  as  explained
in  the  evangelists,  "  giving  thanks."  The  cup  used  was  the  "  cup  of  blessing  "  of  the
Passover.  Christ,  as  Man  heading  the  table  of  the  redeemed,  gives  God  thanks.  True
believers  will  all  say  "  Amen  "  to  this  benediction  and  thanksgiving.  (2)  The  breaking
of  the  bread  and  pouring  out  of  the  wine  vividly  call  to  remembianoe  the  prominent
features  of  the  Passion.  And  forasmuch  as  Christ  himself  broke  the  bread  and  poured
the  wine,  he  evinced  the  voluntariness  of  his  suffering  for  us.  But  that  this  breaking
of  the  bread  and  pouring  of  the  wine  was  not  the' actual  suffering  of  Christ  as  the  tran-
substantiationist  must  maintain,  is  evident,  for  Christ  said,  "  With  desire  I  have  desired
to  eat  this  Passover  with  you  befort  I  suffer"  (see  Luke  xxii.  15).  (3)  The  participO'
tion.  This  set  forth  the  believer's  communion  v/ith  Christ,  his  assimilation  to  Christ,
his  incorporation  with  Christ,  and  his  union  in  spirit  with  the  Lord.  He  gave  the
sloments  to  his  "disciples" — ^mark,  not  as  apostles,  which  they  were,  but  as  disciplet.


564  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1—75.

Tiz.  that  "  all "  disciples  might  claim  this  privilege.  Bread  to  strengthen;  wine  to
gladden.  The  cup  is  by  Ignatius  called  If7ajr7j,  as  it  was  the  symbol  of  love.  By  Paul
it  is  called  the  "  communion  "  (see  1  Cor.  x.  16).  (4)  The  description.  "  My  blood
of  the  covenant."  It  is  the  sign  and  seal  of  the  "  better  promises  "  of  the  "  new,"  or
excellent,  and"  everlasting"  covenant.  (5)  Ihe  hymn.  Praise  at  such  time  is  to  us
most  fitting.  "  Christ,  removing  the  hymn  from  the  close  of  the  Passover  to  the  close
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  plainly  intimates  that  he  intended  that  the  ordinance  should
continue  in  his  Church,  that  is,  it  had  not  its  birth  with  the  ceremonial  law,  so  it
should  not  die  with  it "  (Henry).  (6)  The  departure,  immediately  afterwards,  to  the
Mount  of  Olives,  was  also  significant.  For  he  was  destined  thence,  after  his  actual
Passion,  to  ascend  into  heaven  to  receive  for  us  the  blessing  of  the  covenant.  3.  The
admonitory  incident.  (1)  "  As  they  were  eating,  Jesus  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that
one  of  you  shall  betray  me."  As  at  its  institution  the  Passover  separated  between
Israel  and  Egypt  in  mercy  and  judgment,  so  now  at  its  transformation  into  the
Christian  sacrament,  mercy  and  judgment  were  to  separate  between  the  spiritual  and
sordid  Israel.  Judas  was  the  type  of  his  nation  also  when  his  wickedness  recoiled  upon
him,  as  the  wickedness  of  the  Egyptians  had  recoiled  upon  them.  (2)  The  presence
of  tieaohery  in  the  Church  is  an  occasion  of  sorrow  to  the  true  believer.  "  They  were
exceeding  sorrowful : "  for  the  Lord,  that  his  great  love  should  be  requited  with  villainy ;
for  their  college,  that  its  credit  and  influence  should  be  compromised.  (3)  It  is  also
an  occasion  for  heart-searching.  "  They  began  to  say  unto  liim  every  one.  Is  it  I,
Lord?"  The  search  of  true  self-examination  is  particular  and  special.  The  evil  con-
cealed in  us  can  be  fully  discovered  to  us  only  by  the  Lord.  "  He  that  dippeth,"  etc.
(ver.  23 ;  cf.  Ps.  xli.  9).  External  communion  with  Christ  in  his  ordinances  is  an
aggravation  of  treachery  to  him.  (4)  "  The  Son  of  man,"  etc.  (ver.  24).  It  had  been
foretold  that  Messiah  should  suffer  (cf.  Isa.  liii.  3 ;  Dan.  ix.  26).  But  though  -  Divine
mercy  brought  infinite  good  out  of  that  suffering,  those  who  inflicted  it  were  none  the
less  criminal.  How  resolute  is  the  devil  of  hypocrisy  I  "  Jndas  answered  and  said,  Is
iti,  Rabbi?"— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  31 — 35. — Strength  and  weakness.  After  the  admonitory  incident  of  the  last
Passover,  which  separated  the  unhappy  Iscariot  from  the  apostleship,  Jesus,  journeying
with  the  eleven  towards  the  Mount  of  Olives,  proceeded  to  caution  them  against  the
weakness  which  be  discerned  in  them.  He  is  not  our  truest  friend  who  conceals  from
us  our  faults.

I.  In  Jeb0S  we  bee  the  bnsheinement  of  Divine  steenoth.  1.  In  his  all-
comprehensive  knowledge.  (1)  What  was  "written"  was  perfectly  familiar  to  him.
He  was  supremely  "  mighty  in  the  Scriptures."  The  "  Sword  of  the  Spirit "  is  a  trusty
weapon,  both  for  defence  in  parrying  the  thrusts  of  Satan  and  for  offence  in  putting
the  armies  of  the  aliens  to  the  rout.  (2)  He  knew  himself  to  be  the  "Shepherd"  of
Israel.  That  Shepherd  is  Jehuvah  (see  Ps.  xxiii.  1 ;  Ixxx.  1).  That  Shepherd  is
Messiah  (see  Isa.  xl.  11 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23 ;  Zech.  xiii.  7).  Jesus  identifies  himself  as
that  glorious  Personage  (see  John  x.  11 ;  Heb.  xiii.  20 ;  1  Pet.  v.  4).  As  the  Shepherd
here  is  the  "Fellow"  of  the  "Lord  of  hosts,"  he  only  can  be  intended  who  is  "equal
with  God."  (8)  He  knew  everything  about  his  sheep.  He  could  foretell  the  incident
of  the  denial  by  Peter.  He  could  oppose  the  limit  before  the  second  cock-crowing  of
that  night  to  Peter's  "  never."  He  could  forecast  his  desertion  by  "  all."  He  knows
us  infinitely  better  than  wo  know  ourselves.  (4)  Knowledge  is  power.  Perfect  know-
ledge can  never  be  taken  at  a  disadvantage.  It  cannot  be  surprised.  It  has  boundless
resources.  2.  In  his  all-endwring  compassion.  (1)  With  what  patience  does  he  endure
the  unfaithfulness  of  his  disciples!  Though  he  knew  they  would  desert  him,  yet  does
he  not  spurn  them  from  his  presence.  His  kind  heart  can  see,  even  in  the  excess  of
their  self-confidence,  a  sincere  and  warm  affection.  The  case  is  different  from  that  of
Judas.  His  sin  was  deliberate;  Pet&r's  was  a  sin  of  surprise.  That  of  Judas  arose
from  the  state  of  his  heart ;  the  act  of  Peter  was  against  his  habitual  feelings  and
principles.  Though  he  foresaw  that  all  the  disciples  would  leave  him  to  tread  the
winepress  alone,  his  gentleness  made  no'rejoinder  to  their  protestations  of  devotion  to
him  even  to  the  death.  (2)  The  Shepherd  submits  to  be  smitten  for  the  sheep.  For
himself  he  had  no  need  to  die.     The  formidableness  of  that  "  sword"  of  Dirine  justice


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  665

now  "awaking"  from  its  slumber  of  forbearance  was  fully  in  his  view.  He  saw  the
malignity  of  those  human  hands  into  which  it  was  given  to  be  wielded  against  him.
Yet  did  he  not  seek  to  evade  its  edge.  He  could  already  see  those  "  wounds  in  his
hands"  with  which  he  was  to  be  "wounded  in  the  house  of  his  frienrfs"  (see  Zech.
xiii.  6).  He  could  have  avoided  them;  but  his  sheep  must  he  redeemed.  (3)  The
"scattered"  ones  must  again  be  gathered  into  their  fold.  To  this  end  the  smitten
Shepherd  must  rise  again  from  the  dead.  "  But  after  I  am  raised  up  I  will  go  before
you  into  Galilee."  This  implies  that  he  would  deliver  himself  out  cjf  the  hands  of  his
enemies  and  theirs.  "  I  will  go  before  you,"  equivalent  to  "  I  will  bring  my  liand
again  to  the  little  ones"  (see  Zech.  xiii.  7).  "I  will  go  before  you,"  viz.  as  the  Shep-
herd before  his  gathered  flock  (see  John  x.  4).  "  Into  Gahlee."  He  even  mentioned
the  particular  hill  which  was  to  be  the  place  of  their  meeting  (see  ch.  xxviii.  16).
(4)  We  have  "strong  consolation"  in  the  "mercy"  which  "endureth  for  ever."

II.  In  the  disciples  we  see  an  embodiment  of  weakness.  1.  Their  weakness
appears  in  their  self-confidence.  (1)  Peter  had  more  faith  in  himself  than  he  had  in
the  Scriptures  of  God.  They  anticipated  the  offence  which  the  sheep  were  to  take
when  the  Shepherd  should  be  smitten.  In  the  face  of  this  Peter  said,  "  If  all  shall  be
offended  in  thee,  I  will  never  be  offended."  It  is  easy  to  talk  boldly  and  carelessly  of
death  at  a  distance.  (2)  "If  all  shall  be  offended."  Those  who  think  too  well  of
themselves  are  apt  to  be  suspicious  of  others  (see  Gal.  vi.  1).  (3)  Peter's  self-confidence
grew  with  his  unbelief.  For  when  Jesus  said  unto  him, "  Verily  I  say  unto  thee.  That
this  night,  before  the  cock  crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me  thrice.  Peter  saith  unto  him,
Even  if  I  must  die  with  thee,  yet  will  I  not  deny  thee."  He  should  have  been  diffident
in  respect  to  words  which  never  failed  when  the  most  stupendous  miracles  depended  on
ihem.  (4)  The  foremost  in  self-confidence  are  the  first  to  falL  Such  was  the  case
with  Peter.    Then—

*  Beware  of  Peter's  word,

Nor  confidently  say,
'I  never  will  deny  thee.  Lord,'

But, '  Grant  I  never  may.'

Man's  wisdom  is  to  seek

His  strength  in  God  alone ;
And  e'en  an  angel  would  be  weak

Who  trusted  in  his  own."

2.  2%etr  weaknest  appears  in  their  unbelief.  (1)  They  could  see  that  Jesus  was  in
peril  of  his  life.  This  they  inferred  rather  from  their  knowledge  of  the  hostility  of  the
rulers  than  from  their  faith  in  the  Scriptures  of  prophecy  or  from  the  prophetic  words
of  Christ.  They  could  not  see  who  it  was  that  was  in  peril.  Had  they  seen  the
Father  in  the  Son,  the  peril  would  not  have  affrighted  them.  Note:  Offences  will
come  among  the  disciples  of  Jesus  in  times  of  peril.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  evermore
the  stumbling-block  (1  Oor.  i.  23).  Satan  is  busy  when  our  faith  is  weak.  (2)  They
could  not  see  what  it  truly  is  to  die  with  Christ.  To  die  with  him  is  to  die  to  self
and  the  world — ^voluntarily  to  crucify  our  entire  evil  nature.  Because,  for  lack  of
fiiith,  they  were  unprepared  thus  to  die  with  Jesus,  they  "forsook  him,  and  fled."  The
heart  can  await  the  hour  of  temptation  when  the  truth  is  rooted  in  it.  (3)  They  could
not  see  that  their  Lord  would  rise  again  from  the  dead.  This  unbelief  was  not  for
want  of  being  told  about  the  Resurrection,  either  by  the  prophets  or  by  Christ  himself.
They  were  foolish  in  the  slowness  of  their  hearts  to  believe  (see  Luke  xxiv.  25,  26).
Had  they  understood  and  realized  the  resurrection  of  Christ  on  the  third  day  after  his
ras.^iun,  their  faith  would  have  steadied  them  (of.  1  Cor.  xv.  58).  (4)  If  all  the  apostles
fi.r-oois  their  Lord,  who  has  not  reason  to  fear?  Did  not  tlie  apostles  represent  all  the
fl  ick  which  they  were  afterwards  to  bring  together?  Who  can  boast?  The  Lord
permits  us  to  be  tried,  that  we  may  see  ourselves  as  we  are,  and  be  humbled  by  our
experience.     The  strength  of  pride  is  but  for  a  moment. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  36 — 46. — The  agony  in  the  garden.  Jesus,  with  his  apostles,  after  the  eventful
moonlight  walk  from  Jerusalem,  came  to  a  place  at  the  foot  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,
called  "  Gethsemane,"  or  the  oil-presses.     Here  he  entered  upon  a  scene  the  moral


668  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [Oh.  xxvl  1—75.

grandeur  of  which  is  only  exceeded  by  that  of  Calvary,  The  olive  in  the  oil-press,
like  the  grape  in  the  wine-press,  was  trodden  (see  Micah  vi.  15).  The  sufferings  of  the
Lord  in  the  garden  were  purely  mental ;  those  on  the  cross  were  physical  also.  Meditate
upon  the  trouble  of  his  soul —

I.  In  its  terrible  seveeitt.  1,  This  is  expressed  in  his  references  to  it.  (1)  A
few  days  earlier  he  said,  "Now  is  my  soul  troubled "  (John  xii.  27);  but  here  the
storm  of  temptation  sets  in  in  earnest.  (2)  The  expression,  "  to  be  sorrowful "  (ver.  37),
conveys  the  idea  of  horror.  The  "horror  of  great  darkness"  (see  Gen.  xv.  12).  This
was  the  setting  in  of  that  last  and  darkest  cloud  of  temptation  which  finally  descended
so  low  as  to  darken  the  earth  at  the  Crucifixion  (see  ch.  xxvii.  45).  (3)  The  word
rendered  "  to  be  very  heavy  "  (New  Version,  "  sore  troubled  ")  implies  the  loss  of  pleasure
derived  from  other  things.  This  is  characteristic  of  very  deep  human  grief.  Our  Lord
was  truly  human.  (4)  The  suffering  increases.  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even
unto  death."  The  nature  of  this  sorrow  also  was  human,  but  its  severity  was  beyond
all  human  comprehension.  For  the  love  from  which  he  contended  was  Divine  love  for
the  whole  human  race.  What  must  have  been  the  agony  of  that  sense  of  death !  2.  It
is  expressed  in  the  agony  of  his  prayer.  (1)  "  He  fell  on  his  face."  Great  anguish  is
expressed  as  rolling  in  the  dust  (see  Micah  i,  10).  Job,  in  his  great  grief,  fell  on  the
ground.  (2)  His  prayer  was  importunate.  "If  it  be  possible."  Mark  gives  it  thus:
"  Abba,  Father,  all  things  are  possible  unto  thee  "  (Mark  xiv,  36).  To  God  all  things
are  not  morally,  though  physically  all  things  are,  possible,  "  Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,
but  as  thou  wilt."  Here  is  the  human  will  of  Christ,  in  the  extreraest  circumstances,
deferring  to  his  Divine  will.  (3)  His  supplication  was  with  "  strong  crying  and  tears  "
to  be  saved  from  this  fearful  death-sorrow  (see  Heb.  v.  7).  These  cries  reached  the
hearing  of  the  disciples,  and  they  observed  his  tears  when  he  came  to  them  in  the
moonlight.  (4)  1'he  petition  was  thrice  repeated.  Paul  expresses  his  own  importunity
in  the  words,  "  I  besought  the  Lord  thrice  "  (see  2  Cor.  xii.  8).  Perhaps  the  iteration
of  the  prayer  of  Jesus  implied  as  many  distinct  temptations.  They  were,  however,
related  to  the  same  "  cup."

II.  In  its  varioos  sources.  1.  It  partly  arose  from  the  contradiction  of  sinners.
(See  Heb.  xii.  3,)  (1)  The  treachery  of  Judas  was  working  to  its  issue.  He  sorely
felt  the  ingratitude  of  that  "  familiar  friend  in  whom  "  once  he  worthily  "  trusted,"  but
who  was  now  desperately  fallen  (cf.  Ps.  xii.  9 ;  John  xiii,  18 ;  Acts  i.  25).  (2)  The
treachery  of  the  Jews  was  working  with  Judas,  their  type.  This  also  aiflioted  his
patriotic  heart.  See  that  wonderful  description  in  the  hundred  and  ninth  psalm  of
the  sorrows  of  Messiah  in  connection  with  the  treachery  of  Judas  and  of  the  Jews.

(3)  The  wickedness  of  the  world  at  large  was  also  before  him  in  all  its  enormity.  A
specimen  of  that  enormity  was  soon  to  be  displayed  in  the  conduct  of  the  Eoman
governor  and  his  men  of  war.  For  this  he  felt  acutely,  as  having  taken  upon  him  that
humauity  which  is  common  to  all,  2.  It  partly  arose  from  the  weakness  of  his  disciples.
(1)  They  were  slow  of  heart  to  believe  fully  in  him.  This,  notwithstanding  all  the
pains  he  had  taken  to  instruct  them,  notwithstanding  all  the  miracles  to  couflrm  his
teaching  which  they  had  seen,  (2)  But  they  were  full  of  self-assertion.  This  he  had
that  day  witnessed  in  their  professions  of  readiness  to  die  with  him.  And  though  he,
in  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  rebuked  it,  still  they  remained  self-coafident ;  for  they  slept
when  they  should  have  watched.  (3)  When  David  wept  at  this  Mount  of  Olives,  all
his  followers  wept  with  him  (see  2  Sam,  xv,  30) ;  but  when  the  Son  of  David  was
there  in  tears,  his  followers  were  asleep.  Yet  was  not  their  sleep  without  sorrow  (see
Luke  xxii,  45),  Still  it  was  open  to  rebuke.  "  He  saith  unto  Peter,"  who  had  been
foremost  in  promising  to  die  with  him, "  What,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour  ?  "

(4)  This  evidence  of  their  weakness  Jesus  uses  to  press  upon  them  the  urgent  need  of
their  watching  and  praying,  that  they  might  not  yield  to  the  approaching  temptation.
If  prayer  against  the  hour  of  temptation  was  needful  for  the  Master,  how  much  mora
so  for  the  servants!  "Prayer  without  watching  is  hypocrisy;  and  watching  without
prayer  is  presumption"  (Jay).  (5)  "Sleep  on  now."  This  is  the  same  as  "Why
sleep  ye  ?  "  as  it  is  given  in  Luke  xxii.  46 ;  a  rebuke,  e.y.  "  I  no  longer  enjoin  upon  you
to  watch;  the  season  is  now  past  for  that  duty,  the  time  of  trial  for  which  watching
and  praying  would  have  prepared  you  has  arrived."  He  watched  and  prayed,  and
received  strength  to  drink  the  bitter  cup  (cf.  Luke  xxii.  43;  Heb.  v.  7);  they  slept


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  567

away  the  precious  moments,  and  the  hour  of  trial  found  them  without  strength.  3.  It
partly  arose  from  the  malignity  of  Satan.  (1)  The  devil  was  in  Iscariot  (cf.  Luke
xxii.  3;  John  xlii.  2,  27).  (2)  The  devil  was  in  the  Jews.  The  prevalence  of
demoniacal  possession  at  the  time  of  Christ's  sojourn  amongst  them  was  a  sign  of  the
condition  of  the  nation.  (3)  The  devil  was  in  the  Gentile  nations.  He  was,  and  still
is,  to  a  fearful  extent,  "  the  god  of  this  world."  (4)  That  was  emphatically  "  the  hour
of  the  power  of  darkness  " — the  crisis  in  which  Satan  was  permitted  to  put  forth  all  his
strength  in  his  conflict  with  the  "  Seed  of  the  woman."  For  the  sufferings  on  the
cross  were  but  the  complement  and  sequel  of  those  in  the  garden.  4.  It  principally
arose  from  the  anger  of  Ood.  We  may  here  make  the  general  observation,  viz.  that
the  terrible  "cup"  which  Jesus  had  to  driuk  was  given  to  him  by  the  hand  of  his
Father  (cf.  ver.  39 ;  John  xviii.  11).  The  subject  will  be  more  particularly  considered
as  we  meditate  further  upon  the  trouble  of  the  soul  of  our  Lord.

IIL  In  its  awful  vicakiousness.  1.  Se  shares  his  sorrows  with  those  he  loves  best.
(1)  To  the  college  of  the  apostles  he  said,  "  Sit  ye  here,  while  I  go  yonder  and  pray."
Some  are  able  to  go  only  so  far  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings.  (2)  "  And  he  took  with
him  Peter  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee  "  to  whom  he  said,  "  Abide  ye  here,  and  watch
with  me."  "  Sit  ye  here  "  (ver.  36),  and  "  Abide  ye  here  "  (ver.  38),  mark  a  law  of
progression  in  following.  (3)  To  these  he  said,  "  Watch  with  me."  Watch  while  I
watch.  Watch  as  I  watch.  The  temptations  directed  against  Christ  are  those  directed
against  his  Church.  (4)  But  who  were  these  ?  They  were  the  three  formerly  chosen
to  be  the  witnesses  of  the  Transfiguration  (see  ch.  xvii.  1).  Those  are  best  prepare^  to
suffer  with  Christ  who  have  seen  his  glory.  So  likewise  those  who  suffer  with  him
may  expect  to  reign  with  him.  The  sons  of  Zebedee  had  offered  themselves  to  drink
of  his  cup  (see  ch.  xx.  20 — ^23).  2.  But  there  is  a  limit  to  their  companionship.
(1)  "  Tarry  ye  here.''  Beyond  this  the  best  and  most  perfected  cannot  go.  Christ  had
lately  prayed  with  his  disciples  (see  John  xvii.  1) ;  now  he  prays  alone.  Note :
Our  prayers  with  our  families  must  not  be  pleaded  to  excuse  the  neglect  of  secret
devotions.  (2)  But  why  did  he  now  pray  and  suffer  apart?  Because  his  sufferings
now  were  vicarious,  and  in  these  he  could  have  no  sharer,  for  he  only  was  sinless,  and
he  only  was  Divine.  In  his  pleadings  he  makes  no  mention  of  his  virtues,  for  he  was
suffering  as  the  Sin-bearer  for  the  world.  (3)  That  this  agony  in  the  garden  was  for
lis  is  evident,  else  One  so  great  and  glorious  as  he  was  would  never  have  "feared"  as
he  did.  His  fear  was  n^t  for  the  loss  of  natural  life  to  himself.  That,  to  one  who  on
the  third  day  after  his  death  was  to  rise  again,  is  clearly  out  of  the  question.  His
"  godly  fear  "  (see  Heb.  v.  7,  New  Version)  was  for  the  loss  of  spiritual  and  eternal  life
to  the  whole  world.  May  it  not  also  have  been  lest,  if  the  death-sorrow  in  the  garden
should  prove  fatal,  the  fulfilment  of  the  Scriptures  in  respect  to  his  death  by  crucifixion
might  be  imperilled?  (4)  The  "cup"  was  the  Passion  which  was  now  beginning,  but
had  to  be  completed  on  the  cross.  The  allusion  may  be  to  the  poison-cup  given  to
criminals.  To  this  Paul  possibly  alludes  when  he  says,  "  Jesus  Cmrist,  by  the  grace  of
God,  fasted  death  for  every  man  "  (Heb.  ii.  9).  Here  the  whole  world  is  represented
as  standing  guilty  apd  condemned  before  the  tribunal  of  God.  Into  every  man's  hand
is  placed  the  deadly  cup,  and  he  is  required  to  drink  off  the  poison.  But  Jesus  enters,
takes  every  man's  cup  out  of  his  hand,  drinks  off  the  poison,  and  thus  tastes  or  suffers
the  death  which  every  man  otherwise  must  have  suffered  (see  A.  Clarke,  in  loc).
-J.  A.  M.

Vers.  47 — 56. — The  submission  of  Jesus.  After  the  third  time  praying  in  Gethsemane,
Jesus  came  to  his  slumbering  disciples,  and  said,  "  Sleep  on  now,  and  take  your  rest "
— the  opportunity  for  watching  is  past.  Note :  Opportunities  pass,  never  to  return ;
therefore  we  should  never  fail  to  improve  them  in  their  passing.  "  Behold,  the  hour  is
at  hand,  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners  " — the  hour  of  trial
is  come  for  which  watchings  shonld  have  prepared.  "  Arise,  let  ns  be  going,"  not  to
run  away  from  the  crisis,  but  to  meet  it  (cf.  John  xviii.  4).  "  Behold,  he  is  at  hand
that  betrayeth  me.    And  while  he  yet  spake,  lo,  Judas,"  etc.    Note  here,  and  admire—

I.  The  submission  of  Jesus  to  Judas.  1.  He  might  have  avoided  him.  (L)  He
knew  of  his  coming  (see  vers.  45,  46).  Every  particular  of  the  tragedy  was  vividly
presented  to  his  prophetic  spirit.    (2)  The  Miracle-worker  had  not  lost  his  resources.


568  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvl  1—76.

Oa  a  former  occasion,  when  hurried  by  an  infuriated  rabble  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  at
Nazareth,  that  they  might  throw  him  headlong,  he  knew  how  to  pass  through  the
midst  of  them  (see  Luke  iv.  30).  How  he  did  this  we  are  not  informed — whether  he
shut  their  eyes  or  overawed  them  by  the  sense  of  his  majesty.  But  Judas  knew  the
fact,  and  was  probably  influenced  by  the  recollection  of  it  when  he  nervously  said,
"  Hold  him  fast."  Instead  of  avoiding  the  traitor :  2.  He  endured  his  kiss.  (1)  A  kisa
is  the  token  of  allegiance  and  friendship  (see  Ps.  ii.  12).  (2)  With  Judas  the  token  of
friendship  was  made  the  sign  of  treachery.  The  kiss  of  Judas  came  to  be  an  expression
for  the  greatest  of  all  hypocrisies — the  betrayal  of  innocence  by  simulated  love.  The
"  angel  of  light "  seeks  hiellish  ends  in  heavenly  means.  (3)  By  enduring  that  infamous
kiss  Jesus  permitted  the  traitor  to  show  himself  up.  God's  permission  is  judicially
given  to  the  sinner  to  sin.  "Do  that  for  which  thou  art  come."  Sin  is  its  own
chastiser.  3.  Se  called  him  "friend,"  or  "companion"  (1)  Thus  he  identified  himself
as  the  Ahithophel  of  prophecy  (of.  2  Sam.  xv.  12 ;  Ps.  ili.  9 ;  Iv.  12—14).  (2)  He
was  "  one  of  the  twelve."  The  vilest  wretches  lurk  in  the  best  company.  (3)  Once,
probably,  Judas  had  been  as  sincere  a  friend  to  Jesus  as  Ahithophel  had  been  to  David.
The  Heart-searcher  would  not  have  chosen  him  for  a  disciple  and  promoted  him  to  the
apostolate  unless  he  had  then  been  a  true  man.  (4)  But  how  fearfully  had  he  fallen  I
A  leader  of  the  flock  of  Christ  has  become  the  leader  of  s  mob  of  ruffians  against  his
life.  Apostates  from  religion  become  its  bitterest  foes.  Julian  and  Judas  are  notable
examples.  (5)  There  is  truth  in  the  irony  of  the  term  "  friend."  The  working  out
of  the  redemption  and  salvation  of  men  was  the  great  purpose  cherished  in  the  heart
of  Christ.  Judas,  therefore,  unwittingly  befriended  him  in  furthering  his  sufferings.
Jesus  called  Peter  "  Satan"  for  hindering  him  (see  ch.  xvi.  22,  23).  God  brings  good
.  out  of  the  evil  working  of  the  wicked.

II.  The  submission  of  Jesus  to  the  babble.    1.  He  might  havi  resisted  them.
(1)  With  what  authority  did  he  drive  the  throng  of  sacrilegious  traders  from  the
temple  (see  ch.  xxi.  12,  13)!    (2)  He  was  the  same  Miracle-worker  still.    At  the
utterance  of  the  words,  "  I  am  he,    they  were  so  overpowered  that  "  they  went  back-
ward, and  fell  to  the  ground  "  (see  John  iviii.  6).    They  never  could  have  approached
him  without  his  consent.    The  power  that  restored  the  ear  of  Malchus  could  not  have
been  controlled  by  that  of  Malchus  and  his  company.    (3)  He  might  have  had  "  more
than  twelve  legions  of  angels."    Note:  (a)  The  "innumerable  company  of  angels"
are  marshalled  into  ranks.    (6)  The  angels  were  to  Elisha  "  chariots  of  fire  and  horses
of  Are,"  not  only  to  secure  him,  but  to  consume  his  assailants  (cf.  2  Kings  i.  10 — 15 ;
ii.  11 ;  vi.  14 — 17 ;  Ps.  civ,  4).    (c)  If  a  single  angel  could  destroy  a  hundred  and
eighty-five  thousand  Assyrians  at  a  stroke  (2  Kings  xix.  35),  what  might  not  "  twelve
legions "  do  ?    2.  He  forbade  an,  appeal  to  the  sword.    (1)  Had  he  made  such  an
appeal,  there  would  have  been  a  popular  response.    The  people  were  disposed  even
forcibly  to  make  Jesus  their  Warrior-King  (see  John  vi.  15).    They  readily  followed
false  Christs  who  relied  upon  the  sword.     Peter  was  in  sympathy  with  his  nation
when  he  weilded  the  sword.    (2)  But  Jesus  rebuked  the  impetuosity  of  Peter.    He
struck  without  asking,  "  Shall  we  smite  with  the  sword  ?  "  (see  Luke  xxii.  49).    Peter
did  not  intend  evil,  but  intemperate  zeal  is  often  evil  in  its  results.    (3)  He  reproved
him  for  appealing  to  the  swurd.     (o)  It  was  needless,  for  Christ  could  have  received
succour  from  his  Father.    God  has  no  need  of  our  sins  to  bring  about  his  purposes.
(6)  It  was  dangerous,  viz.  both  to  himself  and  his  fellow-disciples.     For  "he  that
takes  the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword."    (c)  It  evinced  ignorance  of  the  Scriptures.
They  teach  that  the  way  to  glory  is  through  suffering  rather  than  through  fighting.
Peter  would  have  the  end  without  the  means,    (d)  Peter's  unsanctifled  zeal  was
another  step  toward  his  fall,  by  increasing  his  subsequent  fear  of  detection.     (4)  To
show  that  he  did  not  wish  to  be  defended  by  carnal  weapons,  the  Lord  healed  the  ear
of  Malclius  (see  Luke  xxii.  51).    The  soldiers  of  Christ  do  not  war  after  the  flesh  (see
2  Cor.  X.  3,4).    3.  Instead  of  resisting,  he  reasoned.    (1)  '♦Are  ye  come  out  as  against
a  robber,  with  swords  and  staves  ?  "  Judasa  at  this  time  was  infested  with  thieves,  and
every  one  will  lend  a  hand  to  stop  a  thief.    (2)  The  "swords"  were  those  of  the
"cohort"  of  the  chiliarch,  or  "chief  captain" — probably  Roman  soldiers  from  the
Tower  of  Antonia  (cf.  ver.  45  ;  John  xviii.  12).   The  "  slaves  "  were  those  of  the  creatures
of  the  high  priest.     These  classes  were  usually  at  variance ;  but,  like  Pilate  and  Heiod,


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  \0  ST.  MATTHEW.  509

they  find  a  point  of  agreement  in  hostility  to  Christ.  (3)  Thus  they  treated  as  a
robber  him  that  came  to  "restore"  that  he  "took  not  away"  (see  Ps.  Ixix.  4).  He
became  a  prisoner  that  he  might  set  us  at  liberty.  "  If  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  these
go  their  way  "  (see  John  xviii.  8,  9).  (4)  "  I  sat  daily  in  the  temple  teaching,  and  ye
took  me  not."  How  comes  this  change  in  your  conHuot?  Is  it  not  unreasonable  and
inconsistent?  Why  come  clandestinely  in  the  night?  Who  looks  most  like  the
criminal  ?

III.  The  submission  of  Jesus  to  God.  1.  For  the  vindication  of  his  truth.  (1)
"How  then  should  the  Scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  must  be?"  Jesus  carried
tlie  Law  of  God  in  his  heart,  (2)  They  were  "  a  great  multitude  "  that  came  to  arrest
him,  that  the  Scriptures  might  be  fulfilled  which  saith,  "Lord,  how  are  they  increased
that  trouble  me!  "  (Ps.  iii.  1).  (3)  By  being  pursued  as  a  thief,  "he  was  numbered
with  the  transgressors  "  (Isa.  liii.  12).  This  Scripture  met  a  further  accomplishment
when  he  was  afterwards  crucified  between  two  malafactors  (see  Mark  xv.  27,  28).
(4)  He  was  shamefully  deserted  by  his  disciples.  In  their  conduct  they  evinced  (o)
unfaithfulness,  (6)  unkindnoss,  (c)  ingratitude,  (d)  folly.  For  why  should  they
through  fear  of  death  forsake  the  Fountain  of  life  (see  John  vi.  67,  68)  ?  But  this
desertion  was  to  be  a  part  of  Messiah's  suffering  (cf.  Job  xix.  13 ;  Ps.  xxxviii.  11 ;  Isa.
Ixiii.  3 — 5).  (5)  The  Scripture  must  be  fulfilled  that  Christ  should  be  "  led  as  a  lamb
to  the  slaughter  "  (Isa.  liii.  7).  Had  he  summoned  the  angels,  he  would  not  have  been
so  led.  Note :  Nothing  must  be  done  against  the  fulfilment  of  the  Scriptures.  2.  For
the  vindication  of  his  goodness.  (1)  The  sword  of  the  Lord  was  drawn  against  Christ
(see  Zech.  xiii.  7).  The  Great  One  had  to  be  smitten  that  the  "  little  ones  "  might  go
free.  (2)  The  Redeemer  of  mankind  had  afterwards  to  become  the  Intercessor  for  tha
salvation  of  believers.  (3)  He  had  to  become  the  Example  of  the  triumph  of  patience,
of  the  victories  of  suffering.  He  accordingly  denounced  the  human  doctrine  of  victory
by  the  swoid,  by  asserting  the  converse,  viz.  "All  they  that  take  the  sword  shall
perish  by  the  sword."  (4)  History  has  given  its  verdict.  The  Jews  who  put  our
Lord  to  death  by  the  sword  of  the  Komans  perished  by  the  same  Roman  sword.  The
Romans  who  used  the  sword  against  Christ  perished  by  the  sword  of  the  Goths.  The
doom  of  persecuting  Churches  and  of  persecutors  also  is  pre-written  here  (see
Rev.  xiii.  10).

I?eilect :  Are  there  not  still  found  among  the  disciples ;  1.  Those  who  betray  Christ
and  his  cause?  2.  Who  deny  him  and  his  people?  3.  Who  abandon  him,  his  cause,
his  people,  and  his  truth  ? — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  67 — 68. — The  demoralized  council.  The  tribunal  before  which  Jesus  was
arraigned  was  composed  of  "  all  the  chief  priests,"  with  the  high  priest  at  their  head,
and  all  the  "  elders  and  scribes."  It  was  the  Sanhedrin,  by  the  Jews  claimed  to  have
originated  in  the  time  of  Moses,  and  by  learned  critics  acknowledged  to  have  been  at '
least  as  ancient  as  the  time  of  Jonathan  Maocabaaus.  Once  a  venerable  judicial
assembly,  it  had  now  degenerated  into  a  cabal.

I.  Its  coxTNWLLORi  ARE  MDBDEBERS.  1.  They  had  beforehand  plotted  the  death  of
Jesus.  (1)  The  faithfulness  of  his  preaching  had  mortified  their  pride.  The  spirit  of
murder  was  in  the  hatred  and  resentment  which  they  cherished  toward  him.  (2)  After
the  raising  of  La/.arus,  they  consulted  together  what  they  must  do  to  the  Miracle-
worker,  and  Caiaphas  gave  forth  his  memorable  decision.  In  advising  assassination,
he  prophesied  under  an  inspiration  which  he  did  not  understand.  His  accomplices
understood  him  only  as  he  intended.  "  So  from  that  day  forth  they  took  counsel  that
they  might  put  Jesus  to  death"  (see  John  xii.  45 — 53).  "Man  proposeth;  God
disposeth."  (3)  Fear  from  the  popularity  of  Jesus  alone  prevented  them  from
procuring  his  assassination  without  even  the  semblance  of  a  trial  (see  Luke  xx.  19 ;
xxii.  2).  How  questionable  is  the  virtue  that  is  fostered  by  fear  1  (4)  Judas  knew
his  market.  Ho  knew  where  "  blood-money  "  could  be  procured  (see  ch.  xxvii.  3—8).
Satan,  in  the  councillors,  was  "  glad "  to  "  commune "  with  "  Satan  "  in  the  traitor
(see  Luke  xxii.  3—6).  2.  Tliey  assembled  to  carry  their  plot  into  effect.  (1)  The^
first  resolve  to  ruin  Jesus,  then  seek  out  the  means  to  do  it.  So  notorious  was  this
that  it  is  recorded  as  an  historic  fact  (cf.  ver.  59;  Acts  vi.  11 — 13).  (2)  There  is
murder  in  their  h*3te.     The  Jewish  canons  enjoin  that  "Capital  causes  should  be


570  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75.

tried  in  the  day,  and  punished  in  the  day."  But  with  indecent  haste,  in  the  same
[light  that  their  treachery  succeeded  in  seizing  Jesus,  the  court  is  gathered.  They
were  evidently  waiting  for  the  summons.  And  he  is  condemned  in  thw  night.  It
was  "  the  hour "  as  well  as  "  the  power  of  darkness."  (3)  Note :  That  gate  of  the
city  looking  toward  Gethsemane  was  called  "  the  sheep-gate,"  because  the  animals
appointed  for  sacrifice  were  led  that  way.  Admire  the  providence  which  ordained
that  through  this  gate  also  the  very  Lamb  of  God  should  be  led  to  the  slaughter.  The
Law  prescribed  that  the  victims  for  sacrifice  should  be  Ipd  to  the  priest  (see  Lev.  xviii.  5).
Herein  also  is  a  prophecy.  One  evangelist  records  that  Jesus  was  first  led  to  Atnas
(see  John  xviii.  13).  This  was  to  honour  Annas,  and  to  gain  time  for  the  assembling
of  the  council.     God  makes  the  subtlety  of  the  devil  in  men  to  praise  him.

II.  The  witnesses  are  liars.  1.  They  cannot  give  a  consistent  testimony.
(1)  No  man  could  be  legally  condemned  upon  the  testimony  of  a  single  witness  (sse
Deut.  xvii.  6).  The  witnesses  must  also  agree  in  their  testimony.  They  must  speak
with  "  one  mouth."  The  unsupported  testimony  of  a  single  witness  is  stronger  than
the  conflicting  testimony  of  many.  (2)  The  number  of  the  witnesses  against  Jesus
was  sufBcient.  The  retainers  of  the  priests  knew  that  "  they  sought  false  witness
against  Jesus,  that  they  might  put  him  to  death,"  and  "many  false  witnesses"
accordingly  "  came "  (cf.  vers.  59,  60 ;  Pa.  xxvii.  12 ;  xxxv.  11 ;  Mark  xiv.  56).
(3)  But  their  testimony  was  conflicting.  Suborned  men  are  bound  to  say  something
for  their  hire.  But  "  the  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal."  This  would  be  evident
under  cross-examination  from  Joseph  of  Arimathsea ;  and  possibly  Nicodemus  also  was
found  to  be  a  protestant  (see  Luke  xxiii.  50, 51 ;  John  xix.  39).  2.  They  fail  to  prove
an  offence  against  the  Law.  (1)  Blasphemy  was  an  offence  against  the  Law,  punishable
with  death  (see  Lev.  xxiv.  16).  But  what  is  blasphemy?  To  speak  evil  of  God,  or
maliciously  to  rail  against  or  deny  his  work.  (2)  The  Jews  had  a  traditional  disposi-
tion to  account  it  blasphemy  to  predict  the  destruction  of  the  temple  (cf.  Jer.  xxvi.
11,  12 ;  Acts  vi.  13, 14).  The  Pharisees  also  confounded  their  traditions  with  the  Law.
(3)  By  means  of  this  tradition,  then,  they  sought  to  fasten  the  crime  of  blasphemy
upon  Jesus.  Two  witnesses  deposed,  "  This  Man  said,  I  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple
of  God,  and  to  build  it  in  three  days."  Here  note :  (a)  They  were  in  a  strait  when
they  had  to  go  back  to  what  had  passed  three  years  before  (see  Mark  xiv.  58 ;
John  ii.  19).  (6)  This  allegation  was,  in  effect,  a  falsity  ;  for  it  suppressed  some  words
of  Christ,  with  the  action  which  explained  them,  and  added  words  he  had  not  spoken.
False  testimony  lays  hold  on  some  basis  of  truth.  Half-truths  are  often  the  most
vicious  lies,  (c)  In  perverting  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  Jesus,  his  enemies  uncon-
sciously bring  about  their  fulfilment.  3.  The  Judges  themselves  became  lying  witnesses.
(1)  Jesus  had  maintained  a  dignified  silence  while  the  other  witnesses  gave  their
evidence.  It  was  too  manifestly  frivolous  and  malicious  to  require  explanation  or
refutation.  "  There  is  a  time  to  speak,  and  a  time  to  keep  silence."  (2)  Caiaphas  then
sought  to  make  Jesus  a  witness  against  himself  (see  ver.  62).  Still  he  held  his  peace
(s62  Ps.  xxxviii.  12 — 14;  Isa.  liii.  7).  The  personal  Word,  like  the  written  Word,
declines  to  answer  questions  that  are  idle  and  insincere.  (3)  Unable  to  make  the
testimony  matter  for  the  charge  of  blasphemy,  Caiaphas  had  to  shift  his  ground.  He
now  had  recourse  to  adjuration.  This  was  the  refuge  of  rage  at  the  rebuke  of  that
silence  which  stung  him  to  the  quick.  What  a  temper  in  which  to  make  an  appeal
to  the  living  God !  (4)  Jesus  now  at  length  responded.  For  (a)  had  he  refused  to  answer
when  adjured,  they  would  have  accused  him  of  contempt  for  the  Name  of  Gud.  Note :
Persecutors  take  advantage  of  the  consciences  of  good  men.  (i)  He  responded  for
an  example  to  others  of  reverence  for  such  a  solemn  form,  (c)  He  answered  because
now  it  was  no  longer  a  question  of  admitting  or  denying  a  false  accusation,  but  of
admitting  or  denying  a  great  truth — ^to  confess  whether  he  were  the  Christ  or  not
(ver.  64).  The  "  nevertheless  "  should  rather  be  "  moreover : "  "  Not  only  do  I  confess
myself  the  Christ,  but  you  yourselves  will  have  to  confess  it  when  he  who  now  appears
before  you  as  in  weakness  will  be  revealed  in  power "  (see  Eov.  i.  7).  (5)  Then  came
the  climax  of  rage  when  he  was  adjudjjed  worthy  of  death  for  speaking  blasphemy  "
(see  vers.  65,  66).

III.  The  judgment  is  iniquitous.    1.  It  ignored  the  reasons  of  the  claims  of  Jesus,
(1)  The  Jews  expected  their  Messiah  to  he  the  Son  of  God.    In  so  expecting  they  were


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  871

justified  by  prophecy  (see  Ps.  ii.  7, 12).  The  terms  of  the  adjuration  acknowledged
this.  And  they  understood  the  title  to  express  Divinity.  To  call  himself  the  Son  of
God  was,  in  their  estimatipn,  to  make  himself  equal  with  God  (see  John  x.  33).  (2)
Therefoi'e,  unless  Jesus  were  Divine,  he  could  not  have  been  the  Christ.  Otherwise  his
claim  to  be  "  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,"  would  indeed  have  been  a  blasphemy.  But
he  had  vindicated  his  claim  by  infallible  proofs.  He  verified  in  himself  the  prophecies
concerning  Messiah,  and  wrought  many  miracles,  as  his  judges  very  well  knew  (see
John  xi.  47).  (3)  JSefore  proceeding  to  condemn  him,  it  was  their  duty  to  answer  the
argument  from  prophecy  and  miracle.  But  this  they  never  attempted.  Bage  and
violence  were  their  substitutes  for  justice  and  truth.  (4)  And  they  aggravated  their  crime
by  delivering  the  Blessed  One  to  the  insolence  of  their  myrmidons,  who  blindfolded
him  and  smote  him,  and  asked  him  to  prophesy  as  to  whose  fist  was  lifted  against  him
(cf.  ver.  67  ;  Isa.  1.  5,  6 ;  Luke  xxii.  64).  He  well  knew ;  but  he  refuses  to  prophesy
when  men  close  their  ears  against  the  truth.  The  wretches  also  spat  in  his  face,  which
was  a  mark  of  the  most  profound  contempt  (see  Numb.  xii.  4;  Job  xvi.  10;  xxx.  10;
Isa.  1.  6 ;  Micah  v.  1).  2.  It  will  he  reviewed  at  another  tribunal.  (1)  "  What  contrasts
are  here  1  The  Deliverer  in  bonds !  The  Judge  of  all  attainted  1  The  Prince  of  glory
scorned !  The  Holy  One  condemned  for  sin !  The  Son  of  God  accused  of  blasphemy  1
The  Resurrection  and  the  Life  sentenced  to  die  I  The  High  Priest  for  ever  condemned
by  the  high  priest  for  a  year!  "  (Steir).  (2)  To  the  eternal  confusion  of  the  unrighteous
council,  God  ordered  it  that  our  Lord  should  be  condemned  on  the  very  evidence  of  hit
own  innocence,  purity,  and  truth.  In  accusing  him  of  blasphemy  they  were  the
blasphemers.  (3)  They  will  yet  have  to  answer  before  him  for  their  injustice  and
cruelty.  He  will  one  day  come  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  as  the  Prophet  Daniel  has
described  him  (cf.  Dan.  vii.  13,  14).  The  terrors  of  that  judgment-day  will  be  a
sensible  conviction  to  the  most  obstinate  infidel. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  69 — 75. — Sin  in  sequence.  From  the  trial  of  Jesus  before  the  council  the
evangelist  turns  to  the  trial  of  Peter's  faith.  How  striking  is  the  contrast !  Jesus,
forsaken  of  his  friends,  and  unjustly  condemned  and  cruelly  treated  by  his  enemies,
betrays  no  sign  of  fear  or  resentment,  while  Peter,  with  his  Master's  exalted  example
before  him,  shrinks  from  the  slightest  glance  of  recognition.  The  history  of  Peter's
fall  remarkably  illustrates  the  principle  of  sequence  in  sin.   We  are  forcibly  reminded —

L  That  pkidb  cometh  befobb  a  fall.  1.  Some  men  are  constitutionally  self-
reliant.  Within  proper  limits,  self-reliance  is  an  admirable  quality.  (1)  It  conduces
to  nobleness.  For  it  saves  men  from  the  meanness  of  hanging  on  to  their  fellows.
(2)  It  inspires  enterprise.  Nothing  can  be  accomplished  that  is  not  undertaken.  The
achievements  of  the  strong  are  the  astonishment  of  the  weak.  (3)  It  is  an  element
of  greatness.  The  weak  will  submit  to  the  strong.  The  feeble  will  serve  the  mighty.
Where  self-reliance  is  strong,  other  things  being  equal,  there  you  have  a  leader  of  men.
2.  But  such  are  especially  in  danger  of  presv/mption.  (1)  Self-assertion  may  be  immo-
derate, ungenerous,  and  invidious.  "Though  all  men  forsake  thee,  yet  will  not  I;"
"  I  will  never  be  offended ; "  "  Even  if  I  must  die  with  thee,  yet  wiU  I  not  deny  thee  "
(see  vers.  33 — 35).  (2)  Excessive  self-confidence  leads  to  the  neglect  of  prayer.
Peter's  sense  of  self-security  blinded  him  to  his  need  of  Divine  help.  So  he  slept
in  the  garden  when  he  should  have  prayed.  Even  when  exhorted  by  his  Lord  to
pray,  still  he  slept.  (3)  It  leads  to  rashness  in  action.  Peter's  pride  led  him  rashly
to  support  his  strong  professions  by  volunteering  the  use  of  his  sword.  So  was  he  as
wanting  in  watchfulness  as  he  was  in  prayer,  fie  so  looked  in  as  to  neglect  to  look
up  and  look  around.  (4)  After  proving  his  weakness  by  his  shameful  flight,  his  pre-
sumption still  carried  him  after  his  Master  into  the  place  of  trial,  "  to  see  the  end."
But  he  "  followed  at  a  distance,"  fearful  of  being  discovered.  This  dallying  with  his
fears  increased  them.  His  case  is  a  standing  warning  to  Christ's  disciples  never
without  a  cidl  to  run  into  dangers  which  they  may  not  have  strength  to  meet.

II.  That  sin  makes  occasion  fob  sinnino.  1.  One  sin  leads  to  another.  (1)
Peter  was  found  in  questionable  company.  Having  followed  Jesus  "  afar  off,"  he  fell
in  with  the  "  officers  "  of  the  high  priest  and  of  other  enemies  of  his  Master.  "  Evil
communications  corrupt  good  manners."  Bad  company  leads  to  bad  deeds  (see  Ps.  cxix.
115).     He  was  now  in  the  arena  of  temptation.     (2)  Here  a  maid  came  wnto  him.


572  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1— 75.

saying,  "  Thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  the  Galilean."  Here  was  a  noble  opportunity  for
Peter  to  have  shown  zeal  for  the  Truth  suffering  under  insolence.  But  he  missed  it
and  disgraced  himself.  It  is  a  disgrace  to  miss  an  opportunity  of  doing  right.  It
leads  to  the  further  disgrace  of  doing  wrong.  (3)  "  He  denied  before  them  all,  saying,
I  know  not  what  thou  sayest."  The  strong  man  is  thrown  over  by  the  breath  of  a
maid.  "  A  damsel,"  literally,  one  damsel.  And  probably  wishing  him  no  harm.  But
how  great  was  the  sin  which  sprang  from  so  slight  a  cause !  The  publicity  of  this  denial
was  an  aggravation  of  the  sin.  (4)  The  temptation  was  slight  so  far  as  the  girl's
question  went,  but  greater  in!  regard  to  the  bystanders.  We  all  wield  unconscious
influence.  They  probably  had  no  desire  to  imperil  Peter.  The  careless  ones  of  this
world  often  do  more  harm  or  good  to  the  saints  than  they  imagine.  2.  7Jie  progress
of  sin  is  accelerating.  (1)  In  the  first  instance,  we  find  Peter  giving  the  simple
amphatic  denial,  his  words  being  equivalent  to  "  What  thou  sayest  is  utterly  false "
(cf.  Luke  xxii.  57).  In  how  few  words  may  one  commit  a  grievous  sin  (see  ch.  xii.
24 ;  Acts  V.  8)  1  Peter  now  went  into  the  porch,  or  portico  (ver.  71),  doubtless  to  secure
himself  from  further  observation,  being  now  also  ashamed  of  his  weakness,  if  not
of  his  sin.  For  the  enormity  of  sin  is  hidden  from  the  conscience  by  fear  and  carnal
policy.  No  man  gains  strength  to  resist  greater  by  complying  with  lesser  evils.  (2)
In  the  second  instance,  Peter  added  an  oath  to  his  denial.  The  damsel's  pride  being
now  stirred  by  having  the  lie  turned  upon  her,  she  appears  to  have  confided  her  morti-
fication or  indignation  to  "another  maid,"  with  whom  she  followed  Peter  into  the
portico:  In  his  hearing  this  second  maid  said,  "This  man  also  was  with  Jesus  of
Nazareth,"  upon  which  a  man  of  the  company  laid  tVie  accusation  directly  against
him  (cf.  Mark  xiv.  69;  Luke  xxii.  58).  "And  again  he  denied  with  an  oath,  I  know
not  the  Man."  The  liar,  by  the  suspicion  he  naturally  has,  having  forfeited  his  self-
respect,  that  his  testimony  is  not  credited,  is  induced  to  swear.  (3)  In  the  third
instance,  Peter  added  cursing  to  swearing.  Probably  he  had  been  addicted  to  swearing
before  he  came  under  the  influence  of  John  the  Baptist  and  of  Christ.  Old  habits  are
readily  revived.  Between  the  second  and  third  temptations  an  hour  elapsed.  But
time  spent  without  prayer  brings  no  strength  to  the  soul.  ,  The  charge  is  now  brought
close  home  to  him.  It  is  generally  preferred  by  "  those  that  stood  by,"  who  marked
his  Galilsean  accent.  The  rabbins  say  that  the  speech  of  the  Galileeans  was  broad  and
rustic.  Some  say  it  inclined  to  the  Samaritan  and  Syriao,  and  that  they  did  not  pro-
nounce gutturals  well,  and  changed  sh  into  th.  Better  would  it  have  been  for  Peter
had  he  held  his  tongue.  But  the  kinsman  of  Malchus  increased  his  terror  by  calling
to  his  remembrance  his  act  in  cutting  off  the  ear  (see  John  xviii.  26).  His  denial,
therefore,  becomes  more  vehement  as  the  accusation  proceeds.  To  curse  is  to  imprecate
Divine  vengeance  on  himself  if  he  spoke  falsely,  and  the  profanity  of  swearing  added
to  ttiis  cursing  is  the  language  of  passion  and  of  the  enemies  of  Christ.  "  None  but
the  devil's  sayings  need  the  devil's  proofs"  (Henry).  (4)  An  apostle  fallen  1  How
great  that  fall  I  Lucifer  in  hell  I  In  the  fall  of  Peter  we  are  admitted  to  a  view
of  our  own  tendency  to  fall,  and  consequent  need  of  watchfulness  and  prayer.

III.  That  the  sequel  is  debtkitction  or  bbpbntahce.  1.  In  the  case  of  Judas
it  was  destruction  (see  succeeding  homily).  2.  In  the  case  of  Peter  it  was  repentance.
(1)  When  he  had  the  third  time  denied  his  Lord,  "  straightway  the  cock  crew."
During  the  long  hours  in  which"  he  waited  in  the  pala,oe,  his  memory  and  conscience
slept  until  startled  by  "  the  cook's  shrill  clarion."  The  words  of  Christ  now  rushed
into  his  mind  and  pierced  his  heart,  and  made  the  crowing  of  the  cook  a  very  John
the  Baptist  to  the  sinner.  Note :  The  mercy  of  Christ  comes  sometimes  at  the  cock-
crowing.  Since  Peter  fell  through  fear  of  a  maid,  let  us  never  think  contemptibly  of
the  feeblest  tempter.  Since  he  rose  through  the  crowing  of  a  cock,  let  us  never  think
contemptibly  of  the  humblest  means  of  grace.  (2)  When  the  cock  crew,  "the  Lord
turned,  and  looked  upon  Peter  "  (see  Luke  xxii.  61).  Note  here  the  kindness  of  Christ.
Being  in  bonds,  he  could  not,  without  a  miracle,  have  gone  to  speak  with  Peter.  Had
he  called  to  him,  the  disciple  would  have  been  discovered  to  the  malice  of  his  tempters.
The  glance  is  sufficient.  Peter's  denial  comes  in  as.  a  part  of  Christ's  sufferings.
Nothing  more  deeply  grieves  a  genuine  penitent  than  the  reflection  that  he  has  grieved
his  Lord.  (3)  Peter  "  went  out,"  viz.  from  the  scene  of  his  temptation  and  humilia-
tion, deeply  sorrowing  that  he  had  ever  entered  into  it,  and  that  he  might  "  mourn


OH.  XXVI.  1—75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  673

apart"  (cf.  Zech.  xii.  11,  12).  (4)  He  wept  bitter  tears  of  repentance  for  his  presump-
tuoug  sin.  Mark  says,  "  Whea  he  thought  thereon  he  wept "  (Mark  xiv.  72),  Those
who  have  sinned  sweetly  must  weep  bitterly,  if  not  ia  penitence,  in  despair  j  for  sin
is  bitterness  itself.  The  more  bitter  the  tears  of  repentance,  the  sweeter  the  delight
of  the  regenerated  life.  His  grief  and  weeping  were  of  long  duration  (see  Mark  xvi.
7).  Tradition  says  he  never  heard  a  cock  crow  but  it  set  him  weeping.  (5)  Peter
afterwards  confessed  Christ  openly,  and  made  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  what  he
thought  of  him.  He  confessed  him  openly  both  in  life  and  death  with  watchfulness
and  prayer. — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  i. — 77ie  final  devices  of  our  LorcFa/oes.  It  appears  that  the  priest-party,  under
the  lead  of  Caiaphas,  had  resolved  to  secure  our  Lord's  death  in  a  council  held  immedi-
ately after  the  raising  of  Lazarus  (John  li.  47 — 53).  But  it  proved  to  be  a  much
more  difficult  matter  than  they  Imagined,  and  weeks  passed  and  found  them  no  nearer
to  the  accomplishment  of  their  purposes.  At  last  they  were  set  upon  securing  their
end  by  assassination.  They  tried  to  devise  some  way  of  "  taking  him  by  subtlety
and  killing  him."

I.  Why  weeb  they  set  upon  new  devices  ?  Because  not  only  had  all  their  pre-
vious devices  failed,  but  they  had  failed  in  such  ways  as  had  humiliated  and  angered
those  who  devised  them.  They  could  not  get  an  accusation,  they  could  not  secure  his
Person,  they  would  not  leave  him  alone.  1.  They  tried  open  arrest ;  their  ofBcers
were  so  impressed  by  him  that  they  dare  not  touch  him.  2.  They  tried  to  make  him
say  such  things  as  they  could  twist  into  accusations ;  they  only  succeeded  in  entang-
ling themselves,  and  humiliating  themselves  before  the  people.  3.  They  had  been
made  the  object  of  our  Lord's  fiercest  denunciations,  and  this  they  felt  to  be  so  intoler-
able that  they  resolved  not  to  lose  an  hour  in  seeking  their  revenge.  When  men  are
humbled,  they  give  up  their  self-willed  ways.  When  men  are  humiliated,  they  push
their  wilful  ways  through  to  the  bitter  end.

II.  What  difficulties  had  they  yet  to  overcome  ?  Two  special  ones.  1.  The
good  will  of  the  people,  and  especially  of  the  visitors  to  the  feast.  If  they  attempted
public  arrest,  there  would  be  a  rescue  that  would  mean  a  riot,  and  it  would  bring  down
on  them  the  vigorous  hand  of  the  Romans,  and  give  Pilate  another  chance,  of  showing
his  hatred.  2.  The  approaching  feast-time.  It  was  hardly  possible  to  get  a  good  plan
arranged  before  the  feast ;  nothing  could  be  done  during  the  feast ;  and  Jesus  would
slip  away  from  the  city  after  the  feast.  We  can  imagine  their  delight  when  the  diffi-
culties were  got  over  by  the  treachery  of  Judas.

IIL  What  bbvblations  are  made  by  thesb  dbviobs  ?  They  show  up  both  the
times  and  the  people.  1.  They  reveal  the  estimate  J'ormed  of  our  Lord  by  the  people.
They  always  delight  in  a  man  who  can  fearlessly  resist  official  scheming  and  wicked-
ness. 2.  They  reveal  the  prejudiced,  malicious,  and  unreasonable  character  of  the
priest-party.  Personal  feeling  was  allowed  to  carry  away  judgment.  3.  They  reveal
the  character  of  Christ.    He  could  not  be  dealt  with  as  a  criminal. — B.  T.

Vor.  8. — 77ie  law  of  waste.  "To  what  purpose  is  tliis  waste?  "  It  is  interesting  to
notice  that  St.  Matthew  speaks  generally,  and  says,  "  his  disciples ; "  St.  Mark  speaks
carefully,  and  says,  "  some  had  indignation  ; "  St.  John  speaks  precisely,  and  singles
out  the  spokesman — it  was  the  man  with  the  narrow,  covetous  soul,  it  was  Judas
Iscariot.  His  indignation,  partly  real  and  partly  affected,  was  perhaps  honestly  shared
by  some  of  the  disciples,  especially  by  those  of  the  third  or  practical  group.  To  see
the  point  and  interest  of  the  woman's  act — and  we  understand  the  woman  to  have  been
Mary,  the  sister  of  Lazarus — we  must  keep  in  mind  the  Eeistern  love  of  perfumes,  and
the  feast-customs  that  relate  to  perfumes.  Easterns  set  value  on  scents  that  seem  to
ns  too  strong.  Women  keep  special  scents  as  treasures.  A  present  of  perfumes  is  a
mark  of  reverence  and  honour.  The  present  sent  by  Cambyses  to  the  Prince  of
Ethiopia  consisted  of  "  a  purple  vest,  a  gold  chain  for  the  neck,  bracelets,  an  alabaster
box  of  perfume,  and  a  cask  of  palm  wine."  To  sprinkle  the  apartmeii  ts,  and  the  person
of  a  guest,  with  rose-water  and  other  aromatics  is  still  a  mark  of  respectful  attention.
Puint  out  that  Mary's  perfume  would  really  have  been  wasted,  if  it  liad  been  kept  after
so  good  a  use  for  it  came  into  view.     For  there  is  a  waste  in  keeping  idle  and  uselesi,


674  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  ixvl  1—76

as  wall  M  a  wasta  in  ipending,  aud  loeing  by  spending.    Whether  it  i*  or  it  is  not
waste  to  give  depends  on —

I.  Thk  object  thb  oiyeb  has  in  view.  Mary  had  a  most  distinct  object  before
her.  It  was  one  that  glorified  her  act.  She  wanted  to  find  suitable  expression  for  her
thankfulness  to  him  who  had  brought  back  her  brother  from  the  dead ;  and  for  her
personal  love  to  him  who  had  been  to  her  the  dearest  and  noblest  of  friends.  Words
would  not  sufiice  her ;  sh*  wanted  something  that  bad  self-surrender  in  it.  Her  trea-
sured perfume  was  not  wasted  when  it  did  so  much.

II.  The  WAT  ur  which  the  beceiveb  takes  the  oift.  Jesus  did  not  think  it
waste.  To  him  it  seemed  richer  with  meanings  and  affections  than  even  Mary  thought
it  was.  She  had,  unconsciously,  fitted  to  his  mood  of  feeling.  It  could  be  no  waste
that  comforted  Jesus  in  that  sad  hour.

III.  The  point  or  vnsw  feom  which  the  objbctob  oeiticizbd  the  gift.  He
thought  the  only  poor  folk  were  those  persons  who  had  no  money.  Christ  was  "  poor  "
in  a  far  higher  sense.    The  gift  was  given  to  the  poor.

Impress :  1.  Mary  gave  up  what  she  prized.  2.  Mary  gave  up  without  reserve.  3.
Mary  gave  up  in  order  to  find  expression  for  thankful  love. — R.  T.

Ver.  15. — The  crime  of  Judas.  "  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver  him  unto
you  ?  "  The  sin  of  treachery  is  almost  lost  sight  of  in  view  of  the  exceeding  meanness  of
his  trying  to  make  a  little  money  out  of  the  treachery.  It  is  this  that  reveals  the  man,
and  shows  the  covetousness  which,  for  Judas,  was  the  worm  at  the  root.  Loyalties,
reverences,  and  friendships  were  nothing  to  him  if  only  he  could  make  a  little  money.
"  The  history  of  his  base  and  appalling  lapse  is  perfectly  intelligible.  He  had  joined  the
discipleship  of  Jesua,  as  the  other  apostles  also  did,  in  the  hope  of  taking  part  in  a
political  revolution,  and  occupying  a  distinguished  place  in  an  earthly  kingdom.  It
is  inconceivable  that  Jesus  would  have  made  him  au  apostle  if  there  had  not  at  one
time  been  soma  noble  enthusiasm  in  him,  and  some  attachment  to  himself.  That  he
was  a  man  of  superior  energy  and  administrative  ability  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact
that  he  was  made  the  purse-bearer  of  the  apostolic  company.  But  there  was  a  canker
at  the  root  of  his  character,  which  gradually  absorbed  all  that  was  excellent  in  him,
and  became  a  tyrannical  passion.  It  was  the  love  of  money.  He  fed  it  on  the  petty
peculations '  which  he  practised  on  the  small  sums  which  Jesus  received  from  his
friends  for  the  necessities  of  his  company,  and  for  distribution  among  the  poor  with
whom  he  was  daily  mingling.  He  hoped  to  give  it  unrestrained  gratification  when  he
became  chancellor  of  the  exchequer  in  the  new  kingdom  "  (Stalker).  Illustrate  by
the  tiny  mountain  spring  swelling  into  the  flooding  river ;  or  by  the  taint  in  the  blood
producing  a  spot  on  the  skin,  this  growing  into  a  boil,  then  developing  into  a  virulent,
deadly  carbuncle.

L  The  cbihe  or  Judab  in  its  faint  besinninqb.  Self  was  more  interesting  than
Christ.  To  get  gave  more  pleasure  than  to  serve.  This  was  the  trickle  through  the
reservoir-bank  which  would  grow  into  a  flood.  Safety  lies  in  putting  Christ  first,  and
counting  serving  him  hest.  The  root-wrong  was  interest  in  the  mere  possession  of
money.  To  have  money  for  use  is  healthy ;  to  have  money  to  possess  breeds  moral
disease.

II.  The  OEiMK  OF  Judab  in  its  btaobs  or  qeowth.  1.  It  fashioned  unreasonable
expectations.  2.  It  was  annoyed  by  delay  in  their  realization.  3.  It  was  fostered  by
acts  of  petty  unfaithfulness,  i.  It  made  personal  advantage  appear  to  be  the  thing  of
supreme  value.

III.  The  oeimb  or  Judab  provino  to  be  folly  as  well  as  cbimb.  For  it  was
the  ruin  of  Judas,  and  the  blasting  of  all  the  schemes  on  which  he  had  set  his  heart.
CoTetous  Judas  ruined  himself. — ^R.  T.

Ver.  22. — Aiking  fht  Lord  what  we  should  oak  ourselves.  Phillips  Brooks  sees  in
the  questioning  of  our  Lord  by  his  disciples  a  state  of  mind  and  feeling  of  which  he
can  approve.  "  Each  man's  anxiety  seems  to  be  turned,  not  towards  his  brother,  but
towards  himself,  and  you  hear  them  asking,  one  after  another, '  Lord,  is  it  I  ? '  Peter,
Bartholomew,  John,  James,  Thomas,  each  speaks  for  himself,  and  the  quick  questions
come  pouring  in  out  of  their  simple  hearts, '  Lord,  is  it  I  ? '    Certainly  there  is  some-


0H.XIV1.1— 75.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  675

thing  that  is  strange  in  this.  These  men  were  genuine.  There  could  not  be  any
affectation  in  their  question.  A  real,  live  fear  came  over  them  at  Jesus'  prophecy.
And  it  was  a  good  sign,  no  doubt,  that  the  first  thought  of  each  of  them  was  about  the
possibility  of  his  own  sins."  This,  however,  is  what  lies  on  the  surface;  closer  study
of  character  reveals  something  that  is  not  so  commendable.  The  turning  of  these  dis-
ciples to  question  their  Lord  concerning  themselves  illustrates  the  constant  disposition
of  men  to  shift  their  responsibilities,  and  especially  the  responsibility  of  searching  into
and  duly  appraising  themselves.  No  doubt,  self-examination  is  difficult  work,  unplea-
sant, humbling  work;  but  if  a  man  is  to  be  a  man,  he  will  have  to  do  it.  Over  the
Greek  temple  they  wrote,  "  Know  thyself."  It  ii  man's  hardest,  it  is  man'i  noblest,
work.

I.  Ebfebenoe  to  Christ  or  what  wb  oankot  deoidb  oursklvbs  is  oood.  It
wo.uld  have  been  all  right  if  these  disciples  had  done  a  little  self-examination  first,
and  then,  bewildered  and  uncertain,  had  sought  their  Lord's  help.  Instead  of  that,
impulsively,  inconsiderately,  exciting  one  another,  hardly  knowing  what  they  said,  they
all  said  the  same  thing  at  once.

II.  Christ  will  bb  sure  to  tbbow  bttoh  questioners  as  thesb  baok  on  them-
selves. There  was  no  answer  for  each  one.  There  was  a  general  answer  for  all.
"  He  that  dippeth  his  hand  with  me  io  the  dish."  But  they  all  did  that.  That  told
nothing  save  to  a  very  keen  observer,  who  might  notice  that  Judas's  hand  went  into
the  dish  at  the  same  moment  as  the  hand  of  Jesus.  Jesus,  in  effect,  bade  them  ask
themselves  the  question  which  they  were  so  impulsively  asking  him.

III.  Disciples  might  have  answered  their  questions  themselves.  Suppose
they  had  begun  to  examine  their  own  motives,  what  would  the  eleven  have  found  r  and
what  would  Judas  have  found  ?  The  eleven  might  have  gained  satisfaction ;  for
treachery  was  no  natural  fruitage  of  the  relations  in  which  they  were  standing  with
their  Master.— R.  T.

Ver.  28. — Blood  for  remission.  "  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is
shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."  The  word  "  covenant,"  not  "  testament,"  is
almost  everywhere  the  best  equivalent  for  the  Greek  word.  It  is  manifest  that  our
Lord  was  usiug  a  figure  of  speech.  The  liquid  in  the  cup  was  wine,  not  blood ;  our
Lord  made  it  represent  his  blood — the  outpouring  of  bis  life — which  was  to  be  the  seal
of  the  new  covenant.  This  is  a  subject  whose  treatment  must  depend  on  the  theo-
logical school  to  which  the  preacher  belongs.  The  suggestion  now  made  is  not
intended  to  fit  to  any  theories,  nor  is  it  antagonistic  to  any  other  views.  It  is  but  one
of  the  sides  of  a  many-sided  subject;  but  it  is  possible  that  it  may  prove  suggestive
and  helpful  to  some  minds.  The  incident  recalled  by  our  Lord's  figure  is  evidently
that  recorded  in  Bxod.  xiiv.  i — 8.  Moses  sealed  the  covenant  between  God  and  the
people  by  sprinkling  the  representative  pillars  and  altar  with  blood,  which  involved
the  life  of  a  .victim.  So  Jesus  undertook  to  negotiate  between  God  and  the  people,  in
order  to  secure  the  remission  of  sins.  He  conducted  that  negotiation ;  he  brought  it  to
a  satisfactory  conclusion;  he  secured  the  acceptance  of  the  covenan*';  he  sealed  it,
signed  it,  in  the  name  of  God  and  in  the  name  of  man,  with  his  own  blood.  Jesus
was  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  as  Moses  had  been  mediator  of  the  old.  Moses
could  not  seal  his  covenant  with  his  own  blood.  He  sealed  it  with  the  representative
blood  of  living  creatures.  Jesus  could,  and  did,  seal  his  covenant  with  his  own  blood.
He  could,  for  God  and  for  man,  pledge  life  upon  faithfulness.

I.  Covenants  between  God  and  man  abb  hade  THROuaH  mediators.  See  cases
— Noah,  Abraham,  Moses.     So  Christ  mediated  a  covenant.

II.  Covenants  involve  the  takino  of  mutual  pledoes.  In  the  new  covenant,
the  pledge  on  God's  side  is  forgiveness  and  life ;  on  man's  side,  the  obedience  of  faith.
Christ  took  the  pledges,  both  in  the  name  of  God  and  in  the  name  of  man.

III.  Blood  was  the  peopee  seal  or  the  covenant.  It  meant  the  dedication  of
the  life  to  faithful  keeping  of  the  covenant.  Christ  stamps  the  seal  in  his  bloodshed-
ding  ;  his  yielding  life  in  keeping  covenant.

IV.  Drinking  the  wine  is  symbolical  renewal  of  covenant.  This  is  needed
only  on  man's  side.  We  take,  ever  al'resh,  the  solemn  pledge  that  we  will  stand  to
the  covenant  Christ  has  made  in  our  name. — R.  T.


67«  THB  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvi.  1—7*.

Ver.  34. — Belf-krMwledge  and  Divine  knowledge.  Jesus  knew  Peter  better  than  he
knew  himself.  Any  observant  man  would  have  told  wherein  lay  peril  for  such  an
impulsive,  hastily  outspoken,  warm-hearted  man.  Our  Lord  divinely  "  knew  what  was
in  man,"  and  foresaw  the  coming  danger.  We  are  all  keen  enough  at  estimating  the
character  of  others,  but  we  cannot  do  it  with  any  certainty,  because  we  can  only  make
our  experience  of  ourselves  our  standard  of  judgment.  And  oftentimes  those  who  are
most  ready  to  judge  others  are  the  least  efficient  in  appraising  themselves,  and  so  theii
standard  is  incomplete  and  unworthy.  Divine  knowledge  is  perfect.  So  the  true-
hearted  can  say,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my
ways."

I.  Self-knowledqe  can  heveb  be  got  at  impulsively.  Impulse  can  only
express  a  passing  mood  or  feeling;  and  that  may  have  its  explanation  in  temporary
circumstances  and  excitements.  A  man  acting  or  speaking  on  impulse  may  act  or
speak  in  strict  harmony  with  his  real  self.  He  may ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  he  may
act  or  speak  otherwise  than  he  would  if  he  could  quietly  resolve.  Impulse  is  good,  but
it  is  perilous.  Distinguish  from  the  power  of  quick  judgment  and  decision.  Impulses
tell  the  hour ;  they  seldom  tell  the  real  man,

II.  SELF-ENOWLEDaE  CALLS  FOB  OABEF0L  THOUGHT.  We  find  great  differences  in
characters.  Some  are  easy  to  read,  they  belong  to  recognized  classes.  Some  are  very
difficult  to  read ;  we  must  watch  them  a  long  time ;  their  individuality  is  more  marked
than  their  classification.  And  men  find  similar  variety  in  themselves.  Some  may
read  themselves  easily.  St.  Peter  might,  if  he  had  tried.  Some  never  feel  quite  sure
that  they  know  themselves.

III.  Self-knowledge  is  always  subject  to  Divine  ooeheotions.  The  apostle
thought  he  knew  himself  when  he  made  his  stout  assertion.  But  he  came  into
Divine  correction.  This  is  often  given  us  by  the  discipline  of  disappointment  and
failure ;  and  often  by  the  providence  which  offers  us  work  for  which  we  could  not  have
thought  that  we  were  fitted.

IV.  Divine  oobbeotions  snotrLD  lead  to  a  bb-bbadinq  of  oubsblves  in  the
NEW  light.  If  we  fail  to  do  this,  we  shall  have  to  go  on  with  St.  Peter,  and  learn  to
know  ourselves  through  a  bitter  experience. — R.  T.

Ver.  36. — Truths  learnt  in  Gethsemane.  A  little  garden  on  the  side  of  the  Mount
of  Olives  is  now  shown  to  travellers  as  the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  It  is  enclosed  with
a  wall.  A  few  olive  trees  remain,  possibly  the  descendants  of  those  that  covered  Jesus
with  their  shade.  This  spot  is,  however,  too  close  to  the  city,  and  too  near  a  main
road,  to  have  provided  our  Lord  with  the  seclusion  that  he  sought.  Dr.  Thomson
tells  of  gardens  a  little  further  off,  less  than  a  mile  from  the  city,  and  says  that  he
found  one,  in  a  sheltered  vale,  suiting  exactly  our  Lord's  purpose,  only  a  few  hundred
yards  north-east  of  the  exhibited  site.  Three  things  are  impressed  on  us  by  the
scene  in  Gethsemane.  _  •

I.  We  gain  ideas  oonoebnino  cub  Lobd'b  humanity.  It  was  Divine-humanity,
so  we  may  expect  to  find  some  unusual  elements.  But  it  was  veritable  humanity,  so
we  may  expect  to  find  more  likeness  to  us  than  diversity  from  us.  Brotherliness  of
feeling  and  experience  is  seen:  1.  In  the  restlessness  of  Christ's  spirit.  We  know
what  it  is  to  be  restless  when  we  have  forebodings  of  coming  calamity.  2.  In  our
Lord's  desire  to  be  alone,  and  yet  longing  to  have  some  one  to  be  present  and  sympa-
thize with  him.  8.  In  our  Lord's  resistance  of  anticipated  physical  sufferings.  4.  In
his  gentle  way  of  dealing  with  disciples  who  were  weak  rather  than  wilful,  and  there-
fore failed  to  watch.  Gethsemane  helps  us  to  feel  "  he  was  in  all  points  tempted  like
as  we  are."

II.  Wh    OADT    ideas    CONOBBNING    THB    CAUSE    OP     0U«     LoED's     6UFPEKING8.      No

doubt  he  felt,  as  no  one  ever  felt  before,  (1)  the  separation  between  God  and  man ;  and
(2)  the  hatefulness  of  sin.  And  he  estimated,  as  no  one  else  ever  has,  the  awful  curse
and  penalty  which  wilful  sin  has  brought  upon  humanity.  The  woe  he  had  so  soon
to  pass  through  seemed  to  reveal  the  penalty  to  him.  This  made  the  burden  of
deliverance  so  heavy — made  it  involve  so  much.  It  all  crowded  on  his  mind  and
heart,  and  forced  the  earnest  cry  and  prayer.

III.  We  gain  ideas  concebning  oue  Lord's  willingness  to  buffeb.    The  soul-


OH.  XXVI.  1—76.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOKDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  57V

offering — the  will-oflfering  for  sin — was  made  In  Gethsemane.  God  required  the  full
sacrifice  of  a  completed,  tested  obedience.  Calvary  completed  the  testing.  Christ  was
a  perfect  offering.    He  freely,  willingly,  gave  himself  unto  God. — B.  T.

Ver.  89. — Otfhsemant  a  representative  conflict.  Wherein  does  the  scene  of  Calvary
differ  from  the  scene  of  Gethsemane  ?  It  would  be  easy  to  point  out  the  sameness,
the  essential  oneness,  of  the  two  scenes.  But  there  is  a  difference.  It  lies  in  this  :  At
Calvaiy  the  physical  suffering  is  prominent.  Our  thought  is  sympathizingly  occupied
with  our  Lord's  bodily  agonies,  and  bleeding,'  breaking  heart.  At  Gethsemane  the
physical  is  subordinate,  the  mental  and  spiritual  are  prominent;  we  are  in  the  presence
of  an  awful  soul-struggle.  Life  is  everywhere  a  conflict.  Earth  is  a  great  battle-field.
What  does  it  all  mean?  Conflict  in  the  heart.  Conflict  in  the  home.  Conflict  in  the
nation.  Conflict  everywhere.  If  we  get  light  on  the  mysterv  anywhere,  we  get  it  in
the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  where  the  Son  of  man  i«  seen  in  bitter,  almost  overwhelm-
ing conflict.

I.  The  conflict  of  lifb  is  beallt  a  conflict  of  wills.  God  is  the  supreme
will;  and  his  will  ought  to  be  supreme  with  his  creatures.  But  to  man  has  been
entrusted  a  limited  free-will.  That  free-will  man  has  exercised  until  it  has  become
masterful,  and  is  constantly  setting  itself  against  God's  will.  Bodily  conditions,  the
slavery  of  the  senses,  the  attractions  of  the  seen  and  temporal,  all  help  to  the  strengthen-
ing of  man's  will,  man's  wilfulness,  so  that  the  fight  sometimes  becomes  severe.  Our
Lord,  in  taking  on  himself  our  human  nature,  took  on  him  our  sense-conditioned
human  will.    And  this  in  Gethsemane  tried  a  wrestling  with  the  will  of  God.

II.  The  TBI0MPH  nr  thb  conflict  of  life  is  tieldino  cub  will  to  God's
WILL.  This  is  the  triumph  of  Gethsemane.  Our  Lord  did  not  want  the  Divine  will
to  be  altered.  He  wanted  to  gain  the  full  surrender  of  his  whole  nature — ^body,  mind,
soul — to  the  acceptance  of  the  will.  Man  never  gives  up  his  will  save  as  the  issue  of
a  fierce  struggle.  What  force  can  renew  and  strengthen  man's  will  so  that  it  shall
accept  God's  will,  and  make  it  hisf  1.  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  2.  The  work
wrought  through  for  us  by  Jesus.  3.  The  gr»c6  won  for  us  and  given  to  us  by  Jesus.
i.  The  actual  present  power  exerted  on  us  by  Jesus.  6.  The  constrainings  of  the  love
of  Jesus.  Christ  came  to  make  the  will  of  God  infinitely  attractive  to  us.  He  is  the
gracious  Persuader  of  the  human  will. — B.  T.

Ver.  41. — The  recognition  of  good  intentions.  "  The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the
flesh  is  weak."  Our  Lord  dealt  very  tenderly  with  these  disciples.  No  reproachful
word  passed  his  lips.  He  was  considerate  of  the  influence  which  bodily  frailty  can
exert  upon  the  will;  and  did  not  immediately  take  up  the  idea  that  the  will  had
swerved.  "The  priests  on  duty  in  the  temple  were  expected  to  keep  awake  all  night,
and  were  severely  punished  if  the  temple-captain  found  them  asleep.  Peter  and
James  and  John  could  not  watch  for  one-tenth  part  of  that  time,  yet  their  Lord
upbraids  them  very  gently,  and  ascribes  their  seeming  indifference  to  physical
exhaustion."  When  God  refused  to  permit  David  to  build  his  temple,  he  graciously
recognized  his  good  intention  :  "  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  And
yet  we  have  a  familiar  proverb  showing  the  uselessness  of  "  good  intentions  : "  "  Hell
is  paved  with  good  intentions."  On  what  conditions,  then,  can  oui  intentions  be
recognized  and  accepted  ?  We  can  ourselves  see  that  an  intention  may  be  sometimes
right  and  sometimes  wrong.

L  When  an  intention  is  a  mere  sentiment,  it  is  wboko.  It  need  not  be
wrong  as  a  sentiment;  it  is  wrong  if  it  is  treated  as  an  intention,  and  its  acceptance
is  expected  as  such.  It  is  a  mere  sentiment  when  there  is  (1)  no  resolve  of  will  in
relation  to  it ;  and  (2)  firhen  there  is  no  watching  for  opportunity  of  carrying  it  out.
Our  intentions  are  revealed  as  mere  sentiments  whenever  we  let  the  chance  of  fulfilling
them  pass.     This  we  are  constantly  doing,  and  this  fact  has  created  the  proverb.

II.  When  an  intention  is  a  real  purpose,  it  ib  right.  Then  it  is  thought-,
fully,  not  impulsively,  formed.  Due  account  is  taken  of  circumstances  and  abilities.
Fitting  occasion  is  watched  for,  and  energy  is  shown  in  overcoming  difficulties.

III.  An  intention  is  not  made  wrong  bt  bbino  hindered  in  execution.
People  often  mistake  by  assuming  that  failure  shows  our  purpose  to  have  been  wrong,

MATTHEW — n.  2  p


578  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvl  1—75,

But  there  are  other  things  to  take  into  account  beside  our  intentions.  We  can  always
have  this  assurance,  God  knows  whether  we  would  hare  done  what  we  intended  if  we
could.— a.  T.

Ver.  52. — The  place  for  the  sword.  "Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place."  We
need  not  suppose  that  our  Lord  intended  to  give  any  general  directions  concerning  the
use  of  the  sword.  The  question  of  the  lawfulness  or  unlawfulness  of  warfare  cannot,
even  be  connected  with  our  Lord's  expression  to  St.  Peter.  Our  Lord's  words  strictly
St  the  occasion.  "Eesistance  at  that  time  would  have  involved  certain  destruction.
More  than  that,  it  would  have  been  fighting,  not  for  God,  but  against  him,  because
against  the  ful61ment  of  his  purpose."  It  is  rather  strange  to  find  St.  Peter  with  a
fl.vord.  No  doubt  he  had  anticipated  a  conflict,  and  therefore  provided  the  weapon.
It  is  not  likely  that  he  knew  how  to  use  the  sword,  and  he  evidently  slashed  with  it
very  dangerously.

I.  The  bhbath  is  not  alwats  the  place  for  the  bword.  Wo  may  wish  that
it  could  be  kept  there,  but  while  human  nature  is  what  it  is;  while  society  finds  it
needful  to  guard  itself  against  itself;  and  while  nations  will  press  claims  against  other
nations,  the  sword  can  neither  be  kept  in  its  sheath  nor  turned  into  a  ploughshare.
We  can  see  three  types  of  persons  who  must  still,  on  occasion,  take  the  sword  out  of
its  sheath.  1.  The  executioner,  who  carries  out  the  decisions  of  the  law  in  relation  to
criminals,  disturbers  of  the  public  peace,  who  have  been  fairly  tried  and  honourably
condemned.  2.  The  vindicator,  who  must  take  the  sword  out  of  its  sheath  to  avenge
public  wrongs,  ill  treatment  of  ambassadors,  etc.,  as  lately  at  Manipur,  3.  The
defender,  who  meets  the  foe  who  would  rifle  his  home  or  imperil  his  nation's  liberty.

II.  The  sheath  re  always  the  place  toe  the  Christian  sword.  The
"  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal."  We  triumph  by  submission,  not  by  resist-
ance. "In  whatever  other  cause  it  may  be  lawful  to  use  carnal  weapons,  it  is  not  wise
or  right  to  draw  the  sword  for  Christ  and  his  truth"  (Plumptre).  Christ's  law  is
"  Resist  not  evil."  Christianity  has  found  a  strange,  but  a  triumphant,  method  of
dealing  with  evil.  It  lets  it  do  its  worst.  This  was  our  Lord's  way.  He  yielded,
gave  himself  up,  endured,  let  evil  show  itself  fully;  and  the  consequence  is,  the  whole
world  knows  how  utterly  bad  and  base  evil  is. — R.  T.

Ver.  70. — Peter's  time  of  strain.  "  But  he  denied  before  them  all,  saying,  I  know
not  what  thou  sayest."  The  nature  of  Peter's  sin  has  been  so  fully  dealt  with  that
we  may  safely  venture  to  inquire  what  can  be  said  on  behalf  of  him,  and  in  mitigation
of  his  very  grievous  fault.  It  is  not  wise  to  say  harsh  and  inconsiderate  things  con-
cerning our  erring  brethren.  It  is  well  to  remember  the  counsel,  "Let  him  that
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  No  temptation  took  Peter  but  such  as
is  "  common  to  men."  Even  a  Cranmer  repeats  his  story  in  these  latter  times.  We
do  not  excuse  Peter's  sin  when  we  try  kindly  to  estimate  the  time  of  strain  through
which  he  passed.  Every  man  has  such  a  testing-time  put  somewhere  into  his  life.
Sometimes  it  comes  in  the  opening  manhood,  but  perhaps  it  is  more  usually  reserved
for  the  advanced  middle  life,  as  we  see  in  the  cases  of  Abraham  and  of  David.  In
some  way  the  life-principle  is  proved,  and  it  is  seen  whether  the  will  has  become
dissociated  from  the  principle  professed,  so  that  the  principle  is  only  weak  sentiment
that  can  stand  no  strain.    On  behalf  of  Peter,  it  may  be  urged —

I.  That  he  was  phtsioallt  overwrought.  Long  hours  of  watching  and  anxiety
must  have  wearied  him  out;  and  that  sleep  in  the  garden  was  not  refreshing.  Body
prepared  a  way  for  temptation.

II.  That  he  was  doino  a  very  venturesome  thing.  Making  his  way  actually
into  the  court  of  the  palace,  and  among  the  high  priest's  guard  and  servants.  It  was
a  noble  thing  to  do,  but  it  was  a  very  perilous  one.  He  did  not  know  whether  the
scheme  against  the  Master  included  the  servants ;  but  he  risked  the  danger  because
of  his  longing  to  see  what  became  of  the  Lord  he  loved.  No  doubt  he  thought  that
showing  a  bold  front  was  the  best  way  to  escape  observation.  He  would  have  managed
well  if  it  had  not  been  for  his  Galila>an  brogue.

in.  That  he  was  disappointed  in  hib  hopes  coNOERNiNa  Jesus.  He  had
thought  that  an  e»rthly  kingdom  was  to  be  set  up ;  the  arrest  of  JesuB  dashed  that


OH.  xxvn.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDtNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


679


hope  to  pieces  for  ever.  He  was  in  the  hands  of  his  foes.  This  did  not  affect  Peter's
personal  feeling  toward  Christ,  but  it  did  suggest  that  he  had  better  not  profess  open
coanection  with  him.

1.  There  is  a  test-time  for  every  man.  2.  It  is  »  self-revelation.  3.  It  is  a  culture.
4.  The  test-time  is  precisely  relative  to  every  man.  6.  The  relativity  is  the  thing  to
discover. — R.  T.

Ver.  75. — Quick  penitenct  revealing  eharaxter.  St.  Peter  had  become  entangled
through  making  one  false  step.  He  had  never  anticipated  what  happened.  He  began
with  half  a  lie,  which  he  excused  as  merely  a  putting  aside  of  uncomfortable  and  even
perilous  questions.  But  the  "  beginning  of  evil  is  as  the  letting  out  of  water."  Soon
the  tempter  plunged  poor  Peter  over  head  and  neck  in  evasions,  lyings,  cursings,  and
swearings.  Then  cime  the  moment  when  Jesus  was  passing  from  the  council-chamber,
and  as  he  passed  he  turned,  and  gave  Peter  a  looh,  only  a  look,  but  we  can  imagine  the
wealth  of  pitying  that  was  in  the  look.  It  went  right  home;  it  recalled  warning
words;  it  revealed,  as  by  a  lightning  flash,  the  darkness  into  which  Peter  had  fallen  ;
and  he  rushed  out  of  the  place,  and  could  not  restrain  the  tears  that  told  of  bitterest
shame  and  humiliation.     What  does  this  penitence  tell  concerning  Peter  ?

I.  His  SENSITIVENESS.  When  we  see  how  quickly  he  responded  to  Christ's  "  look,"
we  begin  to  understand  how  he  came  to  respond  so  readily  to  the  peril  which  the
maid's  question  brought  him.  He  was  too  sensitive;  he  responded  too  soon;  he  was
always  in  danger  of  speaking  and  acting  before  he  had  time  to  criticize  his  own
impressions.  There  are  many  among  us  like  him.  They  feel  too  soon.  They  respond
too  quickly.  And  they  respond  to  evil  suggestion  and  to  calamity  as  readily  as  to
good  and  success.    We  call  it  highly  nervous  organization.

II.  His  AFFBOTIONATENESS.  We  must  keep  in  mind  how  truly  he  was  attached
to  liis  Lord ;  and  how  open  that  attachment  made  him  to  all  influences  exerted  on
him  by  Christ.  It  was  his  safeguard  in  that  sad  time,  that  he  had  personal  love  to
Christ.  That  disposition  often  brings  men  round  right  again  after  they  have  gone
astray.  Fathers  and  mothers  know  the  anchor-hold  that  a  child's  affectionate  dis-
position gives  to  them.

But  there  is  a  gushing  and  impulsive  penitence  that  is  not  good.  Sometimes  there
is  too  easy  confession  of  sin— confession  before  the  really  humbling  sense  of  sin  is  felt.
Easy  penitence  is  little  more  than  regret ;  and  it  is  usually  very  gushing  in  expression.
Easy  penitence  has  little  force  on  the  moral  nature.  Penitence  needs  to  be  made  deep
and  searching  by  the  help  of  serious  thinking. — B.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CilAPTEB  XXVIL


Vers.  1, 2.—Je8ut  brought  to  Pilate.  (Mark
XV.  1 ;  Luke  xxii.  66 ;  xxiii.  1 ;  John  xviii.
28.)

Ver.  1. — When  the  moming  was  come.
This  is  the  early  morning  of  Good  Friday,
the  11th  of  Nisan.  If  the  rulers  had  had
special  regard  to  legality,  they  could  not
have  condemned  Christ  to  death  at  night,  as
they  had  done  at  the  late  informal  assembly ;
but  their  respect  for  conventional  rules  was
overborne  by  passion  and  hatred.  They
had  decreed  his  death  by  general  consent,
and  then  retired  for  a  few  hours'  necessary
rest.  Now  they  again  met  together,  still
in  the  palace  of  Caiapbaa  (John  xviii.  28),
In  order  to  complete  their  evil  work,  to  en-
dorse the  previous  sentence,  and,  under
some  pretence,  hand  their  Victim  over  to  the


Boman  governor,  who  alone  could  execute
their  murderous  purpose.  The  particle  5i
^irpatas  Si  yevojxivris),  omitted  by  the
Authorized  Version,  takes  us  back  to  the
conclusion  of  the  council  (ch.  xxvi.  66),
the  account  of  its  further  proceedings  being
interrupted  by  the  episode  of  Peter.  AU
the  chief  priests  and  elders  of  the  people.
It  was  a  large  assembly  of  the  Sanhedrin,
many  members,  doubtless,  taking  part  in
these  proceedings,  now  that  the  capital
sentence  was  past,  who  would  not  have
deliberately  planned  a  judicial  murder.
Such  was  the  course  of  Jewish  casuistry.
To  (So-Tc)  put  Mm  to  death.  The  council
had  merely  to  determine  how  to  formulate
such  a  political  charge  against  Jesus  as
would  compel  the  Bomans  to  pimish  the
offender  with  death.  Tliey  were  determined
that  he  should  die  by  an  ignominious  and
cursed  death,  that  his  pretensions,  as  being


580         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvn.  1— 66.


sent  by  God,  might  be  disposed  of  for  ever.
Hence  arose  the  persigtent  cry,  "  Crucify
him  I "  (ver*.  22,  23).  Tiie  Jewish  Tiew  of
cruoifixion  i«  seen  in  Deut.  xxi.  23  and
Gal.  iii.  13.  They  possibly  feared  some
outbreak  if  they  delayed  the  execution,  and
kept  him  prisoner  till  the  conclusion  of  the
feast.

Ver.  a.— When  they  had  bound  him.  With
his  hands  tied  by  a  rope  behind  his  back.
This  was  the  treatment  inflicted  on  con-
demned malefactors.  Daring  the  actual
official  proceediugs  it  was  customary  to  re-
lease the  accused  person  from  bonds ;  hence
this  new  binding  was  necessary.  What
passed  in  the  council  before  this  indignity
was  inflicted  is,  perhaps,  told  by  St.  Luke :
the  Sanhedristi  satisfied  themselTes  that
they  had  a  case  against  Jesus  suiSeient  for
their  purpose,  and  they  proceeded  in  •
body  to  lay  it  before  the  governor.  Pontius
Filate  the  goTemor  (ry  irr^iUyi).  Some
good  manuscripts  omit  "Pontius,"  as  in
Mark  and  Luke;  but  there  seems  to  be  no
doubt  that  he  bore  thii  nomen  gentilieium
(see  e.g.  Tacitus,  'Ann.,'  xt.  44),  which
connected  him  with  the  Samnite  gen*  of  the
Pontii.  He  was  the  sixth  Boman  Procurator
of  Judaea,  and  his  title  in  Greek  was
MrpoTds  rather  than  fiye/idy,  which  was  a
more  general  term  for  a  commander  or  chief
possessing  more  extensive  powers.  He  held
the  office  under  the  Priefect  of  Syria  for  ten
years,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he  was
removed  for  cruelty  and  extortion,  and
banished  to  Vienne,  in  Gaul,  where  he  put
an  end  to  his  own  life.  The  turbulence  and
national  animosity  of  the  Jews  had  rendered
it  necessary  to  invest  the  procurator  with
the  power  of  life  and  death,  which  he  used
in  the  most  unscrupulous  manner,  so  that
he  was  universally  hated  and  feared.  The
quarters  of  the  Boman  governor  were  called
the  Praetorium,  and  to  this  Christ  was  led.
Pilate  usually  resided  at  Csesarea,  but  came
to  Jerusalem  at  the  great  festival,  to  be
ready  to  quell  any  fanatical  outbreak  that
might  occur.  So  nowadays  the  Turks  keep
a  body  of  troops  in  the  same  city  to  preserve
the  peace  between  Christian  worshippers  at
Easter  (I).  Whether  Pilate  occupied  the
barracks  at  the  fortress  Antonia,  or  the
magnificent  palace  of  Herod,  situated  at  the
north-west  angle  of  the  upper  city,  is  un-
certain ;  but  as  we  know  tliat  the  Roman
procurators  did  reside  in  Herod's  palace,
and  as  on  this  occasion  Pilate  was  accom-
panied by  his  wife  (ver.  19),  it  is  most
probable  that  he  took  up  bis  abode  in  the
latter,  and  that  Jesus  was  brought  before
him  there.  Herod  had  a  house  of  his  own
on  the  east  of  Zion,  opposite  the  castle,
which  he  seems  to  buve  occupied  more
often  than  hia  father's  palaoe,  thus  leaving


the  latter  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Boman
governors.  Assuming  this  to  be  the  case,
Dr.  Edersheim writes, "From the slopeof the
eastern  angle,  opposite  the  temple  mount,
where  the  palace  of  Caiaphas  stood,  up  the
narrow  streets  of  the  upper  city,  the  melan-
choly procession  wound  to  the  portab  of  the
grand  palace  of  Herod.  It  is  recorded  that
they  who  brought  him  would  not  themselves
enter  the  portals  of  the  palaoe, '  that  they
might  not  be  defiled,  but  might  eat  the
Passover ' "  ('  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus,'  ii.
565).

Vers.  3 — 10. — Hemorie  and  luicide  oj
Judai,  and  the  use  made  of  the  blood-money.
(Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew;  cf.  Actsi.  18, 19.)

Ver.  8. — Then.  This  transaction  took
place  either  when  Jesus  was  being  con
ducted  to  the  Prsstorium,  or  daring  the
interview  with  Herod  (Luke  xxiii.  7 — 11).
A  great  number  of  tlie  Sanhedrists  had  now
withdrawn  to  the  temple,  and  were  sitting
in  conclave  there.  When  he  saw  that  he
was  condemned.  He  evidently  had  not
contemplated  tba  full  consequences  of  hie
crime ;  be  never  expected  that  the  Jewish
rulers  would  proceed  to  such  extremities.
It  is  probable  that,  in  his  lust  for  gain  and
his  loss  of  love  for  hii  Master,  he  had .
thought  of  nothing  but  Ids  own  sordid
interests,  and  now  was  appalled  at  the  share
which  he  had  had  in  bringing  to  pass  this
awful  result.  The  excuse  made  in  modern
days  for  Judas,  that  he  wished  only  to  force
our  Lord  to  exert  his  Divine  power,  and
to  declare  himself  Messiah,  is  refuted  by
one  out  of  many  considerations  (see  on  oh.
xxvi.  14).  His  remorse  at  this  moment  has
to  be  accounted  for.  If  he  still  believed  in
Christ's  Divine  commission,  he  would  not
have  despaired  of  a  happy  result  even  after
his  condemnation,  nay,  even  when  he  was
hanging  on  the  cross.  Christ's  power  to
deliver  himself  and  to  assume  his  Messianic
position  remnined  unimpaired  by  these
seemingly  adverse  circumstances,  and  a
believer  would  have  waited  for  the  end
before  he  surrendered  all  hope.  Judas's
character  is  not  bettered  by  considering
that  he  did  evil  that  good  might  come,  or
that  he  was  led  to  his  base  course  by  the
hope  that  his  worldly  interests  would  be
improved  by  the  establishment  of  Messiah's
temporal  kingdom.  That  he  had  now  any
desire  or  ambition  for  a  place  in  a  spiritual
kingdom  cannot  be  conceived,  for  he  had
evidently  lost  all  faith  in  Jesus,  and  followed
him  only  for  the  most  sordid  motives.  Be-
pented  himself  (fteTo/ieAijetij).  This  word
(differing  from  fieravola,  which  expresses
change  of  heart)  denotes  only  a  change  of
feeling,  a  desire  that  what  has  been  done
could  be  undone ;  this  la  not  repentanor


OH,  xxvn.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,


S81


in  the  Boriptare  senee ;  it  springs  not  from
love  of  God,  it  has  not  that  character
which  calls  for  pardon.  "Mark,"  says  St
Chrysostnm,  "  when  it  is  that  he  feels  re-
morse. When  his  sin  was  conipleted,  and
had  received  an  accomplishment.  For  the
devil  is  like  this ;  he  suffers  not  those  who
are  careless  to  see  the  evil  before  this,  lest
be  whom  he  has  taken  should  repent.  At
least,  when  Jesus  was  saying  so  many
things,  he  was  not  influenced,  but  when  his
offence  was  completed,  then  repentance  came
upon  him,  and  not  then  profitably."  Only
now  did  he  fully  realize  what  he  had  done ;
in  the  light  of  liis  crime  his  conscience  awoke
and  confounded  him  with  vehement  re-
proaches ;  the  object  for  which  he  had  sinned
seemed  utterly  unworthy  and  base ;  its  attrac-
tion vanished  when  no  longer  pursued.
Brought  again  (returned)  the  thirty  pieces  of
silver.  He  had  received  the  whole  price  for
which  he  had  bargained,  but  he  could  not
retain  the  money  now ;  it  was  a  silent  witness
which  he  oonld  not  endure.  He  may  have
thought  that  he  would  throw  away  the
guilt  of  his  crime  as  he  deprived  himself  of
its  wages,  or  that  he  could  repair  its  conse-
quences by  this  tardy  restitution.

Ver.  4. — I  have  sinned.  He  confesses  his
sin,  indeed,  yet  not  to  God,  but  to  the  partners
and  instigators  of  his  crime,  and  this,  not
with  godly  sorrow,  but  in  self-disgust  and
vexation  of  spirit  that  could  not  be  repressed.
His  was  the  sorrow  that  worketh  death
(2  Cor.  vii.  10).  In  that  I  have  betrayed
[the]  innocent  blood  (aTfia  i.9^ov,  or,  accord-
ing to  some  manuscripts,  at/ia  SlKaiov,  but
in  either  case  without  the  article).  By
spealiing  of  "  blood,"  he  showed  that  he
knew  the  murder  was  certain.  Judas
seems  to  have  had  no  faith  in  Christ's
Divinity,  but  he  had  perfect  assurance  of
his  holiness  and  innocence,  and  felt,  and
endeavoured  to  make  the  rulers  feel,  that
an  iniquitous  sentence  had  been  passed,  and
that  a  guiltless  person  was  condemned  to
death.  This  consideration  added  to  the
bitterness  of  his  regret.  But  he  obtained
no  comfort  from  the  hardened  and  unfeeling
priests.  They  had  gotten  what  they  liad
desired.  The  question  of  Christ's  moral
guilt  or  innocence  was  nothing  to  them;
equally  indifferent  to  them  was  the  fierce
remorse  of  Judas.  What  is  that  to  usl
T(  irphs  Tjfi-at ;  See  thou  to  that  (aii  o^n,
lu  viderit,  equivalent  to  "  that  is  your  con-
cern," as  in  ver.  24).  A  more  unfeeling,
nay,  fiendish  answer  could  not  have  been
given.  It  threw  the  wretched  man  back
on  himself,  left  him  alone  with  his  remorse,
the  blackness  of  his  night  unrelieved  by
any  ray  of  human  sympathy.  In  their  own
obduracy  and  impenitence  they  scorn  the
weakness  of  their  miserable  tool.   A  s  Bengel


well  moralizes,  "Impii  in  facto  oonsortes,
post  factum  deserunt ;  pii,  in  facto  non  con-
sortes,  postea  medentur."  To  sympathize
with  repentance  is  the  duty  and  the  privi-
lege of  the  Christian ;  to  deride  and  scoff
at  the  returning  sinner  is  devilish.  It  is
profitable  to  contrast  the  sincere  repentance
of  Peter  after  his  fall  with  the  remorse  of
the  despairing  Judas.

Ver.  5. — He  cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver
in  the  temple  (ev  rf  yop,  in  the  sanctuary,
or,  as  good  manuscripts  read,  els  rii'  vaiv,
into  the  lanctuary).  The  priests  were  in
the  priests'  court  (which  would  be  included
in  the  term  vais),  separated  by  a  stone  par-
tition from  the  court  of  the  Gentiles.  Into
the  latter  area  Judas  had  pressed;  and,
hurrying  to  the  wall  of  division,  he  flung
the  cursed  shekels  with  all  his  force  into
the  inner  place,  as  if  to  rescind  the  iniquitous
contract  and  to  cast  away  its  pollution.  He
departed.  He  rushed  away  from  the  temple
and  the  city  into  solitude,  down  into  and
across  the  vaUey  of  Hinnom,  up  the  steep
sides  of  the  overhanging  mountain — any-
where to  escape  human  eyes,  and,  if  it
might  be,  to  flee  from  himself.  Vain  en-
deavour I  The  memory  of  his  useless  crime
haunts  him;  he  has  no  hope  in  eartli  or
heaven ;  life  under  this  burden  is  no  longer
supportable.  Went  and  hanged  himself
(a,TrT}y(aro,  he  ttrangled  himeelf;  laqueo  ne
suspendit,  Vulgate).  He  mounted  some  pre-
cipitous rock,  and  unwinding  the  girdle  (for
it  was  nnnecessary  to  find  and  take  a  rope
with  him)  which  he  wore,  and  in  \vhich  he
had  doubtless  carried  the  pieces  of  silver,
fastened  it  round  his  neck,  and  securing  it
to  some  tree  or  projecting  stone,  flung  liim-
self  from  the  height.  The  horrible  result
is  told  by  St.  Peter  in  his  first  address  to
the  disciples  (Acts  i.  48),  "  Falling  head-
long, he  burst  asunder  in  the  midsr,  and  all
his  bowels  gushed  out."  This  may  have
resulted  from  the  breaking  of  the  girdle.  A
fragment  of  Papias  gives  another  explana-
tion, recounting  that  he  was  crushed  and
disembowelled  by  a  passing  waggon.  Thus
Judas,  the  only  man  concerning  whom  the
terrible  expression  is  used,  went  "to  his
own  place  "  (Acts  i.  25).  He  is  tlje  Ahitho
phel  of  the  New  Testament  (2  Sam.  zviL
23:  Ps.  xli.  9;  lv.l2— 14).   '

Ver.  6. — ^Took  the  silver  pieces.  They
picked  up  the  coins  which  Judas  had  flung
away  on  the  marble  pavement  of  the  courl!,
but  were  perplexed  to  determine  what  they
should  do  with  them.  It  is  not  lavrfnl.
These  men,  who  had  felt  no  doubt  or  hesita-
tion in  compassing  the  death  of  an  innocent
Man  by  the  foulest  treachery  and  perversion
of  justice,  have,  or  hypocritically  professed  to
have,  religious  scruples  about  the  disposal
of  this  blood-money  thus  thrown  on  theii


582  The  gospel  according  to  ST.  MATTHBW.    [ch.  XXVII.  1—66.


hands.  While  they  calmly  outraged  all
moral  feeling,  they  punctiliously  observed
certain  outward  ceremonial  decencies.
"They  eti»  n  at  a  gnat,  and  swallow  a
camel."  Tne  treasury  (rbj/  Kop^avav).  The
temple  treasury,  supplied  by  the  offerings
{corbana)  of  the  pious  for  the  expenses  of
Divine  worship.  It  is  most  probable  that
these  scrupulous  priests  had  taken  from
this  treasury  the  silver  which  they  now
deemed  it  sinful  to  replace.  The  price  of
blood.  The  wages  of  murder.  It  was  in-
ferred from  Deut.  xxiii.  18  that  no  money
unlawfully  gained.or  derived  from  an  impure
source,  might  be  uaed  in  purchasing  things
for  God's  service.  Under  Jewish  Law  such
money  must  be  restored  to  the  donor ;  if  cir-
cumstances rendered  this  impossible,  or  the
offerer  insisted  on  giving  it,  it  was  to  be
expended  for  some  public  object,  the  original
owner  being  considered,  by  a  legal  fiction,
to  be  its  possessor  still,  and  that  which  was
paid  for  by  tlie  money  beiog  deemed  as  his
gift  to  the  community  (comp.  Acts  i.  18,
"TJiis  man  purcbased  a  field  with  tlie  re-
ward of  iniquity  ").

Ver.  7. — They  took  counsel.  They  de-
liberated how  to  dispose  of  this  blood-
money.  This  deliberation  may  have  takien
place  after  the  Crucifixion.  The  potter's
field.  The  spot  was  well  known  at  the  time.
It  is  traditionally  said  to  have  lain  on  the
south  of  Jerusalem — on  the  hillside  across
the  valley  of  Hinnom,  on  what  is  called  the
Hill  of  Evil  Counsel.  Here  is  found  a  tract
of  clay,  which  is  still  used  by  the  potters  of
the  city.  In  the  time  of  our  Lord,  the  clay
probably  was  considered  to  be  exhausted,
and  the  area,  excavated  in  all  directions,
and  useless  for  agricultural  purposes,  was
sold  for  a  trifling  price.  To  bury  strangers
in.  The  "  strangers "  are  probably  not
pagans,  but  foreign  Jews  and  Gentile  pro-
selytes, who  came  to  Jerusalem  to  attend
the  festival,  and  died  there.  Others  think
that  foreigners  (Greeks  and  Bomans,  etc.)
exclusively  are  meant,  the  Jews  regarding
their  very  presence  in  the  holy  city  as  de-
filement, and  a  cemetery  purchased  by  un-
clean money  a  fitting  spot  for  their  inter-
ment. The  "  field "  was  set  apart  in  the
Crusaders'  times  as  a  burial-place  for  pil-
grims, and  to  Ibis  day  contains  a  charnel-
house  wherein  are  deposited  the  poor  and
unhonoured  dead  of  Jerusalem.

Ver.  8. — The  field  of  blood.  Aceldama
(Acts  i.  19),  the  Syriao  name.  It  was  so  called
(Sii)  from  the  circumstances  attending  its
purchase,  which  gave  it  an  evil  notoriety,
and  which  the  priests  must  liave  divulged.
"  Tliis  also,"  says  Olirysostom,  taking  the
blood  to  be  that  of  Jesus,  "  became  a  witness
a  gainst  them,  and  a  proof  of  their  treason.
For  th@  ntune  of  (he  place  more  clearly  th»n


a  trumpet  proclaimed  their  blood-giiiltiness."
Unto  this  day.  Until  the  time  when  this
Gospel  was  published,  the  new  appellation
obtained.  It  is  implied  that  a  considerable
interval  had  elapsed.  Such  chronological
hints  are  often  found  in  the  Old  Testament
(of.  Gen.  xix,  37,  38;  Josh.  iv.  9,  etc.).

Ver.  9. — Spoken  by  Jeremy  the  prophet.
The  prophecy,  which  St.  Matthew  says  was
fulfilled  by  the  use  made  of  Judas's  pieces  of
silver,  is  found,  not  in  Jeremiah,  as  we  now
possess  his  text,  but,  with  some  variations,
in  Zech.  xi.  12,  13.  It  must  be  noted,  how-
ever, tliat,  though  the  passage  in  Zechariah
has  many  remarkable  affinities  to  the  quota-
tion in  our  evangelist's  history,  it  is  not
identical  vrith  it.  In  the  prophet's  vision
there  is  no  mention  of  tb«  field,  and  the
money  is  to  be  "  cast  to  the  potter  in  the
house  of  the  Lord."  The  Septuagint  Version
gives  a  very  different  reading,  "  Lay  them
in  the  foundry  [or, '  furnace '],  and  I  will  see
if  it  is  approved,  as  I  was  approved  for  their
Bakes."  And  the  last  part  of  our  quotation
is  hardly  a  representation  of  the  Hebrew,
"  Cast  it  unto  the  potter,  the  goodly  price
that  I  was  prised  at  of  them."  In  the  face
of  these  discrepancies,  it  is  supposed  by
many  that  St.  Matthew  t>Ad  in  liis  mind
some  utterance  of  Jeremiah  not  now  extant ;
but  if,  as  most  expositors  afiirm,  he  was
citing,  more  or  less  accurately,  the  words  of
Zechariah,  we  have  to  account  for  their
being  attributed  to  a  wrong  author.  Of  this
difBculty,  as  it  is  considered,  many  solutions
are  offered.  For  instance :  (1)  The  evangelist
added  no  name  to  "the  prophet;"  and  a
scribe,  hazily  remembering  the  transaction
in  Jer.  xxxii.  6,  etc.,  interpolated  the  word
"Jeremiah."  It  ig  true  that  the  Syriao
omits  "Jeremiah,"  but  all  other  versions,
and  nearly  all  the  Greek  manuscripts,  insert
it;  so  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that
it  existed  in  the  original  text.  (2)  The  two
words  written  abbreviated  thus,  Zplou,
Iiuiou,  might  be  easily  mistaken.  (3)  Tlie
evangelist  feU  into  error,  by  oversight  or
lapse  of  memory,  as  is  supposed  to  be  the
case  in  Mark  u.  26  and  Acts  vii.  4,  16.  (4)
The  last  chapters  of  Zechariah  were  really
the  composition  of  Jeremiah.  (5)  Jeremiah,
being  set  at  the  head  of  the  prophets  in  the
Hebrew  Scriptures,  gava  bis  name  to  all  the
writings  following,  which  were  cited  indis-
ci'imiuately  as  the  utterances  of  Jeremiah.
(6)  St.  Matthew  has  made  (as  in  ch.  ii.  23,  and
BO  Mark  i.  2,  3)  a  cento  of  passages  derived
from  Jer.  xviii.  2,  etc. ;  xix.  1,  2 ;  xxxii.  8 —
14,  combined  with  the  predictton  in  Zecha-
riah, and  attributed  the  passage  thus
formed  to  the  most  celebrated  prophet.
Plainly  the  evangelist  has  not  confined  him-
self to  the  actual  words  of  his  author  or
authors,  but  has  written  a  Targuin  thereon,


CH.  xxvn.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


683


being  divinely  guided  to  see  in  the  present
transaction  a  fulfilment  of  an  obscure  an-
nouncement and  prefiguration  in  olde«  days.
Tliere  are  many  other  solutions  prcjposed,
with  which  we  need  not  concern  ourselves  ;
the  one  last  stated  is  reasonable,  and  may
be  adopted  safely  by  those  simple  Christians
who  believe  that  the  writers  of  the  Bible
were  supernaturally  preserved  from  errors,
uot  only  in  doctrine  and  precept  and  fact,
hut  also  in  chronology,  grammar,  geography,
citation,  etc.   The  whole  difficulty  is  of  little
importance,  and  too  much  has  been  made  of
what,  after  all,  may  be  simply  an  erratum
perpetuated  from  an  ancient  copy.     They
took  (eAa0oy,  which  might  mean,  "  I  took,"
as  in  Zeohariah).    In  the  prophecy  it  is  the
despised  Shepherd  who  casts  the  money  to
tlie  potter ;  but  "  gave  "  in  the  next  clause  is
plural.    The  price  of  him  that  was  valued
Iprioed),  whom  they  of  the  children  of  Israel
did  value  (price)  (t>v    eVi/iiftracTO    hrb   vlSv
'Icrpa^A).    The  Authorized  Version  supplies
01  before  mh  viav  'ltrpa'{i\.     The  Eevised
Version  supplies  rives,  "  whom  certain  of  the
children  of  Israel  did  price."   The  words  are
ironical,  answering  to  the  prophet's  expres-
sion, "  the  goodly  price  that  I  was  prised
at  of  them  "  I    The  preposition  ajri  may  be
rendered  "  on  the  part  of ; "  so  the  evangelist
means  that  the  priests  offered  this  mean
price  for  the  Shepherd  at  the  instigation  of,
at  the  instance  of,  the  children  of  Israel,
who  thus  shared  in   and   authorized   the
iniquitous  transaction.

Ver.  10. — Gave  them  for  the  potter's  field.
This  part  of  the  citation  is  borrowed  from
Jeremiah's  purchase  of  the  field  of  Hanamel
(ch.  xxxU.).  The  Christian  writer  intro-
•  duces  a  second  fulfilment  of  the  ancient
word.  As  the  Lord  appointed  me.  This
must  be  the  equivalent  of  Zeohariah's  "  the
Lord  said  uuto  me  "  (xi.  13).  The  destina-
tion of  these  wages  of  iniquity  was  fore-
ordained. They  could  not  be  used  by  the
Shepherd,  nor  stored  in  the  tomple  treasury,
nor  kept  by  Judas  or  the  priests ;  they  were
to  be  employed  for  another  purpose.

Vers.  11 — 14. — Jesus  examined  hy  Pilate.
(Mark  xv.  2 — 5;  Luke  xxiii.  2 — 5;  John
iviii.  29—38.)

Ver.  11. — Jesus  stood  before  the  governor.
St.  Matthew  omits  here  many  details  which
the  other  evangelists,  and  especially  St.
John,  supply.  Pilate  from  the  first  had
shown  much  reluctance  to  proceed,  not  being
satisfied  with  tie  vague  accusation  that
Jesus  was  a  malefactor,  and  proposing  that
the  Sanhedrists  should  try  him  according  to
Jewish  Law,  as  if  the  question  was  merely  a
religious  cue.     This  treatment  forced  the

Sriests  to  formulate  k  charge  of  which  the
loiuaB  authorities  must  teke  oogmizanM.


They  therefore  stated   unblushingly  that
Jesus  had  said  that  he  was  himself  Christ  a
King  (Luke  xxiii.  2).    At    this  point  St.
Matthew's  account  steps  in.    Art  thou  (ab
el)  the  King  of  the  Jews  1   This  examination
took   place  within    the  Praetorium,  where
Christ  was  detained  in  the  custody  of  some
guards.    The  accusation  of  the  Jews  had
been  made  outside,  as  they  had  scruples
about  entering  the  building.     Jesus   had
never  actually  (so  far  as  recorded)  called
himself  King,  though  the  appellation  had
been  applied   to  him  by  Nathanael  (John
i.  49),  and  the  hosannahs  of  the  multitudes
had  virtually  so  gi-eeted  him.    His  accusers
had  added  the  charge  tliat  he  perverted
the  nation,  and  forbade  to  give  tribute  to
CsBsar.  There  is  scorn  and  suipiise,  mingled
with  some  awe,  in  Pilate's  interrogation,
"  Thou — such  a  one  as  thou — art  the  King
of  the  Jews?"    Thou  sayest.    Wliat  thou
sayest  is  true.    A  strong  affirmation.    Christ
accepts  in  its  fullest  sense  that  which  the
governor  puts  as  a  question  (oomp.  ch.  iivi
25,  64).    St.  Paul  alludes  to  this  scene  in
1  Tim.  vi.  13,  "Christ  Jesus,  who  before
Pilate  witnessed  the  good  confession."

Ver.  12. — When  Pilate  went  forth  again
to  the  door  of  the  judgment-hall,  he  was
met  by  a  storm  of  accusations  from  the  chief
priests  and  elders,  who,  seeing  the  impres-
sion produced  on  him  by  Christ's  bearing,
vied  with  each  other  in  vociferating  charges
against  the  meek  Prisoner.  He  answered
nothing.  With  Divine  patience  he  bore
it  all ;  he  would  not  defend  himself  before
people  who  cared  nothing  for  truth  and
justice,  and  wanted  only  to  secure  con-
demnation and  death.  As  for  Pilate,  he
had  told  him  expressly  that  his  kingdom
was  spiritual  and  not  of  this  world,  and
therefore  his  claims  did  not  interfere  with
the  sovereiguty  of  Borne.  To  him  and  to
the  rest  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said.
Ver.  13. — Hearest  thou  not  how  many
things  (iriiiro,  quanta,  what  great  things)
they  witness  against  theel  Among  the
charges  was  one  that  Jesus  stirred  up  the
people  to  revolt,  both  in  Galilee  and  Judoea.
The  mention  of  Galilee  offered  to  Pilate  a
chance  of  escaping  the  responsibility  of  the
trial,  and  led  to  his  sending  Christ  to
Herod,ras  St  Luke  relates  (xxiii  6 — 12).
It  was  on  the  return  from  Herod  that  the
final  scene  took  place.  Pilate  evidently
did  not  believe  that  this  dignified,  meek,
inoffensive  Man  was  guilty  of  sedition,  and
he  desired  to  hear  his  defence,  which  he
was  willing  to  receive  favourably  (Acts  iil
13).

Ver.  14.— To  never  a  word  (vptis  oJSi  ir
tnjfia,  not  even  to  one  word).  He  made  no
reply  to  a  single  one  of  the  aocusation«
made  against  him.    Ue  had  determined  t0


584         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW     [oh.xxto.  1-


die;  he  was  a  willing  eacrifice;  bo  he  noted
as  his  propliet  bad  foretold,  "He  opened
not  his  mouth"  (Isa,  llii.  7).  Uaivelled
greatly.  The  Roman  governor  in  all  his
experience  had  never  beheld  sacb  calm
resignation,  such  unshaken  equanimity,
such  intrepid  resolution  in  the  face  of
death.

Vers.  15—26. — Barabba$  preferred  to
Jesua.  (Mark  xv.  6 — 15 ;  Luke  xxiii.  17 —
25  J  John  xviii.  39,  40.)

Ver.  15. — Pilate  now  tries  another  ex-
pedient for  delivering  himself  from  the
responeibility  of  condemning  Jesus.  At
that  feast  (/carii  lopT^v,  at  a  feast,  at  feast-
time).  Doubtless  the  Faesover  is  meant,
which  was  the  feast  especially  of  the  Jews,
and  it  is  very  improbable  that  the  praolice
mentioned  in  the  clause  was  allowed  at  any
other  of  the  feasts.  The  governor  was  wont
to  release  unto  the  people  (rf  ix^Vt  t^*
multitude),  etc.  St.  Luke  says,  "  Of  neces-
sity he  must  release  one  unto  them  at  the
feast."  The  custom  is  not  elsewhere  men-
tioned. It  was,  however,  most  probably
an  institution  established  of  old  time  in
memory  of  the  Exodus  (John  xviii.  39),
and  continued  by  the  Bomans  when  they
became  masters  of  the  country.  A  similar
custom  obtained  at  Borne  and  in  Greece  on
certain  great  festivals.  Whom  they  would.
Tlie  governor  u&ually  left  the  priests  and
people  unfettered  in  their  choice;  on  the
present  occasion  he  desired  Jesus  to  be
selected.

Ver.  16. — They  had  then  a  notable  prisoner.
The  plural  verb  must  refer  to  the  multi-
tude, to  whose  class  the  man  belonged.
The  Vulgate,  with  Oiigen,  reads,  "he
had,"  habebat,  referring  to  Pilate,  whose
prisoner  he  was.  The  man  was  notorious ;
as  St.  Mark  tells  us,  "He  lay  bound  with
them  that  had  made  insurrection  with  him,
men  who  liad  committed  murder  in  the
insurrection."  We  have  no  account  else-
where of  this  particular  rising,  nor  of  its
leader,  but  such  commotions  weie  very
common,  and  under  the  guise  of  political
aims  were  utilized  for  purposes  of  robbery
and  assassination.  Called  Barahbas.  The
word  means  "Son  of  the  father,"  which
some  explain  "  Son  of  a  rabbi,"  which  is
improbable;  and  it  is  a  question  whether
this  was  his  real  name,  or  one  applied  to
him  with  reference  to  his  pretensions  to
being  "  a  political  anti-Christ " — ^"a  hideous
caricature  of  the  true  Jesus,  the  Son  of  the
eternal  Father."  It  is  a  strange  fact  that
in  some  (not  very  trustworthy)  manuscripts
the  name  is  given  as  Jesua  Barabbas,  which
afibi'ds  a  remarkable  antithesis  in  Pilate's
question  in  the  following  verse,  "Will  ye
that  I  release  Jesus  Barabbas   or   Jesus


called  Christ?"  There  can  be  no  reason-
able doubt  that  the  prefix  is  not  genuine,
but  has  crept  into  some  texts  inadvertently.

Ver.  17. — Therefore  when  (wAen  then,  oiv)
they  were  gathered  together.  The  illative
particle  refers  to  the  fact  just  mentioned
that  the  notorious  Barabbas  was  at  that
time  in  prison.  The  multitude,  togetlier
with  the  Sanhedrists  summoned  from  their
meeting  in  the  temple,  were  gathered  at
the  doors  of  the  Prtetorium,  when  Pilate
came  out  and  spoke  to  them.  Whom  will
ye  that  I  release  unto  you  1  He  had  great
hope  tliat  their  answer  would  favour  Jesus.
When  it  came  to  choosing  between  a  vile
robber  and  murderer  and  a  beneficent,
moral  teacher,  common  sense  would  guide
the  choice  aright.  Which  is  called  Christ
(ver.  22).  In  Mark  Pilate  terms  him,  "  the
King  of  the  Jews."  He  puts  before  them
these  two  names  as  the  limit  of  their
choice,  minor  offenders  being  not  worthy
of  consideration  in  the  face  of  these  cele-
brated prisoners.  And  he  names  Christ's
claims,  as  if  he  would  remind  the  people
that  in  Jesus  they  possibly  had  the  Messiah
whom  they  desired.

Ver.  18. — For  he  knew.  He  had  recourse
to  this  expedient  because  he  was  well
acquainted  with  the  motives  which  led  the
Sanhedrists  to  desire  his  death.  They  had
shown  their  envy  of  Christ's  influence  with
tlie  people ;  they  were  jealous  of  his  repu-
tation and  success  ;  grudged  him  his
marvellous  powers;  were  embittered  by
his  attacks  on  rabbinism,  and  the  under-
mining of  their  popularity.  Pilate  saw
much  of  this;  he  penetrated  behind  their
flimsy  pretence  of  averting  some  possible
danger  from  the  Roman  dominion,  and  he  *
laboured  in  this  indirect  way  to  save  the
victim  of  this  vindictive  plot.  Of  course,
Pilate  could  not  fully  appreciate  Christ's
character,  nor  enter  into  the  question  of
bis  supernatural  claims ;  he  saw  only  that
he  was  brought  before  him  from  the  basest
motives,  that  no  real  offence  was  proved
against  liim,  and  that  no  fear  could  be
entertained  of  his  heading  a  popular  tumult.

Ver.  19. — ^When  he  was  set  down  (wat
tilting)  on  the  judgment-seat.  This  was  a
curule  chair  placed  on  a  raised  stone  plat-
form in  front  of  the  Prtetorium,  where  the
Roman  governors  sat  to  give  judgment  in
oases  brought  before  them  (see  John  xix.
13).  It  was  while  he  was  waiting  to  hear
the  decision  of  the  multitude  with  respect
to  the  selection  of  the  prisoners  that  the
episode  that  follows  (mentioned  alone  by
St,  Matthew)  occurs.  His  wife.  Her  name,
according  to  ecclesiastical  tradition,  was
Claudia,  the  addition  of  Procula  being
probably  a  mistake.  In  the  apocryphal
Gospel  of  Nioodemus  (oh.  ii.)  sh*  is  laid


DH.  XXVII.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACOOBDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,


685


to  have  been  a  oonveit  to  Judaism.  Other
accounts  a£Bnn  that  she  ultimately  became
a  Ohristian;  and  the  Greek  Church  has
canonized  her,  and  inserted  her  in  the
Menology  on  October  27.  It  is  probable
tliat  she  was  well  acquainted  with,  and
favourably  disposed  towards,  the  claims  of
Christ;  and  if  she  had  impressed  her
husband  in  some  degree  with  her  own
views,  this  fact  may  have  influenced  him
to  make  some  effort  to  save  Jesus.  Doubt-
less she  had  thought  much  upon  the  subject,
and  talked  it  over  with  Pilate;  hence  her
dream  was  the  natural  sequence  of  that
with  which  her  mind  had  been  filled  in
her  waking  momenis,  though  providentially
ordered.  It  speaks  for  the  accuracy  of
the  evangelist's  account,  that  lately  the
governors  had  been  allowed  to  take  their
wives  with  them  into  their  official  districts,
a  law  previously  having  forbidden  this
indulgence  (see  Tacitus,  'Annal.,'  iii.  33,
34).  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that
jnit  Man.  Wordsworth  well  remarks,  "  In
the  whole  history  of  the  Passion  of  Christ
no  one  pleads  for  him  but  a  woman,  the
wife  of  a  heathen  governor,  the  deputy  of
the  emperor  of  the  world."  This  was
another  warning  given  to  Pilate  to  arrest
him  in  his  criminal  cowardice.  The  ei-
pression  used  means  literally,  "Let  there
be  nothing  to  thee  and  that  Bighteous  One,"
which  is  equivalent  to  "  Do  nothing  to  him
for  which  you  will  be  hereafter  sorry."  I
have  Bufferetl  {^iraBov,  I  suffered)  many
things  this  day  in  a  dream  because  of  him.
It  is  useless  to  inquire  the  nature  of  her
dream.  From  the  way  in  which  it  is  here
introduced,  and  from  what  we  know  of
God's  employment  of  dreams  in  other  cases
to  communicate  his  will  to  men,  we  may
reasonably  conclude  that  this  was  divinely
sent  to  convey  a  lesson  to  Pilate  through
his  wife,  who  alone,  perhaps,  was  able  to
arouse  the  better  feelings  of  his  heart.  The
mention  of  her  suffering  shows  that  she  had
some  dreadful  experiences  to  relate  in  con-
nection with  the  fate  of  the  righteous  Jesus.
As  at  the  beginning  of  Christ's  life,  so  at
its  close,  such  communications  were  ad-
dressed to  strangers.  Pilate's  superstitious
fears  would  be  excited  by  this  mysterious
dream,  but  they  were  uot  able  to  overpower
counteracting  influences.

Ver.  20. — But  the  chief  priests  and  elders
persuaded  the  multitude.  For  a  short  time
the  people  appear  to  have  wavered  in  their
choice,  and  Pilate  had  hopes  that  his
stratagem  worked  well.  But  the  Saiihe-
drists  were  at  hand  with  their  insidious
suggestions;  not  a  voice  was  raised  lor
Christ;  all  his  friends  were  scattered  or
silenced;  and  his  enemies  easily  swayed
the   fickle  crowd.    That  they  should  ask


(ash  for)  Barabbas,  and  destroy  Jesus.  By
directing  popular  favour  to  Barabbas,  they
could  make  the  condemnation  of  Jesus
more  certain.  The  expression  in  the  Greek
implies  that  they  used  their  persuasive
power*  in  order  that  (Iva)  the  people  should
demand  the  release  of  Barabbas,  and  com-
pass the  death  of  Jesus.

Ver.  21. — Answered,  to  the  various  cries
which  reached  him.  Whether  of  the  twain  t
Which  of  the  two  1  He  repeats  the  question
before  asked  (ver.  17),  having  given  the
multitude  time  for  deliberation,  and  offering
them  no  alternative  but  to  choose  one  of
these  two  prisoners.  Barabbas.  They  pre-
fer a  murderer  to  the  Prince  of  life — a
selection  on  their  part  guilty  and  malevo-
lent, but  on  the  part  of  God  necessary  for
our  salvation  (Quesnel).  Truly,  Jesus  "  was
despised  and  rejected  of  men."  If  he  had
been  released  now,  his  liberation  would  not
have  been,  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  an  act
of  simple  justice,  but  an  imperial  concession,
an  act  of  grace,  in  which  the  character  of
the  prisoner  wag  uot  regarded.

Ver.  22. — It  was  with  disappointment  and
indignation  that  Pilate  heard  the  rabble's
decision.  He  could  not  refuse  to  release
the  robber  and  murderer ;  but  he  stUl  enter-
tained some  hope  of  a  better  feeling  in  the
crowd  which  would  allow  him  to  acquit
Jesus.  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus  t
Ti  oil/  voffiaa  'Irjaovv  i  What  th*n  shall  I  do
to  Jesus  i  As  yon  demand  the  release  of
Barabbas,  what  am  I  to  do  with  the  other
prisoner?  He  dared  not  act  boldly,  as  his
conscience  and  the  justice  of  the  case  dic-
tated; if  the  popular  voice  was  not  with
him,  he  would  take  no  open  step.  He  added,
which  is  called  Christ,  or,  according  to
Mark,  "whom  ye  call  the  King  of  the
Jews,"  in  scorn  of  the  title  itself,  and  of  the
fickleness  which  honoured  him  one  day  and
now  clamoured  for  his  destruction.  Let
him  be  crucified !  They  have  their  dreadful
answer  ready.  He  is  a  political  offender;
he  is  a  mover  of  sedition  against  the  Eoman
supremacy ;  let  him  meet  the  punishment
to  which  Bome  dooms  her  lowest  criminals
and  runagates.  This  was  the  death  which
Christ  had  foretold  for  himself  (ch.  xx.  19),
the  most  painful,  barbarous,  and  ignominious
punishment  which  the  cruelty,  of  man  ever
invented.

Ver.  23. — Why,  what  evil  hath  he  done  1
T(  y&p  KaKhv  holiiirep  ;  The  particle  yap
implies  a  certain  reasoning  in  the  question,
the  speaker  for  the  nonce  putting  himself
in  the  people's  position,  and  demanding  the
ground  of  their  decision.  The  authorized
translation  is  adequate.  Pilate  thus  showed
bifl  pusillanimity  and  irresolution,  while
exercising  no  control  over  the  feelings  of  the
excited  mob.    But  they  cried  out  the  mors


586


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST,  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvu.  1— 6fi.


(irepi<r<riu;  fKpa^ov,  they  kept  shouting  out  ex-
ceedingly). Tlievery  sight,  of  the  governor's
predilection,  combined  with  his  inducision,
excited  them  to  more  vehement  clamour;
they  flaw  that  he  would  end  by  yielding  to
their  violence.  Jerome  referi,  m  illustra-
tion, to  laa.  V.  7,  "  He  looked  for  judgment,
but  behold  oppression;  for  righteousness,
but  beliuld  a  cry."

Ver.  24. — He  could  prevail  nothing  (obSh
i><l>i\e7,  he  prevailed  nothing').  Naught  that
he  did  altered  the  determination  of  the
multitude.  But  that  rather  a  tumult  was
made  (yireroi,  it  arising).  The  present
tense  gives  a  graphic  touch  to  the  narrative.
The  delay  and  hesitation  of  the  governor
exasperated  the  people,  and  there  were
ominous  signs  of  a  riot,  which  must  be  sup-
pressed at  any  sacrifice  of  principle  or  equity.
He  feared  that  a  report  might  reach  Borne
of  his  having  occasioned  dangerous  excite-
ment at  tlie  Passover  by  refusing  to  punish
a  pretender  to  the  Jewish  throne.  He  sub-
mits to  the  popular  will,  but  endeavours  to
save  himself  from  the  guilt  of  an  accomplice
in  a  most  ittrooiuus  murder.  Took  water,
and  washed  his  hands  before  the  multitude.
This  symbolical  action  would  appeal  to  the
Jewish  sentiment,  as  it  was  a  mode  of  assert-
ing innocence  prescribed  in  the  Mosaic  Law
(Deut  xxi.  6;  Ps.  xxvi.  6).  Pilate  thu«
publicly,  in  the  sight  of  all  the  multitude
who  might  not  have  been  able  to  hear  his
words,  attested  his  opinion  of  the  innocence
of  Christ,  and  weakly  cast  the  guilt  upon
the  people,  aji  if  the  administration  of  justice
lay  with  them  and  not  with  him.  Such
lustrations  were  not  exclusively  Jewish,  but
were  practised  both  among  Greeks  and
Bomans  in  expiation  of  guilt  (see  Wetstein,
ad  loo, ;  and  Kuinoel,  ad  cap.  iii.  6).  I  am
innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  Person.
Some  manuscripts,  followed  by  Alford,
Tischendorf,  and  Westcott  and  Hort,  omit
"just  Person  (5iko(ou)."  If  the  word  is
genuine,  it  must  be  regarded  as  an  echo  of
the  wife's  message  to  Pilate  (ver.  19).  The
cowardly  governor  thus  shakes  off  the  re-
sponsibility of  the  perversion  of  justice  which
he  allows.  See  ye  to  It  (Veis  Sif/eirBe,  vos
videritis,  as  ver.  4).  You  will  take  all  the
responsibility  of  the  act ;  the  blame  will  not
be  mine.  V^in  hope !  Pilate  may  wash  his
hands,  he  Ciinnot  purify  heart  or  conscience
from  the  stain  of  this  foul  murder.  As
long  as  the  Church  lasts  so  long  will  the
Creed  announce  that  Jesus  "suffered  under
Pontius  Pilate."

Ver.  25. — Then  answered  all  the  people.
Insligated  by  the  Sanhedrists  working
insidiously  among  them,  the  multitude,
now  very  numerous,  respond  with  fiendish
alacrity  to  Pilate's  deprecation.  It  was  a
unanimous,  a  national  assumption  of  guilt,


lightly  undertaken,  terribly  vindicated.
His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children.
The  consequences  of  this  condemnation,  be
they  what  they  may,  we  are  willing  to  suiifer.
Lot  God  visit  it,  if  he  will,  upon  us  and  our
children ;  we  and  they  will  tkeerluUy  bear
the  penalty.  A  mad  and  impious  impreca-
tion, the  fulfilment  of  which  quickly  com-
menced, and  has  continued  unto  this  (lay
The  terrible  events  connected  with  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  overthrow  oi
the  theocracy,  and  the  eighteen  centuries
of  exUe  and  dispersion,  bear  witness  to  the
reality  of  the  vengeance  thus  wantonly
invoked.  "As  for  the  head  of  those  that
compass  me  about,  let  the  mischief  of  their
own  lips  cover  them"  (Ps.  cxl.  9).

Ver.  26. — ^Beleased  he  Barabbaa — "him
that  for  sedition  and  murder  was  cast  into
prison,  whom  they  had  desired"  (Luke).
When  he  had  soonrged  Jesus.    This  was  the
usual  preliminary  to  crucifixion,  especially
in  the  case  of  slaves,  and  was  a  piuishment
of  a  most  severe  and  cruel  nature.     The
verb  here  used,  <f>paye\\6a,  is  formed  from
the  hatin  flagellum,  and  denotes  the  employ-
ment of  that  terrible  implement  the  Boman
scourge.     This  was  no  ordinary  whip,  but
commonly  a  number  of  leather  thongs  loaded
with  lead  or  armed  with  sharp  bones  and
spikes,  so  that  every  blow  cut  deeply  into
the  flesh,  causing  intense  pain.    The  culprit
was  stripped  of  his  clothes,  pinioned,  and
bound  to  a  stake  or  pillar,  and  thus  on  his
bare  back  sutfered  this  inhuman  chastise-
ment.   To  think  that  the  blessed  Son  of
God  was  subject  to  such  torture  and  indig-
nity is  indeed  a  lesson  for  us  written  in
blood.     When  "he  gave  his  back  to  the
smiters "  (Isa.  L  6),  he  was  taking    the
punishment   of  our  sin    upon  his  sacred
shoulders,    "  He  was  wounded  for  our  trans-
gressions, he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :
the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon
him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed "
(Isa.  liiL  5).    Possibly  Pilate  thought  that
the  sight  of  Christ's  suffering  might  arouse
at  this  last  moment  the  pity  of  the  Jews
(John  xix.  1 — 16).    But  he  was  mistaken.
The  appetite  of  the  bloodthirsty  crowd  was
only  whetted  by   this  anticipatory  taste ;
tliey  insisted  on  the  whole  programme  being
carried   out,    and    Pilate   yielded    to    the
demand,  giving  up  the  useless    struggle.
He  delivered  him  to  be  crucified.    Pilate
delivered  Jesus  to  the  will  of  the  people,
directing  the  soldiers  to  carry  out  the  ordered
execution.     On   the    view    taken    by  the
Bomans  themselves  of  crucifixion,  commen-
tators  quote  Cicero,  *In  Verr.,'  ii.  5.  66,
"  It  is  a  crime  to  bind  a  Boman  citizen ;  to
scourge  him  is  an  act  of  wickedness ;  to  put
him  to  death  is  almost  parricide :  what  shall
I  say  of  crucifying  him  ?    An  act  so  »bomi-


OH.  xxvn.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


687


nable  it  is  impossible   to  find    any   'word
adequately  to  exprega."

Vers.  27 — 30. — Jesus  moclced  by  the  soldiert.
(Mark  xv.  16—19 ;  John  xix.  2,  3.)

Ver.  27. — The  soldiers  of  the  governor.
The  brutal  soldiers,  far  from  feeling  com-
passion for  the  meek  Sufferer,  take  a  fiendish
pleasure  in  torturing  and  insulting  him.
Tliey  fling  upon  his  bleeding  body  his  upper
garments,  and  take  him  into  the  common
hall  (irpanipiov,  the  Frsetormm).  This  name
was  applied  to  the  dwelling-house  of  the
proviucial  governor,  and  here  refers  to  the
open  court  of  the  building,  outside  which
the  preceding  events  had  taken  place  (see
on  ver.  2).  The  whole  band  (o-werpoj'),  which
usually  signifies  "a  cohort"  (Acts  x.  1),
but  sometimes  only  a  maniple,  which  was
a  third  part  of  the  same  (Poly  bius,  xi.  23. 1).
This  is  probably  what  is  meant  here,  as
they  would  not  denude  the  barracks  of  "all
its  occupants,  who  consisted  of  one  cohort  of
about  six  hundred  men  (Josephus,  '  Bell.
Jud.,'  ii.  15.  6).  The  soldiers  summoned
tlielr  comrades  on  guard  at  the  palace  or  in
the  Tower  of  Antonia  to  come  and  join  in
the  cruel  sport.  "  The  devil  was  then  enter-
ing in  fury  into  the  hearts  of  all.  For
indeed  they  made  a  pleasure  of  their  insults
against  him,  being  a  savage  and  a  worthless
s^  "  (Ohrysostom,  in  Joe.).

Ver.  28. — ^They  stripped  him  (e/cSwcrai/Tei)-
Some  mauuBoripts  read  kySitravTcs,  "  when
they  had  clothed  him ; "  but  this  seems  to
have  been  derived  from  St.  Mark,  and  to
be  here  somewhat  tautological.  They  bad
heard  of  his  claim  to  be  a  King,  so  they
determined  to  deride  him  with  the  mockery
of  royal  honours.  They  tore  his  garments
from  his  mangled  form,  thus  opening  afresh
his  half-dried  wounds.  Put  on  him  a  scarlet
robe  (xAaM''5«  kokk'iv7\v).  This  was  pro-
bably the  short  military  woollen  cloak  worn
by  ofScers,  in  colour  either  scarlet  or  purple,
and  fastened  by  a  buckle  on  the  right
shoulder.  Some  think  it  was  a  cast-off
garment  from  the  wardrobe  of  King  Herod,
which  they  ibund  and  appropriated  to  this
purpose.  Wliatever  it  was,  its  bright  hue
was  suitable  for  this  mockery  of  regal
splendour.

Ver.  29. — Platted  a  crown  of  thorns.  In
carrying  out  their  mockery,  the  soldiers
next  supply  a  regal  crown.  Palestine  was
a  country  thickly  set  with  brambles  and
tborn-growing  bushes.  -They  would  have
hb  difficulty  in  finding  plants  to  suit  their
cruel  purpose,  and  in  plucking  with  their
gauntlet-covered  hands  sprays  sufficient  to
ir^sve  into  a  rude  coronet.  What  was  the
particular  shrub  employed  cannot  be  known
for  certainty.  The  lizyphus.  Spina  Vhristt,
a  kind  of  acacia  with  long  reflex  thorns,  is


of  too  brittle  a  nature  to  be  used  in  this
way.  Some  variety  of  the  cactus  or  prickly
pear  may  be  meant.  "  Hasselquist,  a
Swedish  naturalist,  supposes  a  very  common
plant,  naba  or  nabka  of  the  Arabs,  with
many  small  and  sharp  spines,  soft,  round,
and  pliant  bushes,  leaves  much  resem-
bling those  of  ivy,  being  of  a  very  deep
green,  as  if  in  designed  mockery  of  a  victor's
wreath,  'Travels,'  288"  (F.  M.).  Thorns
were  the  fruits  of  the  primal  curse,  which
Christ,  the  second  Adam,  was  now  bearing,
and  by  bearing  removed.  A  reed  in  hu
right  hand.  By  way  of  sceptre.  This  must
have  been  a  reed  or  cane  of  a  thick  and  solid
character  (see  ver.  30,  and  note  on  ver.  48).
Bowed  the  knee  before  him.  Doing  muck
obeisance  to  him  as  King.  Thus  these
wretched  heatliens  did  that  in  derision
which  some  day  all  Gentiles  shall  do  in
solemn  earnest,  when  "  all  the  kindreds  of
the  nations  shall  worship  before  him  "  (Ps.
xxii.  27).  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews !  Doubt-
less tl)ey  cried,  "Ave,  Kex  JudceorumI"  in
imitation  of  the  "  Ave,Imperatorl"  addressed
to  the  Emperor  of  Eome.

Ver.  30. — They  spit  upon  him.  Eepeating
the  atrocious  outrage  already  offered  (ch.
xxvi.  67).  Smote  him  (tTuTrToc,  imperf.,
kept  smiting  him)  on  the  head.  They  tore
the  mock  sceptre  from  his  trembling  hands,
and  one  after  the  other,  as  (hey  passed,
struck  him  with  it  on  the  head,  at  every
blow  driving  the  thorns  deeper  into  his
flesh.  Here  must  be  introduced  some  other
attempts  of  Pilate  to  save  him,  narrated  by
St.  John  (xix.  4 — 16),  especially  the  episode
of  "EcceHomol"

Vers.  31 — 33. — Jesus  is  led  to  crucifixion.
Via  dolorosa.  (Mark  xv.  20—23;  Luke
xxiii.  26—33 ;  John  xix.  16,  17.)  In  these
accounts,  those  of  Matthew  and  Mark  are
most  alike,  though  varied  in  expression  and
in  some  details ;  that  of  Luke  is  the  fullest ;
that  of  John  distinct  from  the  rest.

Ver.  31. — St.  Matthew,  omitting  some
details,  hurries  to  the  final  scene.  Took  the
robe  off  from  him ;  i.e.  the  scarlet  robe  with
which  they  had  arrayed  him  (ver.  28).
Whether  they  removed  the  crown  of  thorns
is  uncertain.  The  Lord  is  always  depicted
wearing  it  upon  the  cross.  His  own  raiment
(ret  iniria  avrov,  his  garments').  The  term
would  include  the  outer  and  inner  garments,
especially  the  seamless  tunic  for  which  the
soldiers  cast  lots  (John  xix.  23;  Ps.  xxii.
18).  Thus  unknowingly  they  were  pre-
paring to  fulfil  prophecy.  Led  him  away
to  crucify  him.  This  must  have  been  about
9  a.m.  Executions  took  place  outside  the
cicy  waiiB  (see  JTurab,  xv.  .S5,  36 ;  Acts  vi».
58).    "  The  bodies  of  those  beasts,  wiio»»


588


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvn.  1— 6a


blood  i»  brought  into  the  sanctuary  by  the
priest  for  sin,  are  burned  without  the  camp.
Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify
the  people  with  his  own  blood,  suffered
without  the  gate"  (Hob.  xiii.  11, 12).  Lange
describes  the  procession :  "  Instead  of  being
led  forth  by  liotors,  the  command  of  whom
Pilate,  as  sub-governor,  did  not  enjoy,  Jesus
is  conducted  to  the  cross  by  the  soldiery.
A  centurion  on  horseback,  culled  by  TacituB
'  Exactor  mortis,'  by  Seneca  '  Oenturio  sup-
plioio  prsepositus,'  headed  the  company.  A
herald,  going  in  front  of  the  condemned,
proclaimed  his  sentence."  Behind  him
walked  the  prisoner,  bearing  the  instrument
of  his  puuishmeut;  a  small  company  of
soldiers  completed  the  cavalcade.

Ver.  32. — As  they  came  out ;  i.e.  from  the
city  gate  which  led  to  the  place  of  execu-
tion. They  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  Simon  by
name.  He  was,  as  the  other  synoptists
mention,  coming  out  of  the  country  to  Jeru-
salem, where  probably  he  lived.  Cyrene
wap  a  district  in  the  north  of  Africa,  under
Boman  rule,  and  colonized  by  a  large  number
of  Jews  (JosephuB,  'Oont.  Apion.,'  ii.  4;
'  Ant.,'  xiv.  7.  2),  who  had  a  synagogue  of
their  own  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  vi.  9).  Simon
doubtless  became  a  follower  of  Christ,  and
St.  Mark  mentions  his  two  eons,  Alexander
and  Eufus,  as  well-known  believers  (gee
Kom.  xvi.  13).  Probably  the  guards  saw  in
him  some  tokens  of  sympathy  with  Christy
and  compassion  for  his  sufferings ;  or  they
usedhis  services  simply  as  being  a  foreigner,
and  not  likely  to  resent  being  put  to  a  task
which  a  Hebrew  would  deem  the  lowest
degradation.  Him  they  compelled  (tiyydpev-
a-av,  impressed)  to  bear  his  cross.  The  verb
translated  "  compelled  "  is  derived  from  the
Persian,  and  implies  the  compulsory  power
possessed  by  couriers  of  requisitioning  horses
and  carriages  in  forwarding  despatches  (see
ch.  V.  41).  The  cross  was  probably  the
ordinary  Latin  croea,<WMa!  immiisa,  of  which,
however,  the  lower  limb  below  the  transom
was  longer  than  the  upper ;  and  this  latter
afforded  a  place  where  could  be  affixed  the
board  containing  the  inscription.  It  was
not  as  tall  as  usually  represented ;  we  are
told  that  beasts  of  prey  were  able  to  gnaw
the  bodies  hung  thereon.  In  fact,  the
culprit's  feet  were  only  just  raised  above
the  ground,  being  drawn  up  till  the  soles
lay  flat  on  the  upright  beam.  Nails  were
driven  through  tlie  hands  and  feet,  and
the  body  was  supported  partly  by  these,
and  partly  by  a  projecting  pin  of  wood
called  the  seat.  The  rest  for  the  feet,
often  seen  in  pictures,  was  never  used.  A
slight  covering  was  allowed  for  decency's
sake,  the  rest  of  the  body  being  stripped  of
clothing ;  and  thus  the  condemned,  exposed
to  scorching  sun,  bleeding  from  the  cruel


scourge,  suffering  untold  agonies,  was  left
to  die.  Whether  Jesus  carried  the  whole
cross  or  only  the  transom  is  uncertain.  It
is  possible  that  the  two  were  tied  together
by  a  rope  at  one  end,  lo  as  to  form  an
inverted  V,  and  fastened  in  the  proper  posi-
tion at  the  place  of  execution.  However
this  may  be,  it  proved  too  heavy  a  burden  for
him  to  bear.  Spent  with  his  long  vigil  and
lack  of  food,  bis  spirit  afflicted  by  the  agony
in  the  garden  and  the  unknown  sufferings
then  and  afterwards,  his  body  tortured  with
open  wounds  and  weakened  with  loss  of
blood,  he  sank  beneath  the  weight,  as  he
staggered  weariedly  along  the  rough  and
hilly  streets.  Either  from  a  momentary
compunction,  or  more  probably  from  impa-
tience at  the  slowness  of  the  poor  Sufferei-'s
movements,  the  soldiers  gladly  lieized  on
Simon  to  relieve  the  Prisoner  of  the  cross,
or  to  share  its  weight,  and  thus  enable  them
sooner  to  complete  their  cruel  task.

Yer.  S3. — A  place  called  Qolgotha,  that  is
to  say,  a  place  of  a  skull ;  quod  est  Oalvarim
locus  (Vulgate).  Hence  the  Latinized  name
Calvary,  The  word  means  "  a  skull ; "  but
why  the  spot  was  so  called  ii  a  doubtful
question.  That  it  was  the  usual  place  of
execution  is  a  suggestion  with  no  proof,  and
one  would  expect  the  designation  in  this
case  to  be  "  the  place  of  skulls."  Tradition
(authorized  by  Origen)  pointed  to  it  as  the
spot  where  Adam  was  buried,  and  where  his
skull  was  found — a  story  that  seems  to
have  arisen  from  the  typical  reason  that  it
was  congruous  that  the  first  Adam  and
the  second  Adam  should  meet  in  death,  the
latter  winning  the  victory  there  where  the
former  showed  his  defeat.  Most  probably
the  name  was  given  to  it  as  descriptive  ol
its  appearance,  a  bare  space  of  rook  (not  a
hill)  denuded  of  verdure,  and  bearing  a  dis-
tant resemblance  to  a  human  skull  wanting
hail.  The  actual  situation  of  Cavalry  is
hotly  contested  by  exegetes  and  travellers,
and  is  still  far  from  being  determined.  The
only  criterion  offered  by  our  accounts  in  the
Gospels  is  that  it  was  without  the  then  walls
of  the  city,  not  far  from  one  of  the  gates,
and  by  the  side  of  one  of  the  principal  roads
leading  from  the  city  to  the  country.  A
certain  knoll  on  the  hill  Gareb  towards  the
north-west,  by  which  the  Damascus  road
led,  aud  to  which  Jeremiah  (xxxi.  39)  refers,
is  supposed,  not  very  happily,  to  answer
these  requirements.  If  the  present  Church
of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  on  the  north-west  of
Jerusalem,  really  contains  the  actual  Gol-
gotha aud  the  tomb  of  our  Lord,  the  course
of  the  second  wall  as  usually  drawn  cannot
be  correct,  as  it  embraces  this  site  com-
pletely (see  the  Ouardian,  August  80,
1893,  p.  1353).  Opinion,  always  altering,
has  lately  been  inclined   to  endorse  the


OH.  xxvn,  1—66.]    THE  (K)SPBL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         589


autheLtioity  of  many  of  the  traditional  sitei
in  the  holy  city  and  its  neighboutbood.
Further  disooveries  will  set  this  and  other
matten  at  rest.  Meantime,  judgment  muBt
be  suspended  (see  on  ver.  51).

Vers.  34— 41.— 3%«  Crucifixion  and  Ifia
mockery.  (Mark  rr.  23 — 32;  Lake  xxiii.
32—43;  John  xlx.  18—24.)

Ver.  34. — ^Vinegar  .  .  .  minglei  with  gall
(xoXijj).  Instead  of  "vinegar"  (<({ot)  yery
many  manuscripts,  followed  by  Tisohen-
dorf,  WeBtcott  and  Hort,  and  ethers,  read
here,  as  in  Mark,  "  wine  "  (olvov).  Dede-
runt  ei  vinum  bibere  (Vulgate).  Doubt-
leBB  the  two  words  represent  the  same  fluid,
A  wine  of  a  sharp  and  acrid  taste.  The
received  reading  in  onr  text  is  supposed  to
be  derived  from  Fs.  Ixix.  21,  "  They  gave
me  gall  for  my  meats,  and  in  my  thirst  they
gave  me  vinegar  to  drink."  "  Gall "  here
uignifles  some  bitter  ingredient  (St.  Mark
calls  it  "  myrrh  "),  which  was  infused  in  the
wine  to  impart  a  narcotic  quality.  It  was
the  custom  to  offer  this  draught  to  criminals
about  to  undergo  crucifixion,  either  as  an
anodyne  or  to  give  tbem  adventitious
strength  to  bear  their  sufferings.  The
beverage  is  said  to  have  been  prepared  by
some  benevolent  ladies  in  Jerusalem,  and  to
have  been  owed  to  a  gloss  on  Frov.  xxxi.
6,  7,  "  Give  strong  drink  unto  liim  that  is
ruady  to  perish,  and  wine  unto  the  bitter  in
soul;  let  nim  drink,  and  forget  his  poverty,
and  remember  his  misery  no  more.  This
was  not  an  additional  insult  offered  to  Jesus,
as  some  have  opined,  but  a  usual  act  oF
kindliness.  When  he  had  tasted  thereof,  he
would  not  (dvk  ij6t\i)  drink.  He  accepted
the  kindly  offer  so  far  as  to  put  liis  lips  to
the  cup,  but,  recognizing  its  stupefying
qualities,  he  refused  to  drink  it.  He  willed
to  endure  all  the  coming  pains  witliout
mitigation ;  he  would  meet  all  witli  the
powers  of  mind  and  body  undarkened ;  he
would  have  his  senses  and  his  self-conscious-
ness uniiupaired  to  the  end.

Ver.  35.— They  omoified  him.  We  should
try  to  realize  the  utter  degradation  as  well
as  tlie  anguish  of  such  a  deatli.  No  modem
form  of  punishment  carries  with  it  the
abhorred  ignominy  with  which  crucifixion
was  regarded,  and  we  must  put  ourselves
back  eighteen  centuries,  and  enter  into  the
feelings  of  Jews  and  Komans,  if  we  would
view  it  in  its  genuine  aspect.  The  narrative
of  this  harrow  ing  scene  could  not  be  simpler.
The  writer  leavcB  it  reverently  to  speak  for
itself,  without  any  attempt  at  sensational
adjuncts  or  rhetorical  amplification.  There
is  no  indignation  at  the  outrage,  no  com-
passion for  the  Sufferer,  no  commendation
of  the  Divine  patience.  These  are  suppressed,
because  they  needed  no  words ;    the  ou-


Tamlshed  details  are  more  than  roffloient
to  place  the  reader  by  the  Saviour's  side,
and  make  him  feel  every  pang,  sympathize
with  the  grief,  the  shame,  the  horror,  that
rent  the  heart  of  Jesus.  The  sacred  authors
have  said  little  about  the  mode  of  cruci-
fixion, and  have  left  nntold  many  particulars
which  we  should  have  liked  to  hear.  This
horrid  punishment  was  too  well  known  rt
that  time  to  need  description,  and  they  saw
no  necessity  for  dwelling  on  its  revolting
details.  (For  some  of  these,  see  on  ver.  32.)
Whether  in  the  present  case  the  upright
beam  of  the  cross  was  fixed  in  its  position
before  the  Frisoner  was  fastened  to  it,  or
whether  it  was  laid  fiat  on  the  ground,  set
in  order,  and  the  Sufferer  was  nailed  thereto
before  it  was  raised  and  settled  in  its  place,
we  are  not  informed.  The  former  was  the
method  commonly  employed.  To  carry  out
the  execution  a  quaternion  of  soldiers  (Acts
xii.  4)  was  appointed  under  the  command
of  a  centurion  (ver.  54)  Farted  his  garments,
casting  lots.  The  clothes  of  criminals  were
the  perquisite  of  the  soldiers  charged  with
the  execution.  They  divided  these  amongst
the  four,  casting  lots  to  determine  what
each  should  take.  Further  details  are
supplied  by  St.  John  (xix.  28,  24).  That  it
might  be  fulfilled  .  ,  .  they  cast  lots.  Theise
words  are  retained  in  the  Clementine  Vul-
gate and  a  few  cursives,  but  omitted  by  the
best  uncials  and  most  other  manuscripts.
Modern  editors  almost  universally  have
rejected  them  as  an  interpolation  from  the
parallel  passage  in  St.  John.  There  can
be  no  doubt,  however,  that,  whether  genuine
or  not  in  this  place,  they  represent  the
truth.  The  soldiers'  act  did  fulfil  in
marvellous  fashion  the  psalmist's  enuncia-
tion (Fs.  xxii.  18),  where  the  stripping  of
the  Lord's  Anointed  and  the  disposal  of  his
raiment  are  prophetically  stated.

Ver.  36. — They  watched  him  there.  The
soldiers,  in  relays,  had  to  guard  the  criminal
from  liny  attempt  of  his  friends  to  remove
him  from  the  cross — a  long  and  tedious
duty,  during  the  performance  of  which  they
were  allowed  to  sit.  Crucifixion  was  not
accompanied  by  immediate  death.  It  was
one  of  its  greatest  horrors  that  the  tortured
sufferer  sometimes  lived  for  days  before
death  relieved  him  from  his  agony.  Till
this  supervened,  the  guard  had  to  keep
watoh.  That  this  caution  was  not  super-
fluous, we  have  intimations  in  ancient
history,  which  tells  of  crucified  persons
being  sometimes  removed  by  their  friend  f
and  restored  to  the  use  of  their  limbs  and
faculties.  Josephus  ('  Vita,'  75)  rehites
tliat  he  thus  took  down  three  crimiuLil^
after  a  lengthened  suspension,  one  of  whom
completely  recovered,  though  the  others
succumbed  to  their  injuries.    Thisvigilaiice


590  THE   GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvn.  1— 66,


of  the  soldiers  was  providentially  ordered
as  one  of  the  nieans  of  proTing  the  reality
of  Christ's  death.

Ver.  87. — Set  up  over  his  head  his  aoousa-
tion  written.     This  was  the  titttlui.     A
wooden  tablet  smeared  Tfith  gypsum,  had
on  it,  written  in  black  letters,  the  charge  on
which  the  prisoner  was  condemned.    This,
which  had  been  hung  round  the  criminal's
neok  or  carried  before  him  on  the  way  to
execution,  was  now  afiSxed  to   the  upper
portion  of  the  cross  orer  his  liead.    THIS  IS
JESUS  THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS.     The
title  had  been  prepared  by  Pilate  (John
xix,  19,  22),  and  was  conceived  in  terms
studiously  offensive  to  the  Jews,  with  whom
he  was  deeply  indignant.    It  was  written
in  tbree  languages,  so  that  all  of  whatever
nationality  might  read  it — in  Hebrew  and
in  Latin  and  in  Greek  (for  the  order,  see
Westoott  on  John  xix.  20) ;  t.«.  the  national
Aramaic,  familiar  to  all  Jews;  the  official
Latin,  umlerstood  bythe  soldiers  andBomans;
the  current  Greek,  the  dialect  of  Eellenistio
Jews,  and    largely    used    by   all   classes.
"  These  three  languages  gathered  up  the
results  of  the  religious,  the  social,  the  in-
tellectual preparation  for  Christ,  and  in  each
witness  was  pveu  to  his  office  "  (Westoott),
The  title  is  given  by  the  four  evangelists
with    some   verbal    variations,  which    are
owing  in  part   to    the  actual   differences
existing  in  the  three  versions  of  the  in-
eori|ition.    They  run  thus:  "This  is  Jesus
the  King  of  the  Jews"  (Matthew);   "The
King  of  the  Jews"  (Mark);  "This  is  the
King  of  the    Jews"  (Luke);    "Jesus   of
Nazareth  the  King  of  the  Jews"  (John).
Of  these  titles,  those  given  by  Mark  and
Luke  probably  represent  the  Latin;    that
of  Matthew,  the  Greek ;  while  that  of  John
was  intended  for  the  national  population,
who  alone  would  understand  the  veiled  sneer
contained  in  the  addition,  "of  Nazareth."
The  legend  of  the  finding  of  the  cross  and
its  inscription  is  given  by  Butler, '  Lives  of
the  Saints,'  on '  The  Invention  of  the  Holy
Cross.'    A  supposed  ftagment  of  the  title  is
preserved  at  Rome,  in  the  Church  of  the
Holy  Cross,  and  declared  by  a  papal  bull
to  be  authentic.     In  this  case  infallibility
hns  rather  overstepped  its  limits.

Ver.  as.— Then.  St.  Matthew  does  not
give  the  exact  sequence  of  events,  generally
grouping  them  together  for  ethical  and  other
kindred  reasons.  Probably  these  two  male-
factors were  orucified  iinmediately  after  our
Lord.  Thieves;  Ajjo-Tai:  rohber»,  brigands
(oh.  xxi.  13).  Thus  was  Christ  "  numbered
with  the  transgressors"  (Isa.  liii.  12).  St.
Luke  alone  relates  the  acceptance  of  the
penitent  thief.  If  he  was  the  one  set  on
the  right  hand,  possibly  the  carefnl  mention
ol  t!.e  position  of  the  two  robbers,  which  is


found  in  the  other  evangelists,  may  have
a  silent  reference  to  this  episode.  We  know
from  Josephus  ('Ant.,'  xvi.  10.  8;  xx.  8
10 ;  '  Bell.  Jud.,'  il.  12. 2,  etc.)  that  Palestine
was  infested  with  banditti,  who  were
rigorously  pursued  by  the  Bomani,  and
were  commonly  crucified  when  captured.
Doubtless  these  two  criminals  had  been
taken  red-banded  in  some  act  of  robbery
and  murder,  and  it  was  an  exquisite  malice
that  treated  Jesus  as  their  comrade  and
accomplice,  and  placed  him  in  the  position
of  their  leader.  But  Augustine  sees  a
spiritual  signification  in  this  scene:  "The
very  cross  was  the  tribunal  of  Olirist;  for
the  Judge  was  placed  in  the  middle ;  one
thief,  who  believed,  was  set  free ;  the  other,
who  reviled,  was  condemned;  which  signified
what  he  was  already  about  to  do  with  the
quick  and  dead ;  being  about  to  set  some
on  his  right  hand,  but  others  on  his  left"

Ver.  39.— They  that  passed  by.  Golgotha
being  near  a  great  high-road  and  a  much-
frequented  city  gate  (John  xix.  20),  passers-
by  were  numerous,  even  without  counting
those  who  were  attracted  by  the  woeful
sight.  Many  of  them  knew  nothing  of
Christ's  case,  but  seeing  him  punished  in
company  with  the  two  malefactors,  thought
that  he  was  doubtless  guilty  of  the  same
crimes  as  they;  others,  perhaps,  who  had
seen  his  miracles  and  heard  something  of
his  teaching,  conceived  the  notion  that  one
whom  the  priests  and  rulers  condemned
must  be  a  dangerous  impostor,  and  deserved
the  cruelest  of  deaths.  Eeviled  him;
i0\a<r<p7ifjutvv  I  railed  oit  him ;  blasphemahant
(Vulgate).  The  expression,  indeed,  is  true
in  its  worse  sense,  for  they  who  could  thus
revile  the  Son  of  God  were  guilty,  however
ignorantly,  of  gross  impiety  and  irreverence.
Wagging  their  heads.  In  mockery  and  con-
tempt, thus  fulfilling  the  psalmist's  words,
"  All  they  that  see  me  laugh  me  to  scoru ;
they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the
head;"  and,  "I  am  become  a  reproach
unto  them;  when  they  see  me,  they  shake
their  heads  "  (Ps.  xxii.  7 ;  cix.  25).

Ver.  40. — Saying,  Some  manuscripts  (but
not  the  best)  insert  otcJ  after  "  saying."  So
the  Vulgate  (vah .')  and  other  versions.
But  it  seems  to  be  derived  from  the  parallel
passage  in  Mark.  What  the  evangelist
gives  is  only  a  specimen  of  the  insults
hurled  at  the  meek  Sufferer,  who  looked
for  some  to  take  pity,  but  tliere  was  none,
and  for  comforters,  but  found  none  (Ps.  Ixix.
20).  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  etc.
They  shamelessly  revive  the  old  accusation
(ch.  xxvi.  61 ;  John  ii.  19),  doubtless  at
the  instigation  of  the  Sanhedrists  who
mingled  with  tlie  crowd  (ver.  41).  The
saying  rankled  in  the  rulers*  mind,  and  we
see  it  playing  a  part  later  in  the  condemna-


OH.  xxvn.  1-  66.]    THE.  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


691


tion  of  Stephen  (Acts  vi.  13, 14).  Save  thy-
self. Thou  who  boasteat  of  thy  power  to
destroy  and  rebuild  this  magnificent  and
solid  temple,  employ  thnt  power  in  delivering
thyself  from  thy  well-deserved  death.  Little
they  knew  that  Ohrist  was  then  fulfilling
hie  own  prediction,  which  would  ere  long
be  fully  accomplished.  As  little  did  they
understand  that  by  his  words  ("  I  am  able
to  destroy,"  instead  of,  "  Destroy  ye  ")  they
were  bearing  witness  to  the  truth  tliat  he
wa»  voluntarily  laying  down  his  life,  and
that  but  for  this  suireiider  they  could  have
had  no  power  over  him.  If  thou  he  the
Son  of  God,  etc.  Some  manuscripts  and
versions  read  the  passage  thus  :  "  Save  thy-
self, if  thou  be  the  Sou  of  God,  and  come
down  from  the  cross."  But  the  Received
Text  is  most  probably  correct.  These  revilers
are  doing  the  devil's  work,  and  are  quoting
his  words  (ch.  iv.  6),  in  thus  taunting
Jesus.  They  refer  to  our  Lord's  own  state-
ment before  Pilate  (ch.  ixvi.  04),  thinking
it  expedient  to  keep  this  cl  dm  before  the
people's  mind.  He  might,  indeed,  liave
answered  the  jibe  by  coming  down  from  the
cross  ;  but  then,  as  Bishop  Pearson  says,  in
saving  himself  he  would  not  have  saved  us.

Ver.  41. — Likewise  also.  All  classes
that  composed  the  Sanhedrin  were  present
at  the  execution,  and  took  part  in  the
reviling ;  but,  unlike  the  soldiers  (Luke
xxiii.  S6)  ami  the  mob,  they  did  not  address
him  personally,  either  from  supreme  con-
tempt, or  because  they  stood  aloof  from  the
herd,  and  spake  among  themselves.  Some
few  authorities  of  no  great  weight,  after
"elders"  add  "and  Pharisees;"  but  the
words  are  an  interpolation,  though  they  are
without  doubt  true  in  fact.  That  these
leaders  should  presume  thus  to  revile  One
whom  they  knew  to  be  innocent  is  un-
speakably iniquitous.

Ver.  42. — He  saved  others.  They  knew
something  of  his  many  miracles  of  healing ;
many  among  them  had  witnessed  the  cure
of  the  man  blind  from  his  birth  (John  ix.) ;
most  must'  have  heard  of  the  raising  of
Lazarus ; — they  made  these  very  works  of
mercy  a  reproach  against  him.  He  had
proved  himself  a  beneficent  Saviour;  he
had  shown  superhuman  power,  and  yet  they
say,  Himself  he  cannot  save.  There  was
indeed  a  seuse,  not  their  sense,  in  which
this  was  true.  Curist  willed  to  die ;  it  was
his  purpose  thus  to  redeem  mankind;  in
adhering  to  this  steadfast  determination  he
could  not  deliver  himself  from  Buffering
and  death.  Some  read  the  clause  interroga-
tively, "Cannot  he  save  himself?"  It  is
then  paiallel  to  the  expre!-sion  used  at  the
grave  of  Lazarus  (John  xi.  37).  If  he  be
the  King  of  Israel.  "  If"  («')  is  omitted  by
N,  B,  D,  L,  etc.,  and  many  modern  editors.


Its  omission  is  inore  concinnous  to  the
other  taunts,  e.g.  "  He  saved  others ;  "  "  He
trusted  in  God."  His  elaim  to  be  Messiah
would  involve  the  Kingsliip  of  Israel  (ch.
ii.  6),  which  the  title  over  his  head  asserted.
We  will  believe  him  (Tria-TevfTo/isv  aJr^).
We  will  believe  (not  subj., "  let  ns  believe  ")
what  he  says.  The  Sinaitic,  Vatican,  and
other  good  manuscripts  read  iw'  ouTcij/,  "  on
him."  So  Westoott  and  Hort,  Tischendorf,
etc.  This  form  of  expression  would  imply
that  they  would  put  their  trust  in  him,
become  his  followers.  A  confident  boast  1
for  they  were  so  fully  persuaded  of  the  final
triumph  of  their  malice,  that  they  deemed
they  might  safely  make  such  a  promise.
And  yet  Chriot  did  a  greater  thing  than
come  down  alive  from  the  cross ;  he  rose
from  the  dead ;  but  they  believed  not  in
him.  And  if  the  sign  which  they  asked
had  been  vouclisafed,  they  would  have  ei-

Elained  it  away,  or  evaded  its  meaning,  and
ave    been  no  nearer  to   salvation    than
now.

Ver.  43. — Ha  trusted  in  (eV!,  on)  God.
These  scotfers  cite  a  passage  from  Ps.  xxii.
8,  "He  trusted  unto  the  Lord  that  ha
would  deliver  him;  let  him  ileliver  him,
seeing  he  delighteth  in  him  "  (Hebrew) ;  or,
according  to  the  Septuagint,  "He  hoped
in  tlie  Lord;  let  him  deliver  him,  let  him
save  him,  because  he  desires  (6eKei)  him."
Let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have
him  (ei  e4\ei  airdv).  &e\<a  is  used  in  the
Septuagint  in  the  sense  of  '•  I  love,"  "  L  wish
for "  (see  Deut.  xxi.  14 ;  Ps.  xvii.  19 ;  xl.
11).  But  the  Vulgate,  by  omitting  the  first
avrSv,  possibly  takes  the  verb  in  the  usual
sense,  Liheret  nunc,  si  vuU,  eum.  The
Sinaitic  and  Vatican  manuscripts  and  others
support  this  reading,  which  is  followed  now
by  Tischendorf,  and  Westcott  and  Hort,  so
that  the  clause  will  run,  Let  him  now,  if  he
will,  deliver  him.  But  the  Beceived  Text  and
the  Authorized  Version  are  in  closer  agree-
ment with  the  original  language  of  the
psalm.  For  he  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God.
Insultingly  they  allude  to  his  own  assertions
concerning  his  Divine  nature,  implying  that,
were  he  such  as  he  pretended  to  be,  he  would
not  now  be  dying  on  the  shameful  cross.
There  are  wonderful  coincidences  in  thought
and  language  between  this  passage  and  one
in  the  Book  of  Wisdom  (ii.  13—20),  which
speaks  of  the  oppression  of  the  righteous,
e.g,  "He  professeth  to  have  the  knowledge
of  God ;  and  he  calleth  himself  the  child  of
the  Lord.  .  .  .  Let  us  see  if  his  words  be
true ;  and  let  us  prove  what  shall  happen
in  the  end  of  him.  For  if  the  just  man  be
the  Son  of  God,  he  will  help  him,  and
deliver  him  from  the  hand  of  his  enemies."
The  similarity  of  expression  is  to  be  attri-
buted to  the  typical  nature  of  the  treatment


593


TUE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvu.  l-«e.


of  Christ,  wliich  the  writer  of  Wisdom,  with
rsmatlciibla  insigiit,  thng  forcibly  'Icliucatcd.

Ver.  a. — The  thieves  also  .  .  .  cast  the
same  in  his  teeth  (SivtiSi(ov  alrc^,  were  re-
viling him).  Tlie  mention  of  the  penitent
robber  is  found  only  in  Lake  (xxiii.  39 —
43).  It  does  not  seem  to  have  occurred  in
the  traditional  aoconnt  followed  by  Matthew
and  Marl;.  Augustine  thctught  that  these
synoptists  need  the  plural  for  the  singular,
referring,  in  fact,  to  the  impenitent  male-
factor. It  is  more  likely  that  l)oth  the
thieves  at  ilrst  joined  the  mob  in  tlicir  abuse
and  ribaldry,  but  that  one,  after  a  time,  per-
suaded by  the  Divine  patience  and  meek-
ness of  the  Saviour,  and  awed  by  the  gather-
ing darkness,  repented,  confessed,  and  vras
forgiven.

Vers.  45 — 50.— Supernatural  darhneii.
Lcut  wordt,  and  death  of  Jeiut.  (Mark  xv.
33—37 ;  Luke  xxiii.  44—46 ;  Jo!m  xU.  28
—30.)

Ver.  45.— The  sixth  hour;  i.e.  noou.
Christ  was  crucifloJ  about  9  o'clock  a.m.,
the  hour  of  the  morning  sacriflue;  he  had
therefore  by  this  time  been  hanging  three
hours  on  the  cross.  His  agonies,  his  suffer-
ings mental  and  spiritual,  -were  at  their
height.  There  was  darkness  over  a'l  the
land  (JvX  wairav  rhv  7ij>').  The  historical
accuracy  of  this  darkness  there  is  no  more
reason  to  doubt  than  there  is  to  doubt  the
death  of  Christ  itself.  The  great  fact  and
its  details  stand  on  the  Bame  basis.  How
the  phenomenon  was  produced  we  know
not.  That  it  could  not  be  an  ordinary
eclipse  is  cei  tain,  as  the  moon  was  then  full.
It  being  tlie  Paschal  time,  and  the  darkness
thus  produood  woubl  liave  lasted  but  a  few
minutes.  Nor  liad  it  any  connection  with
the  snbsequont  earthquake  (ver.  51),  as
some  nnscieutiflo  cxcgotes  l^ave  supposed.
On  such  occasions  a  thiclcuess  of  the
atmosphere  has  bien  noticed,  but  such  an
occurrence  oonld  never  liave  been  described
in  the  words  used  liy  the  synoptists;  and
the  earthquake  itself  waa  no  ordinary  event,
and  took  place  in  no  ordinary  riianmr.
Wo  cannot  doubt  that  the  darkness  was
Bupernatural,  conveying  a  solemn  lesson  to
all  who  beheld  it.  When  wo  consider  what
was  being  done  on  Calvary,  who  it  was
that  was  dying  there,  what  was  the  object
of  his  Passion,  what  was  the  infinite  and
unspeakable  effect  of  the  sacrifice  tliere
offered,  is  it  wonderful  that  the  Divine
Architect  controlled  Nature  to  sympathize
with  her  Creator,  that  as  a  supeinutural
oll'ulgeiioe  heralded  the  Saviour's  birth,  a
supernatural  darkness  should  shroud  his
death  ?  We  are  in  the  region  of  the  Divine.
What  we  have  learned  to  regard  as  natural
laws    (but    which    really   are    only    our


formulary  for  expressing  our  experience  ol
past  uniformity)  were  superseded  for  the
time  by  the  interference  of  tho  Lawgiver ;
he  used  the  material  to  enforce  the  spiritual,
being  the  Lord  of  both.  Whether  the
darkness  extended  beyond  Judsea  nnto  all
that  part  of  the  earth  which  was  then
illumined  by  the  light  of  the  sun,  we  cannot
tell.  Some  of  the  Fathers  refer  to  it  as  if
it  was  universal.  A  supposed  allusion  was
made  by  Phlegon,  a  writer  of  the  second
century,  whose  work,  called  'Annals  of  the
Olympiads,'  is  not  extant,  but  is  quoted  by
Julius  Africanus  and  Eusobius  (see  Word»-
worth,  in  Joe);  but  it  seems  certain  that
Phlegon  is  speaking  of  an  astronomical
eclipse  which  occurred  in  theordinary  course
of  nature.  Tcrtullian  states  that  a  notice
of  this  darkness  was  to  be  found  in  the
archives  of  Eome  ('Apol.,'  xxL);  but  we
liave  no  further  information  on  this  point.
There  are  some  other  uncertain  refer-
ences, as  that  of  Diouysius  the  Areo-
pagite,  who  is  related  to  have  said  on  the
sudden  obscuration,  "  Either  the  God  of
nature  is  suffering,  or  i'.e  macliiuery  of
the  world  is  being  dis-.olved;"  but  none
of  these  will  stand  the  test  of  criticism;
and  perhaps  it  is  safer  to  determine  that
Gentile  notices  of  the  phenomenon  are  not
forthcoming,  because  the  darkness  was  con-
fined to  Palestine.  It  had,  doubtless,  a
doctrinal  and  typical  signifieance.  Ohry-
Bostom  considers  it  a  token  of  God's  anger
at  the  crime  of  the  Jews  in  crucifying
Jesus;  others  see  in  it  an  emblem  of  the
withdrawal  of  the  light  of  God's  presence
from  this  wicked  land.  It  was,  indeed,  to
all  who  would  receive  it,  a  sign  of  some
awful  event  in  the  spiritual  world  of  un-
speakable consequence  to  the  children  of
men.  The  ninth  hour.  Three  o'clock  p.m.,
about  the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice.

Ver.  46. — Cried  {di'e$6ri(j-ev,  cried  out)
with  a  loud  voice.  The  loud  cry  at  this
terrible  moment  showed  that  there  was  Btill
an  amount  of  vitality  in  that  mangled  form
from  which  extreme  anguish  of  soul  and
body  forced  that  pleading  utterance.  Eii,
Eli,  lama  sabachthani  1  that  is  to  say  (that
i>),  My  God,  my  God,why  hast  thou  forsaken
(^iyxartXiTres,  didft  tlioiL  forealce)vx6%  This
is  the  only  one  of  our  Lord's  seven  sayings
from  the  cross  recorded  by  St.  Matthew  and
St.  Mark.  The  other  evangelists  do  not
mention  it  at  all.  The  language  is  Aramaic,
doubtless  that  used  commonly  by  our  Lord.
He  quotes  the  words  of  the  twenty-second
psalm  as  applicable  to  himself,  as  offering
a  fore-ordained  expression  of  his  agony  of
•oul.  Into  the  full  meaning  of  this  bitter
cry  we  cannot  venture  irreverently  to  in-
trude. At  the  same  time,  thus  much  may
be  said.     It  was  not  mere  bodily  anguish


Cft.  mm.  1-ee.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         693


tliat  elicited  it ;  it  arose  from  some  incalcul-
able affliction  of  soul.  He  was  bearipg  the
sins  of  the  whole  world ;  the  Lord  had  laid
on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all ;  tliere  was  no
one  to  comfort  him  in  his  lieavinesB;  and
the  light  of  God's  countenance  was  for  the
time  withdrawn  from  him.  He  was  "  left "
that  he  might  bear  man's  sins  in  their  full
and  crushing  weight,  and  by  bearing  save.
Yet  there  is  no  despair  in  this  lamentable
outcry.  He  vrho  conld  thus  call  upon
Ood  hai  God  with  him,  even  in  hii  utter
loneliness.  "Amid  the  faintuess,  or  the
confusion  of  mind,  felt  at  the  approach  of
death,  he  expericucos  his  abandonment  by
God;  and  yet  hit  aoul  re^ts  firmly  on,
and  his  will  is  fully  lubject  to,  God,  while
he  is  thus  tasting  death  ,for  every  man
through  God's  grace.  .  .  .  He  held  firmly
to  Gud  and  retained  the  Divinity  of  his
life,  nt  the  time  when  in  his  unity  with
mankind,  and  in  his  human  feeling,  tlie
feeling  of  abandonment  by  God  amazed
liim"  (Lange).  The  verb  "forsaken"  is
not  in  the  perfect  tense,  as  translated  in
thu  Authorized  Version,  but  in  the  aorist;
and  it  implies  that  during  the  tliree  hours
of  darkness  Christ  had  been  in  silence  en-
during this  utter  desolation,  wliioh  iiad
ntiw  come  to  its  climax.  The  Man  Christ
Jesu9  asked  why  he  was  thus  deserted ;  his
human  heart  would  fain  comproliend  this
phase  of  the  propitiatory  sufferings  which
he  was  undergoing.  No  answer  cams  from
tlie  darkened  heaven;  but  the  cry  was
hoard ;  the  unspeakable  sacrifice,  a  sacrifice
necessary  according  to  the  Almighty's
jjurpoie,  was  accepted,  and  with  his  own
blood  he  obtained  eternal  redemption  for
man.

Ver.  17. — Some  of  them  that  stood  there.
These  could  not  have  been  the  Roman
soldiers,  for  they  would  not  hare  nnderstood
the  Saviour's  language,  and  oould  have
known  nothing  about  Eliaa.  Edersheim
supposes  that  the  guards  were  provincial
soldiers,  and  not  necessarily  of  Ijatin  ex-
traction. At  any  rate,  the  speakers  are  Jews
standing  near  enough  to  the  oross  to  oatch
m(jre  or  less  the  words  uttered  by  Jesus.
This  man  (outos,  he,  pointing  at  him)  oalleth
for  Elias.  Whether  they  wilfully  misinter-
preted the  half-hei.rd  cry,  «  Eli,  Eli  I "  or
whether  they  really  misunderstood  it,  is
an  nndecided  question.  In  the  first  case,
we  must  suppose  that  they  spoke  in  cruel
mockery — the  last  of  the  brutal  insults
vented  on  the  meek  Sufferer.  He  cannot
siive  himself;  he  appeals  to  the  old  prophet
to  come  to  rescue  him ;  was  there  ever  such
presumption  1  There  are  two  considerations
which  militate  against  this  supposition.  The
time  of  ribaldry  and  abuse  is  now  past;
the  supernatural  darkness  has  had  a  calming
MATTHKW — II.


and  terrifying  effect ;  and  there  is  ne  ipirlt
of  mockery  left  in  the  awe^l  bystanders.
Besides  this,  it  is  not  likely  that  Jews,  who
with  all  their  errors  and  vices  paid  an  ont-
ward  respect  to  holy  things,  would  have
presumed  to  make  a  play  on  the  sacred  namo
of  God.  Therefore  it  is  no  more  reasonable
to  hold  that,  misunderstanding  Christ's
words,  they  spoke  sciiously,  with  some  vague,
superstitious  idea  tliat  Elijah  might  appear
at  this  crisis,  and  rescue  the  Sufferer  (sec
ver.  49).

Ver.  iS. — Ban,  and  took  a  sponge.  Ac-
cording to  St.  John,  Jesus  had  just  said,
"I  thirst."  The  sponge  and  the  wine  were
provided  for  the  purpose  of  ministering
some  relief  to  the  crucified.  Common
humanity  was  not  quite  extinct  even  la  the
executioners  and  spectators.  Vinegar.  The
acid  wine  used  by  the  soldiers,  and  ealled
posea  (see  on  ver.  34).  Pat  it  on  a  reed.
St  John  calls  it  a  stalk  of  hyssop;  and  if
this  is  the  caper  plant,  it,  though  of  a  oUrab-
ing  nature,  can  piodaoe  a  stick  soma  tkreo
or  four  teet  long  (see  on  ver.  29).  Oavs  kim
to  drink  (^Mrtiev,  imperf,,  wot  offering  kim
to  drinh);  perhaps  with  the  idea  of  helping
him  to  endure  till  Elijah  came.  Thus  was
fulfilled  the  psalmist's  word,  "  In  ray  thirst
they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink"  (Ps.  Ixix.  21).

Ver.  49. — The  rest  [but  the  rest]  said,  Let
be  (Jiipef).  This  is  a  common  oxpression,
meaning,  "Stand  offl"  "Be  quiet!"  "  Softl"
The  bystanders  addressed  tho  person  who
had  presented  the  drink.  In  St  Uark  the
verb  is  in  the  plural,  S^ctc,  that  is,  the
giver  of  the  drirJi  calls  upon  the  others  to
keep  quiet  and  wait.  Let  us  see  whether
Elias  will  acme  {Ipx^rai,  eometh,  is  coming).
They  speak  in  a  kind  of  superstitious
mockery,  half  deriding  and  half  beliaving
in  the  possible  appearance  of  the  great
prophet.  Between  this  verse  and  ths  fol-
lowing, the  Sinaitio,  Vatican,  and  some
other  manuscripts,  together  with  somo  few
versions,  insert  a  passage  borrowed  bom
John-xix.  34,  "And  another  taking  •  spear
pierced  his  side,  and  there  came  out  water
and  blood,"  This  evident  interpolation  has
been  introduced  by  a  scribe,  who  deemed  il
expedient  to  rectify  an  omission  on  St.
Matthew's  part,  and  olnmgil^  inserted  it  in
a  wrong  place.  It  is  to  be  rejected,  not  only
on  critical,  but  on  historical  and  theological
grounds,  seeing  that  It  makes  the  piereing
of  the  side  to  precede  Christ's  death,  and
oouveys  the  impression  that  it  was  this  spear-
wound  that  cut  short  his  life.

Ver.  50. — When  he  had  cried  again.  He
had  oried  aloud  once  before  (ver.  46).  But
he  does  not  repeat  the  former  words;  thu
horror  of  g^eat  darkness  was  past.  Pro-
bably the  cry  here  resolved  itself  into  the
words  leoorded  by  St,  Luke,  "  Father,  Into

24


VU  THE  GOSPEL   ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvii.  1—66.


Hiy  haufla  I  commend  my  apirit."  With  a
loud  voice.  This  loud  cry  at  the  moment
of  deatVi  proved  that  he  laid  down  hi»  life
voluntarily ;  no  man  could  take  it  from  him
(John  X.  17,  18);  he  himself  willed  to  die;
and  this  pri:ternatural  voice  proceeded  from
one  who  died  not  altogether  from  physical
exhaustion,  but  from  determined  purpose.
"Yielded  up  the  ghost  (4</)^/t«  rh  irvevim);
literally,  ditmiised  his  spirit ;  emisit  spiri-
turn).  The  phrase  has  been  interpreted  to
signify  that  Clirist  exerted  his  power  to
anticipate  the  actual  moment  of  dissolution;
but  there  is  no  necessity  of  importing  this
idea  into  the  expression.  It  is  used  ordi-
narily to  denote  the  atit  of  dying,  as  we  say,
"He  expired."  Perhaps  the  exertion  of
uttering  this  great  cry  ruptured  some  organ
of  tlie  body.  We  know  from  the  effect  of
the  piercing  of  his  side  that  his  sacred  heart
was  previously  broken;  and  thus  he  verily
and  really  died  upon  the  cross.  He,  being
in  the  form  of  God,  anl  equal  with  God,
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death
of  the  cross,  euffeied  death  for  every  man.
It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  death  of  Christ
occurred  at  'S  p.m.,  the  very  time  when  the
Paschal  lambs  began  to  be  slain  in  the
temple  courts.  Thus  the  long-prepared  type
was  at  last  fulfilled,  when  "Christ  our
Passover  was  saoriflced  for  us."

Vers.  51 — 56. — Siyitt  /allowing  the  death
of  Christ.  (Mark  it.  38—41 ;  Luke  xiiii.
47—49.2

Vec.  51. — And,  behold.  St.  Matthew  thus
introduces  his  account  of  the  portents  which
attended  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  The
rending  of  the  veil  is  mentioned  by  the
synoptists  as  consequent  on,  and  occurring
simultaneously  with,  the  completion  of  the
ineffable  sacrifice.  The  veil  of  the  temple
(tov  yaoB).  There  were  two  principal  veils
in  tlie  present  temple — one  between  the
vestibule  and  the  holy  place,  and  one  other
which  is  that  here  referred  to,  a  oonstitutmt
part  of  the  edifice.  This  was  the  veil  between
tlie  holy  place  and  the  holy  of  holies,  which
was  moved  aside  only  once  a  year  to  admit
the  high  priest  to  the  shrine  on  the  great
Day  of  Atonement  (Exod.  xxvi.  33).  It  was
large  and  costly,  some  sixty  feet  high,  iind
made  of  rich  materials.  Josephus  ('Bell.
Jud.,'  v.  5.  4)  tells  us  of  one  of  the  veils  in
the  temple,  that  it  was  a  Babylonian  curtain,
embroidered  with  linen  in  various  colours,
woven  together  with  wonderful  art,  such  aa
the  eye  loved  to  rest  upon.  Was  rent  in
twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  An  apocry-
phal Gospel  ('  The  Gospel  of  the  Hebrews '),
quoted  by  St.  Jerome,  in  loo.,  asserts  that  the
exquisitely  carved  lintel  to  which  the  veil
was  fastened  was  at  this  moment  shattered
to  piecef,  and  in  its  fall  tore  the  curtain


asunder.  The  direction  of  the  rent  would
show  that  no  human  hands  had  torn  it
apart,  and  the  rending  seems  to  have  pre-
ceded the  earthquake.  The  violent  act  was
supernatural,  and  of  a  typical  nature,  as  we
are  taught  by  Heb.  ix.  6 — 12.  The  sanctuary
enshrined  the  presence  of  God,  from  which
the  veil  excluded  every  one  but  the -high
priest  on  one  special  occasion,  thus  denoting
the  imperfect  reconciliation  between  God  and
his  people,  and  that  the  way  to  the  holiest
WHS  not  yet  made  manifest.  The  rending  of
this  veil  betokened  the  opening  of  the  access
to  heaven  through  the  wounded  body  of
Christ ;  as  we  read  in  Heb.  1. 19,  20,  "  Hav-
ing boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the
blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,
which  he  hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the
veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh."  "  When  thou
hadst  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death,  thoa
didst  open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all
believers."  The  distinction  between  Jew
and  Gentile  was  abolished,  the  mysteries  of
the  old  Law  were  opened  and  manifested,  all
rites  and  ceremonies  were  made  of  sacra-
mental efficacy,  and  ministered  grace.  How
soon  this  ominous  occurrence  was  discovered,
we  know  not.  The  priest  who  offered  in-
cense at  the  evening  sacrifice  about  this
same  hour  must  have  seen  it,  and  spread
abroad  among  his  comrades  the  news,  to
which  many  would  attach  a  meaning  fatal
to  the  security  of  their  religion.  But  this
was  comparatively  a  private  sign ;  the  next
one  was  of  a  more  comprehensive  and  pnblio
character.  The  earth  did  quake,  and  the
rooks  rent.  The  last  verb  is  the  same  as
was  used  just  before  in  the  case  of  the  veil
There  was  a  local  earthquake  at  this  awful
moment,  as  if  the  very  land  shuddered  at
the  terrible  crime  that  had  been  committed.
The  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  at  Jeru-
salem is  supposed  to  cover  the  Golgotha  of
the  Crucifixion  (see  on  ver.  33).  "An  open-
ing, faced  with  silver,  shows  the  spot  where
the  cross  is  said  to  have  been  sunk  in  the
rock,  and  less  than  five  feet  from  it  is  a  long
brass  open-work  slide,  over  a  cleft  in  the
rock,  which  is  about  six  inches  deep,  but  is
supposed  by  the  pilgrims  to  reach  to  the
centre  of  the  earth.  This  is  said  to  mark  the
rending  of  the  rocks  at  the  Crucifixion"
(Geikie,  'Holy  Land  and  Bible,'  p.  447).
Tlie  fact  of  the  earthquake  is  testified  by
Phlegon,  whose  words  were  quoted  by  Julius
AfricanUB,  in  his  'Chronographia'  (frag-
ments of  which  work  have  been  published
by  Bouth  and  others),  and  by  Eusebius,
in  his  '  Ohronicon '  (the  passage,  no  longer
extant  in  the  original,  being  preserved  by
Jerome,  and  in  an  Armenian  version ;  see
Morison,  on  ver.  45).  The  rending  of  the
rocks  is  attested  by  St.  Cyril,  Bishop  of
Jerusalem  ('  Cateobes.,'  ziiL  33),  who  speaks


OH.  ixvii.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDIXG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


5U5


of   the   remarkable  Assure   In    Qolgotha,
which  he  had  often  noticed,

Ver.  52. — The  graves  (the  lepulehres)  were
opened,  Tbe  earthquake  tore  away  the
stones  that  closed  the  mouths  of  many  of
the  adjacent  tombs.  This  and  the  following
fact  are  mentioned  only  by  St.  Matthew.
Many  bodies  of  the  saints  which  slept  (tuk
Keicoi/j.7iix€ya>v,  who  had  faUen  asleep)  arose.
Matthew  anticipates  the  time  of  the  actual
occurrence  of  tlie  marvel,  wliioh  took  place,
not  at  this  moment,  but  after  our  Lord's
resurrection,  who  was  "the  flrstfiuits  of
them  that  slept"  (see  the  next  verse).
Who  are  meant  by  "the  saints"  here  is
doubtful.  The  Jews  probably  wouM  have
understood  the  term  to  apply  to  the  worthies
of  the  Old  Testament  (comp.  2  Pet.  iii.  4).
But  the  opening  of  the  sepulciires  in  ihe
neighbourliood  of  Jerusalem  would  not
have  liberated  the  bodies  of  many  of  tliose
who  were  buried  far  away.  The  persons
signified  must  be  those  who  in  life  had
looked  for  the  hope  of  I.-^rael,  and  had  seen
in  Christ  that  nope  fulfilled;  they  were
.  such  as  Niundemus  and  Joseph  of  Arima  -
thssa,  true  believers,  who  are  called  saints
in  the  New  Testament.  How  did  these
.bodies  arise?  or  how  were  they  raised  up?
They  were  not  mere  phantoms,  unsubstantial
visitants  from  tlie  sspirit-world,  for  they
were  in  some  sense  corporeal.  That  they
were  not  resuscitated  corpses,  as  Lazarus,
Jairus's  daughter,  and  the  son  of  the  widow,
who  lived  for  n  time  a  second  life,  seems
plain  from  the  impression  applied  to  them
in  tlie  next  veisie,  that  "they  appeared
unto  many,"  i.e.  to  persons  who  htid  known
them  wiiile  living.  Some  have  tliought
that  in  them  was  anticipated  the  general
resurrection,  that,  delivered  from  Hadea
and  united  to  their  bodies,  they  died  no
more,  but  at  the  Ascension  accompanied
Christ  into  heaven.  Scripture  says  nothing
of  all  this,  nor  have  we  any  reason  to
suppose  tliat  any  liumau  body,  save  (hat  of
our  blessed  Lord  (mediaeval  legends  add
that  of  the  Virgin  Mary),  has  yet  entered
the  highest  heaven  (see  Heb.  xi.  39,  40).
Another  opinion  is  that  these  were  not
strictly  resurrections,  but  bodily  appearances
of  saints  like  those  of  Moses  and  Elias  at  tlie
Transfiguration;  but  it  is  a  straining  of
language  to  make  the  evangelist  describe
such  visitations  as  bodies  arising  from  open
sepulchres.  Farrar  tries  to  elude  tlie  diffi-
oulty  by  a  supposition,  as  baseless  as  it  is
dishonouring  to  the  evangelist's  strict  and
simple  veracity.  He  writes,  "An  earth-
quake shook  the  earth  and  split  the  rocks,
and  as  it  rolled  away  from  their  places  the
great  stones  which  closed  and  covered  the
cavern  sepulchres  of  the  Jews,  so  it  seemed
to  the  imaginations  of  many  to  have  dis-


imprisoned the  spirits  of  the  dead,  and  to
have  filled  the  air  with  ghostly  visitants,
who,  after  Christ  had  risen,  appeared  to
linger  in  the  holy  city.  Only  in  some
such  way,"  he  adds,  "  can  I  account  for  the
singular  and  wholly  isolated  allusion  of
Matthew."  Because  a  fact  is  mentioned  by
one  evangelist  only,  it  is  not  on  this
account  incredible.  St.  Matthew  was  pro-
bably an  eye-witness  of  that  which  he
relates,  and  might  have  been  confuted  by
his  contemporaries,  if  he  had  stated  what
was  not  true.  An  early  witness  to  the' fact
is  found  in  Ignatius,  who,  in  his '  Kpistle  to
tbe  Magnesians,'  ch.  iz.,  speaks  of  Christ
when  on  earth  raising  the  prophets  from
the  dead.  The  whole  matter  is  mysterious
and  beyond  human  ken ;  but  we  may  well
believe  that  at  this  great  crisis  the  Lord,
who  is  the  Besurreetion  and  the  Life,
willed  to  exemplify  his  victory  over  death,
and  to  make  manifest  the  resurrection  of
the  body,  and  this  he  did  by  releasing
some  saintly  souls  from  Hades,  and  clothing
them  with  the  forms  in  which  they  had
formerly  lived,  and  permitting  them  to
show  themselves  thus  to  those  who  knew
and  loved  them.  Of  the  future  life  of
these  resuscitated  saints  we  know  nothing,
and  will  not  presumptuously  venture  to
inquire.  When  they  have  demonstrated
that  the  sting  was  now  taken  from  death,
that  the  power  of  the  grave  was  broken,  that
men  sliall  rise  again  witli  their  bodies  and
be  known  and  recognized,  they  pass  out  of
sight  into  the  unseen  world,  and  we  can
follow  them  no  further,

Ver.  53. — Came  ont  of  (lieXiSi^es)  the
graves  after  his  resurrection.  The  mascu-
line participle,  not  agreeing  with  "  bodies  "
{(rdiiara),  denotes  the  personality  of  the
bodies  of  the  saints,  that  these  aiose  perfect
in  soul  and  body.  They  could  not  rise
before  Christ  rose.  "  Christ  the  firstfruits,
afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's."  Ewald
and  others  have  understood  "after  his
resurrection"  to  mean  "after  he  raised
them  from  the  dead."  But  the  language
is  against  such  an  interpretation,  and  there
can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  words
refer  to  Christ's  own  resurrection.  If  it
be  contended  that  the  word  used,  iyipcris,  is
active  in  sense,  we  may  reply  that,  granting
this,  it  merely  emphasizes  Christ's  voluntary
action  in  raising  himself.  As  was  said
above,  St.  Matthew  anticipates  the  regular
sequence  of  events  in  order  to  complete  at
one  view  his  accounts  of  the  poi  tents  that
attended  the  death  and  resurreotiou  of
Christ  The  holy  city.  Jerusalem,  as  in
ch.  iv.  5.  The  guilty  Jerusalem  is  still  the
holy  city,  as  retaining  the  temple,  with  its
services,  the  ministry,  the  Scriptures.  Some
would  understand  the  heavenly  Jerusales^


59«


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  8T.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  «Tn.  1— «&


into  which  these  Bplritnal  bodie*  entered;
bnt  the  context  is  whollj'  against  Btioh  an
exposition.  Appeared  onto  many.  They
•w  ere  permitted  to  show  themselves  openly
in  their  well-known  forma  to  pious  relations
and  friends,  as  witnesses  and  proofs  of  the
resurrection.  If  they  had  abeady  gone  to
heaven,  they  could  not  have  thus  appeared.
It  may  be  right  to  add  that  many  of  the
Fathers  and  modem  commentators  hold  that
these  resuscitated  saints  were  those  to
whom  Christ  preached  (1  Pet.  iii.  19)  when
he'  descended  into  hell,  and  that  they
accompanied  him  into  glory  when  he
ascended  into  heaven.

Yer.  S4. — The  centurion,  and  they  that
were  with  him.  The  officer  with  the  small
body  of  soldiers  appointed  to  perform  and
take  charge  of  the  Crucifixion.  St.  Matthew
relates  the  impression  which  these  events
made  upon  the  soldiers'  minds.  Saw  those
things  that  were  done.  Instead  of  this
reading,  which  has  high  autliority,  Alford,
Tisohendorf,  Westcott  and  Hort  read,  "that
were  being  done,"  as  the  Vulgate,  qua
fiebant.  This  would  point  especially  to  the
loud  cry,  in  accordance  with  the  words  of
St.  Mark,  "saw  that  he  so  cried  out,  and
gave  up  the  ghost."  But  there  is  no
sufficient  reason  for  altering  the  Received
Text :  and  plainly  it  was  not  merely  the
closing  incident  that  affected  the  soldiers,
but  the  whole  course  ol  events  which  they
witnessed  They  saw  the  darkness,  the
earthquake,  the  rending  of  the  rocks,  the
Divine  meekness  of  the  Sufferer;  they
heard  his  last  words,  his  loud  cry,  and
marked  his  patient  death.  All  these  things
contributed  to  tlieir  awe  and  fear.  They
feared  greatly.  This  crucilied  Man  must  bo
something  more  than  human,  for  all  these
wonders  to  accompany  his  death;  will  he
not  visit  upon  us  oiu  part  in  his  crucifixion?
Have  we  notliing  to  fear  from  his  ven-
geance ?  Some  such  course  their  apprehen-
sions may  have  taken.  But  tliey  learned
something  beyond  selfish  dread  of  possible
danger.  Truly  this  was  the  Bon  (Tiki,
anarthrous,  Son)  of  God ;  or,  according  to
St.  Luke,  "  Certainly  this  was  a  rigliteous
JIan."  They  recognized  his  innocence,  and
acknowledged  tliat  he  suffered  unjustly.
What  tbu  centurinn  meant  (for  the  words
appear  tu  liavu  been  his)  by  calling  him
"  Son  of  God  "  is  more  doubtful.  It  may
have  been  on  liis  lips  merely  an  affirmation
that  Jesus  was  huly  and  beloved  by  God ;
but  more  probably  it  meant  much  more
than  this.  He  know  that  Christ  claimed
to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  in  this  hour  of
overwhelming  awe  he  felt  that  the  claim
was  just,  whatever  it  might  mean.  This
crucified  Person  was  at  least  a  hero  or  a
demigod,  or  that  which  the  words   would


imply  In  a  Jewish  sense,  though  he  knew
only  imperfectly  what  was  signified  thereby.
Tradition  affirms  that  the  centurion's  name
was  Longinna,  that  he  became  a  devoted
follower  of  Christ,  preached  the  faith,  and
died  a  martyr's  death.

Ver.  55. — Uany  women.  These  are  men-
tioned as  witnesses  of  all  these  events
which  the  apostles  are  not  recorded  to  have
seen.  Courageous  and  loving,  they  had
followed  the  procession  to  Calvary,  and  at
a  distance  watched  the  woeful  proceedings
there.  Some,  we  know,  had  ventured  to
oome  closer  to  their  dying  Lord  (see  John
xix.  25).  Which  followed  (equivalent  to
had  followed'^  Jesus  from  QaJilee,  minister-
ing onto  hun.  They  had  accompanied
Jesus  on  his  last  journey  to  the  Passover
at  Jerusalem,  tending  him  during  all  the
time,  and  of  their  substanoe  ministering  to
his  wants  (Luke  viii  9).

Yer.  56. — The  historian  mentions  the
most  prominent  of  these  pions  women.
Uary  Magdalene  (Ji  Miry8a\i)r4,  the  Magda-
lene). She  was  a  native  of  Magdala  (ch.
XV.  89,  where  see  note),  a  small  village  on
the  shore  of  Gennesaret.  Some  have  identi-
fied her  with  the  sister  of  Lazarus,  chiefiy
because,  taking  her  to  be  the  "  sinner  "
mentioned  in  Lake  vii.  37,  she  is  related  to
have  behaved  in  a  somewhat  similar  way
to  our  Lord  as  her  namesake.  But  this  is
dearly  a  mistake.  Of  the  two  events,  the
locality,  the  scene,  the  occasion,  the  cir-
cumstances, are  different  Of  this  Mary  of
Magdala  we  really  know  nothing,  excejit
that  out  of  her  Jesus  had  cast  seven  devild
(Mark  xvi.  9 ;  Luke  viii.  2).  That  these
were  demons  of  impurity,  or  that  she  was
the  sinful  woman  who  anointed  our  Lord,
there  is  nothing  whatever  to  prove ;  though
the  notion  connected  with  the  name  Mag-
dalene is  so  rooted  in  men's  minds  eud
language  that  it  is  impossible  to  eradicate
it,  however  erroneous  it  may  be  shown  to
be.  She  had  probably  been  one  who  was
melancholy  mad,  and  subject  to  fits;  Christ
had  seen  the  spiritual  cause  of  this  malady,
and  removed  it  by  freeing  her  firom  de-
moniacal pobscssion.  What  wonder  is  it
that  she  followed  him  from  Galilee,  tending
him  lovingly  and  anxiously  until  the  end?
Uary  the  mother  of  James  and  Joses.  Some
manuscripts  read  Joseph;  but  the  Beoeived
Text  is  correct.  These  two  persons  are
mentioned  among  our  Lord's  "brethren"
in  ch.  xiii.  55.  The  former  is  called  "  James
the  Less"  (Mark  iv.  40),  and  is  the
apostle  of  that  name.  Mary  is  nsuallv
supposed  to  be  the  wife  of  Oleophas  (John
xix,  25),  and  the  sister  of  the  mother  of  out
Lord ;  so  that  these  two  dieoiplee  would  be
Christ's  first  cousins.  Thematter  is  shrouded
in  difficulty,  and  oannot  b«  deoided  with


ee.  xxvn.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSrHIL  ACCOKmNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


597


ftbBolute  certainty.  From  the  preecnt
passage,  at  any  rate,  one  fact  If  ihown,  that
they  were  not  Ohriet's  uterine  brothera — a
truth  which  needed  no  mention,  were  not
the  dishonouring  heresy  of  Helviilius  still
rife  among  us.  The  mother  of  Zebedee's
children.  Salome  (ch.  xx.  20 ;  Mark  xv.  40).
The  rejeotioQ  of  her  ambitious  petition  had
not  lesseaed  her  love  and  devotion  to
Obrist.

Vers.  57— 61.— IZ^e  hirial  of  (he  lody  of
Jam.  (Mark  xv.  42—47 ;  Li^e  xxiii.  50 —
56;  John  xix.  88— 42.)

Ver.  57. — When  the  even  was  oome.  This
was  what  was  called  the  first  evening,  tlie
time  between  the  ninth  hour,  or  three
o'clock,  and  snnset,  and  the  great  sabbath
would  shortly  bo  beginning.  It  was  the
Boman  custom  to  leave  criminals  hanging
on  the  cross  for  days,  till  their  bodies  were
devoured  by  birds  and  wild  animals;  the
Jewish  Law  enacted  that  when  bodies  were
penally  suspended,  they  should  be  taken
down  and  buried  before  night  (Deut.  xxi.
22,  23),  that  the  land  might  not  be  defiled.
To-morrow  (beginning  at  sunset),  being  a
specially  solemn  day,  as  combining  the
sabbath  and  the  Passover  celebration,  the
Jews  were  particularly  anxious  that  the
crucified  bodies  of  our  Lord  and  the  two
robbers  should  be  taken  away  and  put  out
of  sight  before  the  sabbath  began.  To
effect  this  object,  they  went  to  Pilate,  and
begged  him  to  put  an  end  to  their  suifer-
ings  by  the  sharp,  short  process  of  breaking
their  legs.  St.  John's  account  must  be  re-
ferred to  for  this  and  the  result  of  the
soldiers'  examination  of  our  Lord.  There
came  a  rich  man  of  Arimatheea,  named
Joseph,  who  also  himself  was  Jesus'  disciple.
He  is  further  said  to  have  been  "  an  honour-
able counsellor,"  i.e.  a  member  of  the  San-
hedrin,  "a  good  man  and  a  just,  who  also
■waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  had  not
consented  to  the  counsel  and  deed  "  of  the
rest  of  the  rulers.  "It  was  divinely  ap-
pointed," says  the  Ven.  Bede,  "  that  Joseph
should  be  rich,  in  order  to  have  access  to
Pilate,  for  no  mean  man  could  have  access
to  the  governor ;  and  that  he  should  be  a
just  man,  in  order  to  receive  the  body  of  our
Lord."  This  man's  native  jilace  was  Ari-
mathtea,  a  town  with  juuch  probability
idoctifled  with  Eamathaiin-Zophiui  of  1
Sam.  i.  1,  which  lay  in  Mount  Ephraim,  and
was  the  birthplace  of  the  Prophet  Samuel.
Tliat  he  was  "a  rich  man"  naturally  gave
him  some  influence  with  Pilate,  und,  joined
with  his  position  as  a  Sanhedrist,  made  his
request  more  likely  to  be  granted.  "One
Joseph  was  appointed  by  God  to  be  guardian
ol'  Olirist's  body  in  the  virgin  womb,  and
another  Joseph  was   the  guardian  of   his


body  in  the  virgin  tomb,  and  each  Joseph
is  called  a  'just  man '  in  Holy  Scripture  "
(Wordsworth).

Ver.  58.— He  went  to  Filate.  St.  Mark
says, "  came  and  went  in  bolilly  unto  Pilate."
He  liad  hitherto  been  a  disciple  of  Christ,
"secretly  for  fear  of  the  Jews"  (John  xix.
S8);  now  tliat  Christ  was  dead,  and  his
death  aooompaniod  with  suoli  manifest
wonders,  according  absolutely  with  ancient
prophecy,  and  fulfilling  Christ's  own  pre-
dictions, he  hesitated  no  lonjjer,  he  openly
professed  his  partisanship,  and  threw  in  his
lot  with  the  Orueifle  i.  If  from  expediency
or  pusillanimity  he  had  refrained  from  taking
a  prominent  position  as  a  favourer  of  this
wonderful  Teacher,  he  had  lately  learned  a
new  lesson,  and  hailed  the  opportunity  or
publicly  honouring  him  deceased  whom  in
his  heart  he  liad  loved  and  reverenced  while
alive.  So  he  went  to  the  Prtstorium  to  see
the  procurator,  whose  sanction  was  requirea
for  removing  the  body  of  a  criminal  from
the  croB*.  It  was  probably  after  the  de-
putation of  the  Jews  to  Pilate,  mentioned  by
St.  John  (xix.  31),  that  Joseph  had  his  inter-
view. Begged  the  body  of  Jesus,  It  was
not  unusual  for  Iriends  to  obtain  leave  to
pay  the  last  rites  and  to  give  decent
sepulture  in  such  cases;  otherwise  the
corpses  were  tlirown  carelessly  into  name-
less graves,  if  they  were  not  left  to  rot  on
the  cross.  Tlie  indignities  which  Christ
had  suffered  during  life  now  began  to  be
reversed.  Commanded  the  body  to  be  de-
livered. Pilate  first,  we  are  told,  sent  for
the  officer  in  charge  of  the  execution,  and
finding  from  him  that  Jesus  was  really  dead,
granted  Joseph's  request.  Perhaps  he  de-
sired at  the  same  time  to  flout  the  chief
priests,  and  likewise  to  make  some  slight
reparation  to  the  innocent  Victim  of  his
policy.

Ver.  59. — When  Joseph  had  taken  the
body.  In  order  to  eflTect  this,  the  cross  would
be  taken  up  and  deposited  upon  the  gjound,
the  nails  would  be  drawn  from  hands  and
feet,  the  cord  unbound  (if  cord  there  was),
and  tie  corpse  laid  reverently  down.  We
must  rememher  that  this  act  of  Joseph  and
his  friends  was  not  only  a  bold  proceeding,
but  an  act  of  grett  self-denial.  Contact
with  a  corpse  caused  ceremonial  defilement
of  seven  days'  duration,  and  thus  they  would
be  debariecl  from  taking  their  part  in  the
great  Paschal  solemnity,  witli  its  solemn  and
joyful  observances.  But  the  love  of  Jesus
and  the  unselfish  desire  to  render  Mm
honour  enabled  them  to  rise  superior  to  re-
ligious prejudices,  and  willingly  to  make
the  required  sacrifice.  Wrapped  it  in  a
clean  linen  cloth;  literally,  twathed  it  in
eUan  linen.  The  body  was  enveloped  in  a
sheet  of  fine  linen,  pure  and  clean,  as  was


598


THE  GOSPEL   ACCOBDTNG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvn.  1—66.


fitting.  The  linen  was  a  fine  Inilian  cloth
or  muslin,  much  used  for  such  purjoses  in
Egypt.  The  body  woulii  then  he  taken  to
its  destination  on  an  open  bier.  St.  John
adds  the  i'aot  that  Nicodemus  took  part  in
the  entombment,  bringing  a  large  amount  of
myrrh  and  aloes  for  a  temporary  embalraiug,
the  near  approach  of  the  sabbath  leaving  no
time  for  more  elaborate  offices.  All  had  to
be  done  with  the  utmost  expedition  con-
Bistent  with  propriety  and  reverence,  to  avoid
encroachment  on  the  rest  of  that  higli  sab-
bath. Some  of  the  preparations  for  bnrial
would  doubtless  be  made  in  the  vestibule
of  the  tomb,  which  was  a  small  court,  but
BpaciouB  enough  for  the  purpose.  Here  the
limbs  would  be  separately  bound  with  folds
of  linen,  between  layers  of  spices,  the  head
being  wrapped  in  a  napkin.

Ver.  60. — laid  it  in  his  own  new  tomb.  It
was  placed  on  one  of  the  shelves  or  recesses
formed  in  the  sides  of  the  sepulchre.  Thus
did  the  Saviour  make  "  his  grave  with  the
wicked"  (dying  between  two  thieves),  "and
with  the  rich  Inhis  death"(Isa.  liii.  9).  It
was  fitting  that  he  whose  body  saw  no  cor-
ruption should  be  buried  in  a  grave  which
had  never  been  tainted  by  a  human  corpse.
Thus  also  it  was  ensured  that  no  other  body
could  rise  thence  except  his  who  alone  was
buried  therein.  This  tomb,  St.  John  tells
Kd,  was  quite  close  at  hand,  which  at  that
hurried  time  would  be  an  additional  reason
for  making  use  of  it.  Which  he  had  hewn
out  in  the  rock.  The  tomb  was  a  chamber
artificially  excavated  in  the  face  of  the  rook,
with  one  entrance  only.  The  wealthy  Jews
were  especially  fond  of  appropriating  vaults
for  the  burial  of  themselves  and  their
families.  The  ne'.glibourhood  of  Jerusalem
(as  other  parts  of  Palestine)  abounds  with
tombs  out  in  the  solid  limestone.  Eeoent
opinion  has  veered  round  to  adherence  to
the  traditional  site  of  the  holy  sepulchre,
of  which  the  identification  dates  from  the
earliest  days ;  that  which  is  known  aa
"  Gordon's  tomb  "  meeting  with  scant  accept-
ance from  experts,  and  other  sites  not  fully
answering  the  requirements  of  the  case.  The
existing  Chapel  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  in  the
church  of  that  designation,  is  thus  described
by  Dr.  Geikie  ('Holy  Land  and  Bible,'  pp.
437,  etc.) :  On  entering  the  church,  ♦'  im-
mediately before  you  is  'the  stone  of  unction,'
Baid  to  mark  the  spot  on  which  our  Lord'i
body  was  laid  in  preparation  for  huriul,  after
being  anointed.  It  is  a  large  slab  of  lime-
stone. ...  A  few  steps  to  the  left  is  the
place  where,  as  they  tell  us,  the  women  stood
during  tlie  anointing,  and  from  this  you  pass
at  once,  still  keeping  to  the  left,  into  the
great  round  western  end  of  the  church—  the
model  of  all  the  circular  churolies  of  Europe
— under  the  famous  dome,  which  rests  on


eighteen  pillars,  with  windows  round  the
circle  from  whioh  the  dome  Bprings.  In  the
centre  of  this  space,  which  is  sixty-seven  feet
across,  is  the  Chapel  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,
about  twenty-six  feet  long  and  eighteen
feet  wide,  a  tasteless  structure  of  reddish
limestone,  like  marble,  decorated  all  along
the  top  with  gilt  nosegays  and  modern
pictures,  and  its  front  ahlaze  with  countless
lamps.  Inside  it  is  divided  into  two  parts,
the  one  marking,  as  ie  maintained,  the  spot
where  the  angels  stood  at  the  Resurrection,
the  other  believed  to  contain  the  sepulchre
of '  Christ.  ...  In  the  centre,  cased  in
marble,  stands  what  is  called  a  piece  of  the
stone  rolled  away  by  the  angel ;  and  at  the
western  end,  entered  by  a  low  doorway,  is
the  reputed  tomb-chamber  of  our  Loid,  a
very  small  spot,  for  it  is  only  six  feet  wide,
a  few  inches  longer,  and  very  low.  .  .  .  The
tomb  itself  is  a  raised  table,  two  feet  high,
three  feet  wide,  and  over  six  feet  long,  the
top  of  it  serving  as  an  altar,  over  which  the
darkness  is  only  relieved  by  the  dim  lamps."
A  great  stone.  Joseph  and  his  friends  closed
the  entrance  to  the  cave  by  rolling  up  to  it,
and  partly  in  it,  a  huge  stone,  to  obviate  all
danger  of  the  sacred  body  being  meddled
with  by  evil  beasts  or  men.  The  Jewish
sepulchres  were  often  furnished  with  real
doors,  either  of  stone  or  wood,  as  is  proved
by  existing  remains,  whioh  show  grooves  and
marks  where  hinges  have  been ;  Joseph's
tomb  was  not  thus  supplied,  either  from
being  still  in  an  unfinished  state,  or  con-
structed on  a  diiferent  principle.  We  can-
not reason  from  the  present  state  of  the
sepulchre  that  it  is  too  unlike  what  we
must  conceive  the  original  to  have  been  to
permit  of  the  supposed  identification.  If
other  criteria  point  to  this  site,  the  diflS-
eulties  connected  with  present  appearances
may  be  overf-omo  bj  the  consideration  that
the  whole  features  of  the  place  were  altered
by  Constantine,  the  Crusaders,  and  other
builders.  The  surrounding  rook  has  in
many  parts  been  cut  away,  and  the  surface
levelled  or  lowered,  and  the  only  portion
left  in  silu  is  the  inner  chamber  where  the
Lord's  body  was  laid.  Captain  Conder
objects  to  the  traditional  site.  His  own
theory,  which  points  to  a  rock-hewn  tomb
near  the  Grotto  of  Jeremiah,  may  be  seen
in  the  Quarterly  Statement  of  the  Palestine
Exploration  Fund,  April,  1883.  And  de-
parted. He  had  done  what  he  could:
Borrowing,  lie  left  the  place  of  sepulture.
Tradition  has  traced  thu  later  life  of  Joseph.
He  is  said  to  have  b.  en  sent  by  the  Apostle
Philip  to  Brilain,  in  company  with  other
disciples,  and  to  have  tettled  at  Glaston-
bury, in  Somersetshire,  then  much  nearer
to  an  arm  of  the  sea  than  it  is  now.  Here
he  erected  a  little  oratory  of  wicker-worli^


en.  xxvii.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


599


the  first  Christian  house  of  prayer  that
England  saw,  which  was  afterwariis  super-
seded hy  the  noble  abbey  whose  remains
we  admire  to  this  day.  There  is  no  certain
foundation  on  which  the  story  rests ;  the
only  evidence  of  visitors  from  Palestine
having  ever  arrived  at  Glastonbury  is  the
existence  of  an  Eastern  thorn-tree  on  Weary-
all  Hill,  which  possesses  the  curious  pro-
perty of  blossoming  at  Christmas.  The
original  tree,  which  sprang  from  Joseph's
staff,  is  reported  to  huve  flourished  tiU  the
reign  of  Charles  I.,  when  it  was  destroyed
by  the  Puritans ;  but  scions  or  cuttings  were
takin  from  It,  and  many  such  bushes  are  still
to  be  found  in  different  parts  of  the  country.
Ver.  61. — The  other  Mary.  The  mother
of  James  and  Joses  (ver.  56).  These  pious
women  could  not  tear  themselves  from  the
spot  where  their  Lord  was  buried.  The
last  to  leave  him  dead,  they  were  the  first
to  see  him  risen.  And  now  they  watch  the
last  ceremonies  at  a  distance,  intending  to
complete  the  imperfect  embalmment  with
loving  care  as  soon  as  ever  the  sabbath  was
over.  "  Seest  thou  women's  courage  ?  "  says
Chrysostom;  "Beest  tliou  their  affection?
seest  thou  their  noble  spirit  in  expending
money  [Mark  xvi.  1 ;  Luke  viii.  56]  ?
their  noble  spirit  even  unto  death  ?  Let  us
men  imitate  the  women  ;  let  us  not  forsake
JsBus  in  temptations."  We  may  note  that
the  care  of  Joseph  in  providing  an  inviolable
tomb,  and  the  preparations  of  these  good
woman,  sliowed  that  they  as  yet  had  no
faith  in  the  incorruptibility  of  Christ's  body
or  of  his  corporeal  resurrection  from  the  dead.

Vers.  62— 66.— The  great  eabbath.  The
tepulchre  sealed  and  watched.  (Peculiar  to
St.  Matthew.)

Ver.  62. — The  nezt  day,  that  followed  the
day  of  the  preparation ;  ^ns  irrri  iie-ra  rjjy
irapaiTKevijv,  which  is  [the  day]  after  the  pre-
paration. The  language  of  tlie  original
implies  that  the  day  was  one  of  a  class.
The  present  day  was  the  15th  of  Nisan,
and  botli  a  sabbath  and  the  chief  day  of
the  Passover  festival.  The  term  "pre-
paration," or  "prosabbatli"  (Judith  viii.  6),
was  applied  by  tlie  Jews  to  the  day  pre-
ceding the  sabbath  or  the  chief  festivals
(JosephuB,  'Ant.,'  xvi.  6.  2);  but  by  the
time  the  gospel  was  oomfnitted  to  writing,
Paraskeue  had  become  among  Christians
the  usual  designation  of  the  day  of  ChrisL's
deatb;  hence  the  sabbath,  which  was  of
less  importance  than  the  crucifixion  day,  is
here  called,  "  the  day  after  the  Paraskeue."
The  language  of  the  syuoptists  leads  to  the
conclusion  that  the  action  of  the  Siinhedrists
in  applying  to  Pilate  took  place  on  the  sab-
bath, their  uneasy  conscience  and  fear  of
some    surprising    event    overcoming    that


•orupiilous  regard  to  the  sanctity  of  the
holy  day  whicli  they  would  have  strictly
enforced  upon  others.  It  is  just  possible,
however,  that  they  postponed  their  appli-
cation till  the  evening,  having  nothing  to
fear  till  "  the  third  day."  Came  together
unto  Pilate  ;  were  gathered  together.  A  large
deputation  of  the  chief  men  presented  itself
hetbre  the  procurator,  anxious  to  obtain  his
aid  to  prevent  all  tampering  with  the  buried
body  of  Jesus,  at  the  same  time  apprehend-
ing some  event,  they  knew  not  what,  which
niiglit  tend  to  corroborate  his  claims.  Neo-
logians  have  argued  again.st  the  credibility
of  this  section  of  the  gospel  history,  and
have  been  fullowed  by  some  commentators
of  greater  faith.  A  refutation  of  the  most
prominent  objections  wiU  be  found  in
Alford's  notes  on  ver.  ti2.

Ver.  6S.  —  We  remember,  etc.  The
prophecy  concerning  Christ's  resurrection
on  the  third  day  might  have  been  made
known  to  them  in  various  ways.  Tiius  they
may  have  heard  and  partially  understood
our  Lord's  allusion  to  Jonaj]  (ch.  xii.  40),
or  the  words  on  which  the  false  accusation
was  founded  (Jolm  ii.  19);  or  the  apostles
themselves  may  have  divulged  the  myste-
rious announcement,  and  a  general  impres-
sion had  been  produced  tiiat  Jesus  had
constantly  affirmed  thitt  he  would  rise  on
thi!  third  day.  It  is  true  that  the  apostles
and  the  good  women  were  far  from  beUeving
in  the  realization  of  this  assertion  in  the
manner  in  which  it  came  to  pass.  They
probably  looked  for  Christ's  return  in  glory
to  establish  his  kingdom  and  to  reign  as
Messiah.  The  rulers  received  the  predic-
tion in  its  literal  sense,  "  hatred  being  more
keen-sighted  than  love ; "  hence  they  touk
practical  precautions  against  its  collusive  or
pretended  fulfilment.  That  deceiver  {eKsTnas
i  TT\6vos :  literally,  that  vagabond  yonder).
That  impostor,  who  has  become  so  famous,
and  whom  you  kno  .\  all  about.  They  imply
that  without  further  definition,  Pilate  under-
stands whom  they  mean  ;  and  their  calum-
nies and  reviling  cease  not  even  with  their
Victim's  deatb.  While  he  was  yet  alive.
These  bitter  enemies  of  Jebua,  who  liad  tne
best  means  of  ascertaining  the  truth,  cer-
tainly regarded  him  as  now  dead.  Yet
some  modern  sceptics  resort  to  the  theory
of  a  trance  to  account  for  the  itosurreotlon,
whose  historical  accuracy  they  eannot  gain-
say. After  three  days.  A  popular  form  of
expression,  which  would  denote  any  space
which  embraced  portions  of  three  days,  in
the  present  case  being  part  of  Friday,  all
Saturday,  and  part  of  Sunday.  I  wiU  rise
again  {eyelpofiai,  1  rise)  The  present  tense
implies  greater  and  more  assured  certainty
than  the  future.

Ver.  64. — Command  therefore.    In  con-


m


Tllfi  GOSPEL  ACCOHOlItO  TO  ST.  MATTHKW.    toit.  txm.  1- et


sideration  of  tbe  fact  which  we  have  stated,
and  of  our  apprehension  of  some  imposture.
The  rulers  had  no  power  in  themselTes  to
tako  the  measures  which  they  required.
Jesut  was  a  state  criminal,  and  they  dared
not  assume  the  responsibility  of  guarding
his  tomb  from  invasion.  VutU  the  third
day.  Which  was  all  that  was  necessary,  as
Christ  had  promised  to  rise  on  that  day —
neither  before  nor  after  it ;  and  if  it  passed
without  the  predi^^ted  event,  ho  would  be
proved  to  be  an  impostor.  Come  by  night
(yuKTiis).  This  word  is  absent  from  the
best  manusoripts  and  from  the  Vulgate.  It
seems  to  have  been  an  early  interpolation.
And  steal  him  away.  A  most  unlilcely  hypo-
thesis under  the  circumstances.  The  dis-
ciples had  forsaken  Christ  while  alive,  were
now  hiding  in  terror,  and  utterly  demo-
ralized and  depressed  ;  were  they  likely  lo
incur  further  danger  for  the  sake  of  sup-
porting an  assertion,  wLiuli,  unless  it  proved
absolutely  true,  would  only  further  crush
tlicir  faith  and  hope?  The  rulers  seem
to  have  had  an  uneasy  feeling  that  Jesus
might  reappear,  and  they  thui  prepared
themselves  to  cast  discredit  upon  him,  even
if,  like  Lazarus,  he  rose  from  the  dead.
This  explanation  of  the  Besurrection  has
obtained  among  the  Jews  from  the  time  of
Justin  Martyr  ('  Dial.  o.  Try  ph.,'  xvii. ;  cviii.),
and  has  scarcely  yet  died  out,  though  in
many  quarters  what  is  called  the  "  vision-
hypothesis"  has  taken  its  place  (see  on  ch.
xxviii.  15,  and  Edcrsheim,  ii.  pp.  626,  etc.).
The  people.  The  Pharisees  were  always
ilisdainfnl  of  the  vulgar  herd.  "  This  people
who  knoweth  not  the  Law  are  cursed"
(John  vil.  49).  The  last  error  ...  the  first.
"Error  "  ia  nKavn,  ae  they  had  called  Christ
■n-xdi/os  (ver.  63),  so  the  word  here  may  *e
taken  actively,  as  meaning  "imposture."
The  deception  arising  from  his  death  and
supposed  resurrection  would  be  of  graver
consequence  than  that  concerned  with  his
previoQS  life.  Morison,  considering  the  word
to  have  its  usual  meaning  of  "error,"  regards
it  as  used  by  IhePharisees  in  a  political  sense,
in  accordance  with  the  governor'B  stand-
point: "If  til  at  deceiver's  body  should  be
stolen  by  his  disciples,  the  fickle  people
will  undoubtedly  leap  back  to  their  old
conclusion,  lliut  after  all  he  wai  what  he
professed  to  be.  This  conclusion  would  be,
ns  we  all  know,  an  'error;'  but  yet  it
would  bo  most  injurious  to  the  interests  of
OsBsar.  There  would  be  more  political  dis-s
affection  thnn  ever."  It  is  more  simple  to
say  that  the  first  error,  the  acceptance  of
Christ's  Messianic  claims,  was  uot  of  such
decided  and  far-reaching  consequence  as
would  be  the  belief  in  liis  resurrection.
Tlioy  do  not,  indeed,  see  all  that  such  belief
involves;   but  they  understood  enough  to


know  that  it  would  give  supernatural  im-
portance to  all  the  words  and  acts  of  his  Ufa

Ver.  65. — Ye  have  a  watch  (jx^Tt  kou-
VTuSlai/,  take  a  guard).  Pilate  answers  briefly
and  haughtily,  "  Weil,  I  give  permission ;  do
as  you  like;  take  a  body  of  soldiers  at  a
guard,  and  go  yonr  way."  This  last  verb  it
imperative,  so  the  former  is  most  probably
imperative  also.  If  taken  as  indicative,  the
question  arises — What  guard  had  tliey?
This  is  difficult  to  answer,  unless,  as  Alford
supposes,  it  may  refer  to  some  detachment
placed  at  their  disposal  during  the  feast
But  of  this  we  know  nothing  historically.
Make  it  as  sure  (o<rifoA/<rao-ec,  secwe  it  for
younelvee)  as  ye  can ;  literally,  at  ye  know
how.  Take  any  precaution  you  think  fit
to  employ.

Ver.  66.— So  they  (ol  8i,  and  they)  went.
They  left  the  procurator's  presence,  relieved
at  having  gained  their  request  and  pre-
cluded all  fear  of  collueion.  Sealing  the
stone,  and  setting  a  watoh  Qierii  ttjs  kou-
<rTuSias,withthe  watch ;  cum  euetodibus).  The
last  words  are  variously  rendered.  Thus :
"  sealed  the  stone  by  means  of  the  watch  "
(Alford);  "sealing  the  stone,  the  guard
being  with  them  "  (Bevised  Version) ;  "  as
well  as  baviag  the  watch"  (Webster  and
Wilkinson);  "in  concert  with  the  guard"
(Morison).  This  last  expositor  has  best
seized  the  complex  notion  contained  in  the
evangelist's  language:  "They  made  the
sepulchre  sure  by  sealing  the  stone  in  con-
cert with  the  guard  (and  thereafter  leaving
tlie  guard  to  keep  watch)."  The  stone  was
sealed  probably  in  this  manner:  a  cord
w  as  passed  round  tlie  stone  that  closed  the
mouth  of  the  sepulchre  to  the  two  sides  of
the  entrance;  this  was  sealed  with  wax  or
prepared  clay  in  the  centre  and  at  the  ends,
so  that  the  stone  could  not  be  removed  with-
out breaking  the  seals  or  tlie  cord  (comp
Dan.  vi.  17).  Thus  carefully  did  Christ's
enemies  obviate  the  possibility  of  any  fraud
or  collusion;  thus  did  tliey  lliemselves
prove  unanswerably  the  truth  and  reality
of  the  resurrection  of  that  same  Jesus  whose
dead  body  they  so  carefully  guarded.
**  Everywhere  deceit  recoils  upon  itself,  and
against  its  will  supports  the  truth.  It  was
neoe&sary  for  it  to  be  believed  tliat  he  died,
and  that  he  rose  again,  and  that  he  wag
buried,  and  all  these  things  are  brought  U.
pass  by  his  enemies,  .  ,  .  The  proof  of  his
resurrection  has  become  incontrovertible  by
what  ye  [his  enemies]  have  put  forward.
For  because  it  was  sealed,  there  was  no
unfahr  dealing.  But  if  there  wag  no  unfaii
dealing,  and  the  sepulchre  was  found  empty,
it  is  manifest  that  he  is  risen,  plainly  and
inoontrovertibly.  Seest  thou  how  even
against  their  will  they  contend  for  the  proof
of  the  truth  ?"  (St.  Chrysostom,  »■>»  Jo*;


OH.  iivii.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  601


HOMILBTlOa

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  end  »/  Judat.    I.  Tbi  roBHAL  ooMDEm ATnm  of  oint  Lobd.

1.  The  Sanhedrin.  "  When  the  morning  was  come,"  St.  ilatthew  says— the  morning
which  followed  the  long  sad  hours  of  that  night  of  mockery  and  shame  ;  the  morning
which  ushered  in  the  greatest  day  in  the  world'i  history,  the  day  lignalized  by  the
darkest  crime  ever  wrought  upon  this  sinful  earth,  illustrated  by  the  one  allHBu£Scient
Sacrifice  for  sin,  by  the  noblest  deed  of  holiest  self-devotion  which  has  brightened  the
annals  of  the  human  race; — on  that  memorable  morning  all  the  chief  priests  and
elders  of  the  people  came  together.  They  met  now  to  pronounce  the  formal  sentence
of  death.  Their  previous  meeting  was  illegaL  A  capital  cause  could,  by  their  own
rules,  be  tried  only  during  daylight.  This  meeting,  which  St.  Luke  describes  at
greater  length  than  the  first  two  evangelists,  was  held  to  render  valid  the  irregular
sentence  passed  in  the  night.  They  were  careful  to  observe  forms  and  precedents ;
they  heeded  not  the  awful  guilt  which  they  were  contracting.  2.  ITu  deliver]/  to  the
OentUei.  Again  they  bound  him  who  is  the  King  of  kings.  And  then  they  fulfilled
his  own  propheOT — they  delivered  him  "  to  the  Gentiles  to  mock,  and  to  scourge,  and
to  crucify  him "  (ch.  xx.  19).  They  had  determined  on  his  deatli.  It  was  "  not
lawful  for  them  to  put  any  man  to  death ; "  but  they  scrupled  not  to  employ  th«
agency  of  the  hated  Bomans  to  accomplish  their  wicked  purpose.  They  hated  PUate  j
he  had  deserved  their  hatred  by  his  cruelties  and  by  his  scornful  contempt  of  their
religious  prejudices.  But  they  hated  the  holy  Jesus  more  than  they  hated  the  cruel
and  haughty  Pilate ;  and  they  delivered  Jesus,  that  is,  they  betrayed  him ;  they
completed  the  evil  deed  of  Judas.  As  he  betrayed  his  Master  to  them,  so  they
betrayed  their  King,  their  Messiah,  to  the  Roman  Pilate.  It  was  an  act  of  treason,
awful  treason,  against  the  Divine  King  of  the  Jews.  Indeed,  they  knew  not  what
they  did.  "I  wot,"  said  St.  Peter,  after  the  Ascension,  "that  through  ignorance  ye
did  it,  as  did  also  your  rulers  "  (Acts  iiL  17).  They  would  not  have  dared  thus  to
treat  the  Lord,  had  they  believed  him  to  be  the  long-expected  Messiah.  But  their
ignorance  was  guilty  ignorance.  If  they  had  searched  the  Scriptures  with  a  single
heart,  they  must  have  seen  in  the  Lord's  life  the  signs  of  the  Messiah.  Some  of  them
were  old  enough  to  remember  the  visit  of  the  Magi,  and  the  excitement  which  it  caused
in  Jerusalem.  All  knew  more  or  less  of  the  Lord's  beautiful  life,  of  bis  holy  teaching,
of  his  works  of  love  and  power.  But  they  were  blinded  by  hypocrisy  and  self-interest.
They  had  long  sought  his  death.  The  solemn  entry  into  Jerusalem  on  Palm  Sunday,
the  "  Hosanna  I "  shouts,  the  enthusiasm  of  the  multitude,  followed  by  the  controversies
in  the  temple,  with  the  Lord's  awful  parables  and  his  stern  condemnation  of  the
dominant  religionism,  deepened  their  resentment  and  confirmed  them  in  their  wicked
purpose.  They  proposed  to  seize  him  after  the  feast-day;  but  the  unexpected  treachery
of  Judas  enabled  them  to  take  him  at  once  without  uproar  or  danger.  They  knew  his
absolute  innocence;  they  saw  his  holy  calmness,  his  meek,  patient  self-possession  in
the  midst  of  insults ;  they  heard  his  majestic  asiertion  of  his  Divine  office  and  dignity.
They  would  not  believe ;  they  were  blinded  by  their  prejudices,  their  pride,  their
interest;  they  made  the  guilt  of  Judas  their  own;  they  completed  his  fearful  treason,
and  delivered  their  King  into  the  hands  uf  the  merciless  Roman  governor,  whose  cruel
contemptuous  character  they  knew  so  well,  and  whom  they  expected  to  be  the  ready
and  willing  instrument  for  carrying  out  their  evil  design.

II.  JnoAS.  1.  Sia  remorse.  He  had  probably  mingled  with  the  crowd  of  spectators,
like  Peter.  He  had  nothing  to  fear,  as  Peter  had.  It  is  said  that  there  is  a  strange,
awful  attraction  which  draws  a  murderer  irresistibly  to  the  scene  of  his  crime ;  some
such  feeling  forced  Judas  to  linger  about  the  high  priest's  palace.  We  know  not  what
his  thoughts  were  during  that  fearful  night.  It  is  possible  (though  there  is  no
Scripture  foundation  for  the  tlieory)  that  he  may  have  looked  forward,  even  more  eagerly
than  the  other  apostles,  for  the  expected  earthly  reign  of  the  Messiah ;  he  may  liave
been  vexed  and  angry  with  the  Lord  for  not  claiming  the  throne  of  David,  and  thus
raising  his  followers  to  rank  and  eminence.  It  is  just  possible  (very  improbable  it
gcems  to  us)  that  be  may  have  designed  by  his  treachery  to  force  the  Lord  to  declare
himself  as  the  Messiah,  to  exert  his  supernatural  power,  and  to  set  up  bis  kingdom  in


602  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvii.  1—66.

Jerusalem.  It  is  certain  that  his  avaricious  spirit  was  trouhled  exceedingly  by  what  he
called  the  waste  of  Mary's  precious  i  intment,  and  that  the  Lord's  reproof,  though  gentle
and  loving,  irritated  his  dark  and  gloomy  temper,  and  became,  through  the  temptations
of  the  evil  being  to  whom  he  had  sold  himself,  the  goad  which  drove  him  to  his  deadly
sin.  He  brooded  over  his  supposed  wront^s ;  he  fretted  himself  till  he  was  moved  to
do  the  most  evil  deed  the  world  had  ever  seen.  He  gave  place  to  the  devil ;  Satan
entered  into  him,  and  filled  him  with  malice  and  hatred,  and  whispered  that  he  might
by  one  act  have  his  revenge,  and  compensate  himself  for  the  fancied  loss  caused  by
Mary's  generous  offering.  Perhaps  evil  thoughts  like  this,  bitter  recollections  of
supposed  slights,  cruel  exultation  over  his  successful  treachery  and  his  ill-gotten
gains,  filled  the  traitor's  heart  during  the  night,  and  for  a  while  kept  him  from  feeling
the  horror  of  his  crime.  But  in  the  morning  he  saw  that  Christ  was  condemned.  He
had  not  exerted  his  Divine  power ;  the  twelve  legions  of  angels  had  not  come  to  his  aid.
He  was  condemned  like  any  common  malefactor,  and  delivered  to  Pilate  for  the  cruel
death  of  the  cross.  And  Judas  was  the  cause  of  this.  He  had  murdered  his  Friend,
his  Mastei',  his  Lord,  the  Innocent,  the  Holiest  One.  He  repented  now,  but  his
repentance  was  not  fierd^/oia — not  a  change  of  heart,  not  repentance  unto  life ;  it  was
only  fifra/iiKeia,  a  change  of  thought  as  to  his  crime  (comp.  Trench, '  New  Test.  Syn.,'
sect.  69).  He  saw  his  sin  now  in  a  different  point  of  view.  He  could  no  longer  gloat
over  the  luxury  of  revenge,  the  evil  pleasure  of  wicked  gains;  for  his  crime  seemed  to
glare  upon  him  with  fiery  eyes;  he  saw  its  full  horror,  its  blackness,  its  hideousness.
The  thirty  pieces  of  silver  which  he  had  coveted  were  cankered  now ;  they  were  a
witness  against  him,  a  witness  of  his  infamy  and  of  his  foul  treachery ;  they  seemed
to  eat  his  flesh  as  it  were  fire.  He  loathed,  he  hated  them  ;  he  returned  them  to  the
chief  priests  and  elders.  "  I  have  sinned,"  he  said,  "  in  that  I  have  betrayed  innocent
blood."  Can  he  have  thought  that  by  returning  the  price  of  blood  he  might  stay  the
accomplishment  of  that  deed  of  blood  ?  If  he  had  such  a  thought,  his  hope  was  at  once
extinguished  by  the  cold  cruelty  of  the  answer,  "What  is  that  to  us?  see  fbou  to
that."  The  guilt  was  his,  they  said.  They  forgot  that  it  was  equally  theirs.  Pilate
veiy  soon  after  forced  them  to  admit  it ;  he  was  innocent  of  that  blood,  he  said,  "  See
ye  to  it,"  But  now  they  derided  the  misery  of  their  companion  in  guilt ;  he  was  their
tool ;  he  had  served  their  purpose ;  they  would  fling  him  away.  2.  His  despair.
There  was  no  hope  for  him ;  those  cruel  words  drove  him  to  madness.  Perhaps  ne
remembered  words  more  awful  still,  though  they  were  spoken  in  warning,  "  "Woe  unto
th;it  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  1  good  weie  it  for  that  man  if  he  had
not  been  born."  He  had  not  listened  to  the  Saviour's  warning  voice ;  he  hud  thought
more  of  that  paltry  bribe  than  of  his  own  poor  soul.  Avarice,  that  degrading  vice,
had  eaten  all  good  and  holy  thoughts  out  of  his  mind ;  his  heart  was  hardened  by  the
deceitfulncBS  of  sin.  Could  he  not  even  now  in  his  misery  see  his  guilt  and  own  his
sin,  and  weep  like  Peter,  and  like  Peter  be  forgiven  ?  Alas  1  no.  A  horror  of  great
darkness  seemed  to  engulf  him ;  he  could  not  see  that  look  of  love  and  sorrow  which
had  won  Peter  to  repentance.  He  had  trodden  underfoot  the  Son  of  God ;  he  could
not  bear  even  to  think  of  Christ.  He  had  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace  ;  the  Spirit
hiid  departed  from  him.  He  had  no  hope  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come.
He  could  not  enjoy  the  miserable  wages  of  his  treason  ;  he  threw  the  pieces  of  silver
back  to  the  priests  as  they  sat  or  officiated  in  the  sanctuary.  He  departed ;  he  went
and  hanged  himself.  His  death  was  attended  by  strange  circumstances  of  horror;  his
name  has  become  a  word  of  reproach ;  his  memory  is  associated  with  all  that  is  hateful
and  accursed.  Yet  he  was  an  apostle,  "one  of  the  twelve,"  one  of  the  princes  of  the
Church,  who  were  to  sit  on  twelve  thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  His
history  is  full  of  awful  warning  to  all  Christian  people,  especially  to  the  ministers  of
Christ's  Holy  Word  and  sacraments.  It  reminds  us  that  the  highest  places  in  the
Church  are  not  always  safe,  that  we  may  not  dare  to  trust  in  external  privileges,  how-
ever great  they  may  be.  It  warns  us  that  the  deadly  sins  of  ambition  and  avarice  may
ensnare  those  who  seem  very  near  to  Christ.  It  adds  force  and  weight  to  the  Lord's
solemn  lesson,  "  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation."  3.  37te  conduct
of  the  chief  priests.  They  would  not  put  the  money  into  the  temple  treasury,  because
it  was  the  price  of  blood ;  yet  they  themselves  had  brought  about  the  bloodshedding  of
which  that  money  was  the  price.     The  money  was  accursed  in  their  eyes,  but  not  the


OH.  xxvn.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACGOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         603

wicked  deed.  Very  strange  is  the  self-deceit  with  which  hypocrites  blind  their  hearts
and  cheat  their  consciences.  They  bought  with  the  pieces  of  silver  the  potter's  field
to  bury  strangers  in.  It  was  the  field,  it  seems  (comp.  Acts  i.  18),  in  which  Judas  had
put  an  end  to  his  miserable  life,  the  field  which  he  had  designed  to  purchase  with  the
reward  of  his  iniquity.  It  was  well  called  "the  field  of  blood;"  it  was  defiled  with  that
scene  of  blood  and  horror,  and  it  was  bought  with  the  price  of  blood.  The  chief  priests
perhaps  regarded  this  purchase  as  a  work  of  charity.  So  again  and  again  in  the  course
of  history  have  men  sought,  by  charitable  foundations  of  various  kinds,  to  atone  for
past  transgression*.  Many  such  gifts  have  been  given  in  true  repentance;  and  as  the
earnest  and  expression  of  repentance  they  are,  we  may  not  doubt,  accepted.  Without
repentance  and  faith  they  can  no  more  help  the  guilty  soul  than  the  gift  of  the  potter's
fiold  could  atone  for  the  blood-guiltiness  of  the  chief  priests.  4.  The  fulfllment  oj
prophecy,  St.  Matthew  again,  as  in  so  many  other  places,  refers  to  the  writings  of  the
prophets.  His  thoughts  seem  to  have  dwelt  much  in  reverent  awe  on  the  great
mysteries  of  the  sovereignty  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  and  of  that  overruling  provi-
dence which  ever  brings  to  pass  the  counsels  of  the  Most  High.  There  is,  apparently,
an  ancient  transcriber's  error  here,  and  other  difficulties,  which  this  is  not  the  place  to
examine.  But  the  passage  (Zech.  xi.  12,  13)  is  very  remarkable.  The  price  to  be  given
is  weighed,  it  is  to  be  fixed  at  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  The  Lord  speaks  of  it  as  the
"  price  that  I  [the  Lord  God]  was  prised  at  of  them."  The  price  is  cast  down  in
the  house  of  the  Lord ;  it  comes  ultimately  to  the  potter.  The  prophecy  was  fulfilled.
The  price  of  the  Saviour's  blood  bought  a  resting-place  for  the  bodies  of  Gentile
strangers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  holy  city — an  illustration  of  the  great  and  blessed
truth  that  by  the  blood  of  Christ  those  are  made  nigh  who  sometime  were  afar  off,  who
were  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of
promise;  but  now,  through  him,  are  no  longer  strangers  and  foreigners,  but  fellow-
citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God,

Lebsonb.  1.  "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil."  Fight  hard  against  it.  2.
It  grows  and  strengthens  with  years.  Eesist  it  in  its  beginnings.  3.  Ill-gotten  gains
bring  misery.  Flee  from  them.  4.  Mark  the  strange  inconsistencies  of  hypocrisy.
Pray  to  be  true  and  real.

Vers.  11 — 25. — Christ  before  Pilate.  L  Thb  aocusation.  1.  PUateU  question.
Pilate  was  proud  and  cruel ;  he  despised  and  hated  the  Jews.  But  he  had  something
of  the  old  Roman  love  of  justice — he  would  not  condemn  the  Lord  unheard,  as  the
Jews  at  first  desired  (John  xviii.  30,  31).  He  rejected  their  request  contemptuously,
"  Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  accordiug  to  your  Law."  They  kept  back  at  first  the
charge  of  blasphemy,  which  they  knew  Pilate  would  dismiss  at  once,  as  Gallic  after-
wards dismissed  a  similar  accusation.  They  invented  fresh  charges  in  their  cruel
injustice — charges  which  would,  they  thought,  force  Pilate  to  act  as  they  wished.
"  We  found  this  fellow,"  they  said, "  perverting  the  nation,  and  forbidding  to  give  tribute
to  CiBsar,  saying  that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  King."  The  first  two  charges  were  utterly
and  manifestly  false ;  the  third  had  some  show  of  truth.  Pilate  put  the  question  to
the  accused,  "Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews?"  2.  The  Lord's  answer.  "Jesus
said  unto  him.  Thou  sayest."  It  is  an  emphatic  afiBrmation  ;  he  was  the  King  of  the
Jews ;  he  is  the  King  of  the  Israel  of  God.  At  big  nativity  the  Wise  Men  came  from
the  Bast,  asking,  "  Where  is  he  that  is  bom  King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  At  the  beginning
of  his  ministry  he  permitted  Nathanael  to  address  him  as  the  King  of  Israel ;  at  his
solemn  entry  into  Jerusalem  he  wuuld  not  listen  to  the  Pharisees  when  they  bade  him
rebuke  those  who  were  welcoming  him  as  "  the  King  that  cometh  in  the  Name  of  the
Lord."  He  would  not  conceal  the  great  and  solemn  truth ;  but  neither  would  he  leave
Pilate  in  ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  bis  claims.  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this
world,"  he  said  (John  xviii.  36).  Pilate  understood  the  hollowness  of  the  charge
of  sedition ;  he  was  not  deceived  by  the  clamour  of  the  Jews,  "  If  thou  let  this  Man
go,  thou  art  not  Cassar's  friend;  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king  speaketh  against
Cassar."  He  understood  enough  of  the  Lord's  words  and  position  to  feel  that  the
kingdom  which  he  claimed  was  of  a  spiritual  character,  not  opposed  to  the  rule  of
CsBsar ;  he  felt  that  the  accusation  was  false  and  malicious.  3.  The  Lords  silence.
He  had  answered  Pilate ;  he  would  not  answer  the  false  charges  of  the  chief  priests


604         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    t™.  xxvii.  1— GO.

and  elders.  Pilate  had  some  sense  of  Justice ;  they  had  none.  Their  one  object  was
to  compass  his  death  ;  they  cared  not  for  truth  or  justice,  but  only  for  llie  accompIiBh-
inent  of  their  wioktd  purpose.  They  brought  charge  after  charge,  all  alike  untrue.
The  Saviour  heeded  them  not.  "  He  wag  oppressed,  and  he  was  afflicted,  yet  he
opened  not  his  mouth."  He  stood  before  them  in  calm  majestic  silence,  Pilate,
aoxiouB,  it  seems,  to  hear  his  defence,  pressed  him  to  answer ;  but  still  "  he  answered
him  to  never  a  word,  insomuch  that  the  governor  marvelled  greatly."  He  had  never
seen  such  a  Prisoner  before,  so  calm  and  collected  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  a  death
of  agony,  so  meek  and  yet  bo  dignified;  he  felt  the  nobleness  of  Christ,  and  he  strove
to  deliver  him.

IL  Jebus  or  Barabbas.  1.  The  choke  offered  to  the  Jewi.  Pilate  was,  as  St.
Peter  afterwards  said  (Acts  iii.  13),  detormined  to  let  the  Saviour  go.  Ho  tried  every
expedient.  At  first  he  declined  to  hear  the  case:  "Take  ye  him,  and  judge  Iiim."
Then,  when  forced  to  hour  it,  he  declared  himself  convinced  of  his  innocence:  "I  find
in  him  no  fault  at  all."  Then  he  sent  him  to  Herod.  Now  he  appeals  to  the  people,
lioping,  perhaps,  that  they  would  reverse  the  judgment  of  the  chief  priests,  or  possibly
wishing  to  shift  the  responsibility  of  the  decision  from  himself.  He  was  ready,  accord-
ing to  custom  at  the  Passover,  to  release  a  prisoner.  There  was  a  prisoner  called
Barabbas,  probably  a  mere  robber  and  murderer  (Acts  iu.  14) ;  possibly,  as  some  have
thought,  a  leader  of  a  band  of  patriots,  who  sought  to  do  what  Christ  was  accused  of
seeking — to  put  down  the  Roman  power  and  to  restore  the  Jewish  kingdom.  Pilate
waited  till  a  multitude  was  gathered  together.  He  gave  them  the  choice  between  the
two  prisoners — Jesus  the  Christ  or  Barabbas  the  robber.  He  had  heard,  perhaps  had  seen,
how  the  Lord  had  been  welcomed  into  the  city  five  days  before ;  he  thought  that  the
people  would  ask  for  his  release,  and  that  so  he  should  be  saved  from  the  ungrateful
task  of  condemning  One  whom  he  knew  to  be  innocent.  2.  PUate'i  wife.  She  had
had  a  dream  that  morning.  She  saw  in  a  vision  the  holy  and  innocent  Saviour.  It
may  be  iihe  saw  his  awful  sufferings ;  it  may  be  she  law  him  in  his  majesty  sitting
on  the  throne  of  his  glory  to  judge  the  world.  Whatever  the  dream  was,  it  caused
her  much  anxiety.  She  sent  at  once  to  Pilate.  He  was  sitting  on  the  judgment-seat,
awaiting  the  decision  of  the  multitude.  The  message  was,  "  Have  thou  nothing  to  do
with  that  just  Man."  It  seems,  then,  that  something  was  known  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in
tlie  household  of  Pilate.  The  governor  had  heard,  perhaps,  of  his  miracles;  probably
of  the  great  influence  which  he  had  possessed  in  Galilee.  He  had  heard  alio  of  hia
innocence ;  he  was  no  leader  ot  sedition,  no  conspirator  against  Csesar.  Pilate's  wife
had  no  hesitation,  no  fears  of  consequences,  such  as  her  husband  had.  She  bade  him
delivei  the  falsely  accused,  the  Innocent  One.  Happy  would  it  have  been  for  him  if
he  had  followed  her  advice  t  3.  Barabbas  chosen.  The  people,  left  to  themselves,
might,  perhaps,  have  chosen  rightly.  We  are  not  told  what  was  the  composition  of  the
crowd  ;  whether  there  was  •  large  GaliJEean  element  in  it;  whether  or  no  many  were
presuut  out  of  those  great  multitudes  which  had  received  the  Lord  on  Palm  Sunday
with  so  much  enthusiasm.  Some  of  them,  surely,  must  have  been  there ;  they  must
at  least  have  felt  an  interest  in  the  fate  of  One  who  a  few  days  ago  had  been  so  con-
spicuous ;  curiosity,  if  no  better  motive,  would  have  brought  them  there.  But  how-
ever this  may  have  been,  the  chief  priests  and  rulers,  who  ought  to  have  guided  the
people  aright,  led  them  astray.  They  mingled  with  the  crowd,  they  stirred  them,
they  appealed  to  their  Jewish  prejudices,  they  used  all  the  arts  of  persuasion ;  and
they  succeeded  in  turning  the  current  of  popular  opinion.  The  voice  of  the  people  is
by  no  means  always  the  voice  of  God.  Crowds  are  apt  to  be  led  by  sudden  impulse,
by  a  cry,  by  ignorant  party  spirit.  Alas  I  for  a  nation,  when  its  clergy  or  its  chief
men  guide  it  into  error.  The  chief  priests  must  have  been  astonished  at  the  rapidity,
the  completeness  of  their  own  success.  Five  days  before,  the  Pharisees  had  "  said
among  themselves.  Perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  nothing?  Behold,  the  world  is  gone
after  him."  But  now,  when  after  a  pause  for  consideration,  the  governor  put  the
question  to  the  multitude,  "  Whether  of  the  twain  will  ye  that  I  release  unto  you?"
they  all  said,  "  Barabbas."  They  denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just,  and  desired  a
murderer  to  be  granted  unto  them.  And  when  Pilate  asked  again,  "  What  shall  I  do
then  with  Jesus  which  is  called  Christ  ?  "  the  fierce  cruel  answer  burst  from  the  crowd,
"  Let  him  be  crucified  1 "    It  was  the  first  mention  of  the  cross,  save  iu  the  prophetio


CH.  xxvu.  1— 06.]    TUE  GOSPEL  ACCOIIDING  'JO  ST.   MATTHEW.  605

language  of  the  Lord  himself.  It  was  known,  perhaps,  that  that  fearful  punisbmcLt
awaited  Barabhas  and  the  two  other  malefactors ;  and  the  chief  priests,  it  may  be,
thought  that  by  bringing  about  that  mode  of  death  they  would  both  satisfy  their  own
cruel  hatred  and  exhibit  the  Lord  as  a  raiser  of  sedition,  a  cons^ator  against  the
Homan  government.  The  question  had  shown  Pilate's  want  of  courage.  A  judge
should  not  devolve  his  responsibility  upon  the  populace.  He  made  now  a  weak  attem|)t
to  check  the  violence  of  the  crowd.  "  Wliat  evil  hath  he  done  ?  "  he  asked.  But  the
Qerce  cry  only  g&thered  fresh  (trength.  Stimulated  alike  by  the  persuasions  of  the
chief  priests,  by  the  faint  opposition  of  Pilftte,  and  by  the  excitement  of  numbers  and
noise,  it  became  every  minute  more  and  more  violent  and  menacing,  "  Crucify  him  1
crucify  him  1 "  4.  Pilate  washu  his  hands.  His  defence  of  the  Lord  had  been  only
half-hearted.  He  knew  that  he  was  absolutely  innocent;  he  evidently  had  some  vague
nndefiued  a\ve  of  him.  He  would  have  saved  him  if  he  could  have  done  so  without
endangering  himself.  But  Pilate  feared  a  Jewish  mob.  It  was  at  all  times  formidable,
but  especially  so  at  the  seasons  of  the  great  national  festivals.  His  previous  experience
gave  him  reason  to  fear  an  accusation  at  Borne.  He  began  to  yield;  but  he  made  a
weak  attempt  to  throw  the  responsibility  of  the  crime  upon  the  people.  He  washed
his  hands  before  the  multitude,  saying,  "I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just
Person :  see  ye  to  it."  He  thus  at  the  same  moment  pronounced  the  innocence  of  the
Accused,  and  his  own  guilt ;  for  by  this  symbolical  action  he  declared  that  it  was  out
of  fear  of  the  people  that  he  delivered  Jesus  to  their  will.  Cowardice  often  leads  to
guilt.  Very  earnestly  we  ought  to  pray  for  holy  courage  and  strength  of  purpose  to
persevere  in  the  path  of  rectitude.  Pilate,  who  despised  the  Jews,  now  used  a  signifi-
cant act  prescribed  on  certain  occasions  by  the  Mosaic  Ltiw  (Deut.  xxi.  6,  7),  and
shared  apparently  some  of  the  feelings  which  led  the  Jews  to  attach  so  much  impor-
tance to  ceremonial  washings.  But  as  the  outward  washings  of  the  Jews  could  not
cleanse  the  heart,  so  Pilatp'c  act  could  not  remove  the  guilt  which  rested  on  him.
He  condemned  the  Innocent  through  selfish  feai  ;  his  hands  were  full  of  blood.  No
tiiere  outward  rite  can  purge  the  soul.  There  is  only  one  fountain  opened  for  sin  and
uncleanness — the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  which  applied  by  faith  can  cleanse  the
conscience  and  make  the  penitent  sinner  whiter  than  snow.  The  people  understood
the  meaning  of  Pilate.  They  were  willing,  in  their  wild  infatuation,  to  take  the  guilt
upon  themselves ;  they  answered  and  said,  "His  blood  be  on  us,  and  on  our  children  1 "
A  fearful  imprecation,  and  fearfully  fulfilled.  Some  doubtless  of  those  who  uttered
it,  very  many  of  their  children,  were  sharers  of  the  dreadful  calamities  which  attended
the  siege  and  capture  of  Jerusalem  leas  than  forty  yeais  afterwards.  They  had  said,
"Hig  blood  ha  on  us!"  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  were  deluged  in  blood.  They  had
cried,  "  Crucify  him  1  crucify  him ! "  they  perished  in  thousands  by  the  cross.  Still  the
guilt  of  his  blood  rests  on  that  outcast  race ;  and  only  that  blood  can  wash  away  the
stain.  For  the  blood  of  Christ  could  cleanse  even  those  who  shed  it.  It  is  "  the  one
full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
world.".  It  could  cleanse  Pilate,  Caiaphas,  the  fierce  bloodthirsty  multitude,  the  Eomaa
soldiers,  who  indeed  were  obeying  the  orders  of  the  governor,  but  plainly  took  an  evil
pleasure  in  the  cruel  deed.  "  His  blood  be  on  us !  "  the  crowd  shouted  in  their  frenzy.
The  guilt  of  that  blood  must  rest  even  now  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  upon  all  wlio
sin  wilfully  against  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ;  who,  knowing  what  the
Lord  most  holy  suffered  for  them,  live  as  though  the  cross  had  never  been,  as  though
the  blessed  Saviour  had  never  suffered  there  for  them  that  they  might  live.  And  the
holy  influence  of  that  blood  is  upon  the  hearts  of  those  who  come  to  Christ  in  faith
and  love,  who  live  under  the  shadow  of  the  cross,  walking  in  the  royal  way  of  the
cross,  seeking  ever  to  realize  in  all  its  depth  and  fulness  the  precious  and  stupendous
truth  that  "the  Son  of  God  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  Pilate  knew  that
that  blood  was  innocent  blood;  but  he  knew  not  its  sanctity  and  exceeding  precious-
ness.  He  quailed  before  the  wild  clamour  of  the  multitude ;  he  gave  sentence  that  it
should  be  as  they  required;  and  he  released  Barabhas  unto  them,  whom  they  had
desired.

Lessons.  1.  Silence  is  lometimes  golden.  The  Lord  was  silent  amid  false  accu'
sations.  Let  us  learn  of  him.  2.  Selfish  fear  often  leads  to  great  sin.  Fray  for  holy
courage.    3.  The  favour  of  the  mtdtifude  is  uticert^.    Tn4#t  uot  in  populaiity,


606         THE  GOSPEL   ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [on.  xxvii.  1—66.

i.  We  mvut  wa<h  our  hand*  in  innpcency.    Outwaid  rite*  will  not  oleauM  the  impure

•oul.

Vers.  28— 34.-flPf-«pamMon«  for  the  Crucifixion.  L  Thb  BOoaBOoro.  1.  It  had
been  predicted.  "  I  gave  mj  back  to  the  smiters,"  Isaiah  said  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy ;
and  again,  in  words  very  solemn  and  very  precious  to  sin-laden  consciences,  "By  his
stripes  we  are  healed."  The  Lord  himself  bad  told  his  disciples  beforehand  that  he
should  suffer  this  cruel  indignity  (ch.  ix.  19).  The  circumstances  of  the  Lord'i
sufferings  were  revealed  to  the  prophets  ages'  befors  the  time.  This  fact  shows  their
solemn  importance  and  deep  spiritual  significance.  We  should  meditate  in  awe  and
adoring  love  on  all  those  touching  details  which  the  Holy  Ghost  so  long  before  made
known  to  the  prophets,  that  men  should  see  the  day  of  Christ  by  faith,  and  ahould
anticipate  the  saving  power  of  his  atonement.  2.  The  intention  o/  Pilate.  Pilate  had
hoped  to  substitute  the  scourge  for  the  cross.  He  had  at  first  pronounced  the  Lord
innocent.  Then  when  the  chief  priests  had  stirred  up  the  people  and  there  were  signs
.  of  gathering  tumult,  he  thought  of  the  act  of  grace  usual  at  the  Passover  as  a  means
for  releasing  him.  Now  when  the  frenzy  of  the  excited  crowd  had  become  uncon-
trollable, he  resorted  to  the  scourge  as  a  means  for  saving  his  life.  "  I  will  chastise
him,  and  let  him  go"  (Luke  ixiii.  22).  He  thought  that  the  hatred  of  the  chief
priests  might  lie  satisfied,  that  the  pity  of  the  crowd  might  be  moved  by  the  anguish
of  the  scourge.  It  was  a  pitiful  exhibition  of  weakness.  He  would  commit  what
seemed  the  lesser  crime  to  avoid  the  greater.  But  sin  ever  leads  on  to  sin.  We  may
not  do  evil  that  good  may  come ;  we  may  not  follow  the  multitude  to  do  evil.  The
Christian  must  sometimes  stand  alone  against  an  angry  multitude  if  he  knows  that
what  ia  required  of  him  is  wrong  in  the  sight  of  God.  3.  The  severity  of  the  punish-
ment. It  was  a  sickening  sight.  The  shame  was  cruel;  the  torture  terrible.  Holy
Scripture  records  it  in  a  few  simple  words.  Ancient  writers  give  us  harrowing
descriptions  of  the  sufferings  of  Christian  martyrs  under  the  horrible  lash.  We  must
remember  the  Divine  dignity  of  the  awful  Sufierer.  We  are  treading  on  holy  ground;
Ke  must  approach  these  last  scenes  of  the  Lord's  Passion  with  reverence  and  godly  fear.
He  is  God,  and  he  is  suffering  for  us.  We  must  di-aw  near  with  deep  sympathy  for
him,  and  with  humble  contrition,  remembering  our  many  and  grievous  offences  which
brought  thia  agony  upon  him.  And  we  must  come  with  the  deepest  gratitude,  with
fervent  love;  for  these  his  bitter  pains  manifest  the  unutterable  strength  and  tender-
ness of  his  great  love  for  us.

IL  The  mookebt.  1.  The  icarht  robe.  The  Lord  had  already  been  derided  by  the
attendants  of  the  chief  priests,  and  afterwards  by  Herod ;  now  the  Roman  soldiers  were
guilty  of  the  like  brutal  insults.  It  was  a  scene  of  studied  and  gratuitous  cruelty,
which  shows  the  depth  of  wickedness  of  which  human  nature  is  capable.  The  Lord
had  done  them  no  wrong ;  some  of  them,  at  least,  had  heard  the  trial,  and  knew  that
he  was  innocent.  But  he  was  in  their  hands ;  he  was  to  be  put  to  death  ;  and  they
would  have  their  wicked  pleasure ;  they  would  make  sport  of  his  agonies.  They
gathered  round  him  the  whole  cohort  to  share  their  cruel  game.  They  had  heard
of  his  claims  to  royal  dignity ;  they  put  on  him  a  scarlet  robe,  some  cast-off  military
mantle,  in  imitation  of  the  imperial  purple.  2.  The  crown  of  thorns.  They  platted  a
crown  of  thorns  to  represent  the  wreath  of  laurel  worn  by  the  Caesars  at  Kome ;  they
pressed  it  down,  with  its  sharp  spines,  upon  that  holy  head.  They  put  a  reed  for  a
mock  loeptre  into  his  bound  hands ;  and  then  the  whole  cohort,  soldier  after  soldier,
passed  before  him,  each  bowing  the  knee  in  pretended  homage,  each  addressing  him
with  the  derisive  title,  "  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews  I "  When  they  were  wearied  of  this
wicked  sport,  these  bitter  taunts,  they  spat  upon  that  gracious  face ;  they  took  the
reed,  and  smote  him  on  that  thorn-crowned  head,  till,  tired  in  turn  of  these  insulting
outrages,  they  took  off  the  scarlet  robe  and  put  his  own  raiment  on  him,  and  led  him
away  to  crucify  him.  And  he  who  suffered  all  this  bitter  mockery  was  indeed  a  King—
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  At  any  moment  throughout  his  long  protracted
agony  he  might,  by  one  word,  one  look,  have  swept  his  torturers  into  utter  death.  He
Buffered  in  silence,  patiently,  calmly,  setting  us  an  example  of  meekness,  of  holy
endurance.  If  the  Lord  most  holy  bore  these  outrageous  insults,  we  sinful  men  may
well  lake  it  pationtly  when  we  are  called  to  suffer  wrong  when  men  speak  ill  of  ub.


OH.  xxvn.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  607

IIL  The  way  of  sobuowb.  1.  Simon  of  Gyrene.  The  heavy  cross  was  laid  upon
the  Lord.  "He,  beariug  his  cross,  went  forth."  He  was  worn  and  wearied.  The
awful  agony  of  G«thsemane,  the  cruel  scourging,  the  many  sufferings,  bodily  and
mental,  which  in  his  blessed  lore  he  endured  for  us,  had  utterly  exhausted  bis  strength.
He  could  not  bear  the  cross ;  he  sank  beneath  the  burden.  The  soldiers,  perhaps
simply  impatient  of  delay,  perhaps  in  contempt  of  Simon,  who  may  have  been  a
disciple,  and  may  have  shown  his  sympathy  with  the  suffering  Lord,  laid  the  Lord's
cross  upon  this  stranger  of  Cyrene, "  that  he  might  bear  it  after  Jesus."  It  was  done  in
insult,  but  it  wag  in  truth  the  highest  honour.  Simon  was  privileged  to  bear  the
Saviour's  cross,  to  help  him  in  his  seeming  helplessness,  to  alleviate  in  some  small
degree  his  overwhelming  sorrow.  Simon  has  becon;ie  the  type,  the  figure  of  faithful
Christians.  They  must  bear  the  cross ;  the  cross  of  suffering,  in  one  form  or  another,
is  surely  laid  upon  them  all ;  they  bear  it  after  Jesus.  That  sad  procession  is  a
fitting  representation  of  the  Church  of  the  elect.  The  Lord  goeth  at  the  head  of  them.
After  him  follow  in  long  order  all  his  chosen,  each  bearing  his  cross,  each  learning  of
the  Lord  Jesus  who  first  bore  the  cross,  themselves  to  bear  it  patiently  and  with  meek
submission,  glorying  iu  the  cross,  for  the  royal  way  of  the  holy  cross  is  the  only  way
to  life  eternal,  and  without  the  cross  there  cannot  come  the  crown.  2.  Qolgotha.  We
cannot  certainly  identify  the  spot  where  the  dear  Lord  suffered.  It  would  be  con-
secrated by  the  holiest,  the  tenderest  memories;  we  might  well  regard  it  as  the  most
sacred  spot  in  all  the  earth.  The  knowledge  is  hidden  from  us;  and  there  is  meaning
iu  this.  We  may  find  Christ  everywhere;  every  place,  the  whole  world  over,  is
hallowed  by  his  blood.  We  may  realize  his  death,  and  draw  very  near  to  the  cross,,
and  live  under  its  shadow  in  England  as  well  as  at  Jerusalem.  Not  all  who  saw  him
die  were  saved.  It  is  the  sight  of  Christ  by  faith  that  saves  the  soul.  Blessed  be  Gud,
we  may  bear  about  with  us,  wherever  we  go,  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  in
those  who  thus  bear  about  that  precious  death,  the  life  also  of  Jesus  shall  be  manifested.
The  word  "  Golgotha  "  means  "  a  skull."  It  reminds  us  of  death ;  it  tells  us  what  wo
must  one  day  be.  But  in  that  place  which  is  called  "a  skull,"  he  who  is  the  Life  of  the
world  suffered  and  died ;  and  by  his  death  he  hath  abolished  death ;  and  we  know  that
through  him  this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption,  and  Ibis  mortal  must  put  on
immortality  in  that  day  when  he  shall  change  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  fashioning
it  like  unto  the  body  of  his  glory.  3.  The  stupefying  drink.  They  gave  him  wine  to
drink  mingled  with  gall.  Perhaps  the  women  who  bewailed  and  lamented  him  had
provided  it.  It  was  offered  in  kindness,  to  stupefy  the  senses  and  dull  the  feeling  of
pain.  The  Lord  acknowledged  the  kind  intention  by  tasting  the  offered  potion ;  but
he  would  not  drink  it.  He  did  not  refiue  the  vinegar  which  was  given  afterwards  in
answer  to  the  cry,  "  I  thirst."  But  he  would  not  take  the  opiate ;  he  would  meet
deatb  with  clear  untroubled  intellect.  We  cannot  comprehend  the  nature  of  that
spiritual  work  of  atonement  which  he  had  to  complete  ere  ihe  great  cry  of  victory,  "  It
is  finished  I"  could  issue  from  his  dying  lip.  He  would  keep  his  consciousness  calm
and  serene,  that  he  might  fulfil  that  sacred  work.  Let  Christians  imitate  their  Lord ;
let  them  never,  in  times  of  pain  or  distress,  allow  themselves  to  seek  relief  in  strong
drink ;  let  them  learn  submission  from  the  blessed  Master.

Lessonb.  1.  The  Lord  was  scourged.  Bepine  not  in  pain  and  agony,  in  unmerited
disgrace.  2.  He  was  mocked.  Kndure  derision  if  it  comes  in  his  providence,  3.  He
bore  the  cross.    Learn  to  bear  it  after  Christ.

Vers.  35 — 60. — The  Crucifixion.  L  The  Bomax  boldibbs.  1.  They  crucified  him.
The  evangelists  relate  the  awful  deed  with  that  grand  simplicity  which  is  characteristic
of  Holy  Scripture.  There  is  no  rhetorical  description,  nothing  sensational  in  tiieir
accounts.  But  it  was  beyond  all  comparison  the  most  stupendous  event  that  has  ever
happened  on  this  earth  of  ours.  They  crucified  him.  He  wag  the  Son  of  God,  the
Word  of  the  Father,  by  whom  all  things  were  made.  He  was  the  Brightness  of  the
Father's  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his  Person ;  and  they  crucified  him.  He  gavu
himself  to  die.  That  tremendous  sacrifice  must  imply  tremendous  necessities,  deep
incomprehensible  causes  hidden  in  the  mysteries  of  the  awful  holiness  of  God,  and  the
terrible  corruption  of  humanity.  It  must  mean  that  the  accumulated  guilt  of  the  sin
of  the  world  ww  a  burden  which  noo«  could  bear,  a  curse  which  none  could  take  away,


608         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvii.  1—66,

but  God  himself.  It  muit  involye  isBues  deep-reaching  and  mysterious,  very  blessed
find  sacred,  but  Tery,  rery  awful.  And  oh,  it  sets  before  ug  a  love  beautiful  above  al]
beauty,  holy  above  all  holiness,  tender,  compassionatp,  intense,  above  all  that  our
selfish  hearts  can  conceive  of  sweetest  pity  and  most  entire  Felf-saorifioe.  The  cross  is
the  central  point  of  the  world's  history ;  all  the  great  lines  of  our  deepest  moral  and
spiritual  interests  meet  in  it  or  radiate  from  it.  It  was  once  a  thing  must  hateful  and
iiiost  horrible,  far  more  suggestive  of  shame  and  horror  then  than  the  gibbet  is  now.
But  the  Lord  most  holy  died  thereon  for  our  salvation ;  and  the  glory  of  his  precious
love  has  shed  an  aureole  of  golden  light  around  the  tree  of  shame.  And  now  the  cross
is  to  Christian  hearts  of  all  things  dear  the  dearest  and  the  most  sacred ;  for  it  tells  us
with  its  silent  eloquence  the  blessed  story  of  the  exceeding  great  love  of  our  Master  and
only  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  They  crucified  him,  the  four  Roman  soldiers ;  they  knew
not  what  they  did ;  they  knew  nothing,  probably,  of  the  Lord's  life,  of  his  holiness,  of
his  works  of  power  and  love;  they  were  but  obeying  orders;  they  were  less  guilty
than  Pilate,  than  Caiaphas,  than  Judas.  Perhaps  they  took  a  wicked  pleasure  in  that
deed  of  blood.  They  may  probably  have  taken  part  in  the  insults  and  mockery  which
preceded  the  Crucifixion ;  they  had  no  awe  for  Christ  at  first.  Afterwards  the  centurion
in  command,  and  (it  seems  from  St.  Matthew's  account)  the  soldiers  also,  recognized
the  Divine  majesty  of  the  awful  Sufferer.  It  may  be,  we  cannot  tell,  that  that
centurion,  that  those  very  soldiers,  were  saved  by  the  precious  blood  which  was  shod
by  their  hands.  They  pierced  the  Lord;  they  pierced  his  hands  and  his  feet;  in
another  and  k  more  guilty  sense  it  was  the  Jews  who  pierced  him ;  in  another  sense,  a
true  and  deep  sense,  it  was  all  sinners,  especially  those  who  have  sinned  against  his
cross,  against  light,  and  against  knowledge.  But  it  is  written,  "  They  shall  look  upon
me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him ; "  "  Blessed  are  they  that
mourn :  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  We  have  pierced  the  Lord  by  our  sins  and
faardnoss;  but  if  the  great  love  of  the  crucified  Lord  brings  us  to  penitence,  he  will
forgive,  he  will  comfort,  he  will  save.  They  crucified  him.  We  can  scarcely  conceive
the  horrors  which  that  word  expresses,  the  shame,  the  cruel  pain,  the  protracted
torture.  Thank  God,  those  dreadful  sights  are  seen  ho  longer;  the  cross  of  the  Lord
saved  humanity  from  the  cross.  The  first  Christiau  emperor  forbade  the  infliction  of
that  dreadful  punishment.  Christianity  has  done  much  to  soften  the  hardness  of  human
uatiu'e;  that  cruelty  which  was  once  so  common  seems  to  us  now  horrible  and
revolting.  But  the  dear  Lord  suffered  all  that  the  most  atrocious  brutality  could
inflict,  unrelieved  by  any  touch  of  pity  except  the  offer  of  the  stupefying  draught,  and
the  sponge  full  of  vinegar ;  unrelieved  by  any  oflices  of  love  save  the  silent  sympathy
of  the  five,  or  four,  faithful  ones  who  "  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus."  We  should  tbink
much  of  those  sufferings,  and  bring  them  home  to  our  hearts,  and  try  to  realize  them
in  all  their  touching  details.  The  daily,  constant  thought  of  the  cross  is  a  great  safe-
guard against  wilful  sin,  against  ingratitude,  against  ambitious  dreams,  against
murmuring  and  repining.  In  our  sufferings,  when  we  are  oppressed  and  ready  to  sink,
let  us  remember  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us,  by  an  act  of  faitb,
offer  our  sufferings  to  God,  uniting  them  by  faith  with  the  one  great  "coeptable
Sacrifioe,  that  he  may  make  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  that  through  faitb  in  tba
crucified  Saviour  our  sufferings  may  become  a  cross ;  for  the  cross,  we  know,  rairics
the  Christian  man  nearer  to  God,  nearer  to  heaven,  2.  Thty  parted  hit  garments.
Virtue  had  come  out  of  those  garments,  and  had  healed  those  who  had  touched  the  very
hem.  They  would  have  been  regarded  by  Christians  as  most  sacred  relics.  But  the
rough  soldiers  thought  nothing  of  the  dignity  of  him  who  had  worn  them.  Perhaps
they  despised  them  as  poor  and  valueless ;  but,  such  as  they  were,  they  were  their
perquisites ;  they  divided  them,  and  cast  lots  upon  .the  seamless  tunic.  Thus  they
fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  the  twenty-second  psalm — that  psalm  which  describes  suffer-
ings such  as  were  never  borne  by  David  or  by  any  of  the  Old  Testament  worthies,
but  which  was  so  wonderfully  fulfilled  in  the  circumstances  of  the  death  of  Christ.
Tlie  soldiers  little  thought  that  they  wore  doing  what  God  had  foreordained.  How
Btiange  it  seems  to  us  that  they  could  cast  lots,  perhaps  shake  the  dice  in  their  brazen
helmets,  at  the  very  foot  of  the  cross  I  Sacred  symbols  will  inspire  reverence  only  in
those  who  have  a  reverent  spirit.  They  will  not  keep  careless  men  from  ureverent
talk,  or  even  Irom  drinking  or  gambling.     3.  2%ey  W0,(ched  him.     They  watched  lest


CH.  xxvn.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         609

his  disciples  sliotjld  take  him  down.  They  gat  there  and  watched,  whlling  away  the
tedious  houi'8  wiih  vulgar  jesta  and  rough  talk  and  idle  games.  Not  for  a  long  time
did  the  awful  acene  touch  their  stern  uncultured  hearts.  It  seems  to  ua  a  marvellous
thing  that  that  great  sight  should  have  had  at  first  so  little  influence  on  the  surrounding
multitude.  But  human  nature  is  the  same  in  all  ages.  Men's  hearts  are  as  hard  now
as  they  were  then.  Those  who  read  in  vain,  without  sympathy  and  without  emotion,
the  gospel  story  of  the  blessed  Saviour's  death,  in  vain  had  seen  him  die.  Let  us
watch  the  dying  Lord,  but  not  as  those  soldiers  watched  him.  Let  us  live  much
under  the  shadow  of  the  cross,  watching  that  precious  death  with  sorrow  and  contrition
and  adoring  thankful  love.  We  know  what  was  not  known  to  those  Eoman  soldiers —
it  is  "  the  Son  of  God  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."  4.  The  title.  Pilate
wrote  a  title,  and  put  it  on  the  cross.  The  four  evangelists  give  the  title  with  slight
differences.  They  did  not  heed  the  exact  form  of  the  expression.  They  alL  give  the
essential  words,  "  The  King  of  the  Jews."  It  was  not  the  accusation  of  blasphemy
which  caused  the  Saviour's  death.  That  would  have  had  no  weight  with  Pilate.  It
was  the  charge  of  making  himself  a  King  which  forced  the  Boman  governor  to  condemn
the  Innocent.  Pilate,  by  this  writing,  showed  at  once  the  real  grounds  on  which  his
consent  had  been  wrung  from  him,  and  his  own  angry  contempt  of  the  Jews.  This
was  tlieir  King — this  poor,  bleeding,  crucified  One,  And,  it  may  be,  he  meant  to
imply  his  secret  half-belief  that  the  Lord  was  in  some  sense  a  King,  far  more  noble,
high-souled,  king-like,  than  those  hypocritical  chief  priests  whom  he  so  thoroughly
despised,  who  had  driven  him  to  a  deed  which  he  so  utterly  hated.  We  know  that  he
is  the  King,  the  King  of  God's  ancient  people,  the  King  of  the  Israel  of  Gud,  the  King
who  shall  one  day  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory  to  judge  the  world.  He  reigneth  from
the  cross.  The  cross  is  the  throne  vvl)ich  has  raised  him  to  a  more  than  royal  empire —
an  empire  over  the  hearts  of  men,  over  all  the  best  and  honest  and  holiest  human  loul*
from  that  time  ever  onwards.  6.  They  crucified  two  robbers  with  him.  Bobbers  they
were  rather  than  thieves — ^perhaps  accomplices  of  Barabbas — possibly  insurgents  against
the  Boman  government.  And  thus  the  Lord,  the  Most  Holy  One,  was  numbered  with
the  transgressors,  for  they  were  punished  justly.  One  was  set  on  the  right  hand  of
Christ,  the  other  on  the  left — an  anticipation  of  the  great  gathering  on  the  right  and
left  of  the  Judge  in  the  awful  day.  In  the  centre  was  the  cross  of  atonement ;  ou  the
right,  the  cross  of  repentance ;  on  the  left,  the  cross  of  despair.  Man  Is  born  to
sorrow.  All  of  us  must  bear,  in  some  form,  at  some  time,  the  cross  of  suffering.  But
in  the  midst  of  a  suffering  world  rises  the  cross  of  atonement,  the  cross  which  the  holy
Son  of  God  alone  could  bear.  The  cross  of  atonement  draws  many  by  its  constraining
power  to  take  up  the  cross  of  repentance — repentance  not  to  be  repented  of.  But  alas  1
there  are  some  who  reject  and  despise  the  atoning  lore  of  Christ ;  and  their  portion
must  be,  at  the  last,  the  awful  cross  of  despair.

II.  The  mookbbs.  1.  The  pasierd-by.  Mockery  was  a  bitter  ingredient  in  the
Lord's  cup  of  sorrow.  He  had  been  mocked  by  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  by  Herod
and  his  men  of  war,  by  the  Boman  soldiers,  and  now,  alas,  that  cruel  mockery  was
renewed  and  intensified  aa  he  hung  dying  on  the  cross.  Surely,  we  think,  a  crucified
man  might  be  left  alone  to  die ;  surely  that  cruelty  must  be  truly  Satanic  which  in
the  presence  of  that  intense  lufiering  was  not  only  without  pity,  but  sought  to  embitter
by  insulting  taunts  the  agonies  of  the  dying.  The  indifference  of  others  is  very  dis-
tressing to  Buiferera.  "  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ?  Behold,  and  see  if
there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow."  But  how  much  worse  was  that  heartless,
wicked  scorn  I  And  the  dear  Lord,  we  are  sure,  must  have  felt  it  all  the  more  deeply,
because  he  was  dying  there  for  the  souls  of  men,  for  the  souls  of  those  very  men  who
were  mocking  him  in  his  anguish ;  and  he  knew  that  that  mocking  meant  that  their
hearts  were  hardened  against  his  dying  love,  that  for  most  of  them  that  tremendous
sacrifice  was  offered  up  in  vain,  l^his  mockery  was  prophesied  (Ps.  xxii.  6 — 8) ;  it  is
mentioned  again  and  again  in  the  predictions  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  This  shows
its  importance.  The  Lord  must  drink  to  the  dregs  the  cup  which  the  Fatlier  had
given  him ;  every  element  of  woe  in  that  cup  has  its  part,  we  may  be  sure,  in  working
out  our  redemption  ;  nothing  was  in  vain.  The  Lord  must  suffer  scorn  and  contempt
as  well  as  bodily  pain,  cruelty  of  the  lips  as  well  as  of  the  hands,  that,  suffering  all  the
forms  of  anguish,  he  might  make  an  atonement  for  all  the  forms  of  sin.     He  listened

UATTHKW — Hr  8   •


6  Id        fat:  GOStEL  ACCOtlDlNe  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ca.  xsm  1-^6.

in  silence ;  his  followers  must  learn  of  their  dying  Lord  the  Christian  lesson  of  meek-
ness. "When  thou  art  reviled,™  says  Chrysostom,  "set  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon
thine  heart;  think  how  the  Lord  upon  the  eross  endured  that  cruel  scorn,  and  learn
of  him."  The  passers-by  reviled' him;  they  fulfilled  unconsciously  the  predictions  of
the  twenty-second  psalm ;  they  repeated  the  misrepresentations  of  the  false  witnesses ;
they  repeated  the  taunt  of  the  tempter,  "  If  tliou  be  the  Son  of  God."  The  Scm  of
God,  the  tempter  had  suggested,  shoulil  not  suffer  pain  and  hunger ;  the  Son  of  God,
the  niockars  said,  could  not  hang  and  die  upon  the  cross.  They  little  thought  that  it
was  because  he  was  the  Son  of  God  that  he  would  patiently  suffer,  that  he  would
meekly  die.  None  other  than  the  Son  of  God  could  sufter  that  anguish,  could  die  thn  t
death — "the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gare  himself  for  me."  2.  Thf  chief
priests.  They  came  too  with  the  scribes  and  elders;  they  did  not  think  it  unbecoming
to  join  in  the  shameless  insults  of  the  vulgar  crowd  ;  they  forgot  the  dignity  of  their
sacred  office;  they  taunted  the  dying  Saviour  with  his  seeming  helplessness.  "He
saved  others,"  they  said;  they  acknowledged  the  truth  of  his  miracles,  his  works  of
love ;  and  in  their  blind  wickedness  they  upbraided  him  with  those  very  works,  with
that  rery  love.  In  their  ignorance  they  proclaimed  a  great  truth,  though  they  knew
it  not.  "  He  saved  others ;  himself  he  cannot  save."  Yes,  it  was  because  he  would
save  others  that  he  could  not  save  himself.  He  was  laying  down  his  life  of  himself;
at  any  moment  during  those  long  hours  of  torture  he  might  have  put  forth  his  almighty
power ;  but  how,  then,  should  the  Scriptures  he  fulfilled?  How  should  God  and  man
be  reconciled?  How  should  sin  be  put  away,  and  sinful  man  be  saved?  He  who
would  save  others  must  forgot  himself.  The  Loid  is  the  Divine  example  of  the  most
entire  self-sacrifice :  let  us  adore  him ;  let  us  imitate  him.  "  He  is  the  King  of  Israel,"
they  said  In  their  biting,  wicked  irony ;  they  said  the  truth,  though  they  said  it  in
mockery.  They  bade  him  come  down  from  the  cross ;  then,  they  said,  they  would
believe  on  him.  But  he  knew  their  hearts ;  they  would  not  have  believed  had  he  done
so.  He  had  raised  Lazarus ;  he  did  afterwards  raise  himself  from  the  dead ;  but  they
would  not  be  persuaded.  Faith  and  love  cannot  be  forced  by  a  display  of  power.
The  Lord  would  win  the  love  of  men  by  his  own  constraining  love.  Love  is  free ;  it
springs  from  the  true  heart  to  meet  the  lore  which  calls  it  forth.  It  was  his  blessed
lieath  upon  the  cross,  not  a  descent  from  the  cross  in  awful  majesty,  which  was  to
draw  all  men  to  him.  The  chief  priests  derided  him  for  his  seeming  weakness ;  they
dared  even  to  deride  him  for  his  trust  in  God.  "  He  trusted  in  God,"  they  said,  and
then  unconsciously  used  the  very  words  of  prophecy,  the  words  of  the  twenty-second
psalm,  in  their  wickedness,  "  Let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  have  him ; "  repeat-
ing the  insults  of  the  passers-by,  and  taunting  him  with  his  assertion  of  his  Divine
nature ;  for  he  said,  "  I  am  the  Son  of  God."  3.  2'he  crmified  thieves.  They  too  reviled
him,  "  If  thou  be  Christ,  save  thyself  and  us."  Affliction  does  not  always  soften ;
sometimes  it  leads  to  discontent,  murmuring,  rebellion.  The  near  approach  of  death
does  not  always  bring  men  to  repentance ;  sin  hardens  the  heart ;  men  commonly  die
as  they  have  lived.  The  outward  cross  cannot  save  the  soul;  in  the  very  presence  of
the  cross  of  atonement,  in  the  very  sight  of  the  precious  blood>  there  was  one  miser-
able death — a  death  of  agony  without  hope,  without  repentance,  without  forgiyeness.
The  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  very  awful,  but  his  most  blessed  love  sheds  around  it
a  glory  of  unearthly  radiance.  The  cross  of  the  penitent  thief  is  awful  too;  but  his
repentance,  faith,  and  hope  are  full  of  sweet  comfort  for  the  contrite  sinner.  The  cross
on  the  left  hand  is  dreadful  beyond  all  words ;  for,  alas  !  there  is  nothing  to  relieve  the
horror  of  that  death  of  agony  and  blasphemy.  Let  us  beware  and  take  heed  to  our-
selves ;  there  is  but  one  case  of  deathbed  repentance  recorded  in  Holy  Sorijit  ure.  There
is  one;  then  we  may  hope  for  others  even  against  hope:  there  is  only  one  ;  then  we  may
not  dare  to  trust  for  ourselves  to  a  hope  so  slender.

III.  The  end.  1,  Vie  three  hours'  darkness.  It  was  about  the  sixth  hour.  The
noonday  sun  should  have  been  pouring  its  full  light  upon  Jerusalem.  But  there  was
a  horror  of  great  darkness— a  darkness  that  could  be  felt.  It  might  well  be  so.  He
was  hanging  on  the  cross  by  whom  all  things  were  made.  He  was  dying  who  upholdeth
all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power.  So  stupendous  an  event,  the  death  of  him  who  is
the  Life  of  the  world,  must  be  attended  by  wonders,  by  strange  and  awful  signs.  That
fearful  darkness  was  a  stern  rebuke  to  the  cruel  brutal  mockers.    Nature  was  (aounnini^


etL  iTVti.  1-66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.        fill

for  the  Lord  of  nature,  whom  man,  his  nohlt'st  creature,  was  thus  maltreating.  The
Bupematural  blackness  of  the  sky  figured  the  black  wickedness  of  that  fearful  crime.
The  great  darkness  wrapt  the  dying  Lord  like  a  funeral  pall,  hiding  from  unsym-
pathizing  eyes  that  most  awful  spiritual  conflict  by  which  the  loving  Saviour  wrought
out  our  salvation.  It  seems  to  warn  us  that  we  may  not  pry  too  curiously  into  the
mysterious  secrets  of  his  atoning  work.  It  is  hit  work  ;  he  alone  can  accomplish  it.
"I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone:  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me"
(Isa.  Ixiii.  3).  We  stand  afar  off,  and  beat  our  breasts  in  the  consciousness  of  great
sin  and  utter  unworthiness,  and  adore  the  most  gracious  Redeemer,  who  loved  us  with
that  exceeding  love  which  passeth  knowledge.  2.  Hie  great  cry.  The  ninth  hour
was  almost  come.  The  Lord's  last  moments  were  now  very  near,  when  an  exceeding
loud  cry  pealed  through  the  encompassing  darkness.  Ilic  Lord's  holy  humnn  soul
was  emerging  from  the  awful  struggle.  He  had  been  bearing,  we  may  reverently  and
sorrowfully  believe,  the  extreme  burden  of  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  They  had
been  pressed  upon  him,  in  all  their  horror  and  loathsomeness,  in  that  hour  when  he
was  made  "  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  ein."  The  Lord  looked  back  in  clear
consciousness  upon  the  fearful  strife.  "  My  God,"  he  said.  He  quoted  that  wonderful
twenty-second  psalm,  in  which,  ages  before,  he  had  by  bis  Spirit  depicted  his  own
future  Bufferings.  He  teaches  us  by  his  own  examjile  to  use  the  blessed  words  of  Holy
Scriptme  in  our  distress,  in  our  death-agony.  "  My  God."  The  Son  of  God  never
lost  his  trustfulness  in  his  heavenly  Father.  Never  for  one  moment  could  there  be
a  darkening  of  the  perfect  love,  of  the  ineffable  communion,  of  the  Father  and  the
only  begotten  Son ;  and  then  came  those  mysterious  words,  "  Why  didst  thou
forsake  me  ?  "  Did  those  words  relate  to  some  strange  awful  experience  of  the  Lord's
human  soul?  Was  that  soul  left  as  it  were  alone  for  a  while  in  the  presence  of  sin —
the  sin  of  the  whole  world  ?  Had  that  blessed  soul  to  bear  (we  may  say  each  one  to
himself)  the  guilt  of  my  sin,  and  to  feel  that  horror  of  great  darkness  when  the  face
of  God  is  hidden  from  the  sinner?  We  cannot  but  ask  ourselves  these  and  such-like
questions.  We  cannot  answer  them.  It  is  a  subject  less  suitable  for  words  than  for
prayer  and  solemn  meditation.  But  if  it  is  most  awful,  it  is  also  full  of  precious
comfort.  In  the  extreme  anguish  of  spiritual  depression  the  Christian  soul  is  not  cut
off  from  Christ.  There  is  no  sorrow  so  great  as  this;  and  sometimes  God's  holiest
cjiildren  seem  very  severely  tried  by  it.  Tes,  in  those  saddest  hours  when  we  seem
well-nigh  hopeless,  when  we  have  lost  heart,  and  there  is  no  joy,  but  only  darkness
all  around,  even  then  let  us  draw  closer  to  the  cross,  and  strain  our  eyes  to  see  the
Crucified  One,  and  think  of  the  great  darkness  that  hung  around  his  cross,  and  listen
to  his  dying  words.  Let  us  say,  " My  God,  mine  ever  in  gloom  and  spiritual  dryness
and  chill  joyless  depression — my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  Only  let  us
trust  him,  and  wo  shall  know  at  last,  even  in  that  bitterest  of  sorrows,  that  "  whom
he  loveth  he  chastoneth."  We  shall  hear  at  last  in  our  inmost  hearts  the  words  of
comfort,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee!"  3.  I%e  vinegar,  A  strange
dread  came  upon  the  souls  of  the  surrounding  multitude  ;  there  was  no  mockery  now,
but  awful  expectation.  They  thought  that  the  Lord  had  called  for  the  great  prophet
Elijah,  the  prophet  who  was  to  appear  before  the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day
of  the  Lord.  Would  he  come?  they  said  to  one  another,  in  excited  whispers.  And  now
there  was  some  sympathy,  perhaps  springing  from  fear,  for  the  dying  Lord.  One  of
them  gave  him  to  drink.  The  Lord  did  not  refuse  the  vinegar  as  he  bad  refused  the
medicated  potion.  He  received  it  in  gracious  condescension.  He  had  nothing  of  that
haughtiness  which  prompts  men  to  reject  acts  of  kindness  from  those  who  have
wronged  them.  There  was  a  solemn  hush  among  the  crowd,  a  stillness  of  awe,  such
as  we  feel  sometimes  when  a  great  darkness  comes  over  the  heavens  at  the  approach
of  some  tremendous  storm.  Would  Elijah  come  ?  they  whispered  one  to  another.  He
came  not.  The  Lord  needed  him  not;  he  was  giving  his  life  for  the  love  of  souls.  4.
The  Lord's  death.  The  Lord  cried  again  with  a  great  voice.  Perhaps  that  cry  was
the  word  of  triumph  recorded  by  St.  John,  "  It  is  finished  I "  He  had  finished  the
work  which  the  Father  bad  given  him  to  do;  he  looked  back  upon  his  finished
work,  and  summed  it  up  in  that  one  loud  cry  of  victory.  That  loud  cry  from  the
cross  peals  through  the  world ;  still  its  echoes  fall  upon  our  ears.  It  calls  for  our
derout  contemplation  of  thnt  finished  life  of  holiness  and  beauty.    It  calls  upon  each


612         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOSDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvn,  1—60

Christian  bo  to  live,  la  the  imitation  of  that  perfect  life,  that  he  too  may,  through  the
giaoe  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  cleansing  power  of  the  precious  blood,  look  back  in
Bome  poor  measure  on  a  work  in  some  sense  finished,  when  his  last  hour  is  come.
That  loud  cry  spoke  not  of  exhaustion ;  but  at  once,  when  his  work  was  finished,  the
Lord  bowed  his  head,  and  yielded  up  the  ghost.  The  physical  antecedent  of  his
death  was  probably  a  broken  heart ;  the  true  cause  was  his  own  sovereign  will.  He
yielded  up  the  ghost ;  he  let  his  human  soul  pass  from  the  body.  It  was  his  act,
his  will ;  none  took  his  life  from  him ;  none  could  take  it  from  him ;  he  laid  it  down
of  himself.  The  holy  body  hung  lifeless  on  the  cross ;  the  holy  soul  passed  into
Paradise.

Lessokb.  1.  The  cross  Is  the  central  fact  in  the  world's  history.  Let  it  be  the
central  motive  in  our  hearts.  2.  The  Lord  suffered  cruel  pain.  Let  us  lift  up  our
hearts  to  him  in  our  anguish.  3.  He  is  the  King  of  the  Jews.  Let  us  take  him  for
the  King  of  our  hearts.  4.  He  was  cruelly  derided.  Let  us  take  insults  patiently.
6.  He  died.    Let  us  learn  of  him  how  to  die.

Vers.  51 — 56. —  Witness  to  the  Lord's  Divinity.  T.  Thb  witness  of  pobtents.
1.  The  rending  -of  the  temple  veil.  "  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."
It  may  be  that  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God,  yielded  up  tbe  ghost  on  the  day  and
at  the  hour  when  they  killed  the  Passover.  It  was  the  hour  of  evening  prayer.
The  priests  as  they  entered  into  the  holy  place  found  the  great  veil,  which  hid  the
holy  of  holies  from  the  eye  of  man,  fent  ir  twain  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  This
had  happened  at  the  moment  of  the  Lord's  death;  it  was  closely  associated  with
that  tremendous  event.  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  mention  the  Lord's  death  first,
St.  Luke  puts  first  the  rending  of  the'  veil ;  the  two  events  were  so  very  closely
connected  in  time  and  meaning.  The  evangelists  felt  the  deep  spiritual  significance
of  the  rending  of  the  veil  ;_so  doubtless  did  that  great  company  of  priests,  who  after-
words became  obedient  to 'the  faith.  It  was  a  supernatural  event,  not  the  result  of
the  earthquake  or  of  any  ordinary  cause.  It  had  a  deep  and  blessed  meaning.  The
holy  of  holies  was  the  one  spot  in  all  the  earth  where  God  had  been  wont  to  manifest-
bis  immediate  presence  in  a  special  manner.  That  manifestation  had  been  surrounded
with  circumstances  of  awe.  The  sacred  place  where  the  Most  High  had  dwelt  between
the  cherubim  was  hidden  from  men  by  the  great  heavy  veil,  shrouded  in  awful
darkness.  Only  on  one  day  in  the  year  might  that  veil  be  lifted ;  only  one  mortal
being  might  dare  to  enter,  and  that  with  solemn  rites  of  propitiation,  with  great  fear  '
and  trembling.  Biit  now  the  veil  was  rent ;  it  was  rent  at  the  moment  of  the
Saviour's  death :  and  evidently  by  the  Divine  interposition.  The  solemn  ritual  of  the  great
Day  of  Atonement  was  fulfilled  in  the  one  Sacrifice  now  offered  upon  the  cross.  Such
rites  were  no  longer  needed.  God  himself  opens  the  way  into  the  most  holy  place.
His  people  may  draw  near,  very  near,  into  his  immediate  presence.  All  may  come,
not  the  high  priest  only,  but  all  faithful  Christians ;  for  he  who  washed  us  from  our
gins  in  his  own  blood  hath  made  us  priests  unto  God  and  bis  Father,  to  ofier  up
spiritual  sacrifices,  mcceptable  unto  God  through  him.  But  the  rent  veil  figured  also
the  pieiced  body  of  the  Saviour;  for  thus  saith  the  Scripture,  "Having  therefore,
brBthren,  boldness  to  enter  into  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,
which  he  hath  consecrated  fur  us,  though  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh,  ...  let  us
draw  near  with  a  true  heart "  (Heb.  x.  19 — 22).  The  Divine  Word  dwelt  ("  taber-
nacled," John  i.  14)  in  the  body  of  Christ.  Now  that  tabernacle  was  rent.  While
he  was  in  the  flesh,  that  veil  of  mortal  flesh  hun",  like  the  temjile  veil,  between  him
and  the  true  holy  of  holies.  When  it  was  rent,  the  way  into  tbe  holiest  was  made
manifest,  and  the  Lord  in  his  glorified  humanity,  "by  his  own  blood  entered  in  once
into  the  holy  place,"  that  is,  "into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for
us."  There  he  is  making  intei  cession  for  us,  and  in  the  power  of  that  prevailing  inter-
cession we  may  draw  near  to  God.  The  veU  is  rent.  There  was  a  veil  over  all  nations
(Isa.  ixv.  7,  8) ;  it  was  destroyed  when  death  was  swallowed  up  in  victory.  There  is
neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  barbarian  nor  Scythian,  but  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all.  The
veil  is  rent.  There  was  a  veil  upon  the  hearts  of  men,  that  veil  is  done  away  in
Christ.  They  that  are  his,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the
Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  th«


ea.*x\rn.l_e6.]    THE  (JOSPEL  ACCORomG  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         613

Lord.  2.  The  earthquake.  "  The  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent."  It  might  well
be  expected.  Prodigies  such  as  these  are  nothing  in  comparison  with  that  greatest  of
all  wonders  which  had  just  taken  place.  These  lesser  signs  attested  the  tremendous
power  of  that  moral  earthquake  which  the  death  of  Christ  would  cause.  Old  beliefs
would  be  shattered,  old  superstitions  rent ;  there  would  be  a  great  heaving  in  men's
hearts,  a  severing  of  old  lines  of  thought,  a  mighty  change  in  the  spiritual  order  of
the  world.  3.  The  opened  graves.  There  was  a  strange  excitement  in  the  realm  of  the
dead.  It  might  well  be  so.  Isaiah  represents  the  nations  of  the  dead  as  stirred  at  the
coming  of  the  King  of  Babylon  (xiv.  9 — 12),  But  what  is  the  death  of  the  greatest
of  earthly  monarchs  compared  with  the  death  of  him  who  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  The
dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God."  The  "loud  voice"  of  the  dying  Jesus  was
heard  in  Hades.  The  graves  were  opened.  And  when  he  arose,  who  is  the  Firstborn
from  the  dead,  many  bodies  of  the  saints  came  out,  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and
appeared  unto  many.  A  wondrous  miracle,  but  not  wondro-is  compared  with  that
chiefest  of  all  wundero.  the  death  and  resurrection  it  the  Lord.  It  is  not  strange  that
smaller  wonders  shoijid  cluster  round  that  great  centicil  wonder.

II.  The  witness  of  men.  1.  ITie  centurion  and  eoldien.  They  feared  greatly,
the  centurion  especially.  It  seems  from  St.  Mark's  account  that  he  was  deeply  moved,
not  only  by  the  earthquake,  but  by  the  words  and  bearing  of  the  Lord.  He  felt  not
only  that  the  Lord  was  wholly  innocent  (Luke  xxiii.  47),  but  that  he  was  more  than
man;  that  that  title  which  the  mockers  had  ascribed  to  him  in  scorn  was  truly  his;
he  was  the  Son  of  God.  That  centurion  "glorified  God;"  he  probably  became  one  of
that  noble  band  of  Homan  soldiers,  like  the  centurion  at  Capernaum  and  Cornelius  of
Csesarea,  who  believed  in  the  Lord.  The  cross  of  Christ,  and  the.Lord  lifted  up  thereon,
could  draw  all  men  unto  him,  even  the  Soman  centurion,  even  the  soldiers  who  had
pierced  him,  who  had  sat  dicing  beneath  the  cross.  May  we,  one  and  all,  feel  its  con-
straining power  I  2.  The  women.  TheLord'smother  had  stood  by  the  cross;  probably
8t.  John  had  led  her  away  before  the  Saviour's  death.  But.  there  were  still  many
women  beholding  afar  off — good  and  holy  women,  who  had  followed  Christ  from
Galilee,  and  ministered  to  him  of  their  substance.  Mary  of  Magdala  was  there,  out  of
whom  the  Lord  had  cast  seven  devils,  who  loved  him  with  the  devoted  love  of  deepest
gratitude ;  Salome,  who  had  asked  for  her  sons  the  chief  places  in  the  Saviour's  king-
dom, and  now  saw  the  two  crucified  malefactors,  one  on  his  right  hand  and  the  other
on  his  left.  They  had  ministered  to  him  in  life,  gladly  giving  their  worldly  means
to  supply  his  wants;  now  they  were  faithful  even  unto  death.  Let  us  imitate  them
in  their  loving  almsgiving,  in  their  holy  steadfastness,  in  their  watching  round  the
cross.  Christians  should  give  freely.  Christians  should  be  faithful  in  danger  and  in
death,  Christians  should  ever  gaze  upon  the  cross  of  Jesus.

Lessons.  1.  The  veil  is  rent.  Use  the  Christian's  privilege ;  draw  near  in  faith
and  love  and  reverence.  2.  The  cross  won  those  Boman  soldiers.  Let  us  be  ashamed
of  our  hard  hearts;  let  us  pray  for  the  strength  of  deep  conviction.  3.  Be  faithful,
like  those  Qalilaaan  women.

Vers.  57—66. — The  Lord's  grave.  L  Thb  bdbial.  1.  Joseph  of  Arimathwa.  He
was  a  rich  man  and  a  counsellor.  Like  Nicodemus,, he  believed  in  Christ;  but,  like
Nicodemus,  he  had  not  had  the  courage  to  avow  his  convictions.  His  rank,  perhaps,
and  his  riches  had  kept  him  back.  It  was  hard  for  a  man  in  his  position  to  espouse
the  cause  of  the  despised  Prophet  of  Nazareth.  He  had,  perhaps,  absented  himself  from
the  council  at  which  the  Lord  was  condemned.  He  would  not  take  part  in  that  awful
crime,  but  probably  he  had  not  dared  to  oppose  it  openly.  Yet,  notwithstanding  his
timidity,  he  was  a  good  man,  and  a  just ;  he  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God  (Luke  xxiii.
50,  61).  God  judges  more  tenderly  than  men.  We  are  apt  to  condemn  a  man  wholly
when  we  see  one  great  fault  in  him.  God  sometimes  sees  sincerity,  a  real  yearning  after
truth  and  goodness,  where  we  refuse  to  see  anything  save  the  one  obvious  defect.  And
now  Joseph  shook  off  his  weakness.  The  Lord's  majesty  in  suffering  confirmed  his  waver-
ing faith.  He  was  ashamed  of  his  cowardice.  He  had  not  done  his  best  to  save  his
Master.  He  would  at  least  honour  him  now,  cost  what  it  might.  He  went  in  boldly
unto  Pilate,  and  craved  the  body  of  Jesus.  It  was  a  brave  deed.  Friends  of  martyred
Christians  again  and  again  brought  the  death  of  martyrdom  upon  themselves  by  ioing


eU       ME  eOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MAWHEW.     [cb.  xxvii.  1— «e.

the  like.  But  Pilate  commanded  the  body  to  be  delirered.  He  had  washed  his  haodw
before  coDsenting  to  the  Savioar'i  death.  Perhaps  he  thought  that  respect  for  the
lifeless  body  might  help,  like  that  poor  outward  form,  to  atone  for  his  guilt.  2.  The
tepulchre.  The  holy  body  was  to  receive  no  more  indignities.  It  was  not  thrown,
as  ttie  chief  priests  had  probably  expected,  into  some  dishonoured  grave  with  the  two
malefactors ;  it  was  not  left  to  the  eleven,  who  could  provide  only  some  poor  interment.
He  was  "  with  the  rich  in  his  death."  Joseph  and  Nicodemus,  both  rich  men  and
honourable,  cast  aside  their  shame  and  (heir  fears.  They  took  the  sacred  body  from
the  cross  with  reverent  care,  wrapped  it  in  clean  and  tine  linen,  with  the  costly  gift  of
myiTh  and  aloes  brought  by  Nicodemus,  and  laid  it  in  Joseph's  own  tomb,  which  he
had  hewn  out  in  the  rock.  Thus  they  confessed  Christ  before  men.  While  th»
eleven  were  still  overcome  with  terror  and  despair,  these  two  men,  who  had  been  so
fearful,  shook  off  their  fears,  and  showed  openly  their  reverence  for  the  Lord.  They
feared  neither  the  tierce  anger  of  the  Jews  nor  the  ceremonial  defilement  which  would
keep  them  from  the  Passover  rites.  The  cross  of  Chri»t  could  make  the  timid  brave.
He  was  laid  in  a  tomb  hewn  out  of  the  rock.  The  rocks  about  Jerusalem  are  full  of
tombs.  The  whole  world,  indeed,  is  one  vast  cemetery.  Countless  multitudes  of  the
dead  lie  everywhere  around  us.  Clirist  hath  hallowed  the  grave  by  himself  resting
there.  We  may  be  well  content  that  our  poor  bodies  should  be  where  his  sacred  body
lay.  Only  let  us  seek  first  to  be  buried  with  him  by  baptism  unto  death ;  let  us  seek
to  realize  in  our  inner  souls  that  burial  with  Christ-  of  which  holy  baptism  is  the  token
and  tlie  pledge — a  burial  out  of  the  reach  of  the  defiling  touch  of  sin,  in  the  rock
where  the  allurements  of  sin  cannot  penetrate,  if  that  spiritual  burial  is  with  Christ.
8.  Tht  women.  Mary  of  Magdala  and  the  other  Mary  were  sitting  over  against  the
sepulchre.  "Seest  thou  the  courage  of  these  women?"  says  Chrysostom;  "seest  thou
their  affection?  seest  thou  how  they  continued  faithful  unto  death?  Let  us  men
imitate  these  women,  and  let  us  not  desert  the  Lord  in  the  hour  of  trial."

II.  Thb  BEALiNO  OP  THE  TOMB.  1.  The  f ears  of  the  cMef  priests.  The  awe  of  the
lasc  hours  of  the  Crucifixion  was  still  upon  their  souls.  The  Lord  was  dead,  but  they
could  not  rest,  not  even  on  the  sabbath.  Even  on  that  holy  day  they  came  with  the
Pharisees  to  the  Boman  governor ;  they  shrank  not  from  telling  him  their  fears  and  from
asking  his  help.  They  knew  of  the  Lord's  prophecy  of  his  resurrection  on  the  third  day,
though  they  perverted  it  for  their  own  ends.  Some  of  them  were  present  when  he  said,
"  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up."  They  may  have  heard  from
Judas  or  others  something  of  his  more  distinct  predictions ;  they  would  prevent  the  ful-
filment. Thebody  was  safe,  hidden  in  the  rock;  they  would  keep  it  there.  2.  The  guard.
Pilate  haughtily  disrnissed  them.  It  was  their  business ;  he  would  do  nothing  more  for
them.  They  had  a  guard.  Probably  there  was  a  small  body  of  soldiers  put  at  their  •
disposal  to  keep  order  during  the  Passover  celebration.  "Go,"  the  governor  said
sternly,  "  secure  it  as  you  best  can."  "  So  they  went  and  made  the  sepulchre  sure,
staling  the  stone,  and  setting  a  watch."  So  all  through  that  sabbath  day,  and  all
through  the  night  that  followed,  the  Roman  sentries  paced  up  and  down  before  the
sealed  stone.  And  now  the  chief  priests  felt  secure.  The  Lord's  body  lay  still  and
lifeless  in  the  sepulchre ;  his  own  followers  had  laid  it  there.  They,  had  tended  it
with  reverent  caie ;  but  they  had  no  thought,  no  hope  of  a  resurrection.  They  had
forgotten  the  Lord's  words ;  they  understood  them  not.  They  never  seemed  able  to
realize  what  he  told  them  from  time  to  time  of  his  approaching  sufferings  and  death,
and  of  the  glory  that  should  follow.  They  laid  the  sacred  body  in  myrrh  and  aloes ;
they  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  The  clief  priests  completed
the  work;  they  sealed  the  stone;  they  set  there  an  armed  guard;  they  knew  that  the
Lord's  disciples,  few  and  terrified  as  they  were,  would  uever  dare  to  encounter  those
dreaded  Roman  soldiers.  They  had  succeeded  in  accomplishing  their  awful  sin  ;  and,
if  their  consciences  allowed  them  to  sleep,  they  slept  that  night  securely.

Lessons.  1.  We  must  not  judge  men  hastily.  Joseph,  once  so  tearful,  showed
holy  courage  at  last.  2.  The  Loid  was  buried.  Let  us  not  fear  the  grave.  3.  His
burial  has  a  les.son  for  us.  We  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  unto  death.  "  How
shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  therein  ?  "  4.  The  wicked  may  exult  in
the  seeming  success  of  their  designs ;  but  the  Lord  reigneth.


CB.  tmt.  i-eej  fm  gospel  leeo&DiM  to  st.  MAttttEW.      m


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  4. — Judas's  confession.  The  wretched  traitor  got  no  satisfaction  out  of  his
crime.  No  sooner  had  he  committed  it  than  he  was  horrified  at  tlie  enormity  of  the
deed.  Covetous  a«  he  was,  he  could  not  hold,  the  blood-money,  and  he  flung  it  down
as  though  the  very  touch  of  it  burnt  his  fingers.  It  is  not  often  tliat  the  revulsion
from  an  act  of  wickedness  follows  so  swiftly.  Very  probably  Judas  was  aghast  at  the
consequence  of  his  treason,  never  having  imagined  that  it  would  issue  fatally.  He
may  have  aimed  at  forcing  the  hand  of  Jesus,  assuming  that  at  the  last  his  Master
would  exert  miraculous  powers  and  claim  his  Christly  rights.  If  so,  the  man  was
grievously  mistaken,  and  the  discovery  of  his  deadly  error  appalled  him.  Then  a  great
darkness  fell  upon  him,  and  the  madness  of  suicide  took  possession  of  him.  He  seems  to
stand  alone  in  the  enormity  of  his  crime,  but  hla  very  despair  shows  him  to  be  human,
and  his  confession  almost  gives  us  a  glimmer  of  hope  that  even  in  this  miswable  man
there  is  a  possibility  of  better  things.

I.  Thb  traitor  confessed  his  sin.  He  knew  that  he  had  acted  vilely,  and  his
accomplices,  who  were  glad  to  use  him  aa  their  tool,  had  no  pity  for  such  a  scoundrel.
But  it  is  something  that  he  was  brought  to  own  himself  a  sinner.  Tlie  vilest  sinner
is  the  man  who  tries  to  hide  his  sin,  who  plays  the  hypocrite  before  men,  and  who  even
endeavours  to  excuse  himself  in  his  own  conscience  by  sophistical  arguments.  There
are  sins,  however,  whose  scarlet  hue  so  blazes  in  the  sunlight  that  the  rankest
hypocrite  does  not  attempt  to  deny  them.  Confession  is  good,  but  it  is  not  repent-
ance, much  less  is  it  regeneration.

'II.  Judas  owned  the  innoobnob  of  Christ.  He  knaw  it  was  innocent  blood
that  ha  had  betjayed.  It  is  striking  to  notice  how  many  of  the  leading  actors  in  the
murder  of  Christ  testify  to  his  merits.  Pilate  could  find  no  fault  in  him.  The
centurion  at  the  cross  acknowledged  him  aa  a  Son  of  God.  Even  the  traitor  is  con-
strained by  his  own  conscience  to  own  his  treason  and  to  vindicate  the  innocenc*  of
his  Master.  Many  men  have  a  fair  appearance  in  the  distance,  but  they  will  not  bear
too  close  a  scrutiny.  But  those  who  knew  Jesus  most  intimately,  and  those  who
examined  him  in  the  most  critical  moments,  were  able  to  discover  no  flaw  in  his  perfect
character.

III.  Confession  or  sin  ahd  a  recognition  of  thb  merits  op  Chuist  abb  hot
surncBNT  for  salvation.  In  Judas  there  were  the  beginnings  of  better  things.
But  alas  I  they  ended  in  despair  and  death.  If  we  only  see  our  sin  and  Olirist's  good-
ness, we  may  well  shrink  from  entertaining  any  hope  for  ourselves.  We  need  to  go
a  step  further.  Judas  never  fled  to  Christ's  cross ;  therefore  he  ran  to  his  own  gallows.
The  only  deliverance  from  the  tyranny  and  the  doom  of  sin  is  to  be  found  in  the
redemption  which  Christ  has  wrought  on  the  cross.  Even  the  murderers  of  the
innocent  Saviour  come  within  the  scope  of  his  wonderful  grace.  There  would  be  hope
for  a  Judas,  if  Judas  would  but  turn  from  his  awful  sin  in  real  repentanc«  to  Christ
ai  even  his  Saviour. — W.  F.  A.

Ver,  21. — Barahbas.  The  name  of  Barabbas  has  become  odious  throughout  Christen-
dom, although  we  really  know  very  little  against  him.  That  he  was  a  rebel  against
the  Eoman  government  only  means  that  he  furthered  the  cause  of  liberty  which  all
his  people  cherished  in  their  hearts ;  so  that  his  name  might  have  been  associated
with  the  names  of  Tell,  Wallace,  and  other  well-known  patriots,  if  only  be  had  been
successful.  That  he  combined  brigandage  with  insurrection  is  only  too  characteristic
of  the  revolt  of  a  wild,  determined,  lawless  man  in  desperate  straits,  although  this
fact  spoils  much  of  his  heroism.  Still  we  do  not  know  enough  against  him  to  account
for  the  detestation  which  his  name  has  attached  to  it.  That  detestation  docs  not  arise
from  anything  in  his  character  or  conduct.  It  simply  springs  from  the  accident  that
it  was  he  whom  the  people  had  an  opportunity  of  preferring  to  Jesus.  Therefore  it  is
their  treatment  of  him  that  is  of  significant  interest  when  we  consider  the  place  of
Barabbas  in  the  gospel  story.

I.  Barabbas  was  pkbferrbd  to  Christ.  1.  An  indication  of  the,  people's  hatred
to  (Jhritt,     There  is  no  reason  to  Ihiuk  that  Barabbas  was  a  popular  hero.     His  insur-


eiO         THE  GOStEL  ACCOUDlNa  tO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh- xxvn.  1— 66.

rection  was  covered  with  the  ignominy  of  failure,  and  his  patvintism  was  stained  with
the  lawlessness  of  brigandage.  Yet  he  was  chosen  and  Christ  rejected.  So  intense
was  the  passion  of  hate  in  the  mob  under  the  influence  of  their  unprincipled  leaders
in  the  Jewish  hierarchy  I  It  is  strange  that  any  could  hate  the  gracious  Christ ;  and
yet,  since  he  was  the  deadly  enemy  of  all  sin,  he  provoked  the  opposition  of  sinners.
.A  person  who  clings  to  his  sin  will  come  in  his  heart  to  what  is  virtually  a  hatred  of
Chrigt.  2.  A  sign  of  the  people's  hlindness  to  the  merits  of  Christ.  The  wickedness  of
hypocritical  rulers  was  the  driving  force  behind  the  fury  of  the  mob;  with  many  of
tl^e  unthinking  multitude  there  was  doubtless  no  great  antipathy  to  our  Lord  until  this
had  been  roused  by  malignant  agitators.  But  the  people  did  not  perceive  the  attrac-
tions of  Christ,  or  they  would  not  have  preferred  Barabbas.  The  leaders  were  wicked,
the  people  were  blind.  It  i«  possible  to  be  in  very  close  external  contact  with  Christ,
and  yet  not  to  know  him.

II.  Barabbas  was  spared  instead  or  Christ.  This  was  not  fair  or  reasonable,
for  Barabbas  was  guilty  and  Christ  was  innocent.  Nevertheless,  the  unjust  thing  was
done.  This  is  typical  of  another  substitution.  Sinners  are  spared  and  Olirist  is  cruci-
fied. That  too  would  be  monstrously  unjust  if  our  Lord  himself  bad  taken  no  part  in
the  transaction.  We  can  never  see  the  bare  outline  of  the  atonement  even  till  we
perceive  Christ's  own  free  action  in  the  matter.  Though  the  substitution  of  Jesus  for
Barabbas  is  suggestive  of  Christ's  great  sacrifice  for  mankind,  the  cases  are  not  parallel,
because  our  Lord  gave  himself  up  for  the  world's  redemption.  What  is  unjust  and
wrong  in  those  who  slay  him  does  not  stffect  the  right  of  the  Saviour  to  surrender  him-
self ;  and  it  is  in  this  voluntary  giving  up  of  himself  that  the  atonement,  as  a  part  of
the  Divine  economy  of  redemption,  is  just  and  right.

In  conclusion,  let  us  remember  that  we  may  be  in  danger  of  sinning  like  the  people
who  preferred  Barabbas  to  Christ,  when  we  are  tempted  to  sacrifice  our  Lord's  claims
to  any  earthly  considerations.  Money,  pleasure,  self-will,  may  be  our  Barabbas,  chosen
to  be  saved  though  Christ  is  renounced. — ^W.  P.  A.

Ver.  29. — The  crown  of  thorns.  The  wreath  that  the  unfeeling  soldiers  pressed  on
the  brow  of  the  patient  Christ,  in  mimicry  of  the  victor's  crown,  with  its  cruel  thorns
to  lacerate  and  pain,  was  only  meant  for  an  insult.  It  was  one  element  in  the  torture
of  rude  mockery  to  which  our  Lord  was  subjected.  Yet,  though  quite  beyond  the
perception  of  the  brutal  legionaries,  this  was  wonderfully  representative  of  the  true
Eingship  of  Jesus.  He  is  a  King  crowned  with  thorns.  Let  us  look  at  the  fact  from
two  points  of  view.

I.  The  Kingship  of  Christ  hecbssitated  a  crown  or  thorns.  1.  Because  ha
ieas  King  he  could  not  but  suffer.  That  is  a  vulgar  notion  of  royalty  which  regards  it
as  a  state  of  enviable  pleasure.  The  king  of  the  fairy  tales  may  live  in  a  palace  of
delights ;  but  the  king  of  history  is  better  represented  by  Shakespeare,  one  of  whose
monarchs  exclaims,  "  Uneasy  lies  the  head  that  wears  a  crown  ! "  Most  kings  find
some  thorns  in  their  crowns.  2.  2%e  peculiar  Kingship  of  Christ  involved  peculiar
suffering.  No  other  king  wore  a  crown  wholly  woven  of  thorns.  No  other  king  ever
suffered  as  he  suffered.  It  was  not  the  common  fate  of  kingship  that  bruised  and
crushed  the  heart  of  the  Divine  King.  He  came  to  rule  in  the  souls  of  men,  and  the
rebellion  of  men's  souls  wounded  him.  He  came  to  rule  the  wills  of  his  people,  and
the  resistance  of  self-will  hurt  him.  He  came  to  rule  with  righteousness,  to  cast  out
all  unrighteousness,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  world  turned  against  him.  His  great
aim  was  to  overthrow  the  kingdom  of  Satan  and  to  set  up  his  own  kingdom  instead  of
it.  That  is  to  say,  he  came  to  conquer  sin  and  to  reign  in  holiness.  But  the  victory
over  sin  could  only  be  had  through  suffering  and  death.

II.  The  crown  or  thorns  confirmed  the  Kinoship  o»  Christ.  If  they  had  only
known  it,  those  heartless,  mockins;  Sdldiors  wore  really  symbolizing  the  right  of  their
victim  to  be  their  king.  Their  mimicry  of  a  coronation  was  most  typical  of  his  real
coronation.  Jc  sus  is  a  King  crowned  with  thorns,  because  he  is  crowned  with  sorrows,
because  his  sufferings  give  him  a  right  to^it  on  his  throne  and  to  rule  over  his  people.
1.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  give  him  a  right  to  the  highest  honour.  After  describing  his
self-emptying  and  obedience  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross,  St.  Paul  adds,  "  Wherefore
God  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  the  Name  above  every  name,"  etc.  (PhiL


CH.  xxvn.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  617

IL  9).  There  is  no  merit  in  mere  pain,  but  there  is  great  honour  in  suffering  for  a
noble  cause.  Christ  went  further;  he  was  more  than  a  martyr.  He  drank  a  more
bitter  cup  than  any  other  man  has  tasted,  and  he  took  all  this  suffering  upon  liitn
for  the  saviug  of  the  world.  Such  a  crown  of  thorns  worn  for  the  good  of  others
marks  its  wearer  as  worthy  of  the  highest  honour.  2.  2%«  sufferings  of  Christ  give
him  the  kingdom  over  which  he  rules.  He  had  to  win  this  kingdom  for  himself,  and  it
is  his  now  by  right  of  conquest.  But  he  did  not  use  any  weapons  of  carnal  warfare.
He  did  not  fight  with  the  sword.  The  sufferings  of  the  war  were  not  inflicted  on  the
territory  he  was  conquering,  but  on  himself.  He  won  the  world  to  himself  by  dying
for  the  world  on  the  cross. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  84. — Christ  refusing  an  opiate.  The  charitable  ladies  of  Jerusalem  are  said  to
have  provided  some  stupefying  drug  for  the  use  of  condemned  criminals,  in  order  to
alleviate  the  intolerable  torments  of  death  by  crucifixion.  Apparently  it  was  this  drug
that  some  people  offered  to  Jesus ;  but  he  refused  to  take  it.  The  taste  of  it  revealed
its  benumbing  influence,  and  he  would  not  submit  to  this.

I.  Chbist  would  not  shrink  from  bis  allotted  bufferino.  This  scene  is
strangely  contrasted  with  the  scene  in  Gethsemane  but  a  few  hours  earlier.  In  the
garden  Jesus  had  besought  God,  with  tears  and  in  agony,  that  if  possible  the  cup  of  his
Passion  and  death  might  pass  from  him.  Now  he  will  not  take  the  cup  that  brings
allcTistion  to  his  sufferings.  How  shall  we  account  for  this  difference  of  mental  atti-
tude ?  The  answer  is  that  Christ  knew  that  it  was  God's  will  that  he  should  suffer.
Before  he  had  only  prayed  that  the  cup  of  his  sufferings  might  pass,  if  it  had  been
God's  will  to  release  him.  But  he  discovered  that  it  was  not  God's  will.  Then  there
was  not  a  moment's  hesitation.  Christ  was  human  in  his  shrinking  from  pain  and
insult  and  death.  But  he  was  strong  and  absolutely  brave  in  facing  whatever  he
might  have  to  meet  in  doing  or  in  hearing  the  will  of  God.  He  was  no  weak,  effemi-
nate sufferer,  as  pictures  of  the  Gorreggio  school  represent  him.  His  courage  was  perfect.
Manly  and  strong  in  soul,  he  faced  death  and  its  accompanying  torments  without
flinching,  when  he  saw  his  way  led  him  through  those  horrors.

II.  Christ  had  a  work  yet  to  finish.  We  are  thankful  for  the  anodyne  which
medical  science  is' now  able  to  apply  to  great  suffering.  'J'he  chloroform  that  renders
the  patient  unconscious  during  a  surgical  operation,  and  the-  n.orphia  that  relieves
acute  pain,  are  welcomed  as  gifts  of  God.  Surely  it  cannot  he  wrong  to  employ  such
things.  There  is  no  merit  in  the  mere  endurance  of  pain.  But  in  our  Lord's  case
there  was  much  more  to  be  considered  than  the  suffering  of  a  painful  death.  He  had
a  testimony  to  bear.  His  words  from  the  cross  are  among  the  most  precious  memorials
of  his  earthly  ministry.  He  could  not  say,  "  It  is  finished ! "  until  he  was  about  to  bow
his  head  and  give  up  the  ghost.  Therefore  he  felt  it  necessary  to  preserve  his  con-
sciousness to  the  last.  Then  his  suffering  was  itself  a  part  of  his  work.  The  way  in
which  he  endured  what  was  laid  upon  him  entered  into  the  very  process  of  his  atoning
sacrifice.  As  our  great  High  Priest,  he  was  made  perfect  through  suffering  (Heb.  v.  8,
9).  Would  he  have  been  the  perfect  Christ  he  was  if  he  had  left  one  drop  of  the  bitter
cup  ?  If  he  had  taken  the  opiate  which  would  have  allayed  his  pains  at  the  expense
of  hie  consciousness,  would  he  have  made  the  complete  atonement  for  sin  ?  If  it  is  too
much  to  say  "  Yes  "  to  these  questions,  at  least  we  may  see  that  his  great  and  awful  work
could  only  have  been  accomplished  by  the  willing  and  conscious  surrender  of  himself,
and  this  surrender  would  have  been  obscured  to  our  view  if  he  had  accepted  the  offered
relief.  Thus  we  see  tow  to  the  very  last  he  would  not  care  for  himself,  how  he  gave
himself  utterly  in  suffering  and  death  for  the  world's  redemption. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  35. — The  Crucifixion.  "  And  they  crucified  him."  There  is  a  way  of  regard-
,  ing  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord  which  we  may  be  sure  he  himself  must  disapprove  of.
This  is  to  paint  it  in  all  its  horrors  of  physical  torment,  so  as  to  harrow  the  feelings  of
the  spectator,  and  to  excite  the  deepest  commiseration  for  tbe  Sufferer.  Jesus  bade  the
women  of  Jerusalem  not  to  weep  for  him,  but  to  weep  for  themselves  and  their  chil-
dren (Luke  xxiii.  28),  and  this  he  did  when  in  all  his  human  weakness  he  was  just
going  to  his  death.  Much  more  would  he  say  the  same  now  that  he  has  risen  from
the  dead  and  Hsgended  to  the  right  hand  of  God.    lie  4*o«9  not  want  our  vitj.    I'r^


ei8         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDlNa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvii.  1— 66.

would  be  a  wasted  and  mistaken  sentiment.  How,  tl  en,  should  we  to-day  regard  the
crucifixion  of  our  Lord  ?

I.  It  is  the  condemnation  of  sin.  1,  <St»  icUced  Ghriit.  (1)  The  immediate
cause  wal  the  wickedness  of  the  Jews,  who  would  not  submit  to  his  reforming  and
spiritual  reign.  Judas's  treason,  Caiaphas's  rage,  Herod's  jealousy,  Pilate's  weakness,
were  all  wicked  things.  Christ's  death  was  a  murder,  an  awful  crime.'  (2)  Behind
these  particular  causes  the  world's  sin  led  to  the  rejection  and  crucifixion  of  Chrbt
Our  sin  crucifies  him  afresh.  Thus  his  cross  bears  witness  to  the  exceeding  wicked
ness  and  the  awful  results  of  sin.  2.  Christ  kills  sin.  He  condemned  sin  by  dying
under  its  assault.  He  bore  the  crushing  weight  of  the  world's  sin  in  his  own  Person.
But  in  so  doing  he  faced  and  conquered  the  spirit  of  evil.  Christ  on  the  cross  makes
our  sin  look  hideous  and  hateful ;  thus  he  slays  it.

IL  It  IB  TUK  BEVELATION  OF  LOVE.  Never  .before  or.  after  has  so  great  a  love
been  tested  so  severely,  or  revealed  so  truly  in  its  absolute  purity,  in  its  invincible
strength.  God  crowned  the  love  that  is  shown  in  creation,  providence,  and  his
merciful  spiritual  work  in  our  consciences,  by  the  supreme  gift  of  his  Son.  Thus
Christ,  as  the  manifestation  of  One  whose  name  is  Love,  makes  the  love  of  God  known
to  us.  He  does  this  throughout  his  life  by  the  graciousness  of  his  ministry  to  the  sick
and  suffering  and  sinful,  by  his  kindness  to  little  children,  by  his  mercy  to  weeping
penitents.  But  here  at  the  cross  is  the  crown  of  love.  He  loves  his  sheep  so  much
that  he  will  lay  down  his  life  for  them.  His  love  is  stronger  than  death.  He  chooses
death  rather  than  the  sacrificing  of  his  love.

IIL  It  is  ths  bedumftion  of  the  world.  There  is  a  great  piirpose  in  Christ's
death.  The  wicked  men  who  bring  it  about  have  their  low,  selfish  objects.  But
behind  and  above  these  is  God's  great  plan,  Christ's  glorious  aim.  This  is  no  less
than  the  saving  of  the  world  that  rejected  him — we  may  say  that  of  the  very  men  who
nailed  him  to  the  cross ;  for  he  died  for  bis  enemies  as  well  as  for  his  friends.  Wb
must  not  be  satisfied  with  contemplating  the  tragic  scene  of  the  Crucifixion  by  itself.
We  must  look  at  its  deep  meaning.  Here  is  the  sacrifice  for  sin — the  cross,  the  altar ;
Christ,  the  willing  Victim.    Here,  then,  is  the  hope  and  promise  of  our  salvation.

IV.  It  is  the  inspibation  of  bacbipice.  The  apostles  rarely  point  to  the  cross
without  speaking  of  the  example  of  Christ  for  our  following.  "  Let  this  mind  be  in
you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,"  says  St.  Paul  (Phil.  ii.  5).  Christ  suffered  for  us,
leaving  us  an  example,  is  St.  Peter's  teaching  (1  Pet.  ii.  21).  His  fidelity,  his  unselfish-
ness, his  courage,  his  patience,  his  love  in  giving  himself  for  others,  are  the  great
models  for  Christians  to  follow. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  46. — Forsaken  by  Ood.  We  cannot  fathom  the  depths  of  the  dark  and
mysterious  experience  of  our  Lord's  last  mortal  agony.  We  must  walk  reverently,
for  here  we  stand  on  holy  ground.  It  is  only  just  to  acknowledge  that  the  great
Sufferer  must  have  had  thoughts  and  feelings  which  pass  beyond  our  comprehension,
and  which  are  too  sacred  and  private  for  our  inspection.  Yet  what  is  recorded  is
written  for  our  instruction.  Let  us,  then,  in  all  reverence,  endeavour  to  see  what
it  means.

I.  Christ  as  a  trde  Man  shabed  in  the  fluctuations  of  human  emotion.
He  quoted  the.languago  of  a  psalmist  who  had  passed  through  the  deep  waters,  and  he
felt  them  to  be  most  true  in  his  own  experience.  Jesus  was  not  always  calm;  certainly
he  was  not  impassive.  He  could  be  roused  to  indignation ;  he  could  be  melted  to
tears.  He  knew  the  rapture  of  Divine  joy ;  he  knew  also  the  torment  of  heart-breaking
grief.  There  are  sorrows  which  depend  upon  the  inner  consciousness  more  than  on
any  external  events.  These  sorrows  Jesus  knew  and  felt.  We  caimot  command  our
phases  of  feeling.  It  is  well  to  know  that  Jesus  also,  in  his  earthly  life,  was  visited  by
very  various  njoods.  Dark  hours  were  not  unknown  to  him.  Having  experienced
them,  he  can  understand  them  in  us,  and  sympathize  with  our  depression  of  spirit.

II.  Chbist  a8  the  Atonement  fob  bin  felt  the  dabe  eobeor  of  its  guilt.
He  could  not  own  himself  to  be  guilty  when  he  knew  he  was  innocent.  But  he  was
BO  one  with  man  that  he  felt  the  shame  and  burden  of  man's  sin  as  though  it  had  been
his  own.  As  the  great  Representative  of  the  race,  he  took  up  the  load  of  the  world's
sin,  t.«.  he  made  it  his  own  by  deeply  concerning  himself  with  it,  by  entering  into  \U


OH.  xivn.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         619

dreadful  conscqaonces,  by  lubnutting  to  iU  curse.  Such  feelingi  might  Uot  oat  th«
vision  of  Gud  for  a  season.

Ill  Christ  as  the  bolt  Soh  of  God  was  UNcmBABLT  aBBTSD  at  iioana
THB  0ONS0IOUSNK8S  or  HiB  Fatheb'i  fbgsehob.  There  are  men  who  lire  without
any  thought  of  God,  and  yet  this  is  no  trouble  to  them.  On  the  contrary,  they  dread
to  see  God,  and  it  is  fearful  for  them  to  think  that  he  sees  them.  Theee  are  men  who
love  sin,  and  therefore  they  do  not  love  God.  But  Jesus  lived  in  the  love  of  Iiis  Father.
To  lose  one  whom  we  love  with  all  our  heart  is  a  cause  for  heart-breaking  anguish.
JeauB  seemed  to  have  lost  God.  To  all  who  have  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts  any
similar  feeling  of  desertion  must  be  an  agony  of  soul.

IV.  Chbibt  as  tub  beloved  Som  im  whoh  God  was  well  fleaskd  oould  kot
BB  beallt  deserted  bv  God.  Not  oaly  is  God  physically  near  to  all  men,  because
he  is  omnipresent,  but  ha  is  spiritually  near  to  his  own  people  to  sustain  and  save
them,  even  when  they  are  not  conscious  of  his  presence.  The  vision  of  God  b  one
thing,  and  his  presence  is  anotlier.  We  may  miss  the  first  without  losing  the  second.
Our  real  state  before  God  does  not  rest  on  the  shifting  sands  of  our  moods  of  feeling.
In  the  hour  of  darkness  Jesus  prayed.  This  is  enough  to  show  that  he  knew  that  he
was  not  really  and  utterly  abandoned  by  his  Father.  In  spiritual  deadness,  when  it
is  hard  to  pray  at  all,  the  one  remedy  is  in  prayer.  Our  cry  can  reach  God  through
the  darkness,  and  the  darkness  will  not  last  for  ever;  often  it  is  the  gate  to  a  glorious
light.— W,  F.  A.

Vers.  67 — 61, — Th»  httriai  of  Jetut,  We  may  consider  this  in  relation  to  all  the
persons  concerned — Jesus  himself,  Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  Pontius  Pilate,  and  the
Marys.

I.  Jesus  sciBMiTTXNa  to  burial.  Jesus  himself  had  departed.  It  was  only  the
deserted  house  that  was  now  left.  Still,  this  was  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  the  burial  of
it  had  a  significance  in  regard  to  the  spirit  that  had  once  inhabited  it.  1.  Tlie  burial
proves  the  death  of  Christ.  If  he  had  risen  imipediately  it  would  have  beeu  said  that
he  had  never  died  at  all — that  he  had  only  fainted.  But  that  in  his  state  of  exhaustion
he  could  have  been  torn  down  from  the  cross  and  sealed  up  in  a  tomb  without  receiving
auy  nourishment;  that  he  could  then  have  come  forth  and  walked  about  with  do
traces  of  sufiering  upon  him, — all  this  is  simply  impossible.  2.  The  burial  completts
the  humiliation  of  Christ.  It  is  an  humiliation  for  the  body  to  be  handled  by  others  as
lifeless  clay,  and  then  to  be  laid  in  the  tomb,  put  out  of  sight  as  a  dreadful  thing,  soon
to  become  repulsive  and  loathsome.  Christ's  body  never  saw  corruption ;  but  it  was
humbled  to  the  grave.

II.  Joseph  SEOsiNa  the  body  or  Juirs.  1.  This  reveals  his  true  diteipUthip.
Joseph  was  a  rich  man  in  a  high  position.  It  was  highly  dangerous  for  such  a  man
to  avow  himself  a  Christian.  But  the  privilege  of  burying  the  body  of  his  beloved
Master  encouraged  him  t  >  run  the  risk.  We  are  best  known  as  Christ's  by  what  we
will  do  for  him,  especially  when  our  service  involves  sacrifice.  2.  This  aha  reveals
the  tardinest  of  his  confession.  It  was  a  late  avowal.  Why  had  not  Joseph  owned
his  faith  during  the  lifetime  of  Christ?  He  was  too  like  those  who  build  the  tombs  of
the  prophets.  His  courage  was  real,  but  it  was  half  spoilt  by  the  fact  that  it  was  not
manifested  when  it  would  have  been  most  valuable.  How  many  opportunities  of
Christian  service  are  missed  by  delay  in  coming  out  openly  on  the  Lord's  side  I  It  is
well  to  treat  the  bodies  of  our  departed  friends  with  respect ;  but  this  is  a  small  service
compared  with  the  help  and  love  we  could  show  them  during  their  lifetime.  The
Josephs  who  can  only  bury  a  dead  Christ  are  not  of  the  stufiT  out  of  which  apostles
are  made.

III.  Pilate  bubrendebino  the  bodt  (W  Jbsu*.  The  miserable  man  should  have
protected  the  life  of  the  Prisoner  whom  be  knew  to  be  innocent.  His  surrender  of
Jesus  to  death  at  the  clamour  of  the  Jews  was  more  than  an  act  of  weakness,  it  was
treason  against  justice.  Now  it  is  too  late  to  save  the  life  of  the  Prophet  of  Naureth.
The  awful  crime  has  been  committed,  and  it  can  never  be  undone.  Through  all  the
ages  it  will  brand  the  name  of  Pilate  with  aa  indelible  mark  of  ignominy.  Yet  the
governor  will  make  a  little  concession.  A  friend  of  Jesus — especially  as  he  is  rich  and
influential — may  hare  the  lifelasa  aorpsa.    Thus  we  saa  men  who  an  falsa  to  theii


620         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [cii.  xxvii.  1—66.

real  duty  and  the  sacred  trust  that  is  laid  upon  them  showing  a  reasonahle  kindness
in  small  things.     But  this  cannot  atone  for  their  great,  black  wicltedness.

IV.  The  Mabys  at  the  tomb.  Sorrowful  and  loving,  they  sit  and  watch  by
the  tomb.  It  is  all  they  can  do  for  their  Lord,  and  they  cannot  bear  to  leave  him.
Their  faithful  love  is  rewarded.  To  them  is  given  the  first  news  of  the  Resurrection.
Cleaving  to  Christ  will  be  rewarded  by  many  a  surprise  of  joy.  From  the  very  tomb
new  hope  will  come  to  those  who  hold  faithfully  to  him. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  1,  2, 11 — 14. — Christ  lefore  Pilate.  No.  1.  Oaiaphas  had. a  puipose  to  servo
by  giving  Jesus  up  to  the  Romans.  Little  did  he  know  that  while  he  thought  he  was
making  a  tool  of  every  one,  he  was  merely  God's  tool  for  accomplishing  his  puiposcs.
The  harmony  of  the  purpose  of  God,  the  scheme  of  Caiaphas,  the  law  of  Rome,  and  the
relation  of  the  Jewish  court  to  the  Roman  procurator,  explains  fully  how,  when  the
Sanhedrin  took  counsel  against  Jesus  to  put  him  to  death,  the  result  was  that  they
resolved  to  deliver  him  to  Pilate.  In  their  conduct  notice:  1.  Tlwir  scrupulosity
about  entering  the  palace.  They  would  not  cross  a  Gentile  threshold  during  the  Feast
of  Unleavened  Bread.  Types  in  this  of  all  who  are  able  to  be  religious  without
being  moral;  who  shrink  from  violating  some  ceremonial  rule,  but  without  scruple
violate  their  own  convictions — whited  sepulchres,  outwardly  spotless,  but  inwardly  full
of  rottenness  and  corruption.  2.  The  satanically  prompted  cunning  oi  iheir  accusa-
tion. They  had  but  an  hour  ago  been  obliged  to  acquit  him  of  such  charges,  and  to
condemn  him  on  the  ground  of  his  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  But  Pilate  ia  too
keen-sighted  to  be  deceived  by  their  show  of  loyalty.  He  cannot  believe  that  since
last  Passover  this  great  conversion  from  hatred  to  love  of  his  government  lias  taken
place.  One  cannot  but  reflect  what  a  pregnant  moment  this  was  for  Pilate,  when  our
Lord  seemed  to  wish  to  open  the  deepest  desii'es  of  that  severe  Roman  heart,  ^ud
prompt  him  to  long,  with  the  Jews,  for  a  spiritual  kingdom.  Before  answering  his
question,  "Art  thou  the  King  of  the  Jews?  he  must  first  know,  as  John  tells  us,  in
what  sense  Pilate  uses  the  words,  "Sayest  thou  this  thing  of  thyself?  Is  it  not
possible  that  thou  too  for  thine  own  sak'e  shouldest  seek  to  know  this  King  of  the  Jews
in  whom  Israel  has  longed?"  There  were  officers  under  Pilate  whose  heathen
upbringing  hai  not  prevented  them  from  discovering  the  spiritual  grandeur  of  Je»us,
and  desiring  to  belong  to  his  kingdom.  But  it  was  too  much  for  Roman  pride  to  be
taught  by  a  Jew  how  to  find  peace,  and  even  to  submit  to  this  Iwund  Jew  before  hira
as  to  a  King.  A  mirror  is  here  held  up  to  those  of  us  who  do  not  " of  ourselves"  ask
Christ  what  his  claims  are,  who  think  it  quite  right  that  other  people  should  accept
and  acknowledge  him,  but  cannot  bring  themselves  to  do  so.  Pilate  was  a  man
who  represents  thousands  in  every  age,  who  persistently  and  on  principle  live  for  the
world,  and  seal  up  the  deeper  nature  in  them  that  the  world  does  not  satisfy ;  who  try,
as  it  were,  to  live  down  their  own  nature,  their  own  immortality.  Have  your  own
spiritual  necessities  taught  you  the  meaning  of  God's  promise  of  a  King  to  the
Jews  ? — D,

Vers.  15 — 30. — Christ  he/ore  Pilate.  No.  2.  The  other  evangelists  tell  ns  of  Pilate's
first  and  fatal  mistake,  in  offering,  while  convinced  of  his  Prisoner's  innocence,  to
chastise  him  and  let  him  go.  He  showed  the  Jews  he  was  afraid  of  them ;  and  from
this  point  onwards  we  see  him  tossed  between  his  own  convictions  and  his  fears — s
type  of  all  who  in  their  own  souls  have  convictions  about  Christ  and  their  duty  to  him,
which  they  do  not  act  out  lest  they  thereby  incur  loss  or  abuse.  Apparently,  before
the  Jews  have  time  to  do  more  than  utter  a  murmur  of  discontent  at  his  proposal,
another  plan  suggests  itself,  by  which  he  may  possibly  extricate  himself.  The  governors
were  in  the  habit  of  releasing  some  well-known  prisoner  at  the  Feast  of  the  Passover,  and
he  offers  to  release  Jesus.  No  sooner  had  he  done  so  than  his  attention  is  called  away
by  the  extraordinary  message  from  his  wife.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  in  the
Koman  history  of  the  period  than  the  strength  of  character  developed  by.  the  women,
their  keen  interest  in  public  affairs,  and  the  prominent  part  they  play  in  them.  A
law  forbidding  the  wives  of  the  governors  to  accompany  their  husbands  to  the  provinces
had  lately  been  repealed,  and  Claudia  Prooula  was  not  only  with  Pilate,  but  apparently
keenly  interest  in  his  work  wd  tei^derly  soUeitoi^  for  Ijis  hoftour  and  safety.    Ami


OH.  xxva.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         621

still  God  often  thus  speaks  to  men  j  aud  some  woman's  anxious  look  or  word,  or  some
child's  innocent  question,  will  give  the  conscience  new  strength  or  arm  it  with  new
weapons.  The  moments  giren  to  ponder  this  message  are  not  neglected  by  the  leaders.
They  wind  through  the  crowd,  and  prompt  the  people  to  ask  for  B.irabbas.  By  offering
them  the  alternative  between  a  Man  whom  both  he  and  they  knew  to  be  innocent  of
sedition,  and  a  man  notoriously  guilty  of  It,  he  put  them  into  the  very  difficulty  they
sought  to  fix  him  in.  But  they  have  already  seen  that  he  has  a  deeper  conviction
tban  the  innocence  of  Jesus,  namely,  a  fear  of  them,  and  this  they  use.  Pilate,
therefore,  having  done,  as  he  persuaded  himself,  all  he  could  to  save  Jesus,  gives  hira
up  to  the  scourging — a  barbarous  punishment,  under  which  many  died.  He  may  have
interfered  to  prevent  the  full  amount  being  inflicted.  He  did  not  interfere  when  the
soldiers  proceeded  to  mock  their  victim.  In  this  mockery  we  have  a  concrete  and
visible  representation  of  the  manner  in  which  Christ  is  continually  used.  We  salute
him  as  King ;  but  what  is  the  sceptre  we  put  in  bis  bands  ?  Is  it  not  in  many  casea
a  mere  reed,  in  hands  that  are  bound?  Is  it  not  as  real  a  mockery  for  us  to  profess
allegiance  to  him,  and  use  the  strongest  language  we  can  command  to  express  our
adoration,  and  then  go  and  show  that  he  has  not  the  slightest  control  over  our  lives  ?
In  this  would-be  equitable  Human  governor  coming  to  the  people  and  saying,  "What
shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus  which  is  called  Christ?"  we  see:  1,  The  predicament  of
many  among  ourselves  who  would  gladly  be  rid  of  the  question.  But  it  cannot  be.
There  is  this  judgment  to  pronounce.  Even  if  there  were  no  blessedness  in  following
Christ,  the  fact  remains  that  he  is  presented  to  you,  and  that  it  is  your  duty  to  accept
him.  2.  We  see  how  futile  was  the  attempt  of  Pilate  to  transfer  the  guilt  of  this
action  to  the  Jews.  They  were  willing  to  take  the  blood  of  Christ  on  their  heads ;
but,  though  history  shows  how  terrible  has  been  their  share  in  the  vengeance  they
ignorantly  invoked,  Pilate  was  not  necessarily  exempt.  Men  frequently  mistake  the
poipt  at  which  their  own  power,  and  therefore  their  own  responsibility,  ends.  They
consent  to  iniquity,  and  say  they  were  forced  to  it.  How  wore  you /orcein  Would
every  man  in  your  circumstances  do  as  you  are  doing?  Or,  men  invite  you  to  share
their  sin,  persuading  you  that  the  guilt  is  theirs,  if  there  is  any ;  you  will  find  that
they  cannot  bear  your  share,  and  that  you  vainly  seek  to  lay  the  guilt  on  them.  The
very  fate  Pilate  feared,  and  to  avoid  which  he  sacrificed  the  life  of  our  Lord,  came  upon
him.  Six  years  later  he  was  deposed  from  his  office,  and  died  by  his  own  hand.  We
are  apt  to  say  of  him  that  he  was  weak  rather  than  wicked,  forgetting  that  moral
weakness  is  that  which  makes  a  man  capable  of  any  wickedness.  And  who  is  the
weak  man  but  the  one  who  is  not  single-miiide4  who  attempts  to  gratify  both  hi*
conscience  and  his  evil  or  weak  feelings,  to  secure  his  own  selUsh  ends  as  well  as  the
great  ends  of  justice  and  righteousness?  Such  a  man  will  often  be  in  as  great  a
perplexity  as  Pilate,  and  will  come  to  as  ruinous,  if  not  so  appalling,  an  end. — P.

Ver.  62 — ch.  xxviii.  15. — The  Beswrection.  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not
merely  the  greatest  event  of  history,  it  is  the  hinge  on  which  all  history  turns.  If
Christ  died  and  lies  still  in  his  grave  like  other  men,  then  the  whole  preaching  of  the
apostles  falls  to  the  ground.  It  is  plain  he  can  afibrd  us  no  help  of  the  kind  we
especially  need — he  cannot  hear  our  prayer,  he  cannot  guide  our  life.  His  own  word
has  failed,  for  he  said  he  would  rise.  The  whole'  revelation  of  God  he  made,  all  the
information  about  things  un^ieen  and  future,  has  doubt  cast  upon  it.  It  is  the  resur-
rection of  Jesus  that  establishes  a  clear  and  close  connection  between  this  world  a^d
the  unseen  and  spiritual  world.  If  he  rose  from  the  dead,  then  the  world  into  which
he  is  gone  is  real,  and  his  invitation  to  us  to  join  him  there  is  one  we  may  confidently
trust  to.  It  becomes  us,  therefore,  to  consider  with  candour  and  seriousness  whatever
difilculties  men  have  felt  in  accepting  as  true  this  stupendous  fact.  May  not  some
mistaken  and  ill-advised  person  have  surreptitiously  conveyed  away  the  body  and  have
given  out  that  a  resurrection  had  taken  place  P  The  authorities  took  the  most  effectual
meins  they  could  think  of  to  prevent  this.  So  beyond  doubt  was  it  that  the  grave
was  emptied  by  an  actual  resurrection,  that  when- Peter  stood  before  the  Sanhudrin  and
affirmed  it,  they  could  not  deny  it.  This  idea,  therefore,  may  be  dismissed.  It  is
aureed,  by  thos«  who  deny  the  Resurrection  as  much  as  by  those  who  affirm  it,  that
the  disciples  had  a  bondjide  belief  that  Jesus  had  risen  from  the  dead  aud  was  alive,


622  THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvii.  1— 66.

The  question  is — How  was  this  belief  produced?  There  are  three  answers.  (1)  The
disciples  saw  our  Lord  alive  after  crucifixion,  but  he  had  never  been  dead.  (2)  They
only  thought  they  saw  him.  (3)  They  did  see  him  alive  after  being  dead  and  buried.
The  first  is  scarcely  worthy  of  attention, — it  is  go  obviously  inadequate.  We  ask  for  an
explanation  of  this  singular  circumstance,  that  a  number  of  men  arrived  at  the  firm
conviction  they  had  an  Almighty  Friend,  One  who  had  all  power  in  heaven  and  on
earth,  and  we  are  told  they  had  seen  their  Master  after  crucifixion,  creeping  about  the
earth,  scarcely  able  to  move,  pale,  weak,  helpless.  This  supposition  is  no  explanation
of  their  faith  in  him  as  a  risen,  glorious,  almighty  Lord.  The  second  would  suffice
had  we  only  to  explain  how  one  person  believed  he  or  she  had  seen  the  Lord.  But
what  we  have  here  to  explain  is  how  several  pei'sons,  in  different  places,  at  different
times,  and  in  various  moods  of  mind,  came  to  believe  they  had  seen  him.  He  was
recognized,  not  by  persons  wlio  expected  to  see  him  alive,  but  by  women  who  went  to
anoint  him  dead;  not  by  credulous,  excitable  persons,  but  by  persons  so  resolutely
sceptical  and  so  keenly  alive  to  the  possibility  of  delusion  that  nothing  but  handling
his  body  could  convince  them.  Nothing  will  explain  the  faith  of  the  apostles  and  of
the  rest  but  the  fact  of  their  really  seeing  the  Lord,  after  his  death,  alive  and  endowed
with  all  power.  They  were  men  animated  by  no  paltry  spirit  of  vain-glory,  but  by
seriousness,  even  sublimity  of  mind— men  whose  lives  require  an  explanation  precisely
such  as  is  given  by  the  supposition  that  they  had  been  brought  into  contact  with  the
spiritual  v\orld  in  this  surprising  and  solemnizing  manner.  It  is  not  denied  that  the
evideiice  for  the  Resurrection  would  be  quite  sufficient  to  authenticate  any  ordinary
historical  event.  It  can  be  refused  only  on  the  ground  that  no  evidence,  however
strong,  could  prove  such  an  incredible  event.  The  supernatural  is  rejected  as  a  pre-
liminary, so  as  to  bar  any  consideration  of  the  most  important  evidences  of  the  super-
natural. No  account  of  the  belief  in  the  Resurrection  has  ever  been  given  more
credible  than  that  which  it  seeks  to  supplant — the  simple  one  that  the  Lord  <iid  rise
again.  The  position  of  the  Resurrection  in  the  system  of  Christian  facts  and  motives
is  all-important.

I.  It  is  the  chief  proof  that  Jesus  was  not  mistaken  regarding  his  own  Person,  his
own  work,  his  relation  to  the  Father,  and  the  prospects  of  himself  and  his  people.  It
is  also  the  Father's  attestation  to  the  sufficiency  of  his  work.

II.  If  our  Lord's  work  be  viewed  as  a  revelation  of  the  Father,  the  Resurrection  will
equally  be  seen  to  be  necessary.  Were  there  no  resurrection,  we  should  be  obliged  to
seek  our  highest  ideas  of  God  in  the  tomb,  not  in  the  Divine  condescension  and  love
which  are  visible  on  the  cross,  but  in  a  being  overcome  and  defeated  by  the  same  ills
that  overwhelm  us  all.

in.  In  the  risen  Lord  we  find  the  source  of  all  spiritual  strength.  Any  one  who
passes  through  death  uninjured,  who  conquers  that  which  conquers  all  other  men
without  exception,  shows  that  he  has  some  command  over  nature  which  does  not
belong  to  other  men.  And  he  who  shows  this  superiority  in  virtue  of  a  moral
superiority,  and  uses  it  in  the  furtherance  of  the  highest  moral  ends,  shows  a  command
over  the  whole  affairs  of  men  which  makes  it  easy  to  believe  he  can  guide  us  into  a
condition  like  his  own.  Especially  does  the  Resurrection  enable  us  to  believe  that  our
Lord  can  commimicate  the  Holy  Spirit.  Salvation  is  reduced  to  very  small  limits
indeed,  and  the  Christian  religion  btcomes  a  mere  system  of  morality,  if  there  be  not
now  a  living  Christ  able  to  bestow  a  living  Spirit.

IV.  In  the  risen  Lord  we  see  the  character  of  the  life  to  which  we  are  called  in
fellowship  with  him,  and  also  the  destiny  that  awaits  us  in  him.  As  he  passed  to
God,  and  lives  with  him,  so  must  we  now  live  wholly  to  God,  letting  this  great  gulf  of
death  stand  between  us  and  our  past  life  of  aelf-pleasing  and  worldliness.  in  him  risen,
with  a  human  body  and  not  a  bare  spirit,  we  see  what  we  ourselves  are  to  be  in  that
future  life.  The  Divine  Spirit  is  the  source  both  of  holiness  and  of  immortality ;  if  wo
now  have  the  one  evidence  of  his  indwelling,  we  shall  one  day  have  the  other. — D.

Vers,  1 — 10. —  The  price  of  blood.  The  day,  whose  dawn  brought  repentance  to  Peter,
found  the  Jewish  rulers  still  plotting  how  they  might  effect  the  murder  of  Jesus.
They  had  in  the  night  infamously  condemned  him  as  a  blasphemer,  thereby  exposing
hiiu  to  the  pexialty  of  death  by  stoning.    Alaiosl  a  huudied  years  before  this  Judaia


CH.  ixvn.  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  6a3

was  conquered  by  Pompey,  and  made  tributary  to  the  Rumans,  yot  it  wag  not  until
abuut  two  yean  before  this  that  it  was  made  part  of  the  proTince  of  Syria.  Then  the
power  of  capital  punishment  was  taken  from  the  Jews.  Surely  the  sueptre  had  now
departed,  and  Shiloh  must  have  come  (see  Gen.  xlii.  10).  Doubting  whether  the
Roman  governor  Would  put  Jesus  to  death  for  an  alleged  offence  in  religion,  the
Sanhedrin  resolve  to  accuse  bim  of  treason  against  the  Romans  on  the  ground  of  his
having  allowed  himself  to  be  saluted  as  King  of  the  Jews  (cf.  ver.  11 ;  Luke  xxiiL  2 ;
John  xviii.  31).    This  decision  brought  Judas  again  upon  the  scene  (ver.  3,  etc.).

I.  What  corrLD  thibtt  shekels  do  ?  1.  TOey  could  lell  Ghritt  into  the  handt  of
mwrderen.  The  prophecy  in  Zechariah  seta  forth:  (1)  That  God  appointed  one  eminent
Shepherd  to  feed  the  Jewish  people,  who  are  called  "  the  flock  of  slaughter,"  evidently
in  anticipation  of  what  they  should  suffer  from  the  Romans.  This  blessed  Person  is
Divine,  and  confessedly  Messiah  (see  Zech.  xi.  7).  (2)  That  the  orilinary  guides  had  no
regard  for  their  charge:  "Their  own  shepherds  pity  them  not"  (Zech.  xi.  5).  Thii  was
literally  the  case  with  the  Jewish  rulers,  Pharisees,  scribes,  and  priests,  in  our  Lord's
time.  (3)  That  between  these  unworthy  shepherds  and  the  shepherds  of  God's
appointing  there  was  strong  enmity :  "  My  soul  loathed  them,  and  their  soul  also
abhorred  me."  So  Christ  had  a  holy  loathing  for  the  pride,  hypocrisy,  and  wickedness
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  they  cherished  a  malignant  hatred  of  him  for  his
purity  and  truth.  (4)  That  he  gives  up  his  charge  in  judicial  visitation.  And  here
follows  an  awful  description  of  the  ruin  to  be  brought  upon  them  by  the  Romans
(see  ver.  9).  (5)  That  the  covenant  between  him  and  his  people  was  broken,  viz.
the  Sinai  covenant,  and  his  people  rejected,  because  they  refused  the  covenant  from
Zion  which  came  to  replace  it  (Zech.  xL  10).  (6)  That  some  of  the  people,  however,  should
admit  Messiah's  claims.  "So  the  poor  of  the  flock,"  etc.  (Zech.  ix.  11).  These  were
evidently  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  who  were  chiefly  from  the  humbler  classes.  (7)  That
in  contrast  to  these,  the  heads  of  the  nation  estimate  Messiah  at  the  price  of  a  slave :
"  thirty  pieces  of  silver" — the  "goodly  price,"  as  he  sarcastically  observes,  "that  I
was  prised  at  of  them  "  (Zech.  xL  12, 13).  "When  they  had  an  opportunity  of  with-
drawing from  their  infamous  bargain  with  Judas,  they  refused  it.  2.  They  could  pur-
chase  "  the  pottet't  field,  to  bury  itrangers  in."  This  field  was  thenceforth  called  "  The
field  of  blood,"  and  thereby  became:  (1)  A  monument  to  the  truth  of  Scripture.
Zechariah  continues,  "  And  I  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  and  cast  them  to  the
potter  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (cf.  vers.  3 — 10 ;  Zech.  xi.  13).  (2)  A  monument  of
the  innocence  of  Jesus.  This  act  of  Judas  was  ordained  by  Providence  to  refute  the
sceptic  who  otherwise  could  object  that  Jesus  was  cruciSed  as  an  impostor,  on  the
testimony  of  a  disciple  who  knew  him  well.  In  confessing  Jesus  innocent,  Judas
acknowledged  his  Messiahship,  for  otherwise  he  would  not  have  been  innocent.  In
this  confession  of  Judas  we  have  a  specimen  of  the  victory  of  Christ  over  Satan,  and
a  warning  to  persecutors.  (3)  A  monument  of  the  infamy  of  the  traitor  and  of  the
rulers.  And  it  remained  so  when  Matthew  wrote.  Jerome  also  says  that  in  his
days  it  was  to  be  seen  in  .^lia  (the  name  of  the  city  built  on  the  site  of  Jerusalem),
on  the  south  side  of  Mount  Zion.  (4)  It  was  "  to  bury  strangers  in."  The  uncleaa
"stranger"  must  not,  even  in  his  burial,  come  near  to  the  "holy"  villains  who
murdered  their  Messiah !  The  "  stranger  "  has  a  Friend  in  Jesus.  As  the  priests  by
procuring  the  Lord's  death  had  been  unwitting  agents  in  procuring  the  ledemption  of
tiie  world,  so  in  the  final  disposal  of  the  price  of  his  blood  they  unconsciously  did  an
act  which  represents  the  reception  of  the  Lord's  salvation  by  the  Gentiles.  He  that
has  his  burial  through  the  blood  of  Christ  may  hope  also  for  a  resurrection  through  it.

II.  What  ooulo  THK  shekels  not  do  ?  1.  They  could  not  redeem  Christ  from
death.  (1)  Over  that  mile  lying  between  the  house  of  Caiaphas  to  that  of  Pilate,  they
led  him  away,  ''from  prison  and  from  judgment  "  (see  Isa.  liii.  7,  8),  to  "deliver
him  to  the  Gentiles,"  accoiding  to  his  prediction  (of.  ch.  xx.  19;  John  xviii.  32).
The  Churchmen  of  the  Apostasy  imitated  their  Jewish  predecessors  when  they  called
in  the  civil  power  to  shed  for  them  the  blood  of  the  martyrs.  (2)  The  bonds  in  which
Jesus  was  now  led  differed  from  those  in  which  he  was  caiTied  to  Annas.  They  were
those  special  bonds  which  marked  it  to  be  the  will  of  his  persecutors  that  he  should
be  crucified  (see  John  xxi.  18),  So  we  note  that  Jesus  was  put  to  death  by  his  own
countrymen  in  his  true  character  as  the  "  Sou  of  Godj "  and  by  the  Romans  as


624         THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvn.  1— 6«.

"King  of  the  Jews."  (3)  The  true  bonds  which  bound  Jesus  were  those  of  Ws
wondrous  love  to  man.  Other  bonds  could  not  have  held  him.  Ho  suffered  himself
to  be  bound,  that  man  might  be  loosed  from  the  bands  of  sin  (see  Prov,  v,  22 ;  Lam.  i.
12 — 14).  So  likewise  "by  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  2.  They  could  not  purchase
the  repentance  of  the  ruleri.  (1)  "  What  is  that  to  us  ?"  These  men  did  not  concern
themselves  about  the  innocency  of  Jesus.  Tliey  did  not  say,  "  What  is  that  to  us  ?  "
when  Judas  came  to  them  saying,  "  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver  him  unto
you  ?  "  They  paid  the  price  of  blood,  and  were  determined  to  shed  it.  If  the  elders
of  Jezreel,  to  please  Jezebel,  murder  Naboth,  is  it  nothing  to  Ahab  (see  1  Kings  xxi.
19)  ?  (2)  "  See  thou  to  that."  Thus  they  disclaim  the  guilt  of  their  own  wicked
instrument,  and  turn  him  over  to  his  terrors.  Obstinate  sinners  stand  on  their  guard
against  convictions.  Those  who  betray  Christ,  and  justify  themselves,  are  worse  than
Judas.  The  resolutely  impenitent  look  with  disdain  upon  the  penitent.  The  wicked
encourage  men  to  crime,  and  deeert  them  after  its  commission.  (3)  The  cold  villainy
of  the  priests  and  elders  bears  testimony  to  the  injustice  with  which  they  had  treated
Christ.  (4)  "  And  the  chief  priests  took  the  silver  pieces,  and  said.  It  is  not  lawful
for  to  put  them  into  the  treasury."  An  astonishing  amount  of  rascality  may  be
associated  with  the  utmost  ceremonial  scrupulosity.  Probably  they  had  taken  the
money  out  of  the  treasury  to  pay  the  price  of  blood  (see  ch.  xxiii.  24).  They  were
fearful  of  defiling  the  temple  with  blood-money,  while  ruthlessly  defiling  their  con-
.sciences  with  innocent  blood.  Men  are  often  scrupulous  about  trifles  who  stick  not
at  great  crimes.  3.  Z%ey  could  not  redeem  Jitdaafrom  perdition.  (1)  Some  think
Judas  was  partly  induced  to  betray  his  Master  by  the  expectation  that,  as  Messiah,
he  could  not  suffer  death,  and  that  he  would  deliver  himself  from  the  rulers  as  he  had
done  before.  He  might,  therefore,  have  calculated  that  in  this  case  Christ  would  have
the  honour,  the  Jews  would  liave  the  shame,  and  he  would  have  the  money.  Thoy
are  mistaken  who  imagine  that  Olirist  will  work  his  miracles  in  the  interests  of  selfish-,
ness.  But  actions  are  not  to  be  estimated  by  their  consequences,  but  by  their  relation
to  the  Law  of  God.  (2)  How  differently  did  the  silver  appear  to  the  traitor  before  and
after  his  transgression  I  He  "cast  down  "  the  price  of  the  innocent  blood.  How  the
victim  now  hates  the  snare  I  That  which  is  ill  gotten  brings  sorrow  to  the  getter  (see
Job  XX.  12 — 15).  (3)  As  Judas  was  actuated  by  avarice  in  bis  sin,  so  was  he  possessed
with  despair  in  his  repentance.  Eemorse,  sharpened  by  the  sense  of  the  contempt
and  abhorrence  of  good  men,  is  unbearable.  Miserable  is  the  wretch  who  must  go  to
hell  for  ease.  The  repentance  of  Judas  was  that  of  the  damned  at  the  judgment,
when  mercy's  door  is  shut.  (4)  There  is  little  reason  to  believe  that  the  repentance  of
Judas  was  more  than  the  remorse  of  an  upbraiding  conscience  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  24;  John
xvii.  12  ;  Acts  i.  25).  It  was  a  repentance  which  needs  to  be  repented  of  (2  Cor.  vii.
10).  Had  he  r.iturued  the  money  before  he  had  betrayed  Christ,  he  would  have  agreed
while  yet  in  the  way  (see  ch.  v.  23 — 26).  Had  he  gone  to  Christ,  or  even  to  the
disciples  of  Christ,  in  his  distress,  he  might  have  obtained  some  relief.  Sinners  under
conviction  of  sin  will  find  their  old  companions  miserable  comforters.  The  devil  by
the  help  of  the  priests  drove  Judas  to  despair.  Despair  oS  the  mercy  of  God  is  a  fatal
sin.  One  may  know  his  sin,  repent,  confess,  make  restitution,  and  yet  be  like  Judas  I
—J.  A.  M.

Vers.  11—31. — TTie  actors  in  a  momentous  tragedy.  The  scene  is  laid  in  Jerusalem,
in  the  palace  of  the  Roman  governor.  The  occasion  is  the  trial  of  the  Lord  Jesus  for
his  life.    The  whole  human  race  and  all  the  ages  are  interested.     Behold —

I.  The  Prtsoneb  at  tub  bab.  1.  "  Now  Jesus  stood  before  the  governor.''  (1)  But
who  is  this  Jesus  ?  Immanue!  1  The  Creator  and  Upholder  of  all  things,  mysteriously
enshrined  in  human  nature.^  (2)  Then  what  a  miracle  of  condescension  is  here!  The
stoop  was  wonderful  from  the  throne  of  glory  to  the  manger  of  Bethlehem.  But  what
a  marvel  that  he  should  submit  to  be  arraigned  before  •  mortal!  (3)  The  con-
descension will  be  set  in  its  strongest  light  by  a  grand  reversal  of  this  scene.  He  will
yet  appear  as  Judge  of  all.  Pilate  will  then  have  to  answer  at  his  bar.  The  accusers
also  will  then  have  to  give  account  of  their  accusations.  ^4)  We  shall  all  do  well
to  keep  that  solemnity  evermore  in  mind  (see  Ps.  1.  3,  22).  2.  Listen  to  his  con-
fession.   (1)  T«  implicate  him  with  the  Bomani,  he  is  accused  of  claiming  to  be  the


ea.  xxTn. !-««.]     THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.       625

King  of  th«  Jews  (h«  Luke  xxiil.  2).  Ha  ihrinki  not  from  th«  ATOwal  without
explanation  or  qualification.  Ha  ii  King  OTer  Jews  and  Komans,  over  angel*  and
derilB,  orer  heaven,  earth,  and  hell.  (2)  But  he  explaint  the  spiritual  nature  of
the  kingdom  he  came  there  to  egtablisn  (see  John  xriii.  33 — 37).  While  asserting
his  royuty  without  qualification,  he  takes  care  that  Pilate  should  not  proceed  in
ignorance  upon  the  malicious  suggestions  of  the  priests.  (3)  Csssar,  then,  eTldently,
had  nothing  to  fear  from  Jesus.  In  the  face  of  this  "  good  confession  "  (I  Tim.  vi.
13)  the  accusation  waa  utterly  broken  down.  3.  Mark  his  silence.  (1)  When  accused
of  the  chief  priests  he  answered  nothing.  There  was  nothing  to  refute.  Lo,  here  the
dignity  of  innocence  1  (2)  This  might  well  astonish  Pilate,  that  One  whose  life  was
Bought  by  charges  so  manifeitly  fidse  should  not  utter  a  word  to  repel  them.  It  was
a  new  thing  in  the  experience  of  the  goremor.  Suoh  conduct  plainly  showed  that
JesuB  was  no  common  person.  (3)  To  Pilate  still  be  answers  nothing.  The  written
Word,  like  tha  Lord,  does  not  accept  the  challenge  of  the  unbeliever.  It  leaves  every
man  to  work  out  his  own  conviction,  as  it  leaves  him  to  work  out  his  own  salvation.
(1)  Innocence  li  its  own  vindication.  It  can  afford  to  wait  for  Justice.  Hence  we.
must  notrender  railing  for  railing  (see  1  Pet.  ii.  23).

II.  TaB  WITNE8SBB  IM  oouBT.  1.  Th«  Uoderi  were  tfm  rvltri  ^  t\t  Jews.  (1)  They
were  those  hypocrites  whose  enormities  Jesus  had  so  unsparingly  rebuked  in  his
preaching.  Of  this  hypocrisy  they  never  repented,  but  nursed  their  resentment
against  him.  (2)  They  had  vindicated  the  truth  of  the  account  he  gave  of  them,  by
the  manner  in  which  they  proceeded  against  him.  (a)  In  their  plot  to  destroy  him.
(6)  Their  bribery  of  Judas,  fc)  The  Indecent  haste  In  which  they  gathered  the  council
in  the  night,  (i)  Their  false  accusation  against  him  of  blasphemy.  (3)  They
rindicated  it  still  in  their  proceeding.  In  accusing  him  before  Pilate  they  proceed
under  a  new  accusation.  They  artfuUy  concluded  that  the  chairge  of  sedition  would
be  that  by  which  the  Roman  governor  might  be  moved.  Rank,  whether  civil  or
ecclesiastical,  is  no  security  against  rascality.  2.  The  muUitttdt  were  under  their  inspira-
tion, (1)  They  are  moved  by  them  to  clamour  for  Barabbas.  (a)  At  the  Paschal
Feast,  which  commemorated  the  release  of  the  Hebrews  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,
it  became  a  custom,  probably  of  Roman  origin,  to  release  some  criminal  (see  ch.  ixvi.
5).  At  our  gospel  Paschal  Feast  sinners  are  liberated  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  (6)  In
accordance  with*this  custom,  Pilate  gave  them  the  option  of  releasing  Barabbas,  a
notable  offender,  guilty  at  once  of  treason,  murder,  and  felony  (see  Luke  xiiii.  19 ;
John  iviii.  40),  or  Jesus.  Note :  Barabbas  was  really  guilty  of  the  particular  crime
of  which  they  falsely  accused  Jesus  (see  Mark  iv.  7).  Here,  then,  ia  the  ehoice
between  good  and  evil,  between  which  every  man  has  to  decide,  (c)  They  preferred
Barabbas.  "  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas  1 "  is  still  the  cry  of  every  one  wno  hates
good  and  loves  evil.  Herein  the  Jews  violated  their  Law,  which  inflicts  death  "without
mercy  "  upon  criminals  (see  Heb.  x.  28).  (cJ)  How  their  injustice  here  proclaima  the
innocency  of  Jesus  I  The  guilty  Barabbas  thus  released  that  Jesus  might  die,  was
a  fitting  representation  of  that  countless  multitude  of  pardoned  sinners  to  whom  his
death  brings  everlasting  life.  (2)  The  multitude,  moved  by  the  rulers,  demand  the
crucifixion  of  Jesus.  They  did  this  against  reason.  They  did  it  against  the  expostula-
tion of  Pilate.  What  an  opportunity  they  had  of  defeating  the  purposes  of  the  rulers  1
They  fatally  preferred  the  evil  to  the  good.  (3)  They  are  moved  to  take  the  guilt  of
his  blood  upon  them,  (a)  This  was  intended  to  indemnify  Pilate,  who  wavered
between  justice  and  expediency.  It  is  a  bold  undertaking  to  be  bound  for  a  sinner
to  the  Almighty.  None  but  Christ  can  elTcctually  bear  another*!  sin.  (&)  But  they
shared  Pilate's  guilt  by  sharing  his  sin.  (c)  They  cruelly  involve  their  cnildren  Also ;
and  without  limiting  the  terrible  entail.  By  this  act  they  renounced  that  ancient
charter,  "I  will  be  a  God  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed."  Wicked  men  are  the  natural  enemies
of  their  own  children.  (4)  How  dreadfully  this  imprecation  was  verified  I  Within
forty  years  they  suffered  with  singular  resemblance  to  the  manner  in  which  they
caused  Jesus  to  suffer.  Josephus  says,  "When  they  [the  Romans]  bad  scourged  them
[the  Jews],  and  tormented  them  before  death  all  manner  of  ways,  they  crucified  them
over  against  the  wall  of  the  city."  He  proceeds  to  describe  the  horrors  that  he
witnessed,  and  says  they  were  crucified  by  Titus,  five  hundred  in  a  day,  till  "  room
"irr  wanting  for  crosses,  and  crosses  for  bodies."

»  J.w»HKW — II.  2    I


626         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxth.  1—66

m.  The  ooyebnob  in  thb  judqment-seat.  1.  Be  was  convinced  of  the  innocency
ofJesm.  (1)  His  good  sense  showed  Mm  that  nothing  was  proved  against  him.  The
best  men  often  bare  be!?Ti  accused  of  the  worst  crimes.  He  saw  that  "  envy"  had
instigated  the  rulers.  This  is  worse  than  hatred ;  for  it  is  hatred  without  a  cause.
Hatred  presumes  the  imputation  of  a  fault,  but  envy  acknowledges  an  excellence.
The  eye  of  the  ruler  was  evil  because  Jesus  was  good,  (2)  In  this  judgment  he  was
conBrmed  by  his  wife's  dream.  It  was  clearly  a  Divine  testimony  to  the  innocence
of  Jesus.  It  was  probably  of  such  •  nature  as  to  Gil  her  with  apprehensions  of  the
consequences  of  her  husband's  consenting  to  the  death  of  Jesus  (cf.  Gen.  xx.  3).  The
"aufifering"  of  Pilate's  wife  on  this  account  was  creditable  to  her  cocsoienoe.  Tradition
calls  her  Claudia  Procula,  and  she  is  canonized  in  the  Grecian  Church.  Note  :  This
reference  to  Pilate's  wife  marks  the  time  of  the  erent,  and  proves  the  veracity  of  the
ni\.'rative,  for  we  learn  from  Tacitus  that  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  the  wives  of
governors  had  permission  to  attend  them  in  the  provinces.  (3)  He  therefore  sought  to
release  Jesus.  He  declared  that  he  "found  no  fault  in  him."  In  naming  such  a
wretch  as  Barabbas  as  the  alternative  to  Jesus,  in  the  release  at  the  feast,  he  hoped
to  secure  that  of  Jesus.  He  pleaded  with  the  multitude  against  their  clamour  for  the
blood  of  Jesus.  2.  Yet  he  sacrificed  justice  to  expediency.  (1)  He  knew  that  Tiberius
was  jealous  and  sanguinary,  and  he  feared  the  malignity  of  the  Jews.  Philo  describes
Pilate  as  "naturally  inflexible,  rigid,  and  self-willed."  But  he  had  already  had  to
contand  with  two  insurrections  of  the  Jewf,  viz.  when  he  attempted  to  bring  the
Boman  standard  into  Jerusalem,  and  when  he  applied  the  wealth  of  the  sacred  treasury
to  secular  uses.  (2)  He  ought  never  to  have  appealed  to  the  people ;  but  he  loved
power  rather  than  justice.  He  was  prepared  to  do  unscrupulous  things  rather  than
risk  his  procuratorship,  if  not  his  liberty  or  life.  There  are  occasions  in  every  life  to
test  character.  (3)  He  would  fain  relieve  himself  of  his  responsibility,  fie  tried,
to  devolve  it  upon  Herod  (see  Luke  xxiii.  5,  etc.).  He  then  tried  to  devolve  it  upon
the  people  (ver.  24).  No  ceremony  of  washing  the  hands  can  free  them  from  the
stains  of  blood-guiltiness.  To  protest  innocence,  while  practising  crime,  is  to  sin
against  conscience.  "  Sin  is  a  brat  nobody  is  willing  to  own  "  (Henry).  The  priests
threw  it  upon  Judas;  Pilate  now  throws  it  upon  tliem.  "See  ye  to  it."  (4)  Still
God  finds  it  at  the  sinner's  door  (see  Acts  It.  27).  Not  long  after  this,  Pilate  was
deprived  of  his  office  through  the  accusations  of  that  very  people,  and,  being  banished
to  Gaul,  ended  his  life  by  suicide.

IV.  The  soldiers  in  the  PB.2ET0EinM.  1.  They  were  in  the  pay  of  Gcesar.  They
were  by  their  profession  jealous  of  the  honour  of  their  master.  But  there  is  a  King  of
kings,  to  whom  subjects  of  earthly  sovereigns  owe  the  first  allegiance.  In  mistaken
zeal:  2.  They  mock  the  royalty  of  Jesus.  (1)  They  invest  him  with  a  scarlet  robe,
in  derision,  as  though  he  wore  the  crimson  or  purple  of  kings  (cf.  Mark  xv.  17 ;
John  lix.  2).  They  crown  him  with  plaited  thorns.  The  frail  reed  is  made  to
serve  as  his  sceptre  (cf.  oh.  xi.  7 ;  Ps.  xlv.  6).  (2)  In  this  character  they  pay  him
insolent  homage.  They  spat  upon  him,  as  he  had  been  before  abused  in  the  high
prfest's  hall  (see  cb.  xxvi.  27).  They  smote  him  with  the  reed,  making  his  ensign
of  mock  royalty  an  instrument  of  cruelty.  (3)  The  soldiers  seem  to  have  taken  their
cue  from  Herod  (see  Luke  xxiii.  11).  It  was  ordained  that  the  contempt  of  men
should  in  all  this  signally  confess  the  truth  of  God.  (4)  The  evangelists  record  no
word  of  Christ's  during  these  tortures.  He  sustained  them  with  unresisting  submis-
sion (see  Isa.  liii,  7).  How  completely  is  he  left  alone  1  The  Jews  persecute  him,
Judas  betrays  him,  Peter  denies  him,  the  rest  forsake  him ;  and  now  the  Eoman  is
with  his  enemies.  No  plot  could  have  been  better  contrived  to  show  the  moral
grandeur  of  a  hero,  nc(t  braving  but  enduring  the  accumulated  wrongs  of  an  evil
world  with  the  dignity  of  meekness. — J.  A,  M.

Yen.  32 — 44. — The  reproach  of  the  cross.  Upon  the  release  of  the  infamous
Banbbas,  the  innocent  and  righteous  Jesus  was  deliTcred  to  be  crucified ;  and  now
we  see  him  suffering  the  reproach  of  the  cross.

I,  Thb  cross  itself  w^a  a  bbfboaoh.  1,  It  was  a  lymhol  of  shanie.  (1)  As  a  tree
WM  the  means  of  introducing  the  curse  into  the  world,  so  hath  Gud  ordained  that  a
trae  ihould  be  the  means  of  its  removal.     Hence  from  the  earliest  time,  whoever  was


OH.  ixviL  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  6-3

banged  upon  a  tree  was  accounted  accursed  of  God  (of.  Gen.  iii.  12—19;  Deut.  ix.
22,  23 ;  Josh.  viii.  29 ;  x.  26,  27).  Those  curse-bearers  were  types  of  Christ  (see  Gal.
iu.  13).  (2)  CrucifixioQ  amongst  the  heathen  ii  traced  back  to  the  age  of  Semiramis.
It  was  chiefly  inflicted  on  slaves;  on  free  persons  only  when  convicted  of  the  most
heinous  crimes.  Hence  Paul's  emphatic  "  even  the  death  of  the  cross  "  (Phil.  ii.  8).
(3)  It  was  a  part  of  the  reproach  of  a  criminal  that  he  had  to  carry  his  own  cross  to
the  place  of  execution.  Plutarch  says,  "  Every  kind  of  wickedness  produces  its  own
peculiar  torment,  just  as  malefactors  when  brought  forth  to  execution  carry  their
own  crosses."  So  Jesus  carried  his  cross  until  he  sank  under  it  (see  John  xix.  17),
overcome  by  exhaustion  through  his  agony  in  the  garden  followed  by  his  sufferings  hi
the  Prastorium.  He  carried  it  as  Isaac  carried  the  wood  upon  which  he  was  to  be
offered  up.  (4)  So  shameful  a  thing  was  the  cross,  that  no  Jew  or  Roman  citizen
could  be  induced  to  carry  one.  Hence  Simon  the  Cyrenian  was  impressed  to  bear
the  cross  of  Jesus.  Probably  he  was  pointed  out  as  a  disciple  of  Jesus  (cf.  Mark  xv.
^1 ;  Horn.  xvi.  13).  He  became  thereby  the  honoured  representative  of  the  suffering
followers  of  Christ  in  every  age  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  24 ;  Heb.  xiii.  13).  2.  It  tpos  an  instru-
ment of  shame.  (1)  There  was  a  cruel  torture  inflicted  upon  the  victim  before  he
came  to  his  crucifixion.  Jesus  was  accordingly  delivered  by  Pilate  to  be  scourged,
preparatory  to  his  being  crucified.  The  soldiers  to  the  scourging  added  cruel  mockings.
(2)  A  t  the  place  of  execution  he  was  stripped  of  his  garments.  "  The  poorest  man
dies  with  some  clothing  on,  Jesus  with  none;  and  his  garments  fall  not  to  his  fiiends,
but  to  the  soldiers  who  crucified  him  "  (Harmer).  David  said  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy
of  Christ,  for  it  was  never  true  of  himself,  "  They  part  my  garments  among  them,
and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture  "  (Ps.  ixii.  18).  (3)  Then  came  the  actual  crucifixion.
The  stretching  of  the  victim  upon  the  wood.  The  transfixing.  The  concussion
through  the  striking  the  foot  of  the  cross  into  the  hole  dug  for  its  reception,  by
which  the  bones  became  dislocated  (see  Ps.  xxii.  14).  The  lingering  torture,  the
vitals  being  avoided.     "  The  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel."

II.  Rbpeoaoh  was  associated  with  it.  1.  In  the  place  »/  the  arneiflxion.  (1)
"  A  plice  called  Golgotha,  that  is  to  say.  The  i)lace  of  a  skull."  It  had  its  name  from
being  the  place  of  common  execution.  Christ  being  crucified  there  gives  expressiveness
to  the  prediction  of  Isaiah,  "numbered  with  the  transgressors."  (2)  The  ghastly
place  was  an  emblem  of  the  devastated  state  of  the  Church  that  crucified  Christ.  So
of  every  Church-member  who  crucifies  him  afresh.  But  to  the  repentant  sinner  it  is
the  end  of  death  and  beginning  of  life.  "  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify
the  people  with  bis  own  blood,  suffered  without  the  gate  (Heb.  xiii.  12).  (3)  "Golgotha  "
(rhhi)  resembles  "  Gilgal,"  with  the  Syriac  addition  (sn-).  The  latter  place  was  named
by  Joshua  to  commemorate  the  temporal  redemption  of  Israel  from  the  reproach
of  Egypt.  In  the  former  place  Jesus  freed  his  people  by  a  spiritual  redemption  from
the  reproach  of  sin  (see  Josh.  v.  9).  2.  In  the  inscription  on  the  cross.  (1)  "  His
accusation  written  "  (ver.  37).  It  was  common  to  affix  a  label  to  the  cross,  giving  a
statement  of  the  crime  for  which  the  person  suffered.  (2)  But  the  accusation  of
Jesus  alleged  no  crime.  It  was  really  an  accusation  of  the  priests.  They  condemned
Jesus  for  blasphemy,  but  had  him  crucified  for  treason.  It  impeached  them  as
murderers.  (3)  The  accusation  of  Jesus  asserted  a  glorious  truth.  The  truth  was
emphasized  by  being  three  times  written,  viz.  in  three  languages.  Pilate  could  not
be  induced  to  alter  what  he  had  written  (see  John  xix.  21).  Like  Balaam,  he  blessed
when  he  was  entreated  to  curse  (see  Numb.  xxiv.  10).  (4)  When  we  look  at  the  cross
as  the  emblem  of  suffering,  we  see  over  the  head  of  the  Sufferer  the  promise  of  tiiumph
and  the  hope  of  glory.  Sanctified  suffering  evermore  brings  forth  this  fruit.  3.  In  the
characters  crwAfled  along  with  him.  (1)  "  Two  robbers,  one  on  the  right  hand,  and
one  on  the  left."  Placing  the  Lord  between  the  robbers  was  intended'  to  stigmatize
him  with  peculiar  infamy,  as  if  he  were  the  greater  criminal  of  the  three.  (2)  Herein
note  a  further  fulfilment  of  the  words  of  Isaiah,  "He  was  numbered  with  the
transgressors."     He  was  so  numbered  that  we  may  be  numbered  with  his  saints.

III.  Eephoaoh  was  oast  upon  him.  1.  By  those  that  passed  ly.  (1)  "  They
railed  on  him,  wagging  their  heads,  and  saying.  Thou  that  destroyest  the  temple,  and
liuildest  it  in  three  days,  save  thyself."  Here  is  a  shameful  misconstruction  of  his  words.
Cruelty  has  its  refuge  in  falsehood.     "  Save."     They  mock  at  the  name  of  Jesu$,  equi-


628        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvii.  1— 6


valent  to  "  Saviour."  (2)  "  If  thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  the  cross."  Had
he  not  by  many  miracles  proved  himself  the  Son  of  God?  He  would  not  save  himself
by  coming  down  from  tb«  cross,  his  ij  racioug  purpose  being  to  sacrifice  himself  in  order
to  save  sinners.  The  sign  he  had  given  them  was  not  his  coming  down  from  the  cross,
but  his  coming  up  from  the  grave.  (3)  Why  have  they  not  the  patience  of  the
"  three  days  "  to  which  they  referred,  and  they  might  see  the  raising  of  the  temple  of
his  body  ?  (4)  The  wagging  of  the  head  was  the  ixprossion  of  a  malicious  triumph.
Little  did  they  consider  that  this  very  gesture  was  the  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  to  their
dishonour  (see  Ps.  xxii.  7).  2.  By  the  heads  of  the  nation,  (1)  "  In  like  manner  also
the  chief  priests  mocking  him,  with  the  scribes  and  elders  said.  He  saved  others ;  can
he  not  save  himself?"  A  Saviour  who  saves  not,  but  sacrifices  himself  to  be  the
victim  for  salvation  to  others,  they  cannot  understand.  (2)  "  He  is  the  King  of  Israel."
Here  is  irony  founded  on  the  inscription  which  they  could  not  induce  Pilate  to  alter.
"  Let  him  now  come  down  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe  on  him."  Sceptics  are
ever  ready  to  prescribe  to  God  what  miracles  he  must  work  in  order  to  gain  their
confidence,  as  though  that  confidence  also  were  an  infinite  benefit  to  him.  When
Christ  gave  them  the  more  astonishing  evidence  of  his  Messiahship  by  rising  from  the
dead,  they  did  not  believe.  His  completing  his  work  and  not  coming  down  from  the
cross  is  the  reason  why  we  believe.  (3)  "  He  trusteth  in  God ;  let  him  deliver  him
now  if  he  desireth  him;  for  he  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God."  In  this  railing  they
unwittingly  fulfil  a  remarkable  prophecy  of  the  Messiah  (see  Ps.  xxii.  8).  The
fulfilment  of  the  predictions  concerning  the  sufferings  of  Messiah  by  the  enemies  of
Jesus  establishes  his  claims,  3.  By  the  impenitent  male/actor.  (1)  "And  the
robbers  also,"  or  one  of  them  "  that  were  crucified  with  him,  cast  upon  him  the  same
reproach."  The  plural  is  sometimes  put  for  the  singular  as, "  They  are  dead,"  meaning
only  Herod  (ch.  ii.  20) ;  and,  "  When  the  disciples  saw  it  they  had  indignation,"
meaning  only  Judas  (ch.  xxvi.  8 ;  John  xii.  4).  (2)  The  arguments  used  by  the
railers  are  the  stock  arguments  of  infidels.  Libertines  like  the  Jews  are  offended  at
the  paradoxes  of  a  High  Priest  who  desit;ns  to  destroy  the  temple;  at  a  Saviour  who
eaves  not  himself;  at  the  Son  of  God  submitting  to  be  crucified.  But  in  these  very
paradoxes  the  believer  finds  the  sources  of  the  joys  of  salvation. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  45 — 54. — Prodigy  rebuking  levity.  Levity  had  diabolical  revelry  while  the
blessed  Lord  Jesus  meekly  suffered  injustice  the  most  outrageous,  and  cruelty  the
most  refined.     At  its  height  it  was  rebuked — ■

I.  By  a  hobbob  op  darkness.  1.  This  was  prettrnaturdl.  (1)  It  was  not  the
result  of  an  ordinary  eclipse  of  the  sun.  The  Passover  was  celebrated  at  full  moon,
when  such  an  event  could  not  have  taken  place.  A  solar  eclipse  never  continues
beyond  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  This  darkness  continued  three  hours.  (2)  It  may
have  been  produced  by  the  intervention  of  dense  clouds.  Such  an  intervention  would
have  been  unusual  in  JudsBa  in  the  spring  of  the  year  during  tlie  brightest  hours  of  the
day.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  secondary  causes,  they  were  commissioned  by
the  same  Providence  that  sent  the  plague  of  darkness  upon  the  Egyptians  (cf.
Exod.  I.  21 — 23).  (3)  It  was  no  chance  that  so  intimately  connected  this  darkness
with  the  event  of  the  Crucifixion.  It  was  "  over  all  the  land,"  viz.  of  Judaaa,  where
Christ  suffered,  and  prevailed  during  the  latter  three  hours  of  his  suffering.  It
terminated  also  with  the  termination  of  those  sufferings.  To  explain  such  coincidences
as  purely  accidental  is  but  to  substitute  a  miracle  of  chance  for  a  iniracle  of  Providence.
What  is  gained?  2.  It  was  portentous.  (1)  It  expressed  the  moral  anguish  of  spirit
which  Jesus  then  endured  for  us.  For  in  those  three  dreadful  hours  he  was  enduring
the  punishment  of  our  offences.  This  experience  of  Divine  anger  drew  from  him  the
l>atlietio  exclamation,  "Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani?"  (2)  It  expressed  the  present
triumph  of  the  powers  of  darkness  over  the  Sun  of  Ei^hteousness  (of.  Gen.  iii.  15 ;
Luke  xxii.  53).  An  extraordinarjr  illuminatioa  heralded  the  birth  of  Christ,  an
extraorilinary  darkness  signalized  his  death.  (3)  It  indicated  the  spiritual  darkness
of  the  Jewish  people,  who  obstinately  closed  their  eyes  upon  the  Light  of  the  world,
and  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity  by  crucifying  the  Just  One.  It  presaged
also  the  desolation  which  in  consequence  they  were  destined  to  suffer.  (4)  It  expressed
a  mourning  spread  over  nature  for  the  horrible  crime  then  perpetrated  by  men.    This


CM.  4XVII.  1— ee.]    TfiE  GOSPEL  AOCOUDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.        «29

sentiment  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  who,  witnessing  a
wonderful  eclipse  of  the  sun  at  Heliopolis,  in  Egypt,  said  to  Wh  friend  ApoUophanes,
"  Either  God  himself  suffer!  or  sympathizes  with  tbe  suflttrer."

II.  Bt  thb  BENDIN8  OF  THB  TEMFiis's  VEIL.  1.  Thu  olso  wos  prttematurcU.  (1)
The  laatter  of  fact  cannot  be  disputed.  For  it  occurred  at  the  timd  of  the  ereniug
sacrifice,  while  the  priest  was  offering  incense  in  the  holy  place,  and  on  the  occasion  of
a  great  festival  when  the  people  in  vast  numbers  were  praying  without.  The  testimony
of  Matthew  might  therefore  have  been  readily  contradicted  had  it  not  been  true.  It  is
too  late  in  the  day  to  attempt  to  contradict  it  now.  (2)  We  are  not  informed  how  the
wonder  was  effected,  whether  by  lightning  or  by  invisible  hands;  but  the  veil  was
thick  and  strong,  and  could  not  have  been  "  rent  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  "  by  any
ordinary  force.  God  can  work  his  miracles  immediately  or  by  secondary  causes.  (3)
That  this  was  a  Divine  thing  is  evident  from  its  coincidence  with  the  moment  of  the
Redeemer's  yielding  up  his  spirit.  To  say  this  was  a  mere  accident  is  but  to  make
the  miracle  of  chance  all  the  more  stupendous.  2.  This  too  was  portentoui.  (1)  Paul
teaches  us  to  regard  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the  temple  as  emblematical  of  the
rending  of  the  body  of  our  Lord,  the  sacrificial  efficacy  of  which  opened  to  the  guilty
the  way  of  access  to  God,  and  opened  to  all  who  believe,  the  way  into  his  glorious
presence  in  the  future  life.  (2)  It  intimated  also  the  abolition  of  the  Jewish  ceremonial
Law,  which,  by  its  interposition  of  im[}erfect  and  mystic  rites,  had  obstructed  free  and
direct  approach  to  God.  (3)  It  signified  the  revealing  and  unfolding  of  the  mysteries
of  the  Old  Ti  stament,  so  as  to  make  the  face  of  Moses  to  shine  in  the  radiance  of  the
gospel.  In  Christ  we  discover  the  true  Propitiatory,  or  Mercy-seat.  He  is  that  Ark  of
the  covenant  who  contains  in  his  heart  the  unbroken  tables  of  the  Law.  He  is  that
precious  golden  pot  of  incorruptible  Manna,  the  very  Bread  of  life  from  heaven.

III.  By  the  portents  fkom  the  earth.  1.  The  earthquake.  (1)  Travellers  have
observed  marks  of  extraordinary  convulsions  in  these  rocks.  The  fissures  lie  across
the  natural  cleavage.  Though  earthquakes  are  produced  by  natural  causes,  yet  are
they  under  the  control  and  direction  of  Providence.,  (2)  This  earthquake  attested
God's  approbaiion  of  the  Sufferer,  as  it  expressed  also  his  anger  against  his  persecutors
(cf.  Amos  viii.  8 ;  Nah.  i.  6).  So  as  the  rending  of  the  veil  intimated  the  removal  and
abolition  of  the  Jewish  Church,  this  rending  ot  the  rocks  imported  the  ruin  that  was
coming  upon  the  nation.  (3)  The  phenomenon  occurring  at  that  critical  moment
when  JeSus  dismissed  bis  spirit,  significantly  evinced  that  the  dreadful  act  of  rejecting
and  crucifying  the  Christ  provoked  the  desolation.  (4)  It  may  also  be  taken  as  a
token  and  earnest  of  thut  mighty  convulsion  of  nature  which  will  attend  Christ's
coming  to  the  judgment  (cf.  Heb.  xii.  26).  2.  2%e  opening  of  the  tombs.  (1)  This
showed  that  the  power  of  death  and  the  grave  was  vanquished  by  the  death  and
resurrection  of  Olirist.  When  our  Lord  gave  up  the  ghost  it  was  not  life  but  death
itself  that  died.  This  was  the  great  death  out  of  which  life  was  educed.  He  triumphed
over  death  in  the  "  place  of  a  skull" — where  the  trojihies  of  death  lay  around.  His
Divinity  was  proved,  for  he  imjiarted  life  to  the  bodies  of  the  sleeping  saints  (see
John  V.  25).  (2)  "This  opening  of  the  graves  was  designed  both  to  adorn  the
resurrection  of  Christ,  and  to  give  a  specimen  of  our  resurrection,  which  also  is  in
virtue  of  his  "  (Flavel).  (3)  It  was  a  strong  confirmation  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ.
For  those  who  came  forth  from  the  tombs  after  his  resurrection  "appeared  to  many"
to  whom  our  Lord  himself  did  not  appear.  Eeturning  with  Jesus  to  heaven,  they
were  also  pledges  to  angels  and  spirits  of  men  of  the  general  resurrection  to  come.
See  now—

IV.  The  effect  upon  the  spectators.  I.  Upon  the  Jews.  (1)  The  horror  of
darkness  interrupted  their  raillery.  It  struck  them  with  terror.  Guilt  trembles  in
darkness.  It  did  not  change  their  hearts.  (2)  Until  near  the  close  of  this  period  oi
horror,  Jesus  suffered  silently  in  the  sorrowfulness  of  his  soul  for  the  sin  of  the  world,
and  distressed  with  the  awful  loneliness  of  being  forsaken  of  his  God.  This  was  the
worst  part  of  his  sufferings,  and  extorted  from  him  that  loud  pathetic  cry.  This
roused  again  the  courage  of  his  revilers  to  say,  "This  Man  calleth  Elijah."  They
misunderstood  him,  as  carnal  men  do  evermore,  substituting  trust  in  the  human
for  trust  in  the  Divine.  (3)  Jesus  then  said,  "I  thirst"  (see  John  xix.  28).  This
moved  one  standing  by  to  fix  a  sponge  soaked  in  vinegar  on  a  hyssop  stalk,  and  put


630  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxvii.  1—66.

it  to  his  mouth,  but  the  kindness  was  interrupted  hy  ;therd  who,  in  the  same  obdurate
spirit,  said,  "  Let  be ;  let  us  see  whether  Elijah  eometh  to  save  hitn."  The  heart  is
desperately  wicked.  (4)  The  prodigies  which  followed  made  them  "  smite  their
breasts  "  (see  Luke  xxiii.  48).  The  wicked  will  wail  amid  the  convulsions  of  the  last
day  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  19 — 21;  Eev.  i.  7).  2.  Upon  the  soldiers.  (1)  They  had  reviled  him
before  (see  Luke  xxiii.  36),  bu£  now  they  "fear  exceedingly,"  and  the  centurion  in
particular  is  thoughtfully  affected,  for  he  makes  a  true  confession.  (2)  In  his  refleo-
tiong  he  thought  upon  the  manner  of  the  death  of  Christ  (see  Mark  xv.  39),  for  his
death  was  evidently  a  voluntary  act.  (a)  Luke  tells  us  that  the  last  utterance  was,
"  Father,  unto  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  This  he  uttered  with  a  loud  or  great
voice.  Then  immediately  he  "  yielded  up  his  spirit."  His  strength  was  unbroken.
He  died  as  the  Prince  of  life.  (6)  The  circumstance  of  his  expiring  sooner  than  was
usual  with  crucified  persons  (see  Mark  xv.  44),  as  well  as  the  loudness  of  his  voice  in
the  very  act  of  bis  dying,  showed  the  voluntariness  of  his  death  (see  John  x.  17, 18).
(c)  Our  Lord  is  nowhere  said  to  have  fallen  asleep  (cf.  ver.  52),  but  always  to  have
died.  "  Abraham,  Isaac,  Ishmael,  Jacob,  breathed  their  last ;  Ananias,  Sapphira,  Herod,
expired;  Jesus  gave  up  the  ghost,  dismissed  or  delivered  up  his  own  spirit"  (A.
Clarke).  In  the  manner  of  his  death,  then,  behold  the  manner  of  his  love,  (d)  Christ's
loud  voice  was  like  the  trumpet  blown  over  the  sacrifices.  3.  Upon  the  women.
(1)  They  followed  him  in  love.  They  had  ministered  to  him.  They  seem  now  to  .
have  been  the  only  disciples,  excepting  John,  present  at  the  Crucifixion.  They  were
"afar  off."  This  expression  may  only  intimate  that  they  had  come  from  far,  even
from  Galilee.  For  the  mother  of  Jesus  stood  by  the  cross  with  John,  and  Mary  of
Magdabi  and  others  also  were  near.  -  Yet  when  Christ  suflered,  his  friends  were  but
spectators.  Even  angels  stood  aloof  when  he  trod  the  winepress  alone.  (2)  Their
faith  and  love  were  strengthened.  All  that  the  centurion  saw  they  also  saw,  and
with  wider  and  deeper  conviction. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  57—66. — The  treatment  of  the  body  of  Christ.  The  body  of  Christ  is  mysti-
cally taken  to  represent  his  Church  (see  1  Cor.  x.  17 ;  Eph.  iv.  16;  Ool.  i.  18).  In
this  figure  the  fact  is  strongly  set  forth,  viz.  that  Christ  takes  home  to  himself  what-
ever treatment  his  Church  may  receive  (see  Prov.  xix.  31 ;  ch.  xxv.  35 — 46 ;  Acts
'X.  1, 4,  5).  This  also  applies  to  individual  members.  And  agreeably  to  this  analogy,
what  was  done  to  the  literal  body  of  Jesus  is  suggestive  of  the  treatihent  he  also
receives  as  he  is  represented  in  his  followers.     The  actors  may  be  described  as —

I.  Those  LOvmaLT  bolioitoits  fob  his  honoub.  1.  Christ  ha$  disciples,  secfretly  so
through  fea/r.  (1)  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  was  a  "rich  man"  and  yet  "  Jesus'  disciple."
Things  impossible  with  men  are  possible  with  God  (see  oh.  lii.  23 — 26).  "  Judge
nothing  before  the  time."  (2)  He  was  an  "  honourable  counsellor,"  a  member  of  that
wicked  Sanhedrin  that  condemned  Christ,  but  "  he  had  not  consented  to  the  counsel
and  deed  of  them."  In  difficult  circumstances  he  was  true.  He  was  "  a  good  and
righteous  man,  who  was  looking  for  the  kingdom  of  God"  (cf.  Mark  xv.  43;  Luke
xxiii.  50).  Genuine  honour  is  the  associate  of  goodness  and  righteousness.  These
come  to  us  through  Christ.  (3)  Yet  he  had  been  a  disciple  "  secretly  through  fear  of
the  Jews."  Probably  he  had  been  converted  by  his  friend  and  fellow-ruler,  Nicodemus,
and  his  timidity  was  in  keeping  with  the  caution  which  prompted  Nicodemus  to  visit
Jesus  under  the  cover  of  "  night"  (see  John  iii.  1,  2).  Note:  There  are  family  like-
nesses in  spiritual  relationships.  (4)  But  he  did  not  allow  his  timidity  to  involve  hira
in  the  wickedness  of  the  council.  He  doubtless  gave  his  voice  as  well  as  his  vote
against  their  crime.  It  was  he  probably  who  cross-examined  the  suborned  witnesses,
making  their  disagreement  too  apparent  for  the  comfcrt  of  the  priests  (see  Mark  xiv,
56,  59).  In  his  protest  he  probably  took  some  such  line  of  argument  as  that  of
Gamaliel  on  a  subsequent  occasion  (see  Acts  vi.  34; — 39).  2.  They  will  show  kindness
to  his  body,  (1)  The  righteous  soul  of  Joseph  was  grieved  at  the  indignities  to  which
it  bad  been  subjected,  and  at  the  earliest  opportunity  he  went  to  Filat«  and  asked  for  it.
He  then  proceeded  without  loss  of  time  to  remove  it  from  the  accursed  tree  (see  Acts
xiii.  29).  He  had  it  decently  swathed  in  linen,  and  laid  in  his  own  new  tomb  which
he  had  hewn  out  ill  the  rock.  His  friend  Nicodemus  laid  in  with  it  "a  mixture  of
myrrh  and  aloes,  about  a  hundred  poima  weight "  (see  John  xix.  39).    Then,  rolling  a


CH.  xxvir.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  631


great  stone  to  the  door  of  the  tomb,  they  departed.  God  can  find  fit  inatrnments  for
his  work.  His  providence  had  reserved  these  two  secret  disciples  for  this  solemn  duty.
Secret  disciples  are  more  generally  employed  in  rendering  service  to  the  body  of  Christ,
or  materidl  interests  of  his  Church.  (2)  God  honours  the  faithfulness  of  his  secret
disciples  by  encouraging  and  strengthening  their  faith.  Had  Jose'ph  listened  to  the
promptings  of  human  prudence,  he  would  have  hesitated  to  interfere  for  the  body  of
Cbriat,  lest  he  should  be  brought  under  suspicion,  incapacitated  for  doing  good,  perhaps
utterly  ruined.  Probably  his  timidity  had  beeu  iviiiuved  by  the  prodigies  at  our
Lord's  death,  working  in  him  a  stronger  conviction  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah.  Now
he  went  "  boldly  "  to  Pilate  (Mark  xv.  43).  3.  Thereby  they  advance  the  interests  of
his  truth.  (1)  The  riches  and  honourable  station  of  Joseph  are  mentioned,  not  only
because  of  the  influence  they  would  have  with  Pilate,  but  to  show  the  fulfilment  of  the
words  of  Isaiah,  "  And  his  grave  was  appointed  with  the  wicked,  but  with  the  rich
man  was  his  tomb  "  (liii.  9,  Lowth's  translation).  His  grave  would  have  been  with
the  malefactors  had  not  Joseph  interposed.  How  infallibly  the  providence  vindicates
the  truth  of  God!  (2)  See  here  also  an  admirable  Divine  propriety.  It  was  proper
that  the  grave  of  Jesus  should  be  borrowed,  because  the  grave  is  the  heritage  of  sinners
(see  Job  xxiv.  19 ;  Ps.  cxlvi.  4).  It  was  proper  it  should  be  new — never  tainted  with
corruption,  for,  in  no  sense  should  the  Holy  One  see  corruption.  It  was  proper  that
the  cavil  should  be  obviated,  as  if  the  body  of  Christ  had  been  resuscitated  by  touching
the  bones  of  some  prophet  (see  2  Kings  xiii.  20).  Christ's  burial  takes  oflF  the  terror
of  the  grave,  and  we  may  now  be  buried  with  him-  4.  Christ  has  disciples  who  openly
confess  him,  (1)  The  women  were  at  the  tomb.  There  was  Mary  of  Magdala.  She
was  a  respectable  woman,  out  of  whom  the  Lord  had  cast  seven  devils,  whose  power
over  her  was  'probably  her  affliction  rather  than  her  crime.  She  is  without  warrant
confounded  with  the  woman  who  was  "  a  sinner,"  but  whose  name  is  not  mentioned.
There  was  "  the  other  Mary,"  evidently  "  the  mother  of  James  and  Joses,"  mentioned
in  ver.  56,  who  appears  to  have  been  a  sister  of  the  mother  of  our  Lord.  There  was
also  Salome,  unless  "  the  other  Mary  "  and  Salome  are  the  same,  which  is  doubtful
(see  Mark  xyi.  1).  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod's  steward,  appears  to  have  been
there  too  (see  Luke  ixiv.  10).  The  mother  of  our  Lord  had  probably  at  this  time
been  taken  to  the  home  of  John  (see  John  xix.  26,  27).  (2)  These  noble  women  had
followed  Jesus,  some  of  them  at  least  from  Galilee,  were  ever  ready  to  minister  to  his
temporal  necessities,  were  present  at  his  crucifixion,  and  here  they  are  again  at  his
burial.  They  are  in  the  posture  of  mourners,  and  so  testify  to  his  innooency,  for  the
Jews  had  forbidden  to  show  any  external  marks  of  mourning  at  the  burial  of  male-
factors. They  had  heard  the  Lord  speak  of  his  resurrection,  but  probably  interpreted
him  in  some  figurative  sense.  But  though  their  faith  was  confused  and  unsettled,  their
love  was  strong.  Where  love  is  there  is  everything  ;  and  it  will  all  come  out  as  the
ways  of  Providence  unfold.  (3)  These  women  were  there  gratefully  to  witness  and
commend  the  kindness  of  Joseph  and  Nicodemus.  And  after  the  men  had  retired,
tliey  went  into  the  city  just  before  the  setting  in  of  the  sabbath,  to  purcliase  spices  for
the  embalming  of  the  body  as  soon  as  the  sabbath  should  have  passed.  Their  love
was  constant  (cf.  ch.  xxvi.  12, 13).

II.  Those  maliciously  anxious  to  discredit  him.  1.  Notice  the  villainy  of  the
rulers.  (1)  See  it  in  their  guilty  fears.  The  Icindness  of  the  friends  of  Jesus  gave
him  a  tomb ;  the  malice  of  his  enemies  would  keep  him  in  it.  Should  he  rise  again
his  blood  will  be  upon  them.  They  cannot  forget  the  raising  of  Lazarus.  Besurrec-
tions  are  terrible  things  to  the  wicked,  especially  of  those  murdered  by  them  for  their
testimony  to  the  truth  (see  Rev.  xi.  11).  If  the  disciples  of  Jesus  had  lost  all  hope,
his  enemies  had  not  lost  all  fear.  The  fears  of  the  wicked  should  encourage  the  hopes
of  the  good.  (2)  See  it  in  their  nervous  promptitude.  They  are  with  Pilate  soon
after  Joseph  had  left  him.  The  morrow  after  the  preparation  was  just  after  six  in  the
evening.  The  celerity  of  hatred  is  only  exceeded  by  that  of  loTe.  (3)  See  it  in  their
iyoophanoy.  They  were  "  gathered  together  unto  Pilate,  saying,  Sir,  we  remember
that  that  deceiver  said."  Pilate  is  "  Sir,"  Jesus  "  That  deceiver."  What  an  outrageous
inversion  of  propriety  I  "  The  malicious  slanderers  of  good  men  are  commonly  the
most  sordid  flatterers  of  great  men "  (Henry).  (4)  See  it  in  their  unscrupulousness.
They  had  often  quarrelled  with  Christ  for  doing  works  of  mercy  on  the  sabbath,  they


«d2       TflE  QOSPKL  ACOORDm0  TO  St.  MATtHEW.     foH.  xxHl  1-6^

hegitate  not  themBelvea  to  be  busied  with  a  work  of  malice  on  it.  Neither  do  tbey
henitate  to  procure  soldiers  to  momit  guard  upon  It.  Again  they  say,  "We  remember,
eiAs,  Thus  tliese  base  hypocrites  made  it  evident  that  they  well  enough  knew  that
the  words  of  Ohrist,  "  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up,"
referred  to  "  the  temple  of  his  body,"  when  they  perverted  them  at  the  trial  (of.
oh.  xxvi.  61).  2.  See  how  Providence  rebuked  it.  (1)  By  their  confession  it  was
publicly  known  that  Jesus  had  uttered  the  prediction  that  he  should  rise  again  the
third  day.  The  prediction,  then,  was  not  read  rato  the  narrative  after  the  event  of  the
Resurrection.  They  were  anxious  "until  the  third  day,"  because  he  had  "said  while
yet  alive.  After  three  days  I  rise  again."  Note  :  The  modo  of  computation  was  that
which  still  obtains  in  the  Bast.    "  After  three  days "  means  "  until  the  third  day."

(2)  They  relied  upon  the  seal  and  the  guard.  The  seal  supplied  the  place  of  •  lock.
It  was  in  use  as  anciently  as  the  time  of  Daniel  (see  Dan.  vi.  17).  The  sepulchre  was  out
into  the  rock,  so  had  but  one  entrance,  which  was  not  only  blocked  by  a  great  stone
sealed,  but  guarded  by  sixty  soldiers.  The  disciples  could  not  possibly  "  steal  him
awty."    Their  case  rendered  the  evidence  of  the  Resurrection  all  the  more  convincing.

(3)  "  So  the  last  error,"  etc.  The  devil  never  speaks  the  truth  but  when  he  intends
to  proraotr-  some  evil  purpose  by  it.  The  rulers  were  true  prophets  against  their  will.
Little  did  they  ima^e  that  the  measures  they  adopted  would  in  the  most  powerful
manner  contribute  to  the  result  they  dreaded.  There  is  neither  might  nor  council
against  God  (see  Acts  v.  23 ;  xvi.  23).

III.  Those  who  affect  indifferenos  to  nis  olaius.  1.  Pilate  affected  a  haughty
indifference.  (1)  He  conceded  the  body  of  Christ  to  the  request  of  Josejjh.  He  was
the  more  willing  to  do  so,  having  found  no  fault  in  Jesus  at  his  trial.  (2)  He  also
conceded  the  guard  to  the  -request  of  the  rulers.  (3)  He  leaves  the  watoh  to  the
priests,  not  caring  to  be  seen  himself  in  sucIj  a  thing.  "  Make  it  as  sure  as  ye  can,"
looks  like  banter.  2.  The  soldiert  of  the  watch  were  mercenaries.  (1)  They  guarded
the  tomb  because  they  were  paid  to  render  obedience  to  command.  Can  a  man  reduce
himself  to  the  condition  of  an  automaton  ?  (2)  When  they  took  the  bribe  of  the
rulers  to  conceal  the  resurrection  of  Christ  and  give  publicity  to  a  lie,  they  acted  as
free  agents.  (3)  There  can  be  no  neutrality  in  relation  to  Christ.  To  affect  it  cannot
be  innocent.  Every  age  has  its  Pharisees,  who  make  the  written  Word  of  God  a  sealed
book,  perverting  the  letter  and  denying  the  spirit  (cf.  Rev.  xxii.  10).  "  Do  thou
hinder  the  resurrection  of  thy  sin ;  seal  it  down  with  strong  purposes,  solemn  covenants,
and  wftteh  it  by  a  wakeful,  circumspect  walking  "  (Gumall). — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  4. — TO«  uselessnesa  of  remorte.  "I  have  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  the
innocent  blood."  There  are  various  estimates  of  the  character  and  motives  of  Judas
Iscariot.  Dr.  A.  Maclaren  does  not  give  sufficient  scriptural  reason  for  crediting  him
with  mistaken  zeal,  and  the  intention  of  forcing  Christ  to  act.  He  says,  "Judas  was
simply  a  man  of  a  low,  earthly  nature,  who  became  a  follower  of  Christ,  thinking  that  he
was  to  prove  a  Messiah  of  the  vulgar  type,  or  another  Judas  Maccabajus.  He  was  not
attracted  by  Christ's  character  and  teaching.  As  the  true  nature  of  Christ's  work  and
kingdom  became  more  obvious,  he  became  more  weary  of  him  and  it.  .  .  .  His  burst
of  confession  does  not  sound  like  the  words  of  a  man  who  had  been  actuated  by  motives
of  mistaken  affection."  The  word  "repented,"  found  in  ver.  3,  is  the  word  which
merely  means  "  regret,"  a  simple  change  of  feeling ;  it  does  not  suggest  humbled  feeling,
or  sense  of  sin.  A  man  may  be  vexed  at  the  results  of  his  conduct  without  any  recog-
nition of  the  sin  and  shame  of  his  conduct.  Two  of  the  apostolic  band  openly  failed
in  those  hours  of  strain.  Penitence  and  remorse  are  illustrated  in  their  two  cases.
Peter,  through  penitence,  found  recovery.  Judas,  through  remorse,  found  doom.
Penitence  is  useful.    Remorse  is  useless.

I.  Rkmobsb  is  but  thb  bhaus  of  havinq  failkd.  The  word  means  "to  bite
back."  It  may  be  illustrated  by  biting  one's  lips  through  vexation.  It  involves
shrinking  from  the  results  of  having  failed.  It  is  the  annoyance  of  having  miscalcu-
lated ;  it  is  the  feeling  of  being  convicted  of  stupidity ;  it  is  the  regret  of  seeing  a  scheme
fall  about  us  in  ruins  because  we  made  a  false  move.  It  may  include  some  regret  at
the  mischief  we  have  made  for  others,  without  doing  any  goo4  to  ourselves.  But
there  ii  no  sense  of  the  sin  and  shame  of  the  thing  done.    The  seeming  confession,  "  I


OB.xxm  1—66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         633

have  sinned,"  does  but  lightly  pass  the  lips.  Judas  would  have  done  it  again,  if  he
could  have  been  sure  of  lucceeding  the  second  time.  Reniorse  includes  no  self-revela-
tion, no  humbled  feeling.  There  is  anger  with  one's  self,  but  not  shame  or  humility.
So  there  is  no  chance  of  betterment  for  a  man  whil(!  his  feeling  keeps  mere  remorse.

II.  Remobsb  kbkpb  a  hah  away  fbom  God.  You  cannot  take  remorse  to  God.
Fou  never  want  to  do  so.  It  drivel  you  away  from  him.  Judas  never  offered  a  prayer
to  God ;  never  thought  of  pardon  for  his  offence.  Remorse  made  him  hopeless  and
desperate.  He  took  the  life  that  seemed  worthless.  Penitence  always  moves  towards
God ;  it  seeks  him.  There  is  in  it  prayer  and  hope.  God  is  the  AU-merciful  One. — R.  T.

Ver.  12. — The  silence  of  innocence.  "  He  answered  nothing."  "  We  have  to  realize
the  contrast  between  the  vehement  clamour  of'  the  accusers,  the  calm,  imperturbable,
patient  silc^nce  of  the  Accused,  and  the  wonder  of  the  judge  at  what  was  so  different
from  anything  that  had  previously  come  within  the  range  of  his  experience  "  (Plumptre).
Attention  may  be  given  to  the  silences  of  Jesus  during  his  trials.  They  are  at  least
RS  striking  and  as  remarkable  as  his  speeches.  Look  especially  at  these.  1.  His
silence  before  the  high  priest.  False  witnesses,  bribed  witnesses,  made  an  accusation,
by  twisting  one  of  his  figurative  sentences.  The  high  priest  was  prepared  to  twist
any  reply  that  Jesus  might  make.  "  But  he  held  liis  peace."  And  the  silence  made
the  consciences  of  his  judges  speak  out,  and  accuse  them  of  unscrupulous  and  malicious
wickedness.  2.  His  silence  before  Herod.  "  Herod  poured  out  a  flood  of  rambling
remarks,  but  Jesus  did  not  vouchsafe  him  one  word.  He  felt  that  Herod  should  have
been  ashamed  to  look  the  Baptist's  Friend  in  the  face.  He  would  not  stoop  even  to
speak  to  a  man  who  could  treat  him  as  a  mere  wonder-worker  who  might  purchase
hit  judge's  favour  by  exhibiting  his  skill.  But  Herod  was  utterly  incapable  of  feeling
the  annihilating  force  of  such  silent  disdain."  3.  His  silence  before  Pilate  (as  in  text)
It  does  not  seem  that  our  Lord  was  silent  to  Pilate.  It  was  when  the  clamour  of  the
priest-party  arose,  interrupting  the  trial,  that  Jesus  preserved  silence.  Observe  the
very  important  distinction  between  the  silence  of  moodiness  and  sulkiness  and  the
silence  of  conscious  innocence.  Only  the  latter  silence  has  the  true,  reproachful,  con-
science-quickening power.  "A  silent  lamb  amidst  his  foes."  The  lamb  is  the  type
of  innocence.  Christianity  has  glorified  the  silent  endurance  of  wrong,  and  has  made
such  "  silent  endurance "  one  of  the  most  masterful  forces  that  sway  humanity.
Illustrate  these  points.

I.  Inkooenoe  can  affobd  to  be  bilemt.  1.  Because  it  sufBciently  speaks  in
attitude  and  in  countenance.  2.  Because  God  is  always  on  its  side.  3.  Because  time
works  its  vindication.

II.  Innocence  convicts  the  duurxb  bt  silestoe.  1.  It  takes  away  all  possibility
of  contention.  2.  It  prevents  the  injurer  keeping  up  the  excitement  of  rage  and
malice.  3.  It  compels  the  injurer  to  question  his  own  doings.  4.  It  takes  away  all
the  pleasure  of  the  injurer,  when  a  man  bears  tiie  injury  meekly  and  silently.  Tlie
silence  of  Jesus  searches  priest-party,  Herod,  and  Pilate. — B.  T.

Ver.  18. — Pilate't  character-reading.  "  He  knew  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered
him."  Pilate  was  never  under  any  sort  of  delusion  concerning  Christ.  Experience  as
a  magistrate  made  the  criminal's  face,  and  attitude,  and  speech,  and  ways,  quite
familiar  things  to  him.  He  watched  Jesus,  and  was  perfectly  certain  that  he  was  no
criminal,  and  no  dangerous  revolutionist.  And  Pilate  had  not  had  contention  after
contention  with  that  priest-party  without  knowing  the  party  well ;  and  his  estimate  of
it  we  can  well  imagine.  It  did  not  flatter  them,  and  it  was  just.  Of  course,  be  saw
everything  from  the  Roman's  point  of  view,  and  he  made  some  mistakes,  as  eveiy  one
must  who  fails  to  put  himself  in  the  |ilace  of  him  whom  he  appraises;  he  was,  however,
right  in  this  case.  But  what  he  read  seriously  increases  the  guilt  and  shame  of  his  act.
He  has  no  excuse  of  even  Belf-neoej)tion.

I.  Pilatb's  beading  of  TJbji  ohabacteb  anb  motives  of  the  pbiest-pabty.
I'ilate  "was  a  typical  Roman,  noi  of  the  antique,  simple  stamp,  but  of  the  imperial
period;  a  man  not  without  some  remains  of  the  ancient  Roman  justice  in  his  soul,  yet
pleasure-loving,  imperious,  and  corrupt.  He  hated  the  Jews  whom  he  ruled,  and,  in
times  of  irritation,  freely  shed  their  bloud.    They  returned  his  hatred  with  coidiu'.ity,


G34         THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvn.  1—66.

and  accused  him  of  every  crime — maladministration,  cruelty,  and  robbery."  "  Pllnte
understood  their  pretended  zeal  for  the  Boman  authority."  He  may  not  have  known
the  precise  occasion  for  their  strong  feeling  against  Jesus ;  but  he  saw  plainly  that  it
was  a  case  of  malice  and  revenge,  and  they  were  prepared  to  humiliatu  themselves
utterly  in  carrying  out  their  evil  purpose.  But,  if  Pilate  knew  them  so  well,  we  must
judge  his  guilt  in  yielding  to  them  by  the  light  of  his  knowledge.

II.  Pilate's  beadino  of  the  chabactbb  and  uotiteb  of  Jesus.  He  seems  li
have  known  something  of  Jesus.  The  story  of  the  triumphal  entry  had  been  dulj
reported  to  him ;  and  he  formed  his  opiaion  when  he  found  that  Jesus  took  no
material  advantage  of  that  time  of  excitement.  He  settled  it — Jesus  was  a  harmless
enthusiast,  of  no  account  politically.  "  He  questioned  Jesus  in  regard  to  the  accusa-
tions brought  against  him,  asking  especially  if  he  pretended  to  be  a  King."  He  may
have  laughed  cynically  at  our  Lord's  answer,  but  he  knew  well  that  nothing  of  the
demagogue  lurked  behind  that  calm  and  peaceful  face.  Again  and  again  he  declared
him  innocent — he  found  no  fault  in  him.  Pilate  read  him  aright,  but  condemned  him-
self in  the  reading.     Our  guilt  is  always  measured  by  our  knowledge. — E.  T.

Ver.  24. — Guilt  that  will  not  wash  off.  By  the  Mosaic  regulations,  the  elders  of
a  city  in  which  an  undiscovered  murder  had  been  committed  were  to  wash  their  hands
over  the  sin  offering,  and  to  say,  "  Our  hands  have  not  shed  this  blood,  neither  have
our  eyes  seen  it"  (Deut.  ixi.  6).  Pilate  thinks  that  "when  he  gets  the  Jews  to  take
the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  upon  themselves,  he  has  relieved  himself,  if  not  entirely,  yet
in  a  great  measure,  of  the  responsibility.  But  just  as  the  outward  washing  of  hands
could  not  clear  him  of  his  share  in  the  guilt,  so  guilt  contracted  by  our  being  a  con-
senting or  co-operating  party  in  any  deed  of  injustice  and  dishonour  cannot  be  thus
mitigated  or  wiped  away  "  (Hanna).  Hand-washing  as  a  symbolic  action  is  familiar
at  all  times.  Lady  Macbeth  cannot  wash  off  the  murder-spot  which  her  conscience
clearly  sees  on  seemingly  clean  hands.

I.  The  ouilt  or  ignoeance  will  wash  OFr.  We  may  do  things  that  are  wrong
without  knowing  them  to  be  wrong.  They  may  do  mischief  and  bring  trouble  ;  but
they  do  not  involve  soul-stain ;  so  the  sins  of  ignorance — if  the  ignorance  is  not  guilty
ignorance — will  wash  off.

II.  The  guilt  of  fbailty  will  wash  off.  We  sometimes  do  wrong  through  body-
bias.  Sometimes  even  against  our  will.  Sometimes  by  temporary  swerving  of  the  will.
If  there  be  no  set  purpose,  only  human  infirmity,  the  guilt  will  wash  off.

III.  The  guilt  of  forced  doing  against  oue  will  will  wash  off.  We  may  be
compelled,  by  circumstances  or  human  persuasioos,  to  do  what  we  would  not  do.
That  may  bring  trouble  and  spoil  our  lives,  but  it  does  not  soil  our  souls,  and  it  will
wash  off.

IV.  The  guilt  of  wilful  sin  will  not  wash  off.  That  involves  inward  stain.
It  must  be  got  out  That  can  only  be  done  (1)  by  regeneration,  or  (2)  by  judgment,
"  Oil  1  if  a  man  could  roll  off  his  deeds  on  other  men ;  if  a  man  that  is  a  partner  with
olhersxould  only  roll  off  his  portion  of  crime  upon  his  confederates,  as  easily  as  a  man
can  wash  his  hands  in  a  bowl  of  water,  and  clean  them,  how  easy  it  would  be  for  m^n
to  be  cleansed  from  their  transgressions  in  this  world  1  Pilate  was  the  guiltiest  of  all
that  acted  in  this  matter.  He  was  placed  where  he  was  Vjound  to  maintain  justice.
He  went  against  his  better  I'eolings."  He  vrilled  the  death  of  One  whom  he  knew  to  be
innocent.     Pilate's  guilt  will  not  "  wash  oil." — E.  T.

Ver.  32. — Tlie  honourable  ministry  of  Simon.  "Sentence  of  death  having  been
passed  against  Jesus,  he  was  led  forth  to  Calvary,  bearing  his  cross,  guarded  by  a  band
of  Eoman  soldiers,  and  followed  by  a  multitude  of  people.  Exhausted  by  what  he
had  passed  through  in  the  course  of  the  previous  night,  the  load  he  carried  seemed  too
heavy  for  him. ,  The  procession  was  met  by  one  Simon,  a  Cyrenian — who  may  possibly
be  identified  with  the  "Niger"  of  Acts  xiii.  1 — coming  out  of  the  country;  and  the
soldiers  laid  hold  upon  him,  and  compelled  him — the  term  is  a  military  one,  'pressed
him  into  the  service ' — to  help  our  Lord  with  his  burden.  Perhaps  they  laid  the
Whole  beam  on  his  shoulder,  perhaps  only  the  light  end,  Jesus  still  going  foremost  and
continuing  to  bear  the  jiinoipal  weight;  so  that  in  the  most  literal  way  Simon  bore


OH.  MVii.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL   ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         635

it  after  him."  Dr.  Hanna  says,  "  It  wns  part  of  the  degradation  of  a  public  crucifixion
that  the  doomed  one  should  assist  in  carrying  to  the  place  of  crucifixion  the  instrument
of  death."  But  the  reason  why  this  particular  man  was  seized  upon  for  this  ministry
is  not  suggested.  We  may  suppose  either  (1)  that  it  was  a  simple  act  of  wantonness
on  the  part  of  the  soldiers,  who  feared  their  victim  would  die  before  they  could  get  him
to  the  place  of  execution ;  or  (2)  that  he  was  known  as  a  secret  disciple,  and  the  people
pointed  him  out  to  the  soldiers ;  or  (3)  that  he  had  reproached  the  soldiers  for  treating
Jesus  so  cruelly,  and,  in  spite,  they  made  him  bear  the  cross.  However  it  was,  we
certainly  envy  Simon  the  honourable  and  helpful  service  he  was  permitted  to  render
to  our  suffering  Lord.  Fix  attention  on  him  as  the  one  and  only  man  who  helped
Jesus  in  the  time  of  his  sorest  need.  From  his  arrest  to  his  death  no  apostle  helped
him,  no  disciple  helped  him  ;  he  was  alone.  This  unknown  Simon  breaks  the  loneli-
ness, and  shares  vrith  him  the  burden  of  his  cross.

L  Simon's  ministry  was  a  sympathy.  There  must  have  been  something  that  drew
the  attention  of  the  soldiers  to  Simon.  It  might  well  have  been  an  expression  of
sympathy  with  the  fainting  cross-bearer.    It  was  a  sight  to  move  a  sympathizing  soul.

II.  Simon's  ministry  was  a  compulsion.  Yet  evidently  a  willing  compulsion.  He
oould  not  have,  offered  to  bear  the  cross — that  would  have  been  against  the  rules.  He
gladly  did  what  he  was  made  to  do.

III.  Simon's  ministry  was  a  service.  Just  the  service  of  the  hour.  The  thinj,'
Christ  needed  just  then.  The  thing  to  do  for  Ohmt  Just  now  is  what  we  all  need  to
find  out.— E.  T.

Ver.  37. — Ghrist  as  King  of  the  Jews.  It  is  not  difBcult  to  understand  Pilate.  He  is
a  commonplace,  and  in  no  sense  a  complex  character.  His  act  in  putting  this  inscrip-
tion above  Christ's  head  reveals  the  mean-souled  man  who,  because  he  cannot  have  his
way,  will  have  his  revenge  in  a  paltry,  petty  way.  Not  an  outrageously  wicked  man,
the  key  to  his  character  lies  in  his  love  of  distinction,  power,  and  self-indulgence.  A
man  of  weak,  and,  with  his  temptations,  of  corrupt  character,  he  was  anxious  to
conciliate  the  Jews,  so  he  surrendered  Jesus ;  but  he  would  force  his  stubborn  way  in
the  trumpery  matter  of  the  superscription.  To  all  expostulations  he  replied,  "  What
I  have  written  I  have  written."

I.  To  CALL  Christ  "  Kino  of  the  Jews"  may  pkoduob  a  false  impebshon.  1.
Old  prophecies  had  indeed  suggested  the  kingship  of  Messiah,  but  the  kingship  antici-
pat-ed  was  a  theocracy  rather  than  an  earthly  rule.  2.  Disciples  had  taken  up  the
idea  that  Christ  was  to  be  an  earthly  King.  There  was  a  materializing  tendency  in
that  age,  because  material  deliverance  from  Roman  bondage  seemed  to  be  the  one
thing  needful.  3.  Christ  never  claimed  such  a  title,  and  never  acted  as  if  he  claimed
it.  There  is  a  royal  tone  in  Christ's  words  and  works.  He  spoke  of  himself  in  relation
to  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven ; "  but  never  of  himself  as  "  King  of  the  Jews."  4.  Christ
emphatically  declared,  even  to  Pilate,  that  in  such  senses  as  men  attached  to  the  words,
he  was  not  "King  of  the  Jews."  "My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world."  Christ  is
not  an  earthly  king,  and  never  will  be.  He  is  King  of  truth.  King  of  souls.  King  of
righteousness.

II.  To  CALL  Christ  "  Kino  of  the  Jews  "  may  express  the  troth  oonobrnino
HIM,  He  is  King  of  the  Jews,  but  not  of  those  who  are  only  nationally  such.  He  is
King  of  all  who  are  the  true  children  of  Abraham,  because  .they  have  the  faith  of
Abraham.  Christ  may  be  called  a  "  King"  if  we  understand  by  that  term  :  1.  King
of  truth-seekers ;  of  all  truth-seekers  everywhere.  2.  King  of  the  spiritually  minded  ;
of  those  who  cannot  be  satisfied  with  the  seen  and  temporal,  but  must  breathe  the
atmosphere  of  the  unseen  and  eternal,  3.  Christ,  as  we  see  him  on  the  cross,  is
Champion-King.  4.  Christ,  as  now  in  the  spiritual  realm,  is  King  of  his  Church.  "  On
his  vesture  and  thigh  his  name  is  written,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords." — K  T.

Ver.  42. — He  who  saves  others  cannot  save  himself.  The  leaders  of  the  Jewish
nation  looked  with  grave  suspicion  on  every  one  who  claimed  to  be  Messiah ;  and  as
they  fully  believed  that  when  Messiah  came  he  would  "  abide  for  ever,"  the  crucifixion
of  Jesus  was  the  plainest  possible  proof  that  he  was  not  Messiah.  This  text  is  the
taunt  founded  on  this  idea.    "  He  saved  others  "  is  satire.    They  did  not  believe  that


638  THE   G6SPEL  ACCORDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxvn.  l^-«6.

he  had   saved  anybody.    To  them  his  imposture  and  his  helplessness  were  at  one*
ghown  in  this — "  himself  he  cannot  save."    Those  moekera  were  wrong  every  way.

I.  Christ  pid  bavk  others.  Illustrate,  by  specimen  cases,  the  following  three
points  :  1.  He  did  save  from  disiibility  and  disease.  He  gave  sight  to  the  blind,  and
cleansed  the  leper.  2.  He  did  save  from  death.  He  brought  Lazarus  back  from  th«
grave.  3.  He  did  save  from  sin.  Authoritatively  saying  to  the  paralytic,  "  Thy  sins
are  forgiven  thee."    He  did  "save  to  the  uttermost."

II.  Cheist  could  have  saved  himself.  Had  he  so  wished,  he  could  have  com-
manded the  service  of  "  twelve  legions  of  angels,"  "  There  was  not  a  moment,  from
beginning  to  end  of  his  human  career,  in  which  our  blessed  Lord  might  not  have  turned
back  from  shame  and  suffering.  At  the  very  moment  when  these  words  were  uttered,
he  had  but  to  speak,  and  he  would  have  been  surrounded  by  the  responsive  hosts  of
heaven,  and  in  one  moment  his  pain  would  have  been  exchanged  for  triumph."  Nails
could  not  hold  him  against  his  will.     He  could  have  come  down  from  the  cross,

III.  Christ  would  kot  save  himseht.  There  is  the  mystery  of  the  great  self-
gacriflce.  Because  he  would  save  others,  he  woiild  not  save  himself.  Relatively  to  the
work  which  our  blessed  Lord  had  undertaken,  it  was  necessary  that  he  himself  should
not  be  saved.  His  mission  required :  1.  That  his  submission  to  God's  will  should  be
fully  tested.  And  the  last  test  of  a  man  is  this — Can  you  die  just  when  God  pleases,
just  where  God  pleases,  just  how  God  pleases?  i.  That  mission  required  the  surrender
of  a  human  life  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  That  was  the  Divine  plan  for  the  redemption  of
men  from  sin ;  Jesus  must  offer  that  sacrifice,  no  he  would  not  come  down  from  the
cro»8.  Our  Lord's  own  will  gave  the  virtue  to  his  sacrifice.  He  cotdd  have  saved
himself,  but  he  would  not.  He  meant  to  yield  himself,  in  a  voluntary  act  of  obedience
to  Qt)d.  "  By  the  which  will  we  have  been  »anctified,  through  the  gffuring  of  tht
body  of  Jesus  once  for  all."— B.  T.

Ver.  46, — TTie  mystery  of  the  forsaking.     Keble  tenderly  sings—

"  Is  it  not  strange,  the  darkest  hour

That  ever  dawned  on  sinful  earth
Bhould  touch  the  heart  with  softer  power

For  comfort,  tliau  an  angel's  miith  ?
That  to  the  croea  the  mourner's  eye  should  lurn,
Sooner  than  where  the  stars  of  Christmas  buru?"

The  conflict  of  Calvary  reaches  its  climax  in  this  text.  It  brings  before  us  the
sublimest  moment  of  our  Saviour's  life.  It  is  the  moment  in  which  our  Champion
closed  with  the  spiritual  foe  of  evil  in  the  last  death-struggle.  He  spent  his  bodily  life
in  the  effort.  He  gained  the  soul-life  of  obedience  and  trust ;  that  soul-victory  was  his
triumph  for  us.  Watching  with  the  Galilasan  women,  a  little  distance  off,  within  sight
of  the  cross,  within  sound  of  this  gieat,  this  dying  cry,  what  should  be  our  first
thought?

I.  Makifebtly  this  was  the  death  of  a  man.  It  is  singular  that,  in  the  early
Church,  no  evident  effort  was  made  to  maintain  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  Divinity ;  early
controversy  dealt  with  tlie  reality  of  our  Lord's  humanity.  And  an  important  part  in
the  impression  of  that  humanity  was  taken  by  the  scenes  of  his  death.  These  suffer-
ings are  a  man's  suflerings ;  these  cries  are  a  man's  ciies;  this  dtath  is  a  man's  death.
Tl*  humanity  is  broiigiit  home  to  us  by  his  dying  a  violent  death,  a  death  wliich  was
certified  by  a  puVOic  officer.  Our  text,  whatever  else  it  may  be,  is  certainly  the  cry  o(
a  dying  man,  the  element  of  the  flesh,  the  body,  is  now  added  to  our  Bedeemer'a
struggle.  Medical  science  tells  us  that  the  accounts  of  our  Lord's  dying  accurately
represent  what  occurs  in  a  case  of  ruptured  or  broken  heart.  The  same  spasm  of
dreadful  pain,  forcing  a  great  cry,  and  the  same  flowing  of  mingled  blood  and  water,
when  the  heart-sac  is  pierced.  Theie  is  a  very  striking  thing,  further  bringing  out  to
view  the  real  humanness  of  the  cry  of  the  text.  Our  Lord  did  not  make  a  new  sentence,
separating  liis  experience  from  that  of  men,  but  he  used  words  spoken  by  a  psalmist  as
an  utterance  of  his  own  distress  (see  Ps.  xxii.  1).  Our  Lord  evidently  intended  to
identify  his  struggle  with  that  of  man.  It  may  be  said  that  this  text  embodies  and
expresses  the  effect  of  intense  bodily  suffering,  ami  of  approaching  death,  o»  a  man'a


M.  xxTii.  1— 66.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACWOBDINa  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         «r

vOL  Tha  will  of  Ohriit  was  Mt,  not  on  fubmisaion  only,  bat  on  Mtir*  obediuM  to
tbe  will  of  the  Father.  In  Gethiemane  the  regolre  had  no  present  actual  pain  to  Iwttle
with,  only  the  anticipation  of  it.  At  Calvary  the  will  wai  borne  upon  by  aotnsl,
intense,  oyerwhelming,  physical  pain ;  it  had  to  struggle  to  hold  its  own.  The  text
represents  a  supreme  moment,  when  intense  pain  seemed  to  force  the  will  aside,  and
darken  the  soul  with  a  moment's  shade.  Can  we  estimate  what  dying  is  in  its
influence  on  the  will  7  What  is  dying  when  it  comes  eonsciously  to  •  man  in  full
health?  No  falling  asleep,  and  passing  away;  but  the  soul  In  aome  awful  way
dropping  down,  losing  everything — light,  breath,  God,  all;  passing  under,  and  in  that
dread  moment  seeming  to  be  left  in  utter  desolation.  If  we  coi3d  know  what  that
means,  we  should  begin  to  understand  our  Lord's  great  cry.  It  is  a  dying  man's  cry.
n.  Mani'ebtlt  this  was  the  dbath  of  the  beoond  Man,  the  Lobd  fboh  heavek.
This  is  a  Scripture  term.  It  it  the  peculiar  relation  which  Christ  bears  to  ns  that  gives
his  death-scene  its  profounder  significance.  He  has  undertaken  for  man  the  removal  of
ain,  and  that  undertaking  of  necessity  brings  him  into  contact  with  sin,  and  makes  its
consequences  and  its  burdens  rest  on  him.  Christ  undertook  the  work  of  saving  men
from  sin ;  that  is,  of  saving  the  life  of  love  and  obedience  to  Qod  in  their  souls  from
being  utterly  crushed  out  by  ein.  Then  he  must  come  into  conflict  with  it.  Its  burden
of  disabilities  must  lie  oa  him.  He  must  keep  bis  own  soul-trust  and  obedience  while
all  the  burden,  disability,  agony,  death  of  sin,  buffet  him.  If  be  can  keep  his  obedi-
ence and  hia  love  perfect  under  the  worst  that  sin  and  Satan  can  do,  then  be  breaks
their  power  over  man  for  ever — he  breaks  that  power  for  us.  Sin  so  &r  succeeded  as
to  kill  the  body,  sin  failed  utterly  to  touch  the  soul ;  in  the  last  moments  the  soul  u
full  of  affection  and  devotion — it  cries,  "  My  God,  niy  God  I "  So  the  power  of  sin  was
broken.  Man  is  freed,  in  Christ's  triumph,  from  the  soul-bondage  liitherto  laid  on  by
ain.  Christ  was  made  perfect,  through  his  sufferings,  to  become  the  "  Bringer-on  of
Bona  to  glory."  He  is  "  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all  who  come  linto  God  through
Wm."— R.  T.

Yer.  64. — Th*  natural  impression  of  tht  Crueiflxion.  We  may  call  it  the  natural
impression,  because  it  was  made  on  an  outsider,  who  had  come  into  no  relations  with
Christ,  and  is  not  likely  to  have  had  any  prejudices  either  for  or  against  him.  It  was
made  on  a  Soman  officer,  who  would  be  calm  and  Relf-restrained,  inclined  indeed  to  be
eynical,  familiar  with  death-scenes,  and  hardened  by  the  familiarity,  and  not  at  all
auBceptible  of  emotional  influences.  We  can  easily  see  what  the  Crucifixion  was  to
the  Marys,  who  stood  watching  it  through  the  telescope  of  their  tears  from  afar  off ;
but  it  surprises  ns  to  find  what  a  power  it  had  on  that  cold  and  self-restrained  Rowan.
The  man  appears  before  ns  but  for  a  moment,  and  then  vaoishes  for  ever  away.  But
the  vision  of  him  reminds  ns  that  the  cruoified  Christ  has  been  a  larger,  wider  power
in  the  world  than  we  have  reckoned  who  did  but  count  the  number  of  hia  professed
adherents.  Tha  truth  is  larger  than  we  have  ever  thought  it  to  be,  which  Jesus
uttered  when  he  said, "  And  I,  if  I  he  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men
unto  me."

L  What  imfresbed  the  centubion  as  so  sTRAiraBf  Remember  he  had  seen
criminals  die  before  that  day.  Watching  Jesus,  he  was  smitten  with  the  conviction,
"That  Man  is  not  •  criminal."  1.  He  contrasted  him  with  the  two  thieves  who  were
being  cruoified  with  him.  There  was  a  calm  dignity  about  Jesus  which  the  other
anfferers  did  not  and  could  not  show.  Compare  the  things  spoken.  Thieves  reviled ;
Jesus  reviled  not  again.  2.  He  could  compare  Jesus  with  other  victims  he  had  cruci-
fied. And  the  comparison  had  to  be  a  contrast,  a  most  striking  and  impressive  con-
trast. Account  must  be  taken  too  of  the  influence  on  the  Roman  of  tha  wkened  sky
and  the  quaking  ground.

IL  What  was  the  hcpkbssioh  raonuoED  ox  thb  oestubtos  ?  St.  Lnke  reports
Um  as  saying,  "  Truly  this  was  a  righteous  Man."*  He  felt  his  innocence.  A  Roman
would  not  put  our  high  meaning  into  the  term  "  Son  of  God."  What  he  felt  was
that  the  man  was  a  victim,  a  sacrifice  j  he  was  suffering  no  just  reward  of  his  deeds.
The  natural  impression  of  the  Crucifixion  confirms  our  view  of  Jesus  as  "  holy,  harmless,
undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,"  and  fit  to  be,  what  he  was,  the  world's  Sacrifice  for
sin.— R.  T.


638        THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDlilO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xx?n.  1— 1&

Ver.  67. — Joseph's  opportunity.  The  entire  forsaking  of  our  Lord's  apostles  aod
disciples  lias  not  been  sufBciently  considered.  It  must  Ikave  been  one  of  the  sorest
ingredients  in  his  bitter  cup  of  woe.  Not  one  of  them  carae  into  any  relation  with  his
suffering-time.  They  must  have  been  wholly  bewildered  by  their  fears.  They  left
their  Master  to  the  tending  of  strangers,  if  he  had  any  tending  at  all.  But  we  may
do  honour  to  Simon  of  Cyrene  and  Joseph  of  Arimatbaja,  who  found  their  opportunity.

I.  Joseph's  weakness  in  nvr  aoknowledqino  Christ  bbfobb.  Whatever  allow-
ances we  may  be  able  to  make  for  him,  it  certainly  was  a  weakness — it  always  is  a
weakness — to  try  to  be  a  lecret  disciple.  Joseph  was  placed  in  very  di£Bcult  circum-
stances. He  was  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrin.  He  must  have  known  of  the  schemes
of  the  high  priest's  party.  His  soul  must  have  revolted  against  them,  and  yet  he  dared
say  nothing.  He  was  not  strong  man  enough  to  brave  opposition.  He  was  a  timid
soul ;  but,  like  timid  souls,  he  could  on  occasion  do  a  strangely  brave  thing.  "  Spirit
was  willing,  but  flesh  was  weak."

II.  Joseph's  coubagb  in  acknowledging  Cheist  at  last.  For  in  going  to  Pilate,
as  a  known  member  of  the  council,  to  beg  the  body  of  Jesus,  Joseph  declared  himself.
Pilate  would  quite  understand  that  he  oared  for  this  "  Enthusiast."  And  Joseph  was
obliged  to  do  this  publicly,  so  the  news  of  his  request  would  be  spread  abroad  ;  and  our
Lord's  enemies  would  not  be  satisfied  until  they  found  out  what  had  become  of  the
dead  body.  This  act  of  Joseph's,  we  may  be  sure,  made  him  a  marked  man  henceforth
in  the  council.    He  confessed  Jesus  by  his  met

III.  Joseph's  one  act  in  the  bebvioe  of  Cheist.  It  was  precisely  the  thing
which  only  a  man  having  the  authority  and  the  wealth  that  he  had  could  do.  1.
Christ's  body  had  to  be  saved  from  insult,  and  not  one  of  his  disciples  dare  advance  to
claim  it.  It'  it  had  been  left  to  the  Bomans,  it  would  have  just  been  flung,  with  the
other  bodies,  into  the  common  pit,  or  burned  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  Joseph  did
this  good  service — he  saved  it  from  desecration.  2.  Christ's  body  ought  to  have  the
honourable  burial  of  a  king,  and  the  kindly  tending  of  loving  hands.  Joseph  provided
both.  Gentle  handling,  reverent  preparing,  tender  carrying,  loving  burial  in  his  own
new  tomb. — E.  T.

Yer.  61. —  W(fmanli/  devotion.  "Last  at  the  cross,  first  at  the  grave."  It  does  not
appear  that  the  women  dared  do  any  more  than  watch  our  Lord's  death,  watch  his
taking  down  firom  the  cross,  and  watch  where  they  took  his  body.  But  that  watching
was  devotion.  They  did  not  feel  that  the  men  could  do  what  was  really  needed  for
the  dead  body,  and  so  their  devotion  planned  loyal  and  loving  womanly  service  as
soon  as  ever  the  sabbath  was  over,  and  they  would  be  clear  of  our  Lord's  bitter
enemies,  and  of  the  rough  Roman  soldiers.  They  planned  in  their  womanly  way ;
tliey  prepared  for  their  intended  embalming ;  they  started  to  begin  their  work  almost
before  the  morning  broke;  and,  though  they  could  not  do  what  they  purposed,  they
did  well  that  it  was  in  their  hearts.

L  The  women  watching  the  okosb.  There  seems  to  have  been  quite  a  little
company  of  them,  and  we  know  that  Mary,  our  Lord's  mother,  was  one  of  them.
Custom  made  them  keep  together,  and  stand  a  little  apart  from  the  men ;  but  they
were  not  far  off,  not  out  of  the  sound  of  our  Lord's  voice,  and  they  could  see  every-
thing. But  what  must  that  sight  have  been  to  them  ?  Suffering  is  sacred  to  woman ;
a  son's  suffering  is  an  inlinite  woe  to  a  mother.  Not  a  dry  eye;  and  ohl  what
heaving  breasts !

II.  The  women  watching  the  grave.  Only  two  of  them  now.  When  the  last
sigh  came  from  that  cross  John  tenderly  upheld  the  fainting  inother,  and  bore  her
away,  some  of  the  women  going  with  them  to  help  in  tending  her.  Two  of  them  felt
as  if  they  could  not  go.  We  know  those  two.  They  were  Mary  Magdalene  and  Mary
of  Bethany.  They  watched  the  taking  down.  They  followed,  as  loving  mourners,
the  sad  procession.  They  saw  the  men  carry  the  body  into  the  tomb,  come  out,  roll
the  stone  to  the  door,  and  go  away.  But  they  were  fascinated.  They  sat  down  over
against  the  sepulchre ;  they  waited  until  the  gathering  shadows  and  the  cold  night
winds  drove  tnem  to  seek  shelter.  Dear  women!  Their  love  was  helpless  :  it  could
do  nothing  for  its  loved  One.  Oh,  say  not  sol  Love  does  everything  for  its  loved  one,
when  it  loves  on  through  all  woe,  faithful,  true,  self-denying,  unto  the  very  end- — B.  T,


OH.  xxvni.  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.        639


EXPOSITION,


CHAPTER  XXVin.


Vera.  1 — ^10. — Jenus  ritea  from  the  dead,
and  appears  to  the  holy  women,  {Mark  xvi.
1—8 ;  Luke  xxiv.  1—12 ;  John  xx.  1—10.)
It  is  to  be  noted  that  there  are  great  and
iinportant  variations  in  the  four  (or,  with
St.  Paul's,  1  Oor.  xv.,  the  five)  accounts  of
the  events  of  the  Eesurreotion,  which  haye
given  welcome  occasion  to  the  sceptic  to
cast  doubts  upon  the  whole  transaction.
The  divergences  in  the  narratives  are  plainly
to  be  ascribed  to  the  facts  that  the  writers
did  not  depend  upon  one  another,  nor  draw
their  accounts  from  one  source ;  that  each
g;iveB  only  an  incomplete  history,  intro-
ducing those  details  with  which  he  waa
familiar,  or  which  it  suited  his  plan  to  re-
count. On  all  main  points  the  agreement  is
perfect,  and  every  difference  could  be  easily
reconciled,  if  we  knew  the  whole  of  the  cir-
cumstances and  the  exact  sequence  of  each
word  and  act  during  this  momentous  period.
Attempts  at  harmonizing  the  various  ac-
counts have  been  made  with  more  or  less
BuccoBS  by  writers  from  St.  Augustine  to
the  present  time ;  but  as  they  vary  in  many
particulars,  and  have  no  authoritative  basis,
dependence  cannot  be  placed  upon  them.
The  narrative  in  St.  Matthew  is  brief  and
imperfect,  and  we  shall  chiefly  confine  our
remarks  to  the  exposition  of  the  actual  text
before  us,  without  importing  much  matter
from  the  other  evangelists.

Yer.  1. — ^In  the  end  of  the  sabbath;  oifii
ira/3|8aTwv :  late  on  the  sabbath ;  Vulgate,
vespere  sabbati.  The  expression  is  obscure.
In  the  parallel  passage  of  St.  Marl;  we  read,
"  When  the  sabbath  was  past."  We  must
take  it  that  St.  Mattliew  is  thinking  of  the
sabbath  as  extending,  not  from  evening  to
evening,  but  till  the  following  morning.
"  So  that  it  is  noi  the  accurate  Jewish  divi-
sion of  time,  according  to  which  the  sabbath
ended  at  six  on  Saturday  evening,  but  the
ordinary  civil  idea  of  a  day,  which  extended
from  sunrise  to  sunrise  (or  at  least  adds  the
night  to  the  preceding  day)  "  (Lange).  We
have,  then,  now  arrive  I  at  the  commencement
of  the  first  (Jliristian  Easter  Day.  As  it
began  to  dawn  toward  the  first  day  of  the
week ;  eU  luav  (raffPaTav :  in  prima  sabhati
(Vulgate) ;  literally,  urUo  one  day  of  sabbath  ;
i.e.  one  day  after  the  sabbath,  the  Jews
reckoning  their  days  in  sequence  from  the


sabbath,  and  Ohristiani  at  first  carrying  on
the  same  practice,  as  we  see  in  Acts  xx.  7 ;
1  Oor.  xvi.  2.  Later  Christians  named  the
days  of  the  week  in  sequence  from  the  Sun-
day, which  was  the  first  day,  Monday  being
the  second  day,  feria  secunda,  and  so  on.
Came  Mary  Magdalene  and  the  other  Mary
(see  on  ch.  xxvii.  61)  to  see  the  sspulohre.
Love  cannot  abandon  its  object,  living  or
dead.  There  were  probably  other  women
with  these  two,  or  perhaps  there  were  two
separate  bands  of  women  wlio  in  this  early
morning  visited  the  sepulchre.  Among
these  Mary  Magdalene  stands  prominently
forward,  first  in  love  and  first  in  care.  She
and  the  rest  evidently  knew  nothing  of  the
sealing  of  the  stone  or  the  posting  of  tlie
guards.  St.  Matthew's  expression,  "  to  see
(flcap^iroi,  "  to  gaze  upon,"  "  contemplate  ")
the  sepulchre,"  conveys  only  a  partial  notice
of  tlie  object  of  their  visit.  They  came  not
only  to  take  a  view  of  the  tomb,  but  also  to
embalm  the  Lord's  body,  for  which  neces-
sary preparations  had  been  made,  the  ap-
proach of  the  sabbath  on  the  evening  of  the
Crucifixion  having  cut  short  the  arrange-
ments. We  know  from  St.  Mark  that  they
were  perplexed  about  the  difiSoulty  of  re-
moving the  stone,  and  St.  Mattliew  may  i>e
referring  to  a  preliminary  inspection  made
in  regard  of  this  impediment.  Our  Gospel
omits  mention  of  the  intention  of  embalming
the  corpse,  as  the  Resurrection  remlered  it
impracticable ;  and,  indeed,  the  Lord's  body
had  already  been  anointed  for  his  burial  by
Mary  of  Bethany.

Ver.  2. — ^Aud,  behold.  A  wonderful  sight
met  their  eyes.  The  following  event  took
place  before  their  arrival ;  they  saw  only
the  result.  No  mortal  eye  beheld,  and  no
pen  has  recorded,  the  actual  issuing  of  the
Lord  from  the  closed  tomb.  There  was  a
great  earthquake.  St.  Matthew  does  not
attempt  to  give  the  exact  sequence  of  events
Probably  the  shock,  caused  by  the  sudden
advent  and  action  of  the  angel,  befell  as  the
women  were  approaching  the  cemetery.
Christ  had  risen  before  this  occurrence,
nothing  being  a  barrier  to  his  spiritual
body.  For  the  angel  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  from
the  door.  The  narrator  accounts  for  the
phenomenon  just  mentioned.  The  words,
"  from  the  door,"  are  omitted  by  the  best
manuscripts,  the  Vulgate,  and  moderu
editors,  and  seem  to  be  a  marginal  interpo-
lation. The  angel  rolled  away  the  stone
which  Joseph  had  rolled  up  (oh.  xxvii.  60),
not  in  order  to  afford  passage  to  the  body  of
the  Lord,  who  had  already  raised  liimaelt^
but  to  give  tlie  women  and  others  entrance
to  the  empty  tomb,  and  to  strike  terror  into
the  heart  of  the  soldiers.     lu  the  case  uf


640        THE  GOSPEL  ACCOnDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [ch.  xxvm.  1—20


Lazams  the  stone  llad  to  be  removed  to  give
exit  to  the  reBuscitated  body — fi  natural
body  (John  zi.  39, 41) ;  in  the  case  of  Jegus
Buoh  removal  was  not  necessary,  as  his  was"
a  spiritual  body,  possessed  of  BU{iornatural
powers  and  qualities  (John  sz.  19).  And
sat  upon  it.  In  triumph,  and  to  sliow  that
it  was  not  to  be  replaced;  death  had  done
its  work,  and  now  wag  vanquished.  Angels'
appearances  had  always  acoompaiilcd  the
great  events  in  the  history  of  the  chosen
people;  angels  had  shown  theniselvos  at
Christ's  liirth,  at  hii  temptation,  at  his
agony;  now  they  guard  his  tomb,  proving
that  he  was  well-pleasing  unto  tlie  Lord,
and  was  raised  from  the  grave  by  him.  The
narration  of  this  awful  incident  was  pro-
bably given  by  the  soldiers,  who  alone
witnessed  it.

Ver.  3. — His  countenance  (iS4a,  appear-
ance) was  like  lightning.  The  angel's
aspect  was  as  bright  and  startling  as  the
flash  of  lightning  (cnmp.  Ezeb.  1.  11 ;  Dan.
X.  6).  His  raiment  white  as  snow.  Pure  and
glistening,  like  the  etl'cct  of  the  Transll.nura-
tion  on  the  Lord  (oli.  zviii.  2 ;  comp.  Acts
i.  10;  Eev.  x.  1).

Ver.  4. — ^And  for  fear  of  him ;  but  from  the
fear  of  Mm.  J'rom  the  fear  inspired  by  this
awful  angel.  It  would  seem,  froiu  this  ex-
pression, that  the  soldiers  were  sensible,  not
only  of  the  earthquake  and  the  movement
of  the  stone,  but  also  of  the  presence  of  the
heavenly  messenger,  in  this  respect  differ-
ing from  the  companions  ot  Daniel  and  St.
Paul,  who  wore  only  partially  conscious  of
the  visions  beheld  by  the  two  saints  (see
Dan.  X.  7;  Acts  xxii.  9).  Did  shake.  The
verb  is  cognate  with  the  noun  "earth-
quake;" they  were  shaken,  convulsed  with
terror.  If  these  were  some  of  the  company
that  had  watched  the  Cruciflxioii,tliey  were
already  possessed  of  some  feeliug  respecting
the  unearthly  nature  of  the  Occupant  of  the
tomb  which  they  were  guarding,  and  had  a
vague  expectation  of  something  that  might
happen.  At  any  rate,  they  must  have  lieanl
the  late  events  diBcussed  by  their  comrades,
and  were  not  without  apprehension  of  u
catastrophe.  Became  as  dead  men.  They
fell  to  the  ground  in  deathlike  fahitness,
and,  when  they  recovered  from  the  trance,
fled  in  terror  from  the  tomb  into  the  city
(ver.  11).

Ver.  5. — Thfr  angel  answered  and  said.
The  women  arrived  probably  while  the
guards  were  lying  unconscious  on  the  ground.
They  saw  them,  and  they  saw  the  angel
sitting  on  the  stone,  or,  according  to  St.
Mark,  "  a  young  man  sitting  on  the  right
side,  arrayed  in  a  white  robe ; "  St.  Luke  saj's
that  "  two  men  stood  by  them  in  dazzling
apparel,"  t.«.  first  one  had  shown  himself,
and  then  another.    Doubtless  innumerable


angels  were  thronging  around,  and  one  oi
more  became  visible  to  certain  persons  as
they  were  capable  of  receiving  spiritual  im-
pressions, or  as  these  spirits  were  directed
to  show  themselves.  The  women  spake  not,
were  too  aifrigh  ted  to  ask  questions;  but  their
amazed  look,  their  bhink  surprise,  were
themselves  interrogative,  and  the  angel
replied  to  their  inward  emotion.  Fear  not
ye  (u/jeii,  emphatic).  The  soldiers  have
cause  to  fear ;  they  are  the  enemies  of  the
Lord ;  but  ye  are  his  friends,  and  need  feel
no  alarm.  Ye  seek  Jesus,  which  was  cmoi-
fied.  Ye  are  seeking  him,  to  do  hononr  to
his  body ;  I  know  your  pious  intention,  but
it  is  useless.  The  angel  shrinks  not  from
the  mention  of  Christ's  shameful  death,
which  is  uow  his  glory,  "the  power  of  God
and  the  wisdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  23,  24).
"  It  was  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father
.  .  .  through  him  to  reconcile  all  things
unto  himself,  having  made  peace  through
the  blood  of  his  cross  .  .  .  whether  things
upon  the  earth,  or  things  in  the  heavena"
(Col.  i.  19,  20).  The  crucifixion  "was  not
simply  a  temporary  incident  in  the  life  of
Christ.  It  is  an  eternal  principle  in  his
kingdom"  (Milligan).

Ver.  6. — He  is  not  here.  He  is  not  in  this
tomb ;  his  bodily  presence  is  removed  from
this  his  whilom  resting-place.  St.  Mat-
thew's account  is  greatly  condensed,  and
omits  many  details  which  harmonists  try  to
fit  into  our  text.  The  attempt  is  not  to  be
commended,  for  it  really  involves  greater
confusion,  and,  after  all,  is  forced  and  only
conjectural.  For  he  is  risen,  as  he  said.  If
they  had  believed  Christ's  often-repeated
announcement,  they  would  not  have  come
seeking  the  living  among  the  dead.  (For
Chri-it's  predictions  concerning  his  resurrec-
tion, see  ch.  xii.  40 ;  xvi.  21 ;  xvii.  23 ;  xx.
19.)  On  this  simple,  but  pregnant  sentence,
"  He  is  risen,"  depends  the  phenomenon  of
Christianity,  in  its  origin,  existence,  con-
tinuance, extension,  and  moral  power
"Death  began  with  woman;  and  to  women
the  first  announcement  is  made  of  resurrec-
tion" (Hilary,  quoted  by  Wordsworth,  tn
2oc.).  Ccme,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord
lay.  The  iingel  invites  them  to  satisfy
themselves  that  Christ's  body  was  no  longer
in  its  resting-place.  That  Jesus  was  desig-
nated as  "  the  Lord,"  b  Kipios,  by  the  dis-
ciples is  ibvious  (see  John  xx.  18;  xxi.  7,
etc.),  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  words
are  genuine  here,  though  they  are  found  in
many  good  manuscripts  and  in  the  Vulgate.
They  are  omitted  by  N,  B,  33,  etc.,  and  by
Tischendorf  and  Weslcott  and  Hort  in  theii
editions.  Begarding  them  as  genuine,
Bengel  calls  them  "gloriosa  appellatio,*'
whicti  indeed  It  is,  for  it  is  equivalent  to
■'Jehovah."    Harmonists  suppose  that  the


Cfi.  ixvin.  1— 20.]    THE  GOSfftL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.       841


angel  was  at  first  not  seen  by  the  women;
that  Mary  Magilnlcne,  observing  ihe  stone
removed,  at  once  hurried  to  the  city  to  tell
Peter  and  John  ;  tliat,  the  rest  of  the  women
remaining,  the  angel  niaile  liimself  visible
to  them  and  bade  tliem  enter tlie  sepulchre;
and  that,  doing  bo,  tliey  beheld  another
angel  sitting  on  the  right  side  of  the  recess.
Thus,  it  is  conjectured,  tlie  accounts  in
Mark  and  John  may  be  harmonized  with
that  in  our  text.  (See  also  Wtstoott  on
John  XX.,  where  is  given  a  provisional
arrangement  of  the  facts  of  the  first  Euster
Day.)

Ver.  7. — Go  quickly,  and  tell  his  disciples.
St.  Mnrlt  signifloantly  adds,  "and  Peter."
The  disciples  were  to  believe  without  see-
ing. They  had  des'jrted  Christ  in  lii.s  hour
of  need,  had  not  stood  by  the  cross,  nor
aided  in  his  burial;  so  tliey  were  not  to  be
honoured  with  the  vision  of  angels  or  the  first
sight  of  thu  risen  Lord.  This  was  reserved
for  the  failhful  women,  who  thus  received
their  mission  to  carry  a  message  to  the  mes-
sengers— a  foretaste  of  the  miiiislry  which
they  should  perform  in  the  Church  of  Christ.
He  goeth  before  yon  (irpodyd  u/xSs)  into
Galilee.  The  verb  is  noticeable.  It  is  that
used  by  our  Lord  himself  on  his  way  to  the
garden  of  Gethsemano  (oh.  xxvi.  32),  and  it
implies  the  act  of  a  shephenl  at  the  lipnd  of
his  flock,  leading  them  to  new  pastures
Ccomp.  Johnx.  4).  The  gooi  I  Shepherd  had
been  smitten,  and  the  shcp  scattered;  now
under  his  guidance  they  were  to  be  reunited.
The  apostolic  band  had  been  temporarily
dissolved  and  disintegrated;  the  college  was
Bgain  to  be  re-formed,  and  was  to  receive  its
renewed  commission  in  seclusion  and  peace,
that  it  might  return  to  Jerusalem  with  un-
impaired strength  to  commence  its  arduous
labours.  ,The  place  of  meeting  is  in  Galilee,
where  most  of  his  mighty  works  were  done,
and  wliere  it  was  safer  for  the  disci  |des 'to
assemble  than  at  Jerusalem.  The  majority
i>f  thoni  came  from  this  region,  and  thither
tliey  returned  some  ten  days  (John  xx.  26;
xxi.  1 — 4)  after  the  Resurrection,  to  re-
sume their  ordinary  occupations  (ver.  IG).
Thus  they  would  realize  that  it  was  the
same  Jesus  who  met  them  there  with  whom,
these  three  past  years,  they  had  lield  familiar
Intercourse.  It  was  ordained,  for  some
reason  nnt  expressly  stated,  that  from  Gali-
lee should  proceed  Christ's  spiritual  king-
dom which  he  came  to  establish — that
"  word  which,"  as  Peter  said  (Acts  i.  37),
"  was  published  throughout  all  Judcea,  be-
ginning from  Galilee."  We  read  of  only
two  appearances  of  Clirist  in  Galilee — once
at  tlie  lake,  mentioned  in  the  last  cliapt.  r  of
St.  John,  and  again  in  ver.  17  of  this  chap-
ter of  St.  Mattnew.  It  is,  however,  possible
tliat  the  appearance  named  by  St.  Paul  (1
MATTUi.W — II.


Cor.  XV.  6),  when  he  was  seen  by  more  than
five  hundred  hrethren  at  one  time,  may  have
occurred  in  Galilee.  If  this  is  the  case,  it
would  be  remarkable  as  the  only  public  reve-
lation of  Christ  after  his  resurrection,  and
the  comparative  seclusion  of  the  northern
district  may  have  been  one  reason  for  its
selection  as  the  scene  for  this  great  demon-
stration. There  was  doubtless  some  moral
fitness  in  the  humble  aud  despised  Galilee
being  made  the  starting-point  of  his  Church
who  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  of
whom  it  was  contemptuously  said,  "  Doth
the  Christ  come  out  of  Galilee  ?  "  (John  vii.
41).  "As  in  all  things  God  sets  at  naught
the  pride  of  mankind,  and  chooses  persons,
instruments,  and  places  mean  in  tlie  eyes  of
the  world,  teaching  us  that  in  humbler  and
more  retired  abodes,  secret  from  the  world,
we  are  to  seek  for  the  strength  of  God,  who
hideth  himself"  (I,  Williams).  Lo,  I  have
told  you.  The  angel  tlius  solemnly  con-
firms what  he  had  just  said.  The  Authorized
Vulgate  gives,  Ecce,  prsedixi  vohii,  which  is
warranted  by  no  existing  Greek  manu-
scripts, the  uniform  reading  of  the  original
being  eliroy  or  tl-Tra.

Ver.  8. — They  departed  {^eKSav<rai,  better
lmf\eovirai)  quickly  from  the  sepulchre.  At
the  angel's  invitalion  (ver.  6),  they,  or  some
of  them,  had  entered  into  the  inner  chamber
of  the  tomb  (Luke  xxiv.  3),  and  now  came
hurrying  out.  With  fear  aud  great  joy.
With  a  mixture  of  emotions — fear  at  the
sight  of  the  heavenly  visitant,  the  super-
natural presence,  and  joy  at  the  assurance
that  their  beloved  Master  had  risen  again,
having  burst  the  bonds  of  death.  Did  run.
Tliey  did  as  they  were  bidden  with  all  pos-
sible speed,  acting  as  heralds  of  good  tidings
to  the  disconsolate  disciples.

Ver.  9. — As  they  went  to  tell  Ms  disciples.
This  clause  is  omitted  by  the  best  manu-
scripts, and  the  Vulgate  and  other  versions,
and  is  rejected  by  modern  editors.  It  is  not
quite  ill  St.  Matthew's  style,  and  seems  to
be  rightly  rei^arded  as  tt  gloss.  There  is
one  advantage  in  its  omission,  in  that  the
actual  moment  of  this  appearance  of  our
Lord  is  left  undecided,  and  we  are  at  liberty
to  harmonize  it,  if  so  minded,  with  other
details.  Now  the  women,  according  to  our
history, '  eceive  the  reward  of  their  fail  h  and
love.  Behold,  Jesus  met  them,  saying,  All
hail!  Xai/)€T€:  literally, .Be/oiw ye.'  This  i»
not  the  usual  E.istern  salutation,  "  Peace  be
unto  youl "  but  one  that  came  with  peculiar
signiHoance  on  their  lately  sorrow-stricken
hearts.  So  he  had  sail  to  his  apostles,
"  Your  sorrow  shiill  be  turned  into  j  jy "
(John  xvi.  20),  and  now  he  made  good  his
word.  This  is  the  only  one  of  Christ's  ap-
pen ranees  in  Jerusalem  orits  neighbourhooil
that  St.  Matthew  relates.     They  came  aad

2  X


S42       TfiE  GOSPEL  ACCOT^BlNG  TO  St.  MAtTFlEW.    [cii.  xivhi.  t— -^d.


held  him  ty  the  feet  (took  hold  of  hit  feet).
Aa  soon  as  they  saw  him,  they  went  to  liim
with  glad  surprise,  and  yet  with  such  awe,
that  they  could  only  fall  down  before  him
and  tenderly  clasp  his  feet.  He  had  appeared
before  this  to  Mary  Magdalene  (Mark  ivi.
9),  but  had  not  permitted  her  to  touch  him,
because  he  had  not  yet  ascended  to  the
Fatljer  (John  xx.  17),  implying  thereby
either  that  she  nnuld  have  other  opportimi-
tles  of  holding  converse  with  him,  as  he
was  not  going  to  leave  the  earth  immedi-
ately, and  she  must  not  detain  him  now ;  or,
more  probably,  tliat  the  spiritual  liody  de-
man  led,  not  the  touch  of  earthly  affection,
but  the  attitude  of  awe  and  reverence,  and
that  all  future  contact  would  be  supernatu-
ral and  Eplritual,  realizing  his  presence
after  a  heavenly  and  supersensuoui  manner
by  faith.  But  these  women  clung  to  Clirist
with  something  higher  than  natural,  earthly
affection,  acknowledging  his  euperhnmanity,
and  he  allowed  them,  like  Thomas,  to  assure
themselves  of  his  corporeity  by  touch  as
well  as  sight.  WorsMpped  him.  They  re-
mained at  his  feet  in  profound  adoration.

Ver.  10. — Be  not  afraid.  So  he  spake  on
other  occasions  when  his  acts  had  caused
terror  and  amazement  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  27 ;
xVii.  7).  With  all  their  joy  and  love,  the
women  could  not  help  feeling  fear  at  his
sudden  appearance  and  at  the  nearness  of  this
unearthly  yet  familiar  form.  Go,  tell  ray
brethren.  He  here  for  the  first  time  calls
his  diseiplts  his  brethren,  intending  thereby
to  assure  them  of  his  love  and  good  will  in
spite  of  their  cowardly  desertion,  and  to
signify  that  lie  was  in  very  truth  the  Man
Christ  Jesus,  their  Lord  and  their  Master,
whr>m  they  had  known  so  long  and  so  well.
He  had  called  tliem  friends  before  his  Pas-
sion (John  XV.  14, 15);  now  he  gives  them  a
tenderer  title ;  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call
them  brethren  (Heb.  ii.  11).  That  they  go
(Vra  aire'AflaKTi;',  in  order  that  they  may  depart)
into  Galilee..  Tlie  message  is  the  same  as
that  given  by  the  angel  (ver.  7).  It  was
meant  (o  comfort  them  in  the  absence  of
daily  intercourse  with  him.  But  tliey  were
not  to  set  out  immediately;  some  other  inci-
dents were  first  to  belall  them.  And  there
shall  they  see  me.  Galilee  was  to  be  the
scene  of  the  most  important  revelation,
tliougli  the  Lord  vouchsafed  to  individuals
many  proofs  of  his  risen  life  before  the  pro-
mised great  announcement.  Wliy  St.  Mat-
tliew  mentions  none  of  these  we  may  form
conjectures,  but  we  cannot  determine  (see
on  ver.  16).

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  Roman  loldieri  hribed
bij  the  Jewiih  ruleri  to  give  a  false  ancount  of
Ike  Jiemrrection.   (Peculiar  to  St.  Matthew.)

Ver.  11,— When  {while)  they  were  going.


Into  the  city,  in  order  to  find  the  disriples
aud  to  deliver  to  them  their  Lord's  message.
This  account  takes  up  the  narrative  of  ch.
xxvii.  63 — 66  and  ver.  1  of  this  chapter.  As
soon  as  they  recovered  from  their  swoon
and  had  assured  themselves  that  the  tomb
was  empty,  the  soldiers  hurried  in  affright
to  the  Jewish  rulers,  under  whose  orders
they  had  temporarily  been  placeii,  and  told
them  all  the  things  that  were  done.  They
could  speak  of  the  earthquake,  of  the  ap-
pearing of  the  angel,  of  the  removal  of  the
stone,  of  the  absence  of  the  body  which
they  were  appointed  to  watch.  Their  task
was  done;  the  corpse  was  gone,  they  knew
not  how  taken  ;  they  could  not  be  expected
to  contend  with  supernatural  visltai'tii  or
to  guard  against  supernatural  occurreui-es.
St.  Matthew  seems  to  have  introduced  this
inciilent  in  order  to  account  for  the  preva-
lence of  the  lying  rumour  which  he  proceeds
to  mention,  and  which  had  been  widely
disseminated  among  his  countrymen.

Ver.  12. — Whenthay  (i.e.  the  chief  priests)
were  assembled  with  the  elders  On  hearing
the  report  of  the  soldiers,  the  JSanhedrists
held  a  hurried  and  informal  meeting,  to
consult  about  this  alarming  matter.  It
would  be  fatal  to  their  policy  to  let  the
real  truth  get  wind.  Such  testimony  from
unprejudiced  heathens  would  infallibly
convince  the  people  of  the  validity  ot
Christ's  claims,  and  produce  the  very  effect
which  their  unusual  precautions  had  been
intended  to  obviate.  •  One  course  alone  re-
mained, and  that  was  to  prepare  a  circum-
stantial lie  concerning  one  partof  the  story,
and  to  deny  or  ignore  utterly  the  super-
natural details.  The  plainest  evidence  will
not  persuade  against  wilful  blindness.  These
rulers  acted  according  to  Christ's  sad  fore-
boding on  another  occasion,  "If  they  hear
not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will
they  bo  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from
the  dead"  (Lukexvi.  31).  They  gave  large
money  (money  enoitgh)  unto  the  soldiers.
They  bribed  the  soldiers  with  a  sum  of
money  sufficient  to  satisfy  their  cupidity.
This  they  did  personally,  or  more  probably
through  some  trusty  agent.  They  never
doubted  the  facts  to  which  the  guards  bore
witness ;  they  never  attempted  to  discredit
their  story  by  suggestion  of  error  or  super-
stitious invention.  They  accepted  the  tale,
and  took  most  dishonourable  means  to
make  it  innocuous.  They  had  bought  the
aid  of  the  traitor  Judas;  tliey  now  buy
the  silence  of  tijese  soldiers.  It  is  sufjgebted
by  St.  Jerome  that  in  both  cases  they
made  use  of  the  temple  funds,  thus  employ-
ing against  the  cause  of  God  that  which
was  devoted  to  his  service.

Ver.  13.— Say  ye,  etc.    They  put  the  lie
into  the  soldiers'  mouth,  directing  them  to


e«.tiviitl-2d.]    Tl!t3  GK)SPEL  ACCOSDtM  W  ST.  MATTHEW.        Ui


niiwer  inqiiiriea  in  thl»  way.  The  lait
resonrceofaninfatnatedobatlnaoyi  If  they
were  asleep,  how  could  they  know  that  the
disciples  stole  the  body?  St.  Ohrysostom
aomments  well  en  the  infamons  transaction,
"  How  did  they  steal  him  7  O  most  foolish
of  all  men  t  For  because  tf  the  clearness
and  conspicunusness  of  the  trnth,  they  are
not  even  able  to  miike  up  a  falsehood.  For
indeed,  what  they  said  was  highly  incredible,
and  the  falsehood  had  not  eren  specious-
ness.  For  how,  I  ask,  did  the  diseiplei
steal  him,  men  poor  and  uleamed,  and
not  venturing  lo  ranch  as  to  show  them-
selyes?  What?  was  not  a  seal  put  upon
it?  Wliat?  were  there  not  many  wateh-
men  and  soldiers  and  Jews  stationed  round
it?  What?  did  not  those  men  suspect
this  very  thing,  and  take  thought,  and
break  their  rest,  and  are  in  anxiety  about
it  ?  And  wherefore,  moreoTer,  did  they  steal
it  ?  That  they  might  feign  the  doetrino  of
the  resurrection  ?  And  how  should  it  enter
their  minds  to  feign  such  a  thing — men  who
were  well  content  to  be  hidden  and  to  live  ?
And  how  could  they  remoye  the  stone  that
was  made  sure?  How  could  they  have
escaped  the  observation  of  so  many  ?  Nay,
though  they  had  despised  death,  tliey  would
not  have  attempted  without  purpose  and
fruitlessly  to  venture  in  defiance  of  so  many
who  were  on  the  watch.  And  that  more-
over they  were  timorous,  what  they  had
done  before  showed  clearly :  at  letuit,  when
they  saw  him  seized,  all  rushed  away  from
him.  If,  then,  at  that  time  they  did  not
dare  so  much  as  to  stand  their  gronnd
when  they  saw  him  alive,  how  when  he
was  dead  could  they  but  have  feared  such
a  number  of  soldiers  ?"  ('  Horn.,'  xc).

Yer.  14. —  And  if  this  come  to  the
governor's  ears ;  if  thit  bt  iMtrd  hefon  the
governor;  i.e.  if  the  matter  be  brought
officially  before  the  procurator.  For  a
Boman  soldier  to  sleep  on  his  post  was  to
incur  the  penalty  of  death.  Pilate  would
not  be  likely  to  hear  of  what  had  taken
place,  as  vulgar  rumoun  were  not  en-
couraged by  his  stem  and  unsympathizing
attitude  towards  the  Jewish  people,  but  it
was  just  possible  that  some  pmcious  person
might  bring  the  report  before  him,  and  ask
him  to  take  measures  to  ascertain  the  trnth,
and,  if  necessary,  to  punish  the  delinquents.
We  (^/ueis,  emphatic)  will  persnade  him.
Such  persuasion  usually  took  the  form  of
bribery,  Boman  officials  being  notoriously
venal  (comp.  Acta  zxiv.  26);  but  perhaps
the  rulers  intended  to  make  him  believe
that  the  story  was  not  trtie,  but  merely  a
rwtt  to  keep  the  populace  quiet.  The
soldiers  must  have  fully  believed  in  the
Banhedrists'  assertion,  or  they  would  never
Mve  imperilled  their  Uvea  by  promulgating


saeh  a  condemnatory  tale.  Secure  you ;  rii
uou  of  care.  They  promise  the  guard
indemnity  and  freedom  &om  all  penu  oon-
seqnences.  Pilate,  however,  later  learned
the  great  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection,
and  though,  as  far  as  we  know,  he  took  no
steps  towards  punishing  the  guard  (being
probably  oonvinoed  of  its  supernatural
occurrence),  yet,  according  to  a  fragment
of  Hegesippus,  and  Eusebius,  'OhronioV
ii.  2,  he  sent  an  account  of  tlie  matter  to
Tiberius,  who,  in  consequence,  endeavoured
to  make  the  senate  pass  a  decree  enrolling
Jesus  in  the  list  of  Boman  gods.  This  facS
is  attested  by  TertuUian  ('  Apolog.,'  v.).

Ver.  15. — This  saying;  vix.  the  theft  of
the  body  by  the  disciples.  Is  commonly
reported  (wat  tfread  abroad')  among  tha
Jews  until  this  day;  t.e.  and  continues  to  be
reported  until  this  day.  This  was  true
when  St.  Matthew  wrote,  and  it  is  true  at
tho  present  time,  though  thoughtful  Jews
of  late  years  have  adopted  the  idea  that  the
apostles,  in  their  excited  state,  were  deceived
by  visions  of  Christ  which  they  took  for
substantial  realities  (see  on  ch.  xxvii.  64).
In  the  passage  of  Justin  Martyr  (*  DiaL
cum  Tryph.,'  cviii.)  we  are  told  that  the
Jews  sent  emisiaries  in  all  directions  to
spread  this  false  report.  The  evangelist
shows  the  origin  of  this  most  improbable
tale,  and  virtually  ehallengea  any  other
explanation  of  the  rairaole  than  the
authentic  one.

Vers.  16 — 20. — Chur  L»rd  appear*  to  (h*
disciple*  in  OaliUe,  and  gitut  them  a  eom-
miiiion  to  teaeh  and  baptize.  (Peculiar  to
St.  Matthew;  but  comp.  Mark  xvL  IS — 18.)
Yer.  16.  —  Then  the  eleven  disciples.
There  is  no  note  of  time  in  the  original,
which  gives  merely,  But  the  eleven,  etc.  The
meeting  here  narrated  took  place  on  some
day  after  the  first  Easter  week.  The  number
"  eleven  "  shows  the  loss  of  one  of  the  sacred .
college,  whose  complement  was  not  filled  up
till  just  before  Pentecost  (Acts  i.  15—26).
Went  away  into  Oalilee.  St.  Mat  ihew  takes
pains  to  show  the  exact  fulfilment  of  Christ's
very  special  injunction  and  promise  con-
cerning Galilee  (see  vers.  7,  10,  and  notes
there,  and  oh.  xxvi.  32).  The  evangelist's
object  being  to  set  forth  Christ  in  his  cha-
racter as  King  and  Lawgiver,  he  puts  aside
all  other  incidents  in  order  to  give  prominence
td  this  appearance,  where  Jesus  announces
his  supreme  authority  (ver.  18),  gives  the
commission  to  his  apostles,  and  promises
his  perpetual  presence  (vers.  19,  20).  Into
a  monntain  (ri  Spos,  the  mountain),  where
(oS  instead  of  oT)  Jesus  had  appointed  them.
We  do  not  know  the  locality  intended,  though
it  must  have  been  some  spot  familial  to  the
disciplea,  and  was  probably  plainly  d««ig-


544        THE  GOSPEL  ACOORDINO  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [on.  xxTm- 1—20.


nated  at  the  time  nhen  Ohrigt  sppointcd
the  meeting.  Some  have  fixed  on  Tabor  m
the  scene  or  thia  reTelation,  otheri  en  the
Mount  of  Beatitndps ;  but  where  nothing  ia
gtatod  it  la  best  to  lay  aiide  oonjectnra  and
accept  the  designed  indefinitenesi).  Mnny
conimentaton  have  determined  that  this
appearance  on  the  Oalilaan  mountain  waa
that  mentioned  bjr  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  XT.  6),
at  mauifcitcd  to  Ato  hundred  brethren  at
once.  This  is  a  mere  conjecture,  probable,
but  not  certain.  If  it  wag  the  oiwe,  we  must
coDiidsr  that  St.  Matthew  singles  out  the
eleven  apostles  aa  the  most  eminent  among
the  company,  and  those  to  whom  the  Lord
specially  addressed  t)ie  commission  which
he  mentioniL  Of  the  five  hundred  brethren,
St.  Paul,  writing  eome  twenty  years  or  more
after  thia  time,  testifies  that  the  greater
number  were  still  aliTe,  only  soma  haring
"  fallen  asleep."  There  never  was,  indeed,
ail  y  historical  fact  the  authenticity  of  which
was  more  remarkably  and  irrefragably
cei  tified  than  th«  rssuirectioa  of  Christ.

V«r.  17.— They  worshipped  him.  Evi-
dently here  they,  or  the  majority  of  those
present  (for  it  is  plain  thiit  others  beside  the
apostles  were  there),  adored  liim  as  God  and
Lord.  This  is  the  first  time  that  this  action
of  supreme  worship  is  mentioned  in  con-
nection with  the  disciples,  though  the  women
had  offered  the  same  homage  tohim(Ter.  9).
Sut  some  doubted  (ol  Si — without  qI  /iir—
iitiTTacriai).  (For  the  verb,  comp.  oh.  xlv.
81.)  The  doubters  could  not  b.ive  been  any
of  the  eleven,  for  they  had  seen  the  Lord
more  than  onoe  at  Jerusalem,  and  had  had
indubitable  proofs  that  bo  had  risen  from
the  dead,  and  was  no  mere  spirit  or  spiritual
appearance,  but  possei-sed  of  hia  former
body,  with  new  powers,  faculties,  and  laws.
Those  who  for  the  moment  doubted  did  not
hesitate  to  ac!.;iowledge  hia  resurrection,
but  his  identity.  They  were,  perhaps,  at  a
distance.  Cluiat  may  have  appeared  aur-
rounded  witii  heavenly  glory ;  at  any  rate,
in  a  shape,  or  vesture,  or  with  an  aspect
vrith  which  they  were  not  familiar ;  hence
in  this  niajestio  form,  they  failed  to  reoog-
nizfe  tlie  "despised  and  rejected  of  men,"
ttie  Inwly  Jesus  whom  they  had  known
(cf.  Jiilinxxi.  4).

Ycr.  18. — Jesna  oame.  Some  medinval
exe;.  ctes  have  deemed  that  this  verse  refers
tn  the  time  of  the  ascension ;  but  there  is
no  valid  reason  for  dissooiatlng  this  portion
from  the  rest  of  the  account.  If  we  do  this,
we  lose  the  great  reason  fui  tlic  oft-onjoined
meeting  on  the  GaliliBan  mountain,  which
seems  to  have  been  expressly  and  witli  much
care  arranged  to  notify  at  large  the  foot  of
Christ's  Beaorrection  and  of  his  suprema
authority,  and  to  eonvey  the  Lord's  oommia-
■ion  t«  M«  apMtlea  in  vtm  {OMano*  ef  many


witnesses.  We  may  anppose  that  Jesoa,  who
bad  been  standing  apart,  now  drew  neat  to
the  company,  so  that  all,  especially  the
donbtinK,  might  see  him  closely  and  hekr
his  familiar  voice.  Spake  nnto  them  (l)ul-
\jitti>  aireU,  lalhfA  unto  {htTfi).  Doubtleaa
he  aaid  much  mure  than  is  here  recorded,
resolving  doubta,  confirming  faitii,  infnaing
comfort.  "  Thus  it  ia  avan  now ;  we  worship
him,  and  then  he  drawa  near,  and,  by  hia
nearer  approaohea  and  secret  manifestatiM
of  himself  to  onr  hearts,  wa  are  oonflrmed
in  the  faith,  and  see  in  faim  Ood  and  man  "
(I.  Williams).  All  power  (/{ovWa)  is  givM
{it6lri,  vat  glfttt)  ante  ma  in  keavan  and
ia  earth.  Jeana  here  asserts  that  he,  m
Son  of  man,  has  received  from  the  Father
supreme  anthority  in  heaven  and  euth,  over
the  whole  kingdom  of  God  in  its  fiillest
extent  Thia  is  not  given  to  him  as  Son  of
God  ;  for,  as  God,  nanght  can  be  added  to
him  ot  taken  f^om  him;  it  is  a  power  whlob
he  has  merited  by  his  inoarnation,  dea^
and  Passion  (FhU.  ii.  8 — 10),  wUch  waa
foretold  in  the  Old  Testament,  by  psalmist
(Ps.  IL  8;  viil.  5—8)  and  prophet  (Dan.
vii.  13, 14),  and  with  which  he  was  indued
on  the  day  that  he  rose  victorious  from  the
grave.  So  the  verb  "  was  given  "  is  in  the
past  tense,  because  it  refers  to  the  dotation
arranged  in  God's  eternal  purpose,  and  to
tlie  actual  investiture  at  the  Besnrreotion.
The  power  is  exercised  in  his  mediatorial
kingdom,  and  will  continue  to  be  exercised
till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet,
and  destroyed  dcatli  itself  (1  Cor.  xv.  24 —
27);  but  his  absolute  kingdom  ia  everlasting;
as  God  and  Man  he  reigns  for  ever  and  ever.
This  mediatorial  authority  extends  not  only
over  men,  so  that  he  governs  aud  protects
the  Church,  disposes  human  events,  controls
hearts  and  opinions ;  but  the  forces  of  heaven
iilso  are  at  his  command,  the  Holy  Spirit  is
bi'Stowed  by  him,  the  angels  are  in  hia
employ  aa  ministeriag  to  tho  members  of
liis  body.

Ver.  19.— «o  ye  tharsfora  (•?»).  The
illative  particle  is  perhaps  spurious,  but  it
is  implied  by  what  has  preceded.  It  ia
because  Jesus  has  plenary  authority,  and
can  delegate  power  to  whom  lie  will,  that
he  confers  the  following  oommisaion.  He
is  addressing  the  eleven  apostles,  of  whom
alone  St.  Matthew  makea  mention  (ver.  16);
but  as  they  personally  eonid  not  execute  the
grand  commission  in  all  its  extent  and  dnra-
tion,  he  lays  hia  commanda  upon  their  repre-
sentatives and  successors  in  all  ages.  They
were  to  go  forth,  and  carry  the  goepel  throngh-
out  the  world.  Doubtless  herein  ia  implied
the  duty  «f  all  Christians  to  be  in  some  sense
missionaries,  to  nae  their  ntmoat  efforta  to
apraad  abroad  tbs  knowledge  of  Christ,  and
to  «aka  aaaB  obodivit  to  Ub  Law.    The


OB.  xxvin.  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOtlDlN&  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.


64S


propagation  of  the  gospel  ii  a  work  for  all
!q  their  acveral  Bpheres.  Teach;  dooete
Vulgate),  Theie  are  unfortunate  render-
Tig»  of  the  verb  fiaSiiTfdtrarf,  which  means,
'  make  diioiplei."  Teaching  is  ezpresaed  in
(HI.  20,  ai  one  of  the  elements  orcompouents
>(  full  discipleehip.  The  imperatiye  aoriat
iLoStiTtiraTt  is,  as  it  were,  decomposed  by
the  two  following  present  participles,
"  baptizing  "  and  "  teaching."  lu  the  case
of  infants  the  prooesi  is  exactly  what  is
here  represented;  they  are  admitted  into
the  Christian  society  by  baptism,  and  then
instructeil  in  faith  and  duty.  Adnlts  have
to  be  instructed  bci'nre  baptism ;  but  they
form  a  small  minority  in  most  Christian
communities,  where,  generally,  infant  bap-
tism is  tlie  rule,  and  would  be  regarded
rather  as  ezceptions.  Teaching  alone  is
not  Bi  atcd  by  tbe  Lord  to  be  (lie  only  thing
DeceesHi'y  to  conveit  an  unbelierer  into  a
Christ  a,ii ;  this  is  effected  by  the  grace  of
God  applied  as  Christ  proceeds  to  explain.
All  nations  (7rii><Ta  ri  lUvri.  all  the  nations).
The  apostles  were  no  longer  to  go  only  to
"  the  lost  sUeep  of  the  house  of  Israel "  (ch.
X.  G);  tliey  were  to  Christianize  all  the
nations  of  the  world,  Jew  and  Gentile  alike.
The  gospel  is  adapted  to  all  the  varying
minds  and  habits  of  men,  barbarous  and
civilized,  near  and  remote,  ignorant  or
cultivated ;  and  it  is  the  duty  and  privilege
of  Christ's  ministers  to  make  it  kuown  and
acceptable  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe.
Baptieing  them ;  i.e.  individuals  of  all  the
nations.  The  present  participle  denotes
the  mode  of  initiation  mto  dii-oipleship.
Miike  them  disciples  by  baptizing  them.
Christ  thus  explains  his  mysterious  an-
nounoe.uent  to  Niuodemus  (John  iii.  6),
"  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  the
Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
God."  To  the  disciples  the  notion  of
baptism  was  no  new  thing.  As  a  rite
typifying  the  eleimsiug  ol  the  heart  and
the  purpose  of  leadin?  a  new  life,  it  had
been  long  practised  in  the  case  of  proselytes
to  the  Jewish  faith ;  they  had  s.  eu  it  em-
ployed by  John  the  Baptist  (ch.  iii.  6),
and  had  used  it  themselves  (John  iv.  1,
2).  Christ  adopts  the  old  rite,  gives  it  a
new  solemnity,  a  most  sacred  formula
of  administration,  a  new  meaning,  new
spiritual  effects.  The  persons  to  whom
and  in  whose  presence  he  spoke  would
understand  his  injunction  as  applicable  to
all  who  were  capable  of  its  reception,
children  and  adults,  the  subjects  of  the
initiatory  ceremony  of  proselytism.  Tnere
was  no  need  of  closer  specificiition.  Or,  if
any  sucli  instruction  was  needijl,  the  rules
concerning  circumcision  would  be  a
BufBeient  guide.  In  («it,  into)  the  Name  of
the  I'ather,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holv


Ghost.  Our  version  follows  the  Vulg^ate,  tn
nomine,  which  does  not  give  the  right  force
to  the  expression.  The  phrase  does  not
mean  merely  invoking  the  Name,  under  the
sanction  of  the  great  Name,  but  something
mure  than  this.  It  signifies  into  the  power
and  influence  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  into  faith
in  the  three  Persons  of  God,  and  the  duties
and  privile°;es  consequent  on  that  faith,
into  the  fumily  of  God  and  obedience  unto
its  Head.  The  "  into  "  shows  the  end  and
aim  of  the  consecration  of  baptism.  The
"  Name  "  of  God  is  that  by  which  he  is
known  to  us — that  which  connotes  his  being
and  his  attributes,  that  by  which  there
exists  a  conscious  connection  between  Grid
and  ourselves  (oomp.  ch.  xviii.  20).  So
being  baptized  Into  the  Name  of  God  im-
plies being  placed  in  subjection  to  and
communion  with  God  himself,  admitted
into  covenant  with  him.  It  is  to  be  ob-
served that  the  term  is  "name,"  not
"  names,"  thus  denoting  the  unity  of  the
Godhead  in  the  trinity  of  Persons.  The
Lord's  words  have  always  been  taken  as
the  formula  of  baptism,  and  have  in  all
ages  been  used  in  its  adminibtration.  The
three  Divine  Persona  were  revealed  at  the
baptism  of  Jesus  (ch.  iii.  16,  17)  ;  they  are
invoked  at  every  Christian  baptism.  It  is
true  that  we  read,  in  the  early  Church,  of
persons  being  baptized  "in  the  Name  of
the  Lord  Jesus,"  and  "  in  the  Name  of  the
Lord"  (Acts  viii.  16;  i.  48);  but  this  ex-
pression by  no  means  assumes  that  the
names  of  the  other  Divine  Persons  were
not  used ;  it  denotes  that  the  converts  were
admitted  into  the  religion  which  Jesus
instituted,  in  fact,  were  made  Christians.
The  above  formula  has  from  primitive  times
been  considered  indispensahle  for  the  valid
administration  of  this  sacrament  (see
'  Apost.  Can.,' 41 ;  Tertull,  'De  Bnpt.,'  xiii. ;
Justin  Martyr, '  Apol.,'  i.  79).  "  From  this
sacred  form  of  baptism,"  says  Bishop
Pearson,  "  did  the  Ohiireh  derive  the  rule
of  faith,  requiring  the  profession  of  belief
in  the  Father,  Sou,  an<  1  Holy  Ghost,  before
they  could  be  baptized  in  their  Name  "  ('  On
the  Creed,'  art.  i  ;.

Ver.  20. — Teaching  (SiiSao-Koi'TK)  them
(i.e.  all  the  nations)  to  observe  all  things,
etc.  The  word  for  "  teaching "  is  quite
diiferent  from  that  used  in  ver.  19,  and
there  wrongly  translated.  Instruction  is
the  second  necessary  condition  for  disoiple-
bhip.  In  the  case  of  adults,  as  was  said
above,  some  teaching  must  precede  the
initiation;  but  this  has  to  be  supplemented
subsequently  in  order  to  build  up  th«  con-
vert in  the  faith  and  make  him  perfect ;
while  infants  must  be  taught  "as  soon  as
they  are  able  to  learn,  what  a  solemn  vow,
promise,  and  profession    they    have   hero


646


THE  60SML  ACoOilDlNG-  'TO  ST.  MATTfiEW.    t<ja.  xxvat.  1—20.


made."  All  must  be  taught  the  Christian
faith  and  duty,  and  how  to  obtain  God's
help  to  enable  them  to  please  him,  and  to
continue  in  the  way  of  salvation,  so  that
they  may  "die  from  Bin, and  rise  again  unto
righteousneBS ;  continually  mortifying  all
their  evil  and  corrupt  affections,  and  daily
proceeding  in  uU  virtue  and  godliness  of
living"  ('Public  Biiptiara  of  Infants').
"He  gives,"  says  St.  ChrysoBtom,  "  the  one
oliarge  with  a  view  to  doctrine  [j.e.  the  form
of  baptism],  the  other  concerning  command-
BeutB"  ('Horn.,'  xc).  All  that  Christ
commanded,  both  in  doctrine  and  morals,  all
that  he  had  taught  and  enjoined  during
the  three  past  years,  they  were  hence-
forward to  take  as  their  text-book,  and  en-
force on  all  who  were  admitted.into  the
Church  by  baptism.  As  the  Greek  is,  "I
commanded,"  being  aorist  and  not  perfect,
it  may  be  rightly  opined  that  Christ  here
Alludes  also  to  various  details  which  he  set
forth  and  enjoined  during  these  great  forty
days,  between  his  resurrection  and  as-
cension, when  he  gave  commandments  unto
the  apostles  whom  he  had  chosen,  and
spake  to  them  of  the  things  pertaining  to
the  kingdom  of  God  (Acts  i.  2,  8).  And,  lo.
"After  Ihat,  because  he  had  enjoined  on
them  great  things,  to  raise  their  courage,
he  says,  Lo  I  "  etc.  (Chrysostom).  I  am  with
you  alway  (^7^  ^€0'  vfxav  eitit  irdtras  rds
rincpas).  Every  word  is  emphatic.  The
Ascension  was  at  band ;  this  implied  an
absence  of  his  visible  presence,  to  be  re-
placed by  a  spiritual  presence,  more  perfect,
potent,  effectual,  infinite.    It  is  I  myself,  I,


God  and  Man,  who  am  (not  "will  be  ")  hence-
forward ever  present  among  you,  with  yon
as  Companion,  Friend,  Guide,  Saviour,  God.
I  am  with  you  in  all  your  ministrations,
prayers  public  and  private,  baptisms,  com-
munions, exhortations,  doctrine,  discipline.
And  this,  not  now  and  then,  not  at  certain
times  only,  but  "  all  the  days "  of  your
pilgrimage,  all  t  je  dark  days  of  trial  and
persecution  and  affliction ;  all  the  days
when  yon,  my  apostles,  are  gathered  to  your
rest,  and  have  committed  your  work  to
other  hands;  "my  presence  shall  never  be
withdrawn  for  a  single  moment.  Often  had
God  made  an  analogous  promise  to  his
servants  under  the  old  diitpensation — to
Hoses  (Exod.  iii.  12),  to  Joshua  (Deut.  xxxi.
23),  to  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i  8) ;  but  this  spiritual
presence  of  Christ  is  something  unknown  to
previous  history,  a  nearness  unspeakable,  in
the  Church  at  large  and  in  the  Christian's
heart.  Even  unto  the  end  of  the  world ;  the
consummation  of  the  age,  as  ch.  xxiv.  3  (where
see  note).  "When  the  new  era  is  ushered
in,  evangelizing  work  will  cease ;  God  shall
be  all  in  all ;  all  shall  know  him  from  the
least  unto  the  greatest.  And  they  shall  ever
be  with  the  Lord ;  "  wherefore  comfort  one
another  with  these  words  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  18).
Amen.  The  word  iB  here  an  interpolation,
but  it  expresses  what  every  pious  reader
must  say  in  his  heart,  "  So  be  it,  O  Lord ;
be  with  U8  unto  the  end ;  guide  and
strengthen  us  in  life,  and  bring  ub  safely
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,
to  thy  blessed  presence,  where  ia  the  fulnesi
of  joy  for  aTermore  I "


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  Resurrection.  I.  The  anobl  at  the  sefulchbs.  1.  Th«  holy
women.  The  great  sabbath  was  over.  It  had  been  a  busy  day  in  the  temple ;  all
had  been  done  as  usual.  The  priests  little  thought,  while  performing  their  elaborate
ritual,  that  the  one  great  Sacrifice,  Oblation,  and  Satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
world,  the  Sacrifice  of  which  all  their  sacrifices  were  but  figures,  had  been  offered  up
on  Calvary.  Yet  the  great  darkness  and  the  portents  which  had  marked  the  moment
of  the  Saviour's  death  must  have  excited  attention  at  Jerusalem,  must  have  harrowed
the  consciences  of  many,  and  filled  the  whole  city  with  uneasiness  and  doubt  and  awe.
Strange  anxieties  must  have  disturbed  the  rest  of  that  sabbath.  Men  went  about
asking  strange  questions  of  one  another.  Strange  forebodings  filled  the  air.  The
priests  especially  must  have  been  full  of  excitement  and  anxiety.  Their  chiefs  had
been  foremost  in  urging  the  Crucifixion ;  and  the  rent  veil  must  have  filled  them  with
wonder  and  terror.  What  could  it  moau?  The  holy  of  holies  lay  exposed — the
awful  place,  which  no  human  being  might  behold,  save  only  the  high  priest,  and  that
but  once  a  year,  with  solemn  rites  of  expiation.  It  must  have  seemed  to  them  a
tremendous  portent,  foreboding  some  great  change,  some  stupendous  event.  Even  the
cold  indifferent  Sadducees  must  have  been  stirred  into  anxious  expectation  by  a
prodigy  so  significant,  so  startling,  so  plainly  preternatural.  This  feeling  had  con-
strained them  to  apply  to  the  hated  Gentiles  even  on  the  sabbath.  Herod  had
employed  his  soldiers  to  slay,  if  it  wf  re  possible,  the  infant  King  of  the  Jews.  The
chief  priests  employed  the  Eoman  soldiers  to  prevent,  if  it  were  possible,  the  resur-


CM.  iiviii.  1-26.]    THE  (iOSPt!L  ACCORDtN+&  HO  ST.  MATTElfiW.        64'?

rection  of  him  whose  cross  had  borne  the  title  which  the  Wise  Men  from  the  East  had
attributed  to  the  holy  Child  Jesus.  But  if  that  sabbath  hud  been  a  disturbed  and
anxious  day  to  tho  enemies  of  our  Lord,  what  must  it  have  been  to  his  disciples  ?
They  had  watched,  some  few  of  them,  the  awful  scene  on  Calvary.  Most  of  them  had
fled  in  terror.  The  Lord  had  put  forth  no  supernatural  powers,  as  perhaps  they  had
hoped;  there  had  been  no  armies  of  angels  coming  to  his  help,  no  display  of  Divine
glory  to  crush  his  foes.  He  was  dead,  buried  out  of  their  sight.  They  forgot  all  that
the  prophets  had  spoken,  all  that  the  Lord  himself  had  said  about  his  resurrection  on
the  third  day.  Even  the  circumstances  of  his  death,  its  calm  majesty,  its  attendant
wonders,  did  not  restore  their  lost  faith.  "We  were  hoping,"  they  said,  "that  it  was
he  which  should  redeem  IsraeL"  But  now  their  hopes  were  crushed,  their  faith  was
gone.  The  one  terrible  fact  of  his  death  had  overwhelmed  them  in  utter  despair.
They  had  expected  an  earthly  kingdom  In  spite  of  all  his  many  warnings.  That
Jewish  notion  of  the  Messiah's  reign  had  taken  entire  possession  of  their  hearts.  And
now  that  hope  had  vanished  altogether.  The  Lord  had  not  taken  the  throne  of  David ;
he  had  died  upon  the  cross,  the  death  of  eitremest  ignominy.  They  were  sunk  in
misery  and  disappointment  and  despondency.  The  chief  priests  called  to  remembrance
that  they  had  been  told  of  his  predicted  resurrection.  Hatred  is  sometimes  more  keen-
sighted  than  love.  The  disciples  seem  to  have  had  no  hope  at  all.  That  sad  sabbath
day  must  have  been  cloudtd  by  many  remorseful  memories  of  broken  promises  and
selfish  fears — how  all,  save  one,  had  left  him  at  the  last,  and  forsaken  him  in  his
agony  who  had  loved  them  with  so  great  a  love.  But  the  long  hours  of  that  sorrowful
sabbath  were  over  at  last ;  the  first  day  of  the  week  was  dawning — that  day  which  was
to  be  the  first  day  of  a  new  life,  which  was  to  be  consecrated  throughout  the  great
Christian  Church  as  the  beginning  of  new  hopes,  new  aspirations;  the  first  great
Easter  Day  was  shedding  its  faint  glimmering  light  through  the  surrounding  darkness ;
and  the  holy  women  came — Mary  Magdalene  and  the  other  Mary,  and  afterwards,  it
seems  from  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke,  Salome  and  Joanna.  They  had  watched  the  burial
—some  of  them,  at  least.  Perhaps  they  were  not  allowed  to  approach  at  the  time ;
perhaps  only  Joseph,  who  had  obtained  the  governor's  leave,  and  Nioodemus,  a  man
of  rank  and  authority  like  Joseph,  were  permitted  on  that  Friday  afternoon  to  touch
the  body  of  the  Lord.  But  the  women  followed  after,  and  beheld  where  he  was  laid.
They  were  last  at  the  sepulchre  on  the  first  Good  Friday ;  they  were  the  first  to  see
the  empty  tomb  on  the  first  great  Easter  Day.  They  came  to  see  the  sepulchre — "to
•noint,"  St.  Mark  says,  the  body  of  him  whom  they  had  regarded  with  a  love  so  deep
and  reverent.  They  had  prepared  spices  and  ointments  before  the  sabbath;  they
came  as  soon  as  the  sabbath  rest  permitted  to  fulfil  their  work  of  love.  But  that  very
love,  deep  and  true  as  it  was,  expressed  itself  in  preparations  which  showed  that  they
understood  not  the  Saviour's  words,  or  kt  least  that  the  awful  events  of  Friday  had
shaken  their  belief  and  destroyed  their  hopes.  Neither  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  nor  the
holy  women  seem  to  have  had  any  thought  of  seeing  the  Lord  in  life  again,  Joseph
willingly  gave  his  own  new  tomb  to  receive  the  dear  remains.  Perhaps  he  thought
that  one  day  his  own  bones  might  rest  with  the  honoured  body  of  him  whom  he  so
loved  and  reverenced.  None  of  the  followers  of  the  Lord,  not  even  those  apostles  who
had  been  nearest  to  him,  seem  to  have  remembered  those  words  of  his  which  ought
to  have  been  their  greatest  comfort  in  the  hour  of  darkness.  The  shock  had  been  so
great ;  they  were  so  horrified,  terror-stricken,  bewildered.  So  it  is  with  us  sonietimes
in  great  pain,  in  overwhelming  sorrow.  We  cannot  collect  our  thoughts;  we  can
scarcely  pray ;  there  seems  to  be  no  hope,  nothing  but  darkness.  It  may  give  u.^  some
comfort  to  think  that  even  saints,  even  apostles,  shared  this  human  weakness.  But
let  us  remember  that  in  their  despair  they  still  loved  the  Lord;  if  they  had  lost  hope,
they  still  came  to  the  sepulchre ;  if  they  thought  that  he  could  give  them  no  help,
that  they  had  a  living  Lord  no  more,  at  least  they  clung  to  his  sacred  memory,  and
came  to  watch  over  and  to  care  for  his  lifeless  body.  Let  us  in  our  sufferings  try  to
keep  the  thought  of  the  suffering  Lord  close  to  our  very  hearts.  If  there  are  times
when  we  cannot  find  joy  in  the  thought  of  his  glory  and  majesty,  let  us  try  to  find
peace  in  the  thought  of  his  cross,  his  death,  his  burial.  Let  us  pray  that  our  anguish
may  be  made  the  means  of  bringing  us  into  closer  sympathy  with  the  suffering  Lord,
lotf  "  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings ; "  "  for  if  we  have  become  united  witk  hin  ly


648        tHB  GOSPEL  ACCOSDTXO  TO  ST.  MAl'THEW.    [oh.  xiviiL  1—20.

the  likeness  of  his  death,  we  shall  1)0  also  by  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection."  2.
The  descent  of  iht  angd.  The  womeu  had  said  among  themselves,  "  Who  shiiii  roll
us  away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre?"  It  was  a  task  beyond  their
strength,  and  they  were  troubled.  There  was  no  need  for  their  anxiety.  So  we  olton
trouble  ourselTes  about  the  future  ;  we  wonder  how  this  or  that  difficulty  shall  be
overcome ;  who  shall  save  us  from  this  or  that  threati-ninc;  c»lamity.  "  Let  not  your
heart  be  troubled,"  saith  the  Lord;  "ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me."  "In
quietness  and  confidence  shall  be  your  strength."  Those  fears  of  ours,  those  anxious
thoughts  which  almost  wear  us  otit,  comH  from  want  of  faith.  How  often  the  event
proves  that  there  was  no  ground  for  them!  Wi-  frettui  ourselves  vairJy,  we  made
needless  vexations  lor  ourselves  ;  for  after  all  the  threatened  trouble  never  came;  or,
il  it  did  come,  it  was  not  so  terrible;  God  gave  us  strength  to  biar  it.  It  was  so  now.
One  stronger  than  they  had  rolled  away  the  stone.  Tliero  was  a  great  earthquake.
A  mighty  angel  had  come  down  from  heaven;  his  appearance  was  as  lightning,  and
his  raiment  white  aa  snow.  What  could  the  Boman  soldiers  do  in  the  presence  of  thai
effulgent,  blindmg  railiaiice  ?  For  fear  of  him  the  watchers  did  quake  (the  very  earth
had  quaked  at  his  approach),  and  became  as  dead  men.  The  mere  sight  of  one  angel
of  the  Lord  affrighted  them  into  utter  helphasness.  Hoiv  would  it  have  fared  with
the  presumptuous  multitude  who  seized  the  Saviour  iu  Githsemane,  had  he,  who  is
the  Lord  God  of  hosts,  summoned  those  heavenly  legions?  Then  he  meekly  yielded
himself;  for  he  willed  to  suffer  and  to  die  that  we  might  live  for  ever.  Now  his
humiliation  was  over,  the  hour  of  his  triumph  was  couie;  one  angel,  of  the  Lord
scattered  the  Roman  guard.  The  strength  of  man  is  helpless  to  withstand  the  will
of  God.  3.  His  address  to  the  women.  Ho  had  done  what  the  wom"n  knew  was
beyond  their  strength;  he  had  rolled  away  the  stone;  they  found  him  sitting  on  it
in  his  glorious  lieauty.  The  blcssi-d  angels  terrify  the  enemies  of  the  Lord;  they
bring  joy  and  gladness  to  his  chosen.  The  soldiers  lay  on  the  ground  prostrate,  like
dead  men.  The  holy  women  started  at  the  glorious  vision,  but  the  heavenly  music  of
the  angel's  voice  soon  gave  them  peace  and  joy.  "  Fear  not  ye,"  the  angel  said.  The
pronoun  is  emphatic.  The  guards  had  cause  to  fear;  not  so  those  faithful  women.
The  angel  knew  what  had  brought  them  there — their  love  and  devotion  for  the  crucified
Saviour.  But  there  was  no  need  of  their  ointments  and  spices ;  there  was  no  use  for
them;  for  the  angel  said,  "  He  is  not  here;  he  is  risen,  as  he  said."  There  was  some-
thing, perhaps,  of  gimtle  reproof  in  those  words.  The  t^ord  had  said  again  and  »gain
that  he  would  rise  again  the  third  day;  his  disciples  should  have  remembered  his
words;  they  should  not  have  been  thus  hopeless  and  despaiiing;  they  should  have
looked  forward,  despite  the  agonies  of  the  cross,  despite  the  scaling  of  the  tomb,  to
the  glory  of  the  Resurrection.  That  prophecy  was  n^w  filfiUed;  they  might  see  the
empty  tomb :  "  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay."  They  entered  into  the
sepulchre,  St.  Mark  tells  us ;  they  saw  that  the  Lord  was  gone.  The  angel  sent  them
to  bear  the  great  l^Iaster  tidings  to  the  apostles.  The  apostles  had  not  shown  the
courage,  the  affectionate  devotion,  of  these  holy  women.  St.  John  alone  had  stood
beside  the  cross;  no  apostle,  as  far  as  we  are  told,  had  witnessed  the  burial.  The
women,  too,  were  the  first  to  visit  the  sepulchre;  their  devotion  was  rewarded;  tiiey
first  heard  the  glad  tidings;  they  had  the  privilege  of  bearing  the  blessed  news  to  the
apostles,  who  were  to  be  the  witnesses  of  the  Lord's  resurrection  and  to  preach  his
glorious  gospel  throughout  the  world.  Holy  women  have  often  been  the  means  of
bringing  to  the  faith  of  Christ  those  who  liave  afterwards  laboured  most  abundantly
in  the  Saviour's  cause.  The  angel  repeated  his  charge  :  "  Lo,  I  have  told  you,"  he
saiii.     They  might  not  doubt ;  they  had  heard  the  great  truth  from  an  angel's  lips.

IL  The  risen  Lord.  1.  The  women  on  their  way.  They  went  at  once,  they  ran.
Their  hearts  were  filled  with  mingled  feelings.  There  was  fear, — they  could  not  look
upon  that  form,  bright  as  the  lightning-flash,  without  something  of  dread ;  but  there
was  a  great  joy  which  overcame  their  fear.  The  Lord  was  risen.  The  thought  was
too  great  for  them;  it  thrilled  their  hearts  with  strange,  unwonted  throbbingg.  But
they  went  as  they  were  bidden ;  and  as  they  went  a  holier  than  an  angel's  voice  fell
upon  their  ears.  The  Lord  manifests  himself  to  those  who  work  for  him,  who  in
oljodience  and  faith  carry  to  otiiers  the  blessed  story  of  his  cross  and  his  resurrection.
2,  The  meeting  with  ih*  Lord,     JesuB  met  them  on  their  way.     Suddenly,  in  a


0H.XXVIII.1— 20.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOCQEDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.        649

moment,  they  saw  thq  gracious  form  of  their  beloved  Master;  they  looked  onca  more
upon  that  holy  face,  no  longer  stained  with  blood  or  fixed  ia  death,  but  gazing  on
them  with  his  wonted  look  of  heavenly  love  in  the  full  majesty  of  manifest  Deity.
"  A}1  hail  1 "  he  said ;  "  rejoice  1 "  Fear  and  joy  were  struggling  ia  their  hearts  j  but  joy
was  the  right  feeling  ;  there  was  no  need  to  fear.  "  All  hail  1  rejoice  1 "  it  was  an  ordinary
formula  of  salutation;  often  a  mere  conventional  greeting,  but  coining  from  those  lips
it  spoke  volumes;  it  was  full  of  meaning,  deep,  holy,  blessed  meaning.  It  was  the
^fulfilment  of  those  precious  words  of  Ws,  "  Ye  now  therefore  have  sorrow ;  but  I  will
see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you."
The  presence  of  the  Lord  bringeth  joy,  There  is  no  joy  so  full  and  so  holy,  so  sweet
and  so  abiding,  as  that  joy  in  the  Lord  which  is  granted  to  those  who  in  patience  and
humility  have  taken  up  the  cross,  denying  themselves  daily  for  Christ's  sake,  recog-
nizing in  their  hearts  and  lives  the  great  truth  that,  since  the  Lord  died  for  all,  they
which  live  should  live  no  longer  unto  themselves,  but  unto  him  whioli  died  for  them
and  rose  again.  These  women  loved  the  Lord;  they  had  ministered  to  him ;  now  they
were  going  to  tell  the  glad  tidings  of  his  resurrection.  He  met  theni  himself;  ha  bade
them  "  Kejoioe ! "  Tliere,  and  there  only,  is  true  joy  to  be  found,  in  the  love  ol  Christ,
in  work  for  Christ,  in  communion  with  Christ.  They  came  and  held  him  by  the  feet
and  worshipped  him.  They  bowed  themselves  to  the  ground  before  him  in  lowliest
adoration.  They  felt  something  of  that  great  awe  mixed  with  exceeding  joy  which
the  next  Sunday  forced  from  the  lips  of  the  once  unbelieving  Thomas  the  exclamation
of  adoring  faith,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  1 "  Their  joy  was  too  great  for  words;  they
could  only  offer  him  the  worship  of  their  hearts,  prostrating  theinselves,  holding  those
holy  feet  which  three  days  before  had  been  nailed  to  the  cruel  cross,  scarcely  able  to
look  into  his  face  for  awe  and  wonder  and  overpowering  joy.  So  the  Christian  falls
down  in  adoring  worship  when  the  Lord  reveals  hiniself  to  the  longing  soul.  When
we  see  him  by  faith,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  when  he  manifesteth
himself  to  his  chosen  as  he  doth  not  unto  the  world,  when  he  saith,  "Eejoice!  "  then
they  feel  the  truth  of  that  most  precious  beatitude,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen,
and  yet  have  believed; "  then,  though  they  see  him  not  as  the  Marys  saw  his  gracious
face,  yet,  believing,  they  rejoice  with  joy  unspiakable  and  full  of  glory.  In  such
moments  his  people  o£f§r  up  to  him  a  huly  worship — worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth,
such  as,  in  his  condescending  love,  he  seeketh ;  a  worship  nut  selfish,  not  prayer  for  our
own  sakes,  for  the  supply  of  our  own  needs,  imt  higher  than  prayer;  a  worship  which
thinks  not  of  self,  but  only  of  the  Lord,  which  loses  sight  of  self  in  the  contemplation
of  his  love,  his  holiness,  his  majesty,  his  glory.  Such  is  the  worship  of  his  saints  in
heaven ;  so  we  must  seek  to  worship  in  oar  poor  way  on  earth.  iJ.  The  message.
The  Lord  calmed  their  agitation.  "  Be  not  afraiil  I "  The  angel  had  said  the  same,  but
the  Lord's  words  were  sweeter  music  even  than  the  angelic  voice.  Fear  was  mingled
even  now  with  their  great  joy;  human  nature  cannot  but  fear  in  the  awful  pieaence
of  God.  But  the  Lord  in  his  tender  mercy  taught  them  that,  though  risen  now  from
the  dead,  he  was  still,  not  only  very  God,  but  also  very  Man.  He  sent  them  with  the
first  Easter  greetings  to  the  apostles — to  his  brethren,  as  for  the  first  time  he  deigned
to  call  them.  It  was  a  mesviago  of  love,  a  message  of  forgiveness.  They  had  not  acted
as  brethren  should  ;  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord  in  the  hour  of  danger.  But  he  recog
nized  the  truth  of  their  love;  he  forgave  their  weakmss,  their  terrors;  ha  was  "not
ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  It  was  a  gracious  message  indeed,  full  of  sweetness
to  the  sorrowing,  conscience-stricken  apostles.  They  were  to  meet  the  Lord  in  Galilee;
there  he  would  announce  to  them  his  assumption  of  Divine  power  and  majesty;  tlioro
they  shouM  reoei>e  t'le  full  apostolic  commission  and  the  promise  of  his  continual
presence  unto  the  end,  Tliere  were  other  meetings  during  the  great  forty  days;  but
St.  Matthew,  who  was  led  to  dwell  mainly  upon  the  majesty  and  glory  of  the  risen
Lord,  hastens  to  that  great  meeting,  so  full  of  momentous  consequences,  when  the
Loid  in  his  royal  power  gave  authority  to  his  apostles  to  baptize  all  nations  into  the
most  holy  Name,

Lebsoms.  1.  The  holy  women  loved  the  Lord.  Let  us  imitate  that  »ffoctionat«
reverent  love.  2.  They  said,  "  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone?"  Let  us  trust  in
God ;  the  Lord  will  provide.  3.  The  angel  said,  "  Fear  not  ye."  The  holy  angels
miitister  for  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,     4.  The  Lord  met  the  holy  wome  t ;


650        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ch.  xxviii.  1— 20.

he  said,  "  Rejoice  1 "    May  we  share  that  holy  joy !    5.  They  worshipped  him.  Let  ui
leara  to  worship  here,  that  we  may  oae  day  worship  in  heaven.

Vers.  11—15. — The  watch  and  the  chief  priests.  I.  The  befobt  aw  the  watchbbs.
1.  Their  flight.  They  were  all  aghast  with  terror ;  they  knew  not  well  what  had  hap-
pened. The  earthquake  had  terrified  them  at  first ;  then  there  came  a  vision  dazzling
Mke  the  lightning.  From  that  moment  they  were  as  dead  men ;  they  knew  nothing
more.  When  they  recovered  from  that  deathlike  swoon  the  angel  had  vanished;  all
was  still  and  quiet.  Perhaps  tbey  examined  the  sepulchre.  The  stone  was  jTslled
away;  the  tomb  was  open;  it  was  empty.  What  could  they  do?  They  hb»d  teen
posted  thereto  guard  it;  they  were  in  danger  of  death.  Some  fled  away  in  ierror;
some,  bolder  than  the  others,  or  deeming  perhaps  that  to  tell  the  truth  was  the  safest
course,  came  into  the  city.  2.  T/itir  account.  If  they  were,  as  it  seems  most  probable,
Roman  soldiers,  they  were  responsible  to  the  governor  j  but  they  felt  sure  that  he
would  disbelieve  their  story,  and  punish  them  for  neglect  of  duty.  It  seemed  safer  to
go  to  the  chief  priests,  who  were  the  persons  most  interested  in  the  safety  of  the  tomb,
who  might  advise  them  what  to  do  under  the  circumstances.  They  told  them  all  the
things  that  were'done;  they  told  them  the  facts  of  the  case ;  the  earthquake,  the  vision
which  they  had  seen,  their  own  prostration,  the  empty  tomb;  they  left  the  chief  priests
to  draw  their  own  conclusions.

II.  The  action  of  the  chief  pRiESTa.  1.  The  council.  A  meeting  of  the  San-
hedrin  was  hastily  called.  The  chief  priests  were  Baddncees ;  they  believed  that  there
was  no  resurrection,  neither  angel,  nor  spirit.  Now  they  must  havQ  been  in  a  diffi-
culty. The  great  darkness  of  Friday,  the  earthquake,  the  rent  veil,  had  appalled  many
hearts.  The  very  thing  had  happened  which  they  had  anxiously  tried  to  prevent;  the
sacred  body  had  disappeared,  and  the  soldiers  brought  strange  stories  of  awful  appari-
tions, of  earthquakes  and  lightning,  and  the  supernatural  removal  of  the  great  stone
from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  But  men  can  always  discover  reasons  for  disbelieving
truths  which  they  wish  to  repudiate ;  they  can  always  invent  difficuliTes,  discrepancies,
explanations.  The  chief  priests  probably  affected  to  believe  that  the  guards,  worn  out
by  long  watchinf!,  had  been  so  bewildered  by  the  earthquake  as  to  see  in  the  lightiiing-
flashes  the  fancied  form  of  an  angel.  The  Pharisees  in  the  council  did  not  share  in  the
Sadducean  heresies ;  but  they  had  joined  with  the  chief  priests  in  the  application  to
Pilate  for  a  guard  (ch.  xxvii.  62).  They  were,  equally  with  the  Sadducees,  hostile  to
the  Lord,  equally  interested  in  preventing  the  people  from  believing  his  resurrection.
Doubtless  those  few  counsellors,  such  as  Joseph  and  Nicodemus,  who  had  taken  no
part  in  compassing  the  Saviour's  death,  were  not  summoned  to  the  meeting.  To  the  rest
the  Resurrection  involved  awful  consequences.  It  threw  them  into  such  an  abyss  of
tremendous  guilt  and  terrible  condemnation,  that  we  are  not  surprised  if  men  who
were  evidently  selfish,  cruel,  hypocritical,  obstinately  refused  to  admit  the  evidence  of
its  truth.  So,  in  the  face  of  all  testimony,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  holy  body  was
gone,  and  the  certain  knowledge  that  foe  would  not,  and  friend  could  not,  have  borne
it  away,  they  deceived  themselves,  or  forced  themselves  into  a  disbelief  of  the  Lord's
resurrection.  2.  Their  decision.  "They  pretended  that  what  they  had  feared  had  really
taken  place.  They  made  an  arrangement  with  the  soldiers ;  they  were  to  say  that
while  they  slept  his  disciples  came  by  night  and  stole  him  away.  It  was  a  dangerous
thing  for  the  soldiers;  they  might  be  punished  with  death  for  sleeping  at  their  post,
as  Herod  afterwards  treated  the  keepers  of  the  prison  from  which  St.  Peter  was  released
by  the  angel.  So  the  chief  priests  undertook  to  secure  them;  they  promised  to  per-
suade the  governor  if  he  should  hear  of  the  matter.  They  meant  probably  to  bribe
him ;  and  so  they  would  set  the  soldiers  free  Irom  anxiety.  It  was  a  wicked  falsehood,
an  awful  sin  ;  for  they  were  fighting  against  God  ;  but  the  only  alternative  was  an  open
acknowledgment  of  the  truth,  and  that  would  have  brought  upon  them  a  tremendous
disgrace.  It  would  have  been  a  confession  of  guilt — a  confession  that  they  had  been
in  the  wrong  throughout,  that  they  had  been  selfish,  hollow,  hypocritical,  and  that  the
Prophet  of  Galilee  whom  they  so  utterly  hated,  whom  they  had  murdered,  was  indeed
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  They  could  not  bring  themselves  to  this.
They  were  the  rulers  of  the  people,  the  chiefs  of  the  hierarchy ;  they  could  not  huuible
themselvea.    They  chose  the  alternative  of  falsehood.    Thus  it  is  that  sin  leads  oa  to


OH.  xxvm.  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.         651

sin.  Cue  sin  forces  »  man  (or  Beems  to  force  him)  to  commit  another ;  each  wilful  sin
strengthens  the  grasp  of  Satan  upon  bis  soul,  and  brings  him  nearer  to  that  awl'uL  stat«
when  repentance  becomes  impossible.  Let  us  beware,  and  take  heed  to  ourselves.  3.
The  conduct  of  the  soldien.  They  did  as  they  were  taught.  Interest  and  fear  com-
bined to  make  them  the  willing  tools  of  the  chief  priests.  The  priests  bribed  them
largely,  and  the  soldiers  were  absolutely  in  their  power.  If  the  priests  accused  them
of  neglect  of  .duty,  tliey  must  liave  been  condemned;  their  only  chance  of  escape
seemed  to  coincide  with  their  interest;  so  they  took  the  money  offered  them,  and
repeated  the  falsehood  which  the  chief  priests  put  into  their  mouths.  4.  I%e  accept-
ance of  the  story.  It  was  commonly  reported  among  the"  Jews.  But  it  is  a  manifest
falsehood;  it  is  encompassed  with  all  manner  of  improbabilities.  The  soldiers,  if  they
had  slept,  could  not  Ijave  knowu  what  liad  happened.  The  disciples,  terror-stricken  as
they  were,  could  not  have  dared  to  attempt  to  break  open  the  tomb.  Thi-y  did  not
wish  to  remove  the  sacred  body ;  it  had  been  laid  in  an  honoured  grave.  Their  only
wish  was  to  render  the  last  offices  of  love  and  reverence.  If  they  had  removed  it,  what
would  have  been  the  value  of  a  dead  body  to  them  ?  Could  a  dead  body  have  kindled
that  zeal,  that  intense  eDthusiasm,  which  urged  them  to  forsake  home  and  all  earthly
comforts  for  the  love  of  Christ?  Would  they  have  embiaced  a  life  of  hardship  and
constant  danger,  with  the  almost  certain  prospect  of  violent  death,  for  the  sake  of
preaching  a  lie  ?  It  is  impossible  that  zealous,  self-denying  men  like  the  apostles,  could
have  been  impostors ;  it  is  impossible  that  men  who  wrote  what  they  wrote — simple,
artless  records,  full  of  indications  of  truthfulness,  full  also  of  little  differences  which
show  that  there  could  have  been  no  concert,  no  collusion ;  or  letters  of  Christian  coun-
sel beautiful  in  their  transparent  simplicity,  full  of  high,  holy,  heavenly  teaching,  such
as  the  world  had  never  heard  before — it  is  simply  inconceivable  that  such  men  should
have  invented  a  lie,  should  have  suffered,  should  have  died,  for  what  they  knew  to  be
false.  But  perhaps  no  one  maintains  this  incredible  hypothesis  now.  Then  could  they
hava  been  deceived  by  others  ?  Who  could  have  deceived  thern  ?  Whose  interest  was
it  ?  Who  could  have  wished  to  deceive  them  ?  Could  they  have  deceived  themselves
as  to  the  Lord's  resurrection?  Did  they  so  treasure  in  their  hearts  their  Master's  pro-
mise ?  Did  they  so  constantly  expect  to  see  liim  again  ?  Did  they  look  for  his  reap-
pearing so  eagerly  that  tljey  imagined  that  they  saw  his  form  and  heard  his  words?
Did  they  in  honest  enthusiasm  unconsciously  create  supposed  appearances  of  the  Lord
out  of  the  lightning's  flash,  or  the  uncertain  moonlight,  or  the  thousand  causes  wliich
have  from  time  to  time  deceived  honest  men  ?  But  the  Scripture  narratives,  artless
and  truthful  as  they  are,  completely  exclude  this  hypothesis.  The  disciples  had
forgotten  the  Lord's  promise,  or  had  wholly  lost  faith  in  it ;  they  regarded  bim  as
dead,  as  lost  to  them.  Two  of  them  had  laid  him  in  the  tomb,  and  had  closed  it  with
a  great  stone.  The  women  were  preparing  to  anoint  the  body.  None  of  them  had
any  expectation  of  seeing  the  Lord  again.  Even  the  empty  tomb,  strange  as  it  may
seem  to  us,  did  not  at  once  suggest  the  Besurrection.  St.  John,  indeed,  believed  when
he  went  into  the  sepulchre;  in  the  sepulchre  itself,  in  the  home  of  death,  he  saw  by
faith  the  victory  over  death.  But  it  seems  doubtful  whether  St.  Peter  even  then
realized  the  truth  of  the  Lord's  resurrection.  And  certainly  the  abs  nee  of  the  body
brought  sorrow,  not  joy,  to  Mary  Magdalene.  She  stood  at  the  sepulchre  weeping,  and
that  because,  as  she  said,  she  knew  not  where  the  body  of  the  Lord  was  laid ;  her  one
wish  was  to  recover  those  loved  remains,  and,  it  seems,  to  remove  them  .to  a  grave
where  they  might  lie  in  peace  (John  xx.  6 — 15).  Thank  God,  the  central  fact  ol
Christianity  rests  on  the  surest  historical  evidence.  The  great  Christian  Church  has
not  risen  out  of  a  dmm,  a  vision.  The  greatest  moral  and  spiritual  revolution  which
the  world  has  ever  seen  was  not  the  work  of  a  few  honest  but  unintelligent  and  easily
misled  enthusiasts.  Nothing  but  the  truth  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  can  account
for  the  immense  and  sudden  change  from  the  deepest  despondency  to  the  most  wonder-
ful ^eal  and  joy  and  courage  and  endurance.  Nothing  but  the  presence  of  the  risen,
living  Lord  can  account  for  that  strong  conviction,  that  dauntless  energy,  that  sus-
tained persevering  labour,  which  overcame  all  the  superstitions  of  heathenism,  all  the
inertness  of  religious  scepticism,  all  the  mighty  power  of  Borne,  and  went  on  conquer-
ing and  to  conquer  till  the  victorious  eagles  bowed  before  the  mightier  cross,  and  kings
and  emperors  bent  the  knee  in  worship  of  the  Crucified.


652        THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxviq.  1— 20.

Lessons.  1.  Guilt  conceals  itself  by  falsehood.  Hate  sin,  love  the  truth.  2.  To
offer  bribes  or  to  leoeive  tliem  is  alike  evil.  Covetousnesg  is  idolatry.  3.  The  fact
vi  the  Lord's  resurrection  is  incontrovertible,  Let  us  cling  to  it  as  the  ground  of  all  our
hupes ;  let  us  seek  to  realize  its  spiritual  power.

Vers.  16 — 20. — K«  great  meeting  in  Oalilee.  I.  Thb  apfeabanok  of  thb  Lobd,
1.  2%e  place.  This  was  the  one  only  meeting  by  appointment.  The  other  appearances
of  the  risen  Saviour  were  sudden  and  unexpected.  Both  St.  Matthew  and 'St.  Mark  tell
us  that  the  Lord,  just  before  his  agony,  had  announced  to  his  apostles  that,  after  he  was
risen  again,  he  would  go  before  them  into  Galilee.  After  the  Resurrection  the  angel
lirst,  and,  then  the  Lord  himself,  had  made  the  same  appointment.  Evidently  it  was
a  meeting  of  espt  cial  impurtanco ;  the  preparation  for  it,  its  striking  qircumstances,
the  fact  that  it  is  the  only  meeting  with  the  apostles  recorded  by  the  first  evangelist,
invest  it  with  peculiar  solemnity.  The  Lord  had  chosen  some  mountain  in  Galilee
as  the  place  of  meeting.  Thither  came  the  eleven  disciples — probably  only  the
eleven.  Some  have  thought  that  this  meeting  is  the  appearance  mentioned  by
St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  6,  whun  more  than  five  hundred  disqiples,  most  of  wliom  were
living  when  St.  Paul  wrote,  saw  the  risen  Saviunr,  But  it  seems  altogether  improbublc
that  the  presence  of  so  great  a  nuujber  should  have  been  left  unnoticed,  th^t  the
evangilist  should  have  mentioned  only  the  eleven  apostles,  when  there  was  an
assembly  of  more  than  five  liundred  gathered  round  the  Lord.  2,  l%e  effect  of  the
Lwd^s first  abearance.  They  woishipped  him.  Before  the  Resurrection  we  read  from
time  to  time  that  others  woishippud  lum ;  we  are  not  told  that  the  apostles  did  so.
Now  they  felt  the  majesty  of  his  Person.  "  When  they  saw  him,  they  worshipped.''
We  know  not  how  he  appeared,  whether  suddenly,  as  at  other  times,  or  standing  afai
uff  on  the  mountain-top,  or  possibly  iu  the  air  above  them.  Certainly  he  ajipeared
in  the  glory  of  his  resurrection-body — the  body  of  his  glory  (Phil.  iii.  21),  the  same,
yet  nut  the  same,  with  that  body  which  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  which  had  hung
upon  the  cross,  which  had  lain  in  the  tomb  of  Joseph ;  the  same,  as  the  risen  bodie.-
:>f  his  laints  will  be  the  same  with  their  present  corruptible  bodies ;  yet  not  the  tame,
as  the  spiritual  body  will  differ  from  the  natural  body.  The  Lord  appeared ;  and  thi
glory  of  his  presence  filled  the  hearts  of  the  apostles  with  unwonted  awe  and  reverence.
They  prostrated  tliemselves  before  him  in  lowliest  adoration,  offering  up  that  worship
which  the  kneeling  Church  offers  to  the  risen  Lord  at  all  times,  especially  on  that  day
which  is  his;  and  with  deepest  thankfulness,  with  most  devoted  love,  with  most
fervent  adoration  on  that  greatest  of  festivals,  when  we  commemorate  the  resurrection
of  Christ  our  Lord  from  the  dead.  But,  the  apostle  tells  us  with  the  characteristic
tj'uthfulncss  and  simjilicity  of  Holy  Scripture,  "some  doubted."  We  are  not  told  what
their  doubts  were.  It  was  not  sinful,  obstinate  doubt ;  for  the  Lord  came  nearer  and
disprlltjd  it;  he  did  not  reprove  them.  It  may  possibly  have  been  doubted  whether
worship  should  be  ofi'eied  to  him;  and,  if  so,  the  Lord's  tirst  words, "  All  power  is  given
unto  me,"  may  be  regarded  a.s  an  answer  to  that  unspoken  doubt.  Mure  probably  it
was  doubt  of  his  identity  when  they  fiist  saw  him.  None  of  the  eleven  could  theu
duubt  the  fact  of  the  Eesurrection.  But  when  tliey  first  saw  the  glorious  form  in  the
distance,  some  of  them  failed  to  recognize  the  Lord  ;  just  as  they  knew  him  not  at
first  ou  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  when  he  came  to  th<m  walking  upon  the  »ater;  as  Mary
Magdalene  "knew  not  tbat  it  was  Jesus,"  when  first  she  saw  the  risen  Lord.  He
came  nearer  in  his  gracious  love,  lie  came  and  spoke  unto  them.  None  could  doubt
longer,  when  they  saw  him  close  at  hand,  when  they  heard  the  well-known  tones
of  that  much-loved  voice.  So  Cbristi.in  men  doubt  sometimes  now  whether  tlie
Lord  has  really  called  them,  whethoi  tliey  have  the  high  privilege  of  his  presence.  Ho
will  not  leave  them  in  doubt  if  tliey  love  iiim  and  keep  hia  word.  He  will  pome
nearer ;  he  will  fulfil  his  blessed  promise,  manifesting  himself  to  them  as  he  doth  not
unto  the  world,

II.  Th£  Lobd'b  wobdb.  1.  Ee  talked  to  them.  The  Greek  word  implies  more  than
a  short,  set  speech.  He  said,  doubtless,  much  more  than  the  evangelist  has  recorded-
We  know  that  the  Lord  did  and  said  many  things  which  are  not  written  iu  this
book ;  but  God  has  provided  lor  the  preservation  of  all  that  is  necessary  for  our  faith
and  for  our  salvation.     "  These  things  are  written,  that  we  laight  believe  that  Jesus  is


o«,  xxviii.  1— 20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.       658

the  Ghriot,  the  Son  of  Cbd ;  and  that  helieving  we  might  have  life  through  his
Name."  2.  Tht  mediatorial  kingdom.  "  All  authority  was  given  to  me,"  said  tlie
risen  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  perfect  God  and  perfect  filau.  It  was  given  long
ago  in  the  eU'rnal  |)iirpose  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  It  had  been  announced  in  prophecy,
more  or  less  clearly,  from  the  time  when  lin  iirst  entered  into  the  world,  when  it  was
foretold  that  the  Seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  Now  it  was
given.  "  To  this  end  Clirist  both  died,  and  rose,  and  revived,  that  he  might  be  the
Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  living."  That  kingdom  was  won  by  his  death,  sealed  and
ratified  by  his  resurrection.  It  was  because  he  took  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant,
and  became  obedient  unto  death,  that  Ood  highly  exalted  him,  and  gave  him  the
Name  which  is  above  every  aame,  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ
is  Lord.  He  is  King  over  the  kingdom  of  heaven  which  he  established.  "He  must
reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet."  His  authority  is  unlimited  ;  he  is
"the  Head  of  all  principality  and  power."  His  authority  extends  over  the  heavenly
host:  "  Anr;els,  authorities,  and  powers  are  made  subject  unto  him"  (1  Pet.  lii.  22).
The  angels  n  ere  bidden  .  to  worship  him  at  his  incarnation  (Heb.  i.  6).  They  are  his
ministers;  his  angels  he  called  them,  even  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  (ch.  xiii.  il).  He
employs  them  for  the  service  of  his  kingdom,  for  the  saving  of  souls.  His  authority
extends  over  all  the  earth.  All  souls  are  his,  bought  with  his  blood  ;  all  are  bound
to  render  to  him  obedience,  honour,  worfliip.  In  his  Name  every  knee  must  bow.  All
hearts  must  be  yielded  up  to  him  in  willing  love  and  reverence,  for  the  cross  has  lifted
him  up  to  the  eyes  of  the  world  as  the  Incarnate  Love,  and  the  Resurrection  proves  that
that  Sacrifice  of  holiest  love  has  been  accepted  by  the  Father.  3.  The  apostolic  com-
miision.  As  the  Lord's  authority  extended  over  all  the  earth,  so  should  the  commission
of  his  apostles.  The  limits  assigned  to  their  first  mission  (ch.  x.  o)  are  now  with-
drawn. Because  all  authority  was  his,  they  were  now  to  go  forth  in  his  Name  and  in
virtue  of  that  worldwide  authority.  They  were  to  "  go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach
the  gospel  to  every  creature;"  they  were  to  "make  disciples  of  all  the  nations."  It
seems  a  strange  injunction  when  we  think  that  it  was  delivered  to  eleven  poor,
humble,  unlearned  Jews;  but  not  strange  when  we  remember  who  gav9  that  solemn
charge — the  Lord  whom  all  the  angels  worship,  "who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever."
His  servants  speak  in  his  Name  hj  his  authority;  the  humbler  they  are,  ihe  more
deeply  they  abase  themselves  and  feel  their  own  weakness  and  sinfulness,  the  more
eHectually  does  his  grace  work  in  them  :  "My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness,"
saith  the  Lord.  And  the  answer  of  his  servants,  in  fwth  and  self-abasement,  is,  "  T
can  do  all  things  through  Church  that  strengtheneth  me."  From  this  time  the  Church
of  Christ  was  to  be  catholic,  universal,  open  to  all  who  would  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  "This  gospel  of  ihe  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness
unto  all  nations."  The  apostles  were  to  begin  the  work  of  gathering  all  nations  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is  the  Church  of  Christ.  Ami  that:  (1)  By  ba])tizing
them.  We  have  here  the  institution  of  the  sacrament  of  baptism.  It  is  the  initiatory
sacrament  of  Christianity.  In  the  ordinary  course  of  things  it  will  precede  Christian
teaching,  though  whenever  it  has  not  been  administered  in  infancy,  candidates  must
be  prepared  by  careful  instruction.  In  virtue  of  our  baptism  we  become  disciples,
scholars  in  the  school  of  Christ.  Our  baptism  binds  us  to  learn  of  him,  to  sit  at  his
feet  and  hear  his  Word,  to  follow  him,  imitating  his  great  example,  walking  in  the
blessed  steps  of  his  most  holy  life.  And  Christian  baptism  is  into  the  Name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  only  in  the  Name  of  Christ
(as  Acts  X.  48),  that  is,  by  his  authority  ;  nor  only  on  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  (as
Acts  ii.  38,  if  «»1  be  the  right  reading  there),  that  is,  on  condition  of  a  confession  of
Christ,  of  faith  in  him ;  but  it  is  also  into  the  one  Name  of  the  blessed  Trinity.  The
children  of  Israel  were  baptized  into  Moses  (1  Cor.  x.  2),  that  is,  into  the  society  of
which  Moses  was  the  head — ^into  his  authority.  We  are  baptized  into  the  Name  of  God,
into  that  Church  which  is  his,  called  by  his  Name ;  into  the  family  of  God  the  Father,
into  the  mystical  body  of  Christ  the  Son,  into  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  Name  is  One,  and  yet  Three.  "The  Lord  our  God  is  one  God."  Yet  in  that  eternal
unity  there  is  a  Trinity  of  Persona.  Into  this  mysterious,  this  awful  Name,  we  are
baptized.  May  he  whose  name  we  bear  keep  ui  steadfast  in  the  true  faith  of  his
holr  ,-wu«al  I     (2)  By  teaching  them.    Bapti-sm  i«  an  i^iitiatory  tiU.    Teiwhing  must


654       THE  GOSPEL  AUCOEDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.    [<"=•  **t"'-  ^—^'^

folliiw.  Christ's  apostles,  Christ's  miaisterB,  must  teach,  not  by  word  only,  but  by
holy  example,  and  that  continually,  perseveriugly.  They  must  teach  all  things
whatsoiver  the  Lord  commanded;  not  merely  this  or  that  favourite  doctrine,  but
tlie  whole  range  of  Scripture  truth.  They  must  keep  nothing  back,  but  "declare  the
whole  counsel  of  God" — the  doctrine  of  the  sovereignty  of  God  and  the  fact  of  human
free-will  and  responsibility ;  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  and  the  necessity
of  good  works ;  a  simple  reliance  on  the  merits  and  death  of  Christ,  and  the  absolute
necessity  of  holiness  of  heart  and  life ;  the  doctrines  of  grace  and  the  doctrine  of  the
sacrameats ;  all  the  truths  of  the  Ghristiaa  religion,  all  the  practical  duties  of  the
Christian  life,  must  have  their  due  place  in  the  teaching  of  the  Church.  4.  The
last  promise.  "  Behold,  I  ara  with  you  always."  It  is  a  repetition  of  the  promise  made
before  his  sufferings :  "  I  will  cume  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,  and  your  joy
no  man  taketh  from  you."  The  Lord  had  come  again.  He  would  never  again  leave
bis  servants;  he  would  be  with  them  always,  all  the  days,  all  the  appointed  days  of
the  world's  history,  to  the  consummation  of  all  things.  Not  one  day  would  he  be
absent  from  them.  Though  after  the  Ascension  they  would  see  him  no  more  with  the
outward  eye,  he  would  be  with  them  by  his  Spirit,  dwelling  in  their  hearts,  present
always,  every  day;  present  in  the  administration  of  the  sacraments  which  he  had
ordained,  giving  by  that  presence  virtue  and  efficacy  to  those  outward  visible  signs
which  without  that  presence  could  convey  no  inward  and  spiritual  grace ;  present  in
their  teaching,  guiding  them  into  all  truth,  filling  them  with  zeal  and  ardent  love
for  souls,  giving  them  the  eloquence  of  deep  conviction,  the  inspired  eloquence  which
comes  from  the  promptings  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  present  always  in  the  daily  life  of
faith  and  obedience  and  self-sacrifice,  and  that  for  ever — unto  the  end,  not  only  in
apostolic  times,  but  present  now;  present  with  us,  if  we  are  faithful;  present  as
surely  and  certainly  as  be  was  with  the  apostles  whom  he  had  chosen;  present  with
those  who  have  succeeded  the  apostles  in  the  ministry ;  present  to  help  them  in  the
administration  of  the  sacraments,  in  their  public  teaching,  in  the  daily  ministrations ;
present  with  all  faithful  Christians,  and  that  all  the  days,  at  all  times,  in  joy  and
health  and  prosperity,  in  sorrow,  in  sickness,  in  bereavements,  in  the  hour  of  death  ;
I'resent  always,  guiding,  teaching,  comforting,  encouraging,  making  all  things  work
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his
purpose.  The  Church  may  well  say  "Amen"  to  that  gracious  promise.  "Amen,  even
so  come,  Lord  Jesus ;  be  with  us  always  according  to  thy  blessed  Word ;  for  without
thee  we  can  do  nothing,  and  in  thy  presence  is  the  fulness  of  joy."

Lessons.  1.  The  soul  that  sees  the  Lord  falls  down  before  him  in  adoring  worship.
Oh,  may  we  see  him  now  by  faith,  that  we  may  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth  1  2.  H
we  come  to  him  in  earnest  supplication,  he  will  draw  near  to  us,  he  will  remove  our
doubts  and  perplexities.  3.  All  power  is  his :  in  earth, — then  let  us  obey  him  and
imitate  him  in  love  and  reverence ;  in  heaven, — then  let  us  trust  in  him  in  the  full
assurance  of  faith.  He  can  prepare  a  place  for  his  chosen  in  the  many  mansions  ol
his  Father's  house.


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  6. — Z%e  vacant  tomb.  Jesus  did  not  only  appear  after  his  death,  as  ghosts  are
said  to  have  appeared,  startling  nervous  people  in  haunted  places.  His  tomb  was  left
vacant.  His  body  had  disappeared.  This  is  an  important  fact  in  regard  to  the
Kesurrection.

I.  There  is  a  negative  as  well  ab  a  fobitive  evidence  ron  the  Resurrection.
The  positive  evidence  is  in  the  appearance  of  Christ  to  his  disciples;  the  negative
evidence  is  in  the  empty  tomb.  If  Jesus  had  not  risen  from  the  dead,  men  could  have
]iointed  to  his  sealed  tomb,  could  even  have  torn  it  open  and  shown  the  corpse
within.  Why  did  none  of  the  enemies  of  Jesus  do  this  r  No  effort  appears  to  have
been  made  to  take  this  simple  means  of  confuting  the  preaching  of  the  apostles.  Yet
it  was  manifestly  in  the  interest  of  the  Sadducean  rulers  cf  the  Jews  to  have  followed
this  course.  But  if  the  body  of  our  Lord  was  not  to  be  fcund,  what  had  become  of  it?
Uis  enemies  could  have  had  no  interest  in  hiding  it — quite  the  contrary.    M.  Renan


CH.  xxvm.  1— 20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.       6:5

has  suggested  that  Mary  Magdalene  carried  the  body  away  and  hid  it.  Even  If  we  can
think  the  dariog  deed  practically  possible,  psychologically  it  is  impossible.  Such  an
ugly  fraud  would  certainly  have  been  found  out ;  for  still  the  body  would  need  to  be
disposed  of.  But  in  their  despair  none  of  the  disciples  were  in  the  mood  to  invent  a
fiction  of  a  resurrection.  Their  sudden  transformation  from  despair  to  joy  and  con-
fidence cannot  be  accounted  for  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  fraud.  The  very  lamenesB  of  this
extraordinary  theory,  considered  as  the  best  that  a  great  imaginative  critic  can  devise,
ii  a  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  event  he  would  fain  fiad  some  means  of  explaining  away.

II.  Chbist  has  biben  in  thb  fulness  or  his  powsb  ahs  Lire  It  may  seem  to  us
of  little  moment  that  he  should  have  brought  his  body  out  of  the  tomb.  If  he  himself
still  lived,  if  his  soul  was  still  alive,  could  we  not  dispense  with  his  body?  Here  we
reason  about  a  region  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge.  We  do  not  know  how  m
disembodied  spirit  can  act;  we  do  not  know  what  necessity  there  may  be  for  some
bodily  instrument  to  enable  it  to  communicate  with  other  beings.  It  ie  enough
to  know  the  fact  that  Christ's  full  resurrection-life  was  corporeal  as  well  as  spirituaL
For  us  the  important  truth  is  that  it  was  and  is  now  a  perfect,  wakeful,  and  energetic
life.  Jesus  is  no  dim  shade  flitting  through  the  aborles  of  the  dead;  he  is  no  sleeping
soul  like  those  of  our  blessed  dead  who,  as  some  think,  sleep  in  him  awaiting  their
resurrection.  He  has  risen  into  his  perfect  life.  He  is  with  us  now,  more  truly  living
than  during  his  earthly  ministry.

ni.  Christ's  besdbbeotion  is  ▲  ttfb  op  thk  CHBiBTiAa*s  bbsubbsociov.  The
physical  circumstances  must  be  different  in  the  case  of  other  people  whose  bodies  have
long  since  mouldered  to  dust,  perished  by  fire,  melted  away  in  the  sea,  or  been  devoured
by  wild  beasts  and  cannibals.  But  the  &ct  of  a  full  and  perfect  life  is  what  is  alone
important.  Jesus,  the  firstfruits  from  the  dead,  is  the  promise  of  this  life  for  his
people.    They  who  sleep  in  him  will  awake  in  his  likeness. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  17. — Douhtt  oi  to  the  Bttwrredion,  If  some  doubted  when  they  saw  Jesus,  it  is
not  surprising  that  some  doubt  now  that  it  is  nearly  nineteen  centuries  since  our  Lord
was  on  earth  among  men  in  visible  form.  Therefore  \\,  is  not  just  or  charitable  to  turn
savagely  against  people  who  are  seriously  perplexed.  The  only  right  and  Christian
course  is  to  try  to  help  them.

L  Thkbk  iicbt  bx  uccb  utstsbt  xs  belioion.  It  reaches  out  beyond  our  every-
day experience,  and  deals  with  things  of  God  and  the  unseen  world,  and  therefore  we
should  be  prepared  to  see  the  clouds  gathering  over  many  of  its  difficult  regions,  li
we  look  for  a  mathematical  demonstration  or  a  scientific  verification  of  the  facts  and
doctrines  of  our  faith,  we  shall  often  be  disappointed.  At  present,  in  this  world  of
partial  lights,  such  things  are  not  always  to  be  had  on  demand.  Religion  belongs  to
the  region  of  practical  life.  If  we  have  enough  evidence  for  a  reasonable  conviction,
this  is  all  that  we  really  need.  Absolute  freedom  from  all  questions  we  cannot  have ;
nor  do  we  need  it ;  we  are  disciplined  by  our  mental  difSculties.

IL  Thebs  abb  diftioolties  which  oub  own  ionobanob  will  account  roB.  Wt
do  not  know  why  "  some  doubted."  Was  our  Lord's  appearance  greatly  altered  ?  We
cannot  for  a  moment  imagine  that  some  one  else  was  personating  the  dead  Christ.
The  very  fact  that  some  who  saw  him  doubted  about  him  shows  ti^t  even  the  more
sceptical  Christians  did  we  the  risen  Christ.  But  how  mysterious  are  these  vague
hints  I  They  just  show  that  we  have  not  yet  full  light.  In  the  twilight  there  are
many  obscurities.

nL  It  is  oub  dtttt  to  bxauinb  thb  kvidenoe  or  thb  Rxsubbxotior.  Too  often
doubt  feeds  on  itsell  Some  people  devour  sceptical  books,  but  they  have  not  patience
to  examine  the  other  side.  They  give  a  large  welcome  to  doubts  of  all  kinds,  thinking
this  conduct  fiiir  and  generous  and  libend-minded;  but  they  are  very  grudging  of
receiving  what  is  urged  in  favour  of  Christian  truth.  Then  there  are  those  who  are  too
careless  to  think  at  all  seriously.  They  catch  the  floating  doubts  and  play  with  them
indolently—no  more.  Others  are  earnest  in  the  pursuit  of  truth.  These  people  would
do  well  to  consider  the  cumulative  evidence  for  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  1.  There  is
the  alternative — What  became  of  his  body  if  he  did  not  rise  ?  2.  How  couU  men  who
had  despaired  suddenly  wake  up  to  a  great  confidence  if  no  resurrection  had  occurred  to
revive  their  £iith  ?    8.  If  one  or  two  hysterical  fanatics  might  have  fancied  they  bad


664         TUJS  CK)8PKL  ACCORDING  TO  BT.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xmn.  1— 2^

■een  a  flitting  ghoit  in  the  twilight,  is  that  a  reason  for  beliering  th»t  a  dozen  men
could  hare  had  a  Bimilar  hatlucination — not  to  mention  th«  fire  hundred  to  whom  St.
Paul  refers — many  of  whom  he  knew  to  be  alive  in  hia  own  day  ?  St.  Paul's  undouMad
Bpuitle  to  tlie  Corinthians  sums  up  the  evidence  with  great  force.

rV.  Faith  ih  thk  Rebubrsotion  ib  laroelt  defendekt  on  ocb  idea  or  Chbibt.
Thii  is  not  merely  a  question  of  an  historical  fact.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  is  not^to
be  compared  with  the  fabled  resurrection  of  Nero.  We  have  first  to  learn  who  Christ
wM.  The  unique  nature  of  Christ,  seen  in  his  earthly  life,  prepares  us  to  believe  in  his
resurrection.  It  is  not  merely  a  resurrection  ;  it  is  the  resurrection  of  Christ  that  we
are  to  Me,  as  the  crowning  of  his  wonderful  life  on  earth. — W.  F,  A.

Von.  18 — 20. — I%e  grtat  eommisiioft.  This  is  the  grand  missionary  charter.  Here
is  more  than  our  justification  for  urging  on  missionary  work,  more  than  our  encourage-
ment for  maintaining  it ;  here  is  our  positive  duty  to  evangelize  the  world.  Let  ue
look  at  the  source,  the  object,  and  the  encouragement  of  this  great  commission.

L  In  fwuRos.  The  authority  and  commandment  of  Christ.  1.  T^e  authority  o/
Chritt.  Jesus  speakf  these  words  after  hia  resurrection.  He  is  now  to  be  exalted  to
the  right  hand  of  GK>d.  But  his  exaltation  is  not  to  a  place  of  idle  honours.  It  ii  to  a
throne  of  power.  The  authority  which  he  has  won  by  his  triumph  over  tin  and  death
he  will  now  use  in  conquering  the  world.  (1)  This  is  authority  in  heaven ;  therefore
it  will  involve  hearenly  blessings — ^pardon,  regeneration,  eternal  life.  (2)  It  is  also  on
earth ;  therefore  it  will  bring  numberless  blessings,  and  will  help  men  here  and  now.
2.  Th»  eommand  cf  Ohriit.  He  uses  his  authority  by  commissioning  his  disciples  to
preaeh  his  gospeL  The  first  claim  of  missionary  work  does  not  come  from  the  misery
and  need  of  the  heathen ;  it  does  not  come  from  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  which  it
would  be  so  well  for  all  to  share  in ;  though  here  are  two  powerful  motives.  It  springs
from  the  direct  command  of  Christ.  The  Church  that  neglects  missions  is  disregarding
the  express  orders  of  her  Lord.

II.  Its  object.  1.  Te  g».  The  disciples  are  to  become  apostles ;  Christians  are  to
be  missionaries.  When  it  is  possible,  the  Church  is  to  spread  abroad.  We  are  not  to
wait  for  the  world  to  come  to  Christ ;  we  are  to  go  out  into  the  world  to  preach  Christ
Christianity  must  t>e  aggressive,  and  Christians  must  be  active  in  carrying  the  gospel
to  all  who  have  not  yet  received  it.  2.  To  make  disciple$.  It  ia  not  enough  to  live
among  the  heatheiu  Many  do  this  for  ptu-ely  selfish  reasons.  The  gospel  is  spread  by
teaching.  There  is  a  teaching  of  great  power  in  the  true  living  of  a  Chiistiaa  life.
But  we  must  add  definite  instruction  in  the  truths  of  our  faith.  The  kingdom  of
heaven  rests  on  truth,  it  finds  its  way  best  through  the  making  known  of  its  facts  and
principles.  It  does  not  dread  the  light ;  it  welcomes  it  and  spreads  it.  Evangelistic
appeals  in  which  there  is  no  teaching,  unless  they  follow  on  good  sober  instruction,
must  vanish  in  the  smoke  of  shapeless  emotions.  3.  To  haptite.  Not  merely  is  the
truth  to  be  preached;  Christ  requires  a  confession  of  discipleship.  He  expects  his
people  to  \>e  bound  together  in  Church-fellowship.  The  great  central  revelation  about
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  to  be  the  foundation  of  our  teaching  and
the  bond  of  our  union.  This  does  not  mean  that  we  must  comprehend  the  Trinity ;  it
means  that  we  must  know  the  Fatherhood  of  G«d,  the  Divinity  and  saving  power  of
Christ,  and  the  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  To  discipline.  "  Teaching
them  to  observe,  eto.  Mission  converts  must  be  taught  the  will  and  commandments
of  Christ — trained  in  Christian  ethics.

III.  Thb  encousaoeuint.  1.  TTui  living  pretence  of  Christ.  We  do  not  preach  a
dead  or  an  absent  Christ.  We  have  not  only  to  do  with  the  Jesus  of  ancient  history.
The  living  Christ  is  with  us.  But  that  is  not  alL  It  is  a  mistake  to  detach  this  verse
from  the  preceding  verse,  as  is  often  the  case  in  popular  discourse.  Christ  is  with  us
in  our  missionary  work.  We  have  no  right  to  expect  the  encouragement  of  his
presence  if  we  do  not  fulfil  the  condition  he  lays  down.  The  missionary  Church  is  the
Church  that  has  most  of  Christ.  The  power  and  inspiration  of  missionary  work  is  his
presence  in  our  midst.  2.  The  abiding  presence  qf  Chritt.  He  is  with  his  people  in
their  missionary  work  to  the  end  of  the  world.  ^1)  Then  missionary  work  is  to,  be
continuous.  (2)  Then  Christ  is  with  us  now  in  this  work  as  truly  as  he  was  with  'the
apostle*.    Wf  cannot  fail  with  such  a  presence.    We  are  to  preach  to  tdl  nations,  and


OH.  xxTin.  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACX30RDINQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.        661

in  tbe  end  kll  wttioni  will  be  won,  and  "the  earth  ihall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the
Lord  M  the  waters  oorer  the  lea." — ^W.  F.  A.

Yen.  1 — 10. — Lesson$  of  the  Be$wreei(on.  The  fonr  ertngeliita  eononr  In  letting
forth  the  three  Bucceuire  steps  in  the  evidence  by  which  our  Lord's  incredulous
followers  were  at  length  persuaded  of  the  reality  of  his  resurrection.  These  are :  1.
The  foot  of  the  sepulchre  being  found  empty,  2.  The  testimony  of  the  angels  who
were  seen  in  it.  3.  The  appearances  of  our  Lord  himself.  On  these  points  we  shall
not  now  particularly  dwell,  but  direct  attention  to  certain  side-lights  which  the  oarra-
tive  affords.    Thus  it  teaches  us—

I.  That  thxbs  abi  enBrrnAL  birimd  thb  hicxahioal  AaaxoiBs  »  matuxb.  1.
Thi$  M  evident  in  tht  angePs  work,  (1)  The  earthquake  is  attributed  to  him.
"  Behold,  there  was  an  earthquake; /or  an  angel  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  The  rolling  away  of
the  stone,  in  like  manner,  is  ascribed  to  him.  Whaterer  mechanical  agencies  were  in
commission  here,  angelical  energy  was  behind  them.  (2)  This  is  not  the  sole  example
of  the  exertion  of  such  energy  in  the  production  of  physical  effects.  Angels  smote  the
Sodomites  with  blindness,  and  brought  down  a  torrent  of  Sre  and  brimstone  upon  the
cities  of  the  plain  (see  Qen.  xix.  11,  IS).  They  brought  the  pestilence  upon  Israel  in
the  days  of  David,  by  which  seventy  thousand  were  destroyed,  and  in  the  days  of
Hezekiab  they  smote  a  hundred  and  eighty-flve  thonsand  Assyrians  (see  2  Sam.
xxir.  16;  2  Kings  xix.  36).  An  angel  dissolved  the  chain  that  bound  Peter  in
Heroid's  prison,  and  made  the  doors  fly  open  before  him  (see  Acts  xii.  6 — 11).  (3)
Within  narrower  limits  human  spirits  exert  energy  in  the  material  world.  The  micro-
cosm, the  body,  responds  to  the  will.  Through  the  medium  of  the  body  we  act  upon
the  macrocosm  around.  We  change  the  course  of  rivers,  tunnel  mountains,  cut  water-
ways through  continents,  modify  climates,  alter  the  flora  and  fauna  of  a  country,  give
direction  and  development  to  instincts  in  animals.  (4)  The  universe  is  dual,  vie
spiritual  and  material.  These  complements  mutually  act  and  react.  The  spiritual
cannot  be  divorced  from  the  physical.  Any  system  of  natural  philosophy  that  fiuls  to
recognize  this  is  essentially  deficient.  (5)  One  grand  use  of  miracles  is  to  force  this
truth  upon  our  consideration.  A  miracle  is  not  necessarily  an  inversion  of  the  laws  of
nature,  though  to  a  limited  knowledge  such  may  appear  to  be  the  case.  It  ia  rather
the  evidence  of  the  presence  behind  materialism  of  a  superior  spiritual  agency.  "  The
works  which  none  other  did"  (see  John  xv.  24).  2.  In  the  manner  in  iohiA  he
impmsed  the  tente».  (1)  He  rendered  himself  visible.  The  watch  saw  him,  and  were
in  consequence  stricken  with  terror.  This  terror  was  deepened  by  their  having  felt
the  earthquake  and  seen  the  rolling  away  of  the  stone.  He  sat  upon  the  atone  in
tranquil  triumph  in  their  presence,  as  if  defying  the  armies  of  earth  and  heU  to  replace
it  or  to  hinder  the  resurrection  of  the  Redeemer.  The  women  also  saw  him.  His
appearance  generally  was  that  of  a  j/oung  man  (see  Mark  xvi.  16X  But  his  counte-
nance, or  rather  his  whole  form,  was  bright,  "  like  lightning."  His  raiment  was  white
as  snow — whitened  by  the  lightning-brightness  transmitted  from  his  Person.  This
white  radiance  was  the  emblem  at  once  of  purity,  Joy,  and  triumph,  and  eminently
B\utable  to  the  tidings  he  bore  (c£  Acts  L  10;  x.  80).  (2)  He  rendered  hlmseU
audible.  He  used  the  voice  and  language  of  humanity  to  ^ve  to  the  women  oomfort,
instruction,  and  direction.  (3)  Whether,  however,  these  visual  and  audible  impres-
sions were  made  upon  the  physical  organs  of  the  witnesses  or  upon  the  spiritual  senses
in  them  corresponding,  is  not  certain,  though  the  presumption  is  that  the  physical
senses  were  addressed,  since  mechanical  force  was  undoubtedly  exerted  in  produdng  the
earthquake  and  in  the  removal  of  the  stone.  We  should  ever  recognise  God  in  nature.
XL  That  thi  besdbbeotion-bodt  is  rhdowbd  with  rrniBiAi.  noriBTixs.  L
Such  uxu  the  COM  with  the  body  of  JetM.  (1)  His  resurrection  was  not  witnessed
by  the  watch.  They  felt  the  earthquake ;  they  saw  the  angel ;  they  witnessed  the
tolling  away  of  the  stone;  but  Jesus  they  saw  not.  Note  :  He  does  not  reveal  himself
to  the  increduloua  and  disobedient.  He  did  not  appear  even  to  the  women  until  he
had  first  tried  their  faith  and  obedience  by  his  ministering  angeL  (2)  The  reaurreotion
of  Jesus  appeara  (o  have  taken  plac*  before  tk*  stone  waa  rolled  away.  Taking  the
narrative  as  it  lies  before  as  in  Matthew,  the  women  appear  to  have  seen  the  angel  roll
•way  (be  atona  and  M«t  himself  uprai  it,  and  witnessed  also  the  eifeot  of  thi  vision

MATTUW— D.  S  V


m      «H^  dOSPEL  ACCOtlblifa  fO  St.  MAttMEW.   tot  iiviit  1-%

upon  the  watch.  The  account!  in  Mark  and  Luke  may  be  harmonized  to  this  view.
Then,  descending  from  the  stone,  he  conducted  them  into  the  t<)mb,  where  they  saw  a
second  angel,  but  otherwise  a  vacant  sepulchre.  "  He  is  not  here :  for  he  is  risen,  bn
he  said.  Come,  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay."  The  stone  was  not  removed  to  let
the  Saviour  out,  but  to  let  the  witnesses  in  to  see  that  he  was  already  gone.  (3)  The
presumption,  then,  is  that  the  body  of  Jesus  had  undergone  such  a  change  that  it
passed  out  of  the  sepulchre  through  the  pores  of  the  stone,  as  the  electric  matter  freely
passes  through  concrete  substances.  The  following  remarkable  words  are  ascribed  to
the  Babbi  Judah  Hakkodesh :  "After  three  days  the  soul  of  Messiah  shall  return  to  its
body,  and  shall  go  out  of  that  stone  in  which  he  shall  be  buried."  (4)  This  same
etberial  property  was  afterwards  exhibited  whenever  Jesus  vanished  from  the  sight  of
those  to  whom  he  had  appeared.  It  was  likewise  remarkably  exhibited  on  those
occaEions  in  which  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  his  disciples  when  they  were  assembled
with  closed  doors  (see  John  xx.  19 — 29).  2.  £ut  the  body  of  Jesus  is  the  pattern
reswrrection-body.  (1)  "  As  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthy,  we  shall  also  bear
the  image  of  the  heavenly  "  (ct  Rom.  viii.  29 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  20, 44,  48,  49  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;
iv.  11 ;  Phil.  iii.  20,  21).  (2)  The  bodies  of  the  saints  that  arose  after  his  resurrection
exhibited  the  same  etherial  qualities  (see  eh.  xxvii.  63).  (3)  This  will  let  in  light
upon  the  subject  of  the  mingling  of  the  saints  of  the  first  resurrection  with  living  men
during  that  great  period  of  the  reign  of  Christ,  which  is  the  burden  of  prophetic  hope
(cf.  Eom.  viii.  17 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  8 — 12 ;  Bev.  v.  10;  xx.  6).  (4)  Jesus  rose  the  third  day,
not  only  to  answer  the  type  of  the  Prophet  Jonah,  and  to  verify  his  own  words  (see
ch.  xii.  40),  but  to  indicate  the  time  of  the  first  resurrection  of  his  saints  (cf.  Hos.
vi.  2).    "  A  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years."

IIL  That  thk  besubbsotion  of  Chbist  brings  HBi.yxi7  nkabeb  to  believxbs.
1.  /(  hrmgs  them  into  ecmtrnttnton  with  angels.    (1)  The  appearance  of  the  angels  to
the  women  evinced  that  through  the  risen  Saviour  we  come  to  a  heavenly  communion
(see  Heb.  xii.  22).    Angels  own  Jesus  as  their  Lord  as  well  as  we.    Their  communica'
tion  is  concerning  him.     (2)  The  women  had  comfortable  assurance  in  their  action.
It  annovmced  to  them  that  the  Lord  who  had  been  delivered  for  our  offences  had
rendered  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice,  and  therefore  received  his  legal  discharge  firom
the  prison.    (3)  They  had  this  also  in  their  words,     (a)  "  Fear  not  ye."    The  watch
were  left  to  their  fears.    Not  so  the  women,    l^e  daughters  of  Sarah  (see  1  Pet.  iii.  6).
(&)  "  For  I  know  that  ye  seek  Jesus,  which  hath  been  crucified."    Love  seeks  Jesus
because  he  hath  been  crucified.     Those  who  seek  the  Crucified  One  need  never  fear,
(c)  "  He  is  not  here :  for  he  is  risen,  even  as  he  said."    Those  who  seek  Jesus  crucified
will  find  him  risen.     "  He  is  risen  1 "    This  is  joyful  news,  not  only  to  the  women,  but  tc
all  disciples  of  Christ  in  every  age.     The  risen  Christ  is  our  consolation.    If  we  find
him  not  immediately  in  sensible  comfort,  the  assurance  that  he  is  risen  will  be  followed
by  that  comfort  in  good  time.     Henceforth  let  us  seek  Jesus  as  One  that  is  risen,  viz.
not  with  carnal  thoughts  of  him  (see  2  Cor,  v.  16),  but  with  heavenly  mind  and
spiritual  communications  (cf.  Bom.  x.  6 — 8;  Phil.  iii.  20;  Col.  iii.  1 — 3).    (d)  "Qo
quickly."     Those  sent  on  God's  errands  must  not  loiter.     («)  "Tell  his  disciples."
The  disciples  of  Jesus  are  more  honoured  than  kings.     The  apostles  should  believe
without  seeing.    The  women  are  sent  to  testify  to  them,  and  thus  to  test  their  faith.
We  must  not  monopolize  our  comforts  (see  2  Kings  vii.  9).     "  It  is  more  blessed  to
give  than  to  receive."     (/)  "  Behold,  he  goeth  before  you  into  Galilee."    Angels  are
in  the  secret  of  the  Lord.     2.  It  brings  them  into  new  relations  with  their  Lord,    (1)
He  spiritually  manifests  himself  to  them.     The  women  were  highly  honoured  to  be
the  first  to  whom  tiie  risen  Lord  appeared.    That  favour  expressed  the  removal  from
the  sex  of  its  ancient  reproach  (cf.  1  1'im.  ii.  14).    (2)  He  speaks  comfortable  words
to  them,     "  All  hail ! "  equivalent  to  "  Rejoice  ye  I  "    Let  joy  triumph  over  fear.    The
risen  Christ  is  his  people's  Joy.    "  All  hail  I "  equivalent  to  "  All  health  I " — spiritual  and
saving  health  to  you  I    (3)  He  affords  sensible  proofs  of  his  love.    "  And  they  came  and
took  hold  of  his  feet,  and  worshipped  him."    They  were  now  sure  it  was  no  phantasm,
but  the  very  body  of  the  real  Jesus.    (4)  He  gives  them  his  gracious  commission :  "  Fear
not;  go  t«ll  my  brethren  that  they  depart  into  Galilee,  and  there  shall  they  see  me."
He  went  to  Galilee  to  multiply  his  witnesses.    The  greater  part  of  his  disciples  were
Galilseaus,  There  it  was  prol»bly  that "  h»  Was  seen  of  morethan  five  hundi«d  br«threa  "


ca.  ttvnt  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCOllDlNa  f 0  ST.  MATTHEW.        659

(cf.  Acts  1.  15 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  6).  (5)  He  calls  liig  disciples  his  "  brethren."  Here  for  the
tirst  time  we  find  him  using  this  condescending  and  endearing  appellation.  The
Eesurrectiou,  which  declared  him  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  declared  also  all  the  sons
of  God  to  be  his  brethren.  The  spirit  of  the  servant  now  gives  place  to  that  of  the
son.  First  we  are  "  servants,"  then  "  friends  "  (see  John  xv.  15),  finally  "  brethren  "
(see  ch,  XXV.  40 ;  John  xx.  17).  (6)  The  Christian  disclpleship  is  now  constituted
into  a  sacred  brotherhood. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  11 — 17. — The  commotion.  The  earthquake  which  accompanied  the  resurrec-
tion of  Christ  had  its  counterpart  in  the  moral  commotion  which  this  event  occasioned.
Thus—

I.  The  watch  webb  moved.  1.  Thty  were  alarmed  /or  their  lives.  (1)  By  "  the
things  that  were  come  to  pass."  They  had  felt  the  shock  of  a  "  great  earthquake."
The  stoutest  heart  will  shake  in  tiie  presence  uf  a  force  that  iuovrs  the  foundations  of
the  earth.  To  this  terror  was  added  the  appearance  of  the  angel  whose  form  shone
like  lightning,  while  his  raiment  glittered  as  the  snow.  The  effect  was  paralyzing.
"  For  fear  of  him  the  watchers  did  quake,  and  became  as  dead  men."  Who  can  abide
amidst  the  wonderful  visions  and  tremendous  elemental  uproar  of  that  great  day  of  the
Lord,  when  in  the  glory  of  his  majesty  he  shall  arise  to  shake  terribly  the  earth?  (2)
By  the  fear  of  military  discipline.  They  were  responsible  with  their  lives  for  the  safe
custody  of  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  the  security  of  the  sealed  stone.  But  the  stone  has
been  rolled  away  and  the  sepulchre  is  vacant.  What  are  they  to  do  ?  The  ways  of  God
are  perplexing  to  the  sinner.'  (3)  The  soldiers  tremble  for  their  lives  when  they
should  have  trembled  for  their  sins.  The  death  of  the  sinful  is  of  all  deaths  the  most
terrible.  Unhappily,  this  is  too  seldom  and  too  partially  seen.  2.  l%ey  acted  with  the
wisdom  of  the  world.  (1)  We  have  no  proof  that  they  deserted  their  post.  Some  of
them  went  into  the  city  to  report  to  the  elders  the  things  that  had  come  to  pass.
This  probably  they  did  by  order  of  their  captain,  whUe  the  rest  waited  to  receive  their
officii^  discharge.  The  steady  discipline  of  the  Roman  soldier  has  its  lessons  for  the
Christian  soldier.  (2)  They  entered  into  the  wicked  plot  of  the  elders.  Covetousness
conquered  the  Roman  soldier.  What  a  mass  of  evidence  did  he  consent  to  set  aside
for  a  bribe  1  The  mercenary  tongue  will  sell  the  truth  for  money.  Fear  may  have
wrought  with  their  covetousness.  They  might  doubt  whether  the  governor  would
believe  the  truth,  or  whether  the  rulers  might  not  sot  up  another  plot  against  theit
fidelity.  They  elected  to  take  the  money  and  trust  to  the  piomise  of  the  rulers  to
secure  them  against  the  terror  of  the  military  discipline.^  (3)  What  a  glorious
opportunity  did  the  soldiers  miss  of  becoming  honourable  witnesses  for  Christ !  But
God  made  them  his  witnesses  in  spite  of  their  imworthiness.  He  can  make  men
efficient  preachers  of  his  gospel  without  giving  to  them  a  particle  of  the  preacher's
honour  or  reward.

IL  The  elders  webe  uoted.  1.  2%«  hypocrite  is  alarmed  for  his  credit.  (1)
The  murderer  would  appear  a  saint.  To  free  themselves  of  the  guilt  of  the  murder  of
Christ,  the  rulers  had  accused  him  of  being  a  "deceiver"  (see  ch.  xxviL  63).  But  his
resurrection  from  the  dead  is  a  triumphant  refutation  of  that  wicked  defence.  (2)
What  will  the  elders  do  now  that  blood-guiltiness  is  brought  home  to  them  ?  Will
they,  even  at  the  eleventh  hour,  confess  their  hypcrisy  and  sue  for  mercy  for  their
aggravated  sin  ?  Or  will  they  at  the  peril  of  their  damnation  defend  theu:  credit  and
jwrsist  in  their  hypocrisy  ?  How  solemn  are  the  resolutions  of  the  will  I  (3)  They
elect  to  persist  in  their  impenitence.  What  a  melancholy  example  of  the  power  of
unbelief  I  It  often  pleads  w»nt  of  evidence.  Here  ii  an  instance  of  determined
unbelief  against  admitted  evidence.  An  evil,  churlish  heart  will  repel  the  clearest
evidence.  Note :  The  waywardness  of  unbelief  prevents  the  Saviour  from  rising  in
our  hearts.  2.  But  he  vainly  seeks  to  preserve  it.  (1)  His  efforts  may  be  desperately
impudent.  The  elders  deliberately  resolved  to  oppose  a  lie  to  the  living  Truth.  They
give  "  large  money  "  to  the  soldiers  to  encourage  them  t«  publish  the  lie.  How  deeply
did  they  sin  in  thus  casting  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  the  soldiers  1  They
teach  them  to  lie  speciously.  "By  night,"  etc.  But  the  war  is  toilsome  which  false-
hood has  to  wage  with  truth.  "  If,"  etc  (ver.  14).  Note :  The  "  large  money  »  is  the
sequel  of  the  small  money  p«d  to  Isoanw.    Iniquity  begets  iniqmty,  and  the  deacenU


660  THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [oh.  xxTm.  1—20

are  with  an  tkggTkTating  speed  (see  Pi.  Ixix.  27).  If  the  wicked  give  "large  money"
to  promote  a  lie,  the  good  should  not  give  small  money  grudginzly  to  propagate  the
saving  truth.  (2)  His  confusion  will  be  all  the  more  signal,  (a)  The  disciple*  were
not  likely  to  attempt  the  stealing  of  the  body.  For  had  they  thought  Christ  a  doceiver,
they  would  not  have  run  any  risk  for  him.  Had  they  believed  him  the  Messiah,  they
could  have  had  no  occasion  or  inducement.  The  pilgrimage  of  the  women  was  one  of
devotion,  to  weep  over  the  dead,  and  pour  some  fresh  ointment  orer  One  whom  they
desired  to  preserve,  but  dreamt  not  of  being  able  to  restore.  They  were  perplexed  as
to  who  should  roU  away  the  stone,  being  ignorant  both  of  its  being  sealed  and  of  the
watoh  baiug  set  over  it.  They  were  not  likely  to  be  in  any  plot  for  the  stealing  of  his
body  to  iramp  up  a  story  of  his  resurrection.  (6)  The  soldiers  were  not  likely  to  have
allowed  the  removal  of  the  body.  A  watch  of  sixty  armed  men  could  not  have  been
overpowered  by  a  few  terrified  disciples.  The  whole  watch  could  not  have  been
asleep,  and  asleep  so  soundly  as  not  to  be  awakened  by  the  rolling  away  of  a  stone  so
large  that  a  company  of  women  despaired  of  moving  it,  and  by  the  entrance  into  the
sepnlchre  of  a  number  of  men,  and  their  subsequent  exit  from  it  bearing  the  body.
This  is  all  the  less  likely  to  have  occurred  when  It  is  remembered  that,  according  to
Roman  military  law,  it  was  instant  death  that  a  guard  should  be  found  off  their  watch.
And  if  they  were  asleep,  how  did  they  know  what  happened?  (e)  The  elders  pain-
fully felt  the  clumsiness  of  their  story,  else  why  did  they  not  search  the  lodgings  of
the  disciples  for  the  body  said  to  have  been  stolen  by  them  ?  Were  they  Ukely  to
have  been  careful  for  the  safety  of  the  Roman  soldiers  jinless  they  had  some  reason  for
it  ?  Do  not  the  words  of  Qamaliel  (see  Acts  v.  38,  39)  assume  that  the  resurrection
might  be  true  ?  Could  this  argument  have  been  pleaded  in  the  council  had  the  senators
continued  to  maintain  their  story  ?

III.  Thi  DI80IPLIB  wiBB  MOVED.  1,  What  U  BOTTotB  to  ih«  toicktd  it  often  joy  to
tht  good.  (1)  While  the  soldiers  went  to  the  elders  with  the  news  of  the  Resurrection,
to  fill  their  faces  with  shame,  the  women  went  to  the  disciples  with  the  ttame  news,  to
fill  their  hearts  with  gladness.  They  were  commissioned  to  gather  the  disciples  to  a
particular  mountain  in  Galilee,  there  to  meet  their  risen  Lord.  The  "names"  in  Jeru-
salem were  "  a  hundred  and  twenty ; "  in  Galilee  tlie  number  was  greater.  This  was
probably  the  occasion  upon  which  the  Lord  appeared  to  "  above  five  hundred  brethren  '
(see  1  Cor.  xv.  6).  Matthew  passes  by  at  least  five  different  appearances  of  our  Lord,-
and  proceeds  to  speak  of  one  which  seems,  from  its  previous  appointment,  to  have  been
an  occasion  of  peculiar  solemnity  and  importance.  His  object  evidently  was  to  refute
the  tale  respecting  the  stealing  of  the  body.  (2)  The  fact  of  the  Resurrection  is
eminently  joyful,  as  it  settles  for  ever  the  Messiahshlp  of  Jesus,  and  with  it  the  absolute
truth  of  his  teaching  and  the  trustworthiness  of  his  glorious  promises.  2.  Holy  joy  i$
deepened  with  the  assurance  <^  faith.  (1)  When  the  disciples  saw  Jesus  they  wor-
shipped him.  Here  was  a  recognition  of  his  Divinity  (cf.  ch.  iviii.  26 ;  Acts  x.  28 ;
Rev.  V. ;  vi. ;  xii.  10).  By  accepting  their  worship  Jesus  acknowledged  himself  to  be
Ood.  Christian  worship  is  the  adoration  of  Christ  as  "  the  true  God  and  Eternal  Life  "
(see  1  John  v.  20, 21).  To  worship  in  truth  is  to  serve  in  love.  (2)  "Some  doubted."
They  doubted  that  we  may  believe.  For  the  disciples  were  the  reverse  of  credulous
Ditn.  They  doubted  transiently,  viz.  while  Jesus  was  yet  at  a  distance ;  but  when  he
"  came  to  them,  and  spake  nnto  them,'.'  they  doubted  no  more  (fit  ver.  18 ;  Luke  xxiv.
87 ;  John  zx.  24):  Doubts  may  transiently  trouble  the  sincere  worshipper,  but  in  due
time  Jesus  will  come  nearer  and  blessedly  manifest  himself  (see  John  xvi  21).  The
wickedly  obstinate  will  not  believe,  though  they  see  (see  John  ix.  41). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  18 — 20. — Tht  commitsion.  The  angel  at  the  sepulchre  directed  the  women  to
announce  the  resurrection  of  Christ  to  his  disciples  and  summon  them  to  meet  him  in
Galilee.  Jesus  himself  afterwards  appeared  to  them  and  repeated  this  instruction.
The  eleven  accordingly  repaired  to  the  appointed  place,  and  with  them  probably  the
five  hundred  brethren  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  6).  "  Some  "  of  this  number — some  of  those  who
had  not  seen  him,  like  Thomas — "  doubted  "  of  the  reality  of  the  Besurreotion,  until
they  were  convinced  by  the  evidence  of  sense.  la  the  words  he  addressed  to  them  we
nave:  1.  The  commission  he  received  from  God.  2.  The  commission  he  gave  to  his
disciples.    8.  The  promise  of  his  pr««eno«  with  them.    The  oommisaion  to  the  disciples


OH.  xXTm.  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.       661


inoludM  three  particulars:  (1)  The  uniTerial  publication  of  the  gospeL  (2)  The
baptizing  of  such  aa  should  embrace  it.  (3)  Th.eir  instruction  in  its  doctrinea  and
precepts.    We  shall  now  direct  particular  attention  to  two  points,  vie. —

L  COSSIDBB  BAPTISM  AB  A  BION  OF    ChBIBTIAM    DI8CIPLE8HIP.        1.    Thii  U  evinced

in  iti  history.  (1)  The  Israelites  were  recognized  as  disciples  of  Moses  when  they
were  baptized  "  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea "  (see  1  Cor.  i.  2).  From  that  period,
amidst  all  their  rebellions,  they  never  called  in  question  the  Divinity  of  his  mission.
In  this  baptism  also  they  were  separated  from  the  abominations  of  the  Egyptians,  and
initiated  into  the  pure  precepts  and  blessed  promises  delivered  to  them  by  the  hand  of
Moses.  (2)  Those  baptized  by  John  are  called  his  disciples.  So  far  convertible  are
the  terms  "  baptism  "  and  "  disciple  "  that  John's  doctrint  is  called  his  "  baptism  "  (cf.
ch.  iiL  1,  2 ;  Luka  iiL  3 ;  Acts  xix.  4).  (3)  Jesus  made  disciples  by  baptism  after
John  was  cast  into  prison  (see  John  iv.  l).  (4)  Baptism  is  clearly  made  a  sign  of
Christian  discipleship  in  the  terms  of  the  commission.  The  Greek  term  here  translated
"  teach "  differs  from  that  afterwards  rendered  "  teaching,"  and  literally  signifies  "  to
disciple,"  and  is  accordingly  in  the  margin  construed  "  make  disciples  "  or  "  Christians  "
of  all  nations  (oi.  Acts  xi.  26).  "  Make  disciples"  is  the  reading  of  our  New  Version
\n  the  text.  (6)  This  is  recognized  in  the  practice  of  the  apostles  (see  Acts  iL  37,  41 ;
X.  48 ;  xix.  1 — 7).  2.  Ferton»  are  haptized  in  order  to  being  taught.  (1)  This  follows
from  what  has  been  advanced.  A  disciple  is  simply  a  learner.  Men  are  not  baptized
because  they  are  instructed,  though  a  preliminary  instruction  may  be  necessary.  The
Church,  to  which  baptism  introduces  us,  is  a  school  in  which  the  sons  of  God  are
educated  for  heaven.    This  discipleship  continues  to  the  end  of  life.    (2)  The  com-


mission sets  forth  the  subjects  of  our  learning,  "  Teaching  them,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  The
teaching  Is  doctrinal  and  practical  also.  Life-lessons  in  all  good  senses.  (3)  Since
Christian  teaching  is  to  follow  baptism  rather  than  to  precede  it,  and  since  holy  teach-


ing cannot  be  begun  too  early,  there  is  great  propriety  in  the  baptism  of  infants.
Preliminary  confession  of  faith  is  necessary  for  adults  who  have  errors  to  renounce,
but  infants  are  happily  not  in  this  evil  case.  (4)  Hence  because  baptism  replaces  cir-
cnmcision  as  the  sign  of  God's  covenant,  baptism  is  called  "  the  circumcision  of  Christ,"
{.e.  of  Christianity  (see  CoL  iL  11, 12).  If  baptism  be  not  regarded  as  taking  the  place
of  circumcision,  then  the  covenant  has  now  no  initiatory  rite.  The  Lord's  Supper  ii
not  initiatory,  but  of  regular  habitual  observance,  as  the  Passover  formerly  was.

U.   CONBIDEB  THB   ITATnal   OF   THB    ChUBOH    OF    THE   BAPTIZED.      1.   It   i»   O  tmitv.

(1)  Disciples  are  all  baptized  into  one  faith :  "  Into  the  Name,"  etc.  The  discipleship
of  the  faith.  Whatever  diversity  there  may  be  in  non-essentials,  there  must  be  unity
in  cardbtals  (see  Eph.  iv.  6).  (2)  The  baptized  constitute  one  mystical  body  (see  1  Cor.
lii,  12, 13 ;  Gal.  iii.  27,  28 ;  Eph.  iv.  6,  6).  Hence  schism  is  represented  as  a  setting
up  of  human  names  in  competition  with  the  one  great  Name  (see  1  Cor.  i.  12 — 15).
f 3)  Love  is  the  badge  of  Christian  discipleship  (see  John  xiii.  34, 35).  2.  It  is  catholic.
(1)  The  commission  to  baptize  overarches  ethnic  distinctions.  "  All  nations."  '1  his
may  have  been  at  first  understood  to  refer  to  the  Jews,  wherever  dispersed  among  the
nations ;  but  it  was  soon  taken  in  the  wider  meaning  (see  Gal.  iii  27,  28).  We  are
Christians  first,  then  Britons,  or  Franks,  or  Germans.  (2)  It  connects  heaven  and
•arth,    "All  power,"  etc. ;  "  therefore,"  etc.  (see  Eph.  iiL  14, 16>

"One  family  we  dwell  in  him,

One  Ohnich  above,  beneaui.
Though  now  divided  by  the  stream,
The  narrow  stream  of  death."

(3)  It  extends  throughout  the  ages.  It  is  not  strictly  correct  to  speak  of  the  patriarchal,
Jewish,  and  Christian  Churches.  The  Ohuich  of  God  is  one  under  the  successive
dispensations  so  distinguished  (see  Gal.  iiL  16,  29).  We  are  grafted  into  the  olive
that  grew  in  Abraham's  jrarden.  3.  It  has  visible  wad  invisible  parti.  (1)  There  is
no  visible  Catholic  Church.  We  find  no  Scripture  warrant  for  the  idea.  It  would
necessitate  a  division  in  the  unity  of  the  Church.  It  would  mtroduce  the  monstrosity
of  two  bodies  to  the  one  Head.  (2)  The  major  part  of  the  one  Church  is  the  invisible
sart.  Disembodied  saints  from  all  the  ages  are  in  it.  Hence  It  takes  its  name  from
to  head-quarters  in  heaven  (see  Beb.  xiL  23).    The  sprntwd  members  of  it  h«r»  on


ru


662      fBE  GOSPEL  ACCOttCtNQ  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,    [ca.  tarmi.  1— 20.

earth  are  the  permanent  members  from  amongst  those  that  are  visible  (see  Bom.  ii.
28,  29).  But  they  cannot  be  certainly  known  until  the  judgment.  (3)  The  Church
of  the  baptized  is  a  very  noble  corporation.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  connected  with
it.  To  be  permanently  bo  connected,  we  must  have  vital  union  with  ChriBt.  (4)  This
is  that  Church  so  built  by  a  true  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  that  the  gates  of  Hades
cannot  prevail  against  it  (ch.  xvi.  18).  For  the  weeding  out  of  the  tares,  at  death,  is
a  benefit,  not  an  injury  to  it.  The  dissolution  of  the  body  does  not  for  an  instan*^
int«rrupt  th«  life  of  faith  in  Christ  (see  John  xL  26).— J.  A.  M.

Ter.  2.— Angel-ministries.  Concerning  the  nature  or  the  location  of  angels  we  do
know,  probably  we  can  know,  nothing.  When  they  have  come  into  the  earthly
spheres  they  have  always  appeared  to  be  meu  like  ourselves ;  their  peculiarity  has  not
been  their  wings,  but  their  purity  and  radiancy.  But  one  thing  does  come  out  quite
clearly  and  impressively  from  every  case  of  angel-visitation.  They  are  always  ministers,
engaged  in  some  form  of  ministering.  Whatever  dignity  we  may  think  to  belong  to
the  angels,  it  is  the  dignity  that  lies  in  service.  Here  in  our  text  the  angel  is  no  mere
figure ;  he  has  something  to  do ;  he  waits  upon  the  rising  Lord,  rolls  back  the  stone
from  the  door,  and  sits  upon  it.  Summarizing  the  work  of  the  angels,  it  is  said,  "  Are
they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of
salvation?"

I.  The  highest  DiaNiTT  Dt  the  othsb  wobld.  Angels  are  beings  that  belong  to
the  other  world ;  and  if  we  can  get  to  know  about  them,  we  get  to  know  something  of
the  occupations,  interests,  and  sentiments  of  the  other  world.  And  this  is  the  thing
which  the  angels  more  especially  teach  us — in  that  other  world  their  highest  and
noblest  idea  is  "  serving  one  another  in  love."  There  is  one  characteristic  of  the  eternal
state.  It  is  even  so  characteristic  as  to  seem  to  be  the  only  characteristic  worth
mentioning — it  is  ministry.  Heaven  is  heaven  because  every  member  can  say,  "  I  am
among  you  as  he  that  serveth."    They  learn  this  of  Christ.

n.  The  highest  dignitt  in  this  wobld.  The  angels  illustrate  it,  and  the  Lord
Jesus  taught  it.  "  Whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,  let  him  be  your  servant."
Instances  may  be  taken  from  the  several  ages,  pre-Christian  and  Christian ;  and  it  may
be  shown  that  we  never  have  an  augel  exhibiting  himself  or  getting  for  himself;  they
are  always  doing  two  things — obeying  and  serving.  Then  show  what  an  impression  of
the  grandeur  of  angels  we  have.  But  what  is  our  notion  of  them  ?  Do  we  think  of
them  as  having  extraordinary  privileges  ?  That  is  not  their  dignity.  This  is  it — they
have  risen  into  the  full  joy  of  ministering.  The  circle  is  complete  :  God,  Christ,  the
Spirit,  beings  of  the  other  world,  redeemed  men  and  women  in  this  world,  are  one  in
this — all  are  ministering. — ^B.  T.

Ver.  6. — Ohrisfs  resurrection  tin  (Kknowledgment  of  man's  «ou^-v»c(ory.  Oui
Redeemer's  work  lacks  completeness  until  his  soul-triumph  of  trust  and  submission  has
manifestly,  in  some  open  way,  gained  the  acknowledgment  and  acceptance  of  God.
And  this  is  precisely  what  we  have  in  the  Resurrection.  In  Gethsemane  a  soul-triamph
of  obedience  and  trust  was  won.  That  soul-triumph  was  tested  by  the  physical  woes
of  Calvary.  That  soul-triumph  was  seen  to  have  gained  •  Divine  acceptance  on  the
morning  of  the  Resurrection.  And  the  acceptance  of  the  perfect  Son  involves  the
acceptance  of  that  humanity  of  which  he  was  the  Head  and  Representative.  OUr  Lord's
humanity  was  headship.  By  natural  generation  all  men  are  in  Adam ;  by  spiritual
regeneration  all  men  are  in  Christ,  or  may  be  in  Christ.  Examine  this  relation  carefully.

I.  TiiiKK  or  GETHSEMAirai.  There  is  the  conflict  between  flesh  and  spirit,  between
the  shrinking  from  duty  which  involved  suffering,  and  the  obedience  and  trust  of  the
Bon.  Just  the  kind  of  struggle  carried  on  in  our  souls  many  a  time  since  then.  We
may  say,  "  That  conflict  was  undertaken  for  me.  It  was  a  necessary  part  of  the
working  out  of  salvation  for  me  which  the  Lord  Jesus  undertook."  But  we  may
also  say,  "  That  conflict  wbb  mine."  The  fight  between  flesh  and  spirit  was  always
ending  in  the  mastery  of  the  flesh,  while  I  managed  it  myself.  But  I  watch  that  great
■oul-fight  of  Gethsemane  with  the  holiest  and  intenscBt  feeling,  because  it  it  mine.  In
Christ  its  Champion,  humanity  won  liberty  firom  the  bondage  of  self,  won  the  trust  and
the  obedience  of  the  Son.


m.  ilfm.  i-26.]    THl  SOS^St  leeOftDllfG  TO  ST.  MAtTtlfiW.      «6S

II.  Thinm.  or  Oalva«t.  There  the  conflict  was  renewed.  The  first  victory,  which
had  been  altogether  one  of  the  soul,  of  feeling,  must  be  yet  again  proved  in  a  conflict
whose  main  element  should  be  bodily,  phyncal  suffering.  Shame,  weariness,  pain,
death-agony,  all  tested  the  reality  of  the  triumph  that  had  been  gained  in  Gethsemane.
And  here  too  we  can  see  the  representative  character  of  our  Eedeemer's  work.  We
have  often  thought  that  we  had  won  a  right  state  of  mind  and  feeling ;  but  we  have
gone  forth  to  actual  life  and  relations,  and  found  that  our  soul-victory  failed  to  stand
the  actual  testings  of  life.  We  may  say,  "Jesus  died  on  Calvary /or  me;  &  Sacrifice
and  Propitiation  for  my  tins."  We  may  also  »ay,  "  That  death  on  Calvary  was  mine.
I  could  not  make  my  soul-victory  itand  the  test  of  the  worries  and  pains  and  trials
uf  life.  Jesus  took  up  the  matter  for  me,  and  on  Calvary  I  see  myself  in  him ;  my
burden  on  him ;  my  fight  fought  by  him ;  and  his  victory  is  victory  for  me, — it  is
my  victory."

III.  Think  of  thb  Bgbubbxotion.  It  may  be  said,  "Bat  Jesus  died."  It  may
seem  as  if  his  conflict  ended  in  defeat.  At  Calvary  we  have  no  decided  sign  of  victory.
The  disciples  went  away .  in  hopelessness  and  tears.  Can  a  word  be  spoken  that  shall
relieve  the  darkness  ?  We  may  find  it  in  our  text.  Look  at  the  burial-place,  and
hear  the  angel  say,  "  He  is  not  here :  for  he  is  risen."  And  we  may  say,  "  That  resur-
rection was  mine.  It  is  the  seal  of  my  triumph.  I  stand  now  in  all  the  joy  and
strength  of  a  victor.  In  Christ  my  foot  is  on  self  and  sin  and  death.  I  can  enter
into  the  '  power  of  his  resurrection.' "  Are  we  then  to  expect  freedom  from  temptation,
deliverance  from  all  the  outward  ills  of  life  ?  Kay,  not  so.  If  I  had  said  so,  you  would
have  smiled,  as  you  remembered  what  cares  worried,  burdens  pressed,  and  sins  still
humbled  you.  It  is  this — life,  toil,  suffering,  look  and  are  wholly  different  things  when
we  realize  Clirist  in  us,  we  in  Christ,  and  his  victories  involving  ours  in  them.  The
resurrection  of  our  Lord  is  the  Divine  acknowledgment  of  man's  soul-victory  over  sin
—evil  consequences ;  and  over  sin — evil  power.  Those  who  are  united  by  faith  to  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  enter  daily  into  his  triumph;  it  is  repeated  in  them  again  and
again ;  and  day  by  day  they  are  "  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  them."
We  often  dwell  on  salvation  from  penalty.  We  should  often  realize  tliat  victory  over
sin  and  over  self  which  is  won  for  us  by  Christ.  Too  often  we  are  satisfied  with  say-
ing that  we  may  have  strength  from  Clirist  to  wrestle  with  evil  if  we  ask  for  it.  But
we  ought  to  go  on  to  say  that  we  have  the  victory  in  having  the  risen  and  living  Christ,
Every  form  of  evil  Christ  has  met  for  us  and  beaten ;  that  is,  I,  in  Christ,  have  met  and
beaten.  Sickness  is  a  beaten  foe ;  pain,  loss,  disappointment,  suffering,  are  beaten  foes;
death  itself  is  a  beaten  foe.  And  God  has  openly  acknowledged  man's  soul-victory  in
raising  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead. — B.  T.

Ver.  9. — Surprise — woriMp.  Canon  Liddon,  in  an  impressive  sermon  on  this  text,
asks,  "  How  did  these  women  receive  Jesus  when  thus  (suddenly)  he  met  them  ?  The
fear  and  great  joy  with  which  they  had  come  out  of  the  sepulchre  must  surely  now
have  been  intensified :  fear, — ^for  here,  beyond  all  question,  was  he  who  was  so  lately
a  tenant  of  the  tomb,  who  had  traversed  the  unseen  world,  the  world  of  the  dead ;  and
great  joy,— for  here  was  indisputable  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  angel's  message,  |  He
is  ris(in.'  He  was  here  himself,  the  same  figure,  tlie  same  form,  the  same  gracious
countenance,  lately  marred  and  bruised,  now  lighted  up  with  an  unearthly  radiance,
the  pierced  bands,  the  pierced  feet.  What  did  they  do?  They  came  and  held  him
by  the  feet,  and  wor8l>ipped  him.  There  are  three  features  in  this  action  of  these
bumble  and  deeply  religious  women  that  are  especially  deserving  of  our  attention.
1.  Their  forgetfulness  of  themselves.  2.  Their  reverence.  3.  Their  tenacity  of
purpose ; "  this  is  taken  as  being  suggested  by  their  act  of  tiolding  him  by  the  feet.
Attention  may  also  be  fixed  on  the  fact  that  the  women  were  taken  by  surprise,  and
that  revealed  much  concerning  them.

I.  Their  act  undbb  surprise  showed  that  tueib  fbelinqs  towards  C-hbibt
WJSBE  OEUUINK.  Men  are  constantly  found  out  by  being  "  taken  at  unawares.  But
a  man  who  is  thoroughly  genuine  never  minds  being  "  taken  at  unawares.  Ihese
women  were  sincere.  In  an  insUnt  genvune  feeling  worthily  responded  to  the  Oiinst-
revelation.  .  „  ..

n.  Thbib  act  dmdkb  suepbisb  showed  taxa  BXonoNAi.  ohabaotibibtiob.    £)otic«


664       THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDINO  TO  BT,  MATTUEW.    [oh.  xxthi.  1— 2a

particnlarly  whkt  they  did  imder  impulsa.  It  was  what  womea  would  do  under  such
circumttances,  not  what  men  would  do.  Women  get  round  to  Jeiua  hy  the  heart
rather  than  hy  the  head ;  but  he  accepts  the  worship  of  emotion  as  freely  as  the
worship  of  intellect.     Let  woman  serve  Christ  woman's  way,

III.  Thsib  aot  undeb  hurpbibb  nkedkd  Divine  cobbeotiom.  It  was  dangerously
impulsive;  it  was  unspiritual ;  it  was  a  satisfaction  in  materuU  presence;  it  lacked
thought.— R.  T.

Yer.  13. — The  helphitneu  of  a  fooliih  excuse.  If  ever  there  was  a  foolish  excuse
offered,  this  was  it.  If  they  were  Roman  soldiers  who  compoaod  the  waUih,  everybody
must  have  known  it  was  untrue,  for  sleeping  on  duty  was  punished  by  death,  it
they  were  part  of  the  temple-guard,  everybody  Would  know  that  they  had  been  set  up
to  tell  this  tale  by  the  enemies  of  Jesus.  If  inquiry  be  made  concerning  the  source
of  St.  Matthew's  information,  it  may  suffice  to  remind  that  two  at  least  of  our  Lord's
friends,  Joseph  and  Nicodemns,  were  members  of  the  Sanhodrin,  and  would  be  fully
cognizant  of  the  Sanhedrin  secrets.  The  invention  of  an  excuse,  and  bribing  men  to
muie  it,  show  how  bewildered  the  priet>t-party  was  by  the  facts  and  incidents  reported.
They  never  attempted  to  deny  the  facts;  they  invented  an  excuse  which  they  knew
bad  no  atom  of  foundation  in  fact.  Those  watchmen  could  not  declare  that  one  single
disciple  had  been  seen  near  the  place.  It  is  ever  true  that  they  are  in  grave  danger
of  accusing  themselves  who  attempt  to  excuse  themselves.

I.  This  excuse  deceived  nobody.  1.  It  did  not  deceive  the  watchmen;  they
must  have  laughed  as  they  looked  into  the  anxious  faces  of  these  officials,  and  pocketed
their  hush-money.  2.  It  did  not  deceive  the  priest-party.  They  knew  perfectly  well
that  it  was  all  their  own  invention,  and  never  a  disciple  had  touched  the  body.  8.  It
did  not  deceive  Pilate,  to  whom  the  report  was  sure  to  come.  He  enjoyed  the  con-
fusion of  the  men  who  had  mastered  him  and  compelled  him  to  do  a  wrong,  4.  It
did  not  deceive  the  disciples.  Fur  they  had  absolutely  silent  consciences,  and  the  idea
of  stealing  the  body  had  never  come  to  them.  6.  It  does  not  deceive  us ;  for  we  can
see  that  making  such  s  lying  excuse  is  just  what  the  priest-party  was  capable  of;  but
stealing  the  body  is  just  what  the  disciples  were  incapable  of.

II.  This  excuse  did  not  help  those  who  made  it.  It  did  not  touch  the  &ot  that
the  body  was  gone.  It  did  not  prevent  the  circulation  of  the  report  that  Jesus  was
risen  from  the  dead.  These  men  spent  their  money  for  nothing,  and  only  mad*  them-
selves laughing-stocks.

III.  This  exoube  did  helf  those  aoainst  whom  it  was  hade.  It  drew  attention
to  the  disciples;  it  set  men  upon  inquiring  what  had  really  happened;  it  made  the
foct  of  miraculous  resurrection  stand  out  all  the  more  clearly. — R.  T.

Yer.  18, — Power  in  the  riten  ChrUfi  hartdt,  L  No  one  of  us  needs  proofs  of  the
fact  of  our  Lord's  resurrection  from  the  dead.  Yet  that  resurrection  remains  an  unsolved
mystery.  No  one  can  explain  it,  but  we  inquire  concerning  its  significance.  One
point  only  now  engages  our  attention,  Everybody  who  dies  lives  after  death.  Our
dead  friends  are  not  dead.  We  never  think  of  them  as  dead.  They  are  dead  in  the
sense  of  ceasing  to  respond  to  their  present  environment,  but  they  are  not  passed  out
of  existence.  Moses  and  Elias  passed  away  from  mortal  scenes  ages  before,  but  they
spake  with  Jesus  in  the  holy  mount.  What  is  true  of  man  is  also  true  of  the  Divine
Man.  If  never  a  word  had  been  spoken  about  his  resurrection,  we  should  have  known
that  Jesus  lived  after  and  beyond  death.  That  cross  could  not  end  Jesui ;  it  only
liberated  a  human  spirit.  Have  we  learned  the  lesson  which  our  Lord  almost  in  vain
tried  to  teach  Martha  ?  She  cried,  in  her  blinding  agony,  "  Lord,  if  tliou  hadst  been
here,  my  brother  had  not  died."  He  answered,  "  Thy  brother  shall  rise  again."  She  mis-
understood his  reply,  and  away  went  her  thoughts,  coursing  down  the  ages,  until  they
came  up  against  a  great  resurrection  and  judgment  day.  We  need  not  so  misunder-
stand our  Lord.  Ue  did  but  wrap  up  his  meaning  in  the  usual  figurative  fashion.
What  he  said  was  this,  "  Lazarus  lives ;  is  Uving  now.  What  you  really  want,  is
not  requickening  of  life,  but  restored  relations  of  the  living  Lazarus  to  Uts  body  of
Lazarus."

IL  There  i*  •  marked  difference  between  our  Lord's  living  after  dwth,  and  evory*


OH.  xxvui.  1—20.]    THE  GOSPEL  AOOOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.        665


body  elie'(  liTing  aftar  dMth.  Whan  a  idm  diet  hii  We-vwrh  U  ions.  He  lirM,  but
he  cannot  carry  on  hU  work.  Uo«m  diea  on  Mount  bfebo  j  nay,  Mot«i  lirei ;  but  ha
cannot  carry  on  hii  work,  and  lead  Iirael  through  into  tha  Promiied  Land.  The  artist
li  visited  by  the  angel  of  death  with  the  half-finished  picture  on  fall  easel  I'he  artiit
lives,  but  he  cannot  perfect  the  picture.  Charles  Dickena  died  with  hit  work  '  Edwin
Drood'  half  written,  and  the  plot  undiiclosed.  Sir  Edgar  Boehm  wai  caught  away
from  hii  studio  with  the  part-moulded  statue  before  him.  'J  hey  IItb,  but  they  cannot
touch  and  finiih  their  incomplete  work.  If  the  deail  irc  actiTs  in  some  unknown
sphere,  they  are  certainly  dormant  In  relation  to  all  their  e»rtb-woi  k.  For  them  death
ends  all  entarprise.  But  it  was  not  so  with  Christ.  Death  did  not  end  alL  His
redemptive  mission  was  not  closed  with  his  death.  He  resumed  his  earth-work.  After
death  he  took  it  up  again.  Call  it  a  picture,  Jesus  worked  again  at  the  picture.  Call
it  a  book,  Jesus  wrote  on  at  the  book.  Call  it  the  redemption  of  man  from  sin.  Call
it  the  sanctification  of  men  unto  righteousness.  Jesus,  liring  after  death,  goes  on
redeeming,  goes  on  sanctifying.  And  the  full  conTincement  of  this  lact  is  tha  real
meaning  and  purpose  of  oar  Lord's  resurrection.  It  was  forty  days  of  showing  us  that
he  was  at  work  again  ;  of  helping  us  to  realise  what  his  work  was,  and  what  his  work
would  be  for  ever.  Our  dead  Lord  is  not  only  alive,  he  is  active  in  relation  to  his  life-
work.  "Alive  for  evermore;  "  his  power  is  thus  symboliied,  "  He  has  the  keys  of  hell
and  of  death."

III.  The  text  declares  the  renewal  of  our  Lord's  commissioa.  All  power  is  given
into  the  hands  of  Christ,  but  the  only  power  Christ  knows  of  or  cares  for  is  ipirituai
power.  What  the  world  calls  "  |K>wer  "  was  to  Christ  illusion,  mockery,  play.  To
be  Earth-King  of  humanity  presented  no  attraction  to  him.  The  power  given  to
Christ  is  the  spiritual  power,  for  which  alone  he  eared.  It  ia  power  on  the  souls  tliat
we  are,  and  not  mere  power  over  the  bodies  that  we  have,  and  the  relations  that  our
bodies  can  sustain.

IV.  How  did  Jesus  come  to  have  this  spiritual  power  ?  It  is  esMy  to  say  that  God
gave  it  to  him;  but  there  must  be  some  good  reason  why  Qod  gave  it  to  him,  and  to
no  one  but  him.  And  it  seems  that  God's  giving  was  really  this — sealing  to  him  the
power  which  Jesus  himself  had  won;  and  putting  Josus  in  the  place  or  office  where
bis  power  could  have  free,  full  exercise.  Christ's  life  on  the  earth  was  the  moral
discipline,  the  varied  testing,  the  range  of  experiences,  which  prepared  him  for  the
trust  of  power  to  save  which  he  now  holds.  Moral  forces  ou  moral  beings  are  gained
only  through  moral  experiences.  He  who  would  save  man  must  be  man,  must  know
man,  must  go  at  least  a  representative  loimd  of  human  exiieriences. — K.  T,

Vet.  19.— Z^e  threefold  ifame.  "  In  ths  Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  o<
the  Holy  Ghost."  Sometimes  the  N»me  of  the  Lord  Jesus  only  is  mentioned  in  tha
formula.  Here  our  Lord  gives  one  Name  with  three  sounds.  Each  separateNama
giving  a  distinct  relation  of  the  one  Being  to  men.  Our  Lord  did  not  say,  "  in  the
names,"  but  "In  the  Name."  However  we  may  present  the  thruef  Idness,  we  must
keep  it  manifestly  consistent  vrith  the  Divine  unity.  "  The  union  of  the  three  names
in  one  formula  (as  in  the  benediction  of  2  Cor.  xiii.  U)  Is  in  itself  a  proof  at  once  of
the  distinctness  and  equality  of  the  three  Divine  Persons."  The  apostles  were  to  go
forth,  and  disciple  all  nations,  that  is,  bring  them  all  into  the  full  joy  of  sonship  with
•  God,  into  which  they  had  themselves  been  brought ;  and  they  were  to  receive  their
pledge  and  seal  their  sonship  by  baptizing  them  into  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  significance  of  the  threefold  Name  is  seen  in  the
light  of  this  recovered  sonship  of  men.

L  Th«  Nam«  or  THE  FiTHiB,  WHO  OLilMi  ITU  SoHsnif.  It  is  the  relation  to
himself  In  which  God  set  his  creatures.  They  are  his  chilli  m.  He  designed  to  give
them  fatherly  care;  he  expected  from  them  sonlike  obedience.  Men  are  sons  of  God,
and  they  ought  to  have  bved  and  served  like  sons.  Min's  sin  lay  in  refusing  bis  son-
ship.  But  man's  wilfulness  could  not  affect  God's  claim.  God  still  demands  sonship
of  every  child  bom  in  hia  image.

II.  Tmb  Nam*  of  th*  Soir,  mw  ■■owa  tm  Sohbhip.  In  hia  own  earth-Ilia  o(
trust  and  obedience.  Men  who,  in  their  wUfulneaa,  refused  their  sonahip^  oama  at  laat
to  loae  thair  aaaaa  of  eoaaUy ;  ihaj  naadad  to  hare  tha  varj  idaa  raoovam ;  tkay


666       THE  GOSPEL  ACCOBDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW,     [cb.  xxviil  1—20.

seeded  to  see  it  as  an  actual  realized  fact,  and  that  is  the  meaning  of  Christ's  living
through  a  Son's  life  here  on  earth.

III.  The  Namb  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  wobeb  the  Sonbhip.  For  the  sonship
must  not  be  a  mere  external  fact,  a  formal  ordering  of  the  conduct  and  relations.
True  BonBhip  is  a  cherished  spirit,  which  finds  expression  in  outward  relations.  And
the  Holy  Ghost  is  God  working  within  us,  in  the  spheres  of  thought,  of  motive,  and  of
feeling.  He  ever  freshly  inspired  the  spirit  of  sonship.  One  Name — God  who  asks
response  in  sonship.— B.  T.

Ver.  20. — ITie  vision  of  the  abiding  Christ.  Ohrist  ever  with  us  must  be,  in  some
way,  effectively  apprehended  by  us,  or  it  will  be  but  vague,  helpless  sentiment.  We
must  be  able  to  see  him  who  is  thus  "  with  ui  always."  What,  then,  is  seeing  the
living  Christ  ?

L  The  wobld'b  wat  of  bebino  Christ.  The  "  world  "  is  our  Lord's  term  for
men  who  are  outside  his  special  renewal,  who  are  left  to  the  guidance  of  the  senses
and  the  mind  in  their  "  feeling  after  God,  if  haply  they  might  find  him."  The  man
in  Christ  is  the  man  to  whom  God  is  the  inspiration  and  the  life.  The  man  of  the
world  is  the  man  who  is  satisfied  to  be  his  own  inspiration  and  his  own  life.  The
"  world '.'  represents  such  a  seeing  of  Christ  as  is  possible  to  the  senses ;  and  even  to  the
senses  God  "  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  has  been  shown.  The  "  world,"  on  its  own  terms,
and  in  its  own  ways,  has  seen  the  Christ.  He  has  been  looked  upon,  handled,  and
listened  to.  He  has  made  his  impressions  on  lawyer  and  Pharisee,  Sadducee  and  scribe,
priest  and  princely  governor,  as  well  as  on  the  common  people.  The  senses  could  see
Christ,  but  they  could  not  see  much.  And  so  to  the  "  world,"  Christ  is  really  lost,
gone  away.  "  He  is  not,"  says  the  world ;  "  for  I  cannot  see  him."  And  with  this  it
thinks  to  settle  the  question.  But  exactly  what  we  have  to  contend  with  is  the  world's
incapacity  to  see  the  unseen.  It  is  not  best  to  have  our  Lord  in  the  sphere  of  our  senses.
Once  having  had,  for  a  while,  the  sense-manifestation  of  Christ,  it  is  better,  every  way
better,  that  the  sense-limits  should  be  removed.  Want  we  want  now,  and  what  we
have,  is  an  "  unlocalized,  invisible,  spiritually  present,  everywhere-present  Saviour."

II.  The  diboiWjEb'  wat  of  sbeinq  Chbibt.  For  their  good,  their  Master  often  puzzled
those  disciples.  As  they  sat  at  table  with  him  in  the  upper  room,  they  were  in  a  most
bewildered  state  of  mind.  They  could  not  get  at  their  Lord's  meaning.  He  was  going
away.  He  was  coming  again.  He  was  going  away  in  order  that  he  might  come
again.  Others  would  not  be  able  to  see  him,  but  they  would  be  able.  Perhaps  they
lighted  on  this  explanation.  He  means  that  the  memory  of  his  life  and  character,  and
the  influence  of  his  wise  teachings,  will  abide  with  us,  and  that  will  be,  in  some  sense,
like  having  him  present  with  us.  And  that  would  be  a  wonderful  advance  on  the
"  world's  "  way  of  seeing  Christ.  And  yet  even  that  way  is  too  limited.  For  those  first
disciples  it  put  Christ  into  the  limits  of  their  personal  knowledge  and  experience  of
him,  and  that  could  not  have  been  his  meaning  when  he  said,  "  But  ye  see  me."  For
us  it  limits  the  apprehension  of  Christ  to  the  Gospel  records.  He  wonld  have  us  reach
something  altogether  higher  than  that.    He  himself  is  "  with  us  all  the  days."

III.  Christ's  wat  of  bhowiso  himself  to  ub.  Jesus,  in  the  upper  room,  talked
much  to  his  disciples  about  the  Spirit.  They  could  not  at  first  think  of  their  Lord  as
Spirit,  because  they  had  him  with  them  in  the  flesh.  But  he  tried  to  make  them  feel
that  this  Spirit  would  do  for  them  permanently  just  what  he  had  done  for  them  tem-
porarily. He  would  comfort  them,  watch  over  them,  teach  them,  sanctify  them.
And  at  last  he  ventured  to  say,  "  When  your  eyes  are  fully  opened,  you  will  see  that
the  Comforter,  who'  abides  with  you  alway,*  will  really  be  me  come  back  to  you  again."
"  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will  come  to  you."  It  is  as  if  he  had  said, "  I  pass
from  the  region  of  bodily  senses.  I  shall  not  be  only  a  mental  memory.  To  the
opened,  trusting,  loving  heart  I  shall  come,  to  be  the  spirit  and  life  of  his  spirit ;  to  b«
a  new  and  nobler  self  in  him."  In  their  measure  the  great  apostles  seem  to  have
caught  their  Lord'a  meaning.  St.  Peter,  standing  beside  the  sick  iBneas,  spoke  as  if
he  actually  saw  the  Lord  there  present,  and  said,  "  ^neas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee
whole."  St.  John  seems  to  be  always  with  Ghrigt,  You  never  see  him  but  you  seem
to  see  also  his' Master.  Tou  never  listen  to  a  word  from  his  lips,  or  read  a  word  from
his  pen,  but  you  feel  that,  behind  the  words,  ia  the  inspiration  of  the  Master  himself.


OH.  xxvm.  1— 20.]    THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.       667

St.  Paul  seems  to  gain  a  twofold  sight  of  the  ever-preaent  Christ.  Sometimes  he  sees
himself,  as  it  were,  ensphered  in  Christ :  "  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ."  Sometimes  he
realizes  Christ  as  a  mysterious  other  One,  Divine  One,  who  dwells  within  us.  He  speaks
of  "  Christ  in  us,"  and  says,  with  the  most  surprising  spiritual  insight, "  I  live :  yet  not
I ;  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Christ  is  with  us  all  the  days,  and  we  may  know  that  he  ii ;
we  may  even  tee  him. — K.  T.

jfoxB. ^The  Exposition  in  thia  volume,  from  cb.  xv.  to  the  end,  is  written  tqr  tb(

Rev.  W.  J.  Deann,  ILA.


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX


n>


THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MAHHEW.


VOLUME  n.


CHAPTER  XHL

PAOB

The  Pliable  of  the  Soww      16,  87,  44,  4/1
The  Tsreii  the  ICiutard  8eed|   the

Leaven             ...            ...            ...  80

The  Parable*  addieeaed  to  the  Die.

oiplei               ...            ...            ...  2S

The  Lord's  Preaohing  at  Kaiareth  ...  24

The  Parable  of  the  Soils  ...            ...  26

Christians  enjoying  what  Prophets

desired             ...            m.            ...  27

Parable  of  the  Tares            ...            27,  89

The  Unstard  Seed  and  the  Learen ...  28

The  Pearl  of  Oreat  Price  ...            ...  29

^s  Drag-net      ...  ».  29, 61

The  Christian  Teaoher      ,„           ...  80

-  The  Carpenter's  Son "    ...            ...  81

The  BegianiBg  of  Parables              ...  82

The  Qieat  Administrator's  Foresight  84

The  Herb  that  is  a  Tree    ...            ...  84

The  Foretold  now  beoome  the  Told  86
The  Traasnre  of  Orect,  bnt  Oaref ai,

Joy    ...            ...            ...            ...  86

The  SnpsrlatiT*  Priae  going  to  the

Seeker              ...            ...            ...  86

The  Gathering  together  in  Order  to

the  Separating...            ...            ...  86

The  Defying  of  ConTiotioa              ...  87

Parable  of  the  Learen       ...            ...  40

Parables  of  the  Hid  Treasnre  and  th«

Pearl  of  Price  ...            ...            ...  41

The  Parable  of  the  Net     ...            ...  48

The   Beason  of  the  Parable  of  the

Bower                ...             ,m             ...  46   I


PAei

The  Tares  In  the  Field      .„               47,  60

Parable  and  Prophecy       „,            ...  49

The  Chief  Good  „ 50

The  Honseholder               ...            ,..  53

Prejadioe             ...            .„            ...  54

The  Beason  for  the  Use  of  Parables  65

The  Besponsibility  of  the  Hearer  .„  66
Seeding  the   Earthly   Fields  to    get

Seed  for  the  Heavenly  Fields  ...  66
Evil  and  Good  only  together  for  a

Time...             ...            ...            ...  67

The  Hope  that   may  be    in    Little

Things              67

The  Force  there  may  be  in  Qniet

Things              ...            ...            ...  68

Religion  gained  at  Personal  Saeriflc*  68

Satisfied  only  with  the  Best             ...  69

The  Final  Sorting-time     ...            ...  60

Unexpected  Learning  in  a  Carpenter's

Son    .M           n.           ~.           M.  60


CHAPTEE  xnr.

The  Death  of  John  the  Baptist  ...  67

The  Feeding  of  the  Fire  Thonaand...  69

The  Walking  on  the  Sea    ...  71,  77

Herod's  Hypothesis            ...  ,,,  74

The  Mnrder  of  John  the  Baptist  m.  76

Jesns  feeding  the  Mnltitnde  ...  76

The  Bnin  of  Beokleas  Basbness  ...  77

The  Baciament-miracle     ...  ...  78

A  Contention  of  Sense  and  Faith  ...  80

John's  Death        ...             „.  ...  81


INDEX.


OHAPTEE  XVI.


rxsB
82
83
85
86
88


Peter  walking  on  the  Sea  ...
The  Morals  of  a  Tragedy  ...
The  Table  in  tbe  Wilderueai
Lesaons  of  the  Storm         ...  ,

Philanthropy       ...  ...

John's  Bngged  Faithfulness  ...       89

The       Foolishness      of      Unliniited
Promises  ...  ...  ...       89

Yoin  BegretB       ...  ...  ...      80

The  First  Impnlse    of   the   Sorrow-
stricken  ...  ...  ...      91

The  Necessity  for  Constraint  ...      91

The  Soothing  Power  of  Prayer        ...      92
A   First    Lesson    on    the    Spiritual
Presence  ...  ...  ...      92

Tbe  Lack  of  Staying  Power  ...      93

The  Name  which  Disciples  found  for
JeiuB...  ...  ...  ...      93


CHAPTEB  XV.

TTnwashen  Hands

«.     104

Departure  from  the  Holy  Land

...     107

The  Return

...     109

The  Mischief  of  Tradition...

...     Ill

The  Source  of  Defilement...

...     Ill

"  Blind  Leaders  of  the  Blind  "

...     112

The  Triumph  of  a  Mother's  Love

...     113

The  Healing  Ministry        ...

...     114

On  Hand-washing

...     114

The  Syro-Phcenioian  Woman

...     115

Feeding  of  the  Four  Thousand

...     116

Casnistry  reproved             ...

...     117

Great  Faith          ...             ...

...     119

The  Power  of  Christ          ...

...     121

The  Compassion  of  Jesus  ...

...     122

The  Eight  to  reproach  Others

...     123

Schemes  for  shirking  Obligation

...     124

The  Evil  Inflaence  of  Man-made  Bules  124

Sincerity  the  KKy-note  of  Piety       ...  125

The  Secret  of  Human  Defilement   ...  125

A  Claim  on  God's  Meroy    ...             ...  126

Importonity  and  Quick-wittedneas  ...  127

The  Praise  of  Faith            ...             ...  127

One  Effect  of  Miiaoles  of  Healing  ...  128

The  Mission  of  Miracles  of  Supply  ...  128


The  Visit  to  Galilee
CsBsarea  Philippi...
The  Cross


141
143

147


IHI'KS

rAsi

The  Cry  for  a  Sign

M«

...    150

Dangerous  Leaven

•  M

...    151

The  Great  Confession

...

151, 161

The  Bock  on   which  the  Church  is

built  ...  ...  ...  ...  152

A  Terrible  Anti-olimaz      ...  ...  1S3

The  Great  Condition  ...  ...  154

The  Gain  that  is  Loss,  and  the  Loss

that  is  Gain      ...  ...  ...  154

Peter's  Confession  ...  ...  155

Necessity  of  the  Croas       ...  ...  156

Tbe  Signs  of  the  Messiah  ...  m.  157

The  Leaven  of  Error  ...  ...  159

Christian  Self-denial  ...  ...  162

Profit  and  Loss    ...  ...  ...  164

The  Sign  of  Jonas  ...  ...  165

Pharisaic  Leaven  ...  ...  166

Opinions  concerning  Jesna  ...  166

Visions  of  the  Mystery  of  Christ     ...  167

Tbe  Book-tmth  ...  ...  ...  167

The  Power  of  the  Keys     ...  ...  168

Testing  the  Higher  Beliefs  ...  168

He  hinders  Christ  who  would  hold

Him  back  from  His  Sufferings    ...  169

The  Great  Gain,  and  tbe  Greater  Loss  169

The  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man       ».  170


CHAPTER  XVn.

The  Transfignration         181,  189, 193,  195

T)ie  Maniac  Boy  ...  ...  ...  185

Betum  to  Galilee  ...  ...  187

The    Elijab.ministry    of    John    the

Baptist  ...  ...  ...  190

The  Disciples'  Failure       ...  ...  190

The  Power  of  Faith  ...  ...  191

Christ  paying  Tribute        ...  ...  192

The  Lunatic  Lad  ...  ...  194

The  Stater  in  the  Fish's  Month       ...  195

The  Harbinger    ...  ...  ...  197

The  Secrets  of  Faith         ...  ...  199

Greatness  in  Submission    ...  ...  200

The  Mission  of  the  Selected  Ones  ...  201

The  Beappearance  of  Moses  and  Elias  202

A  Repetition  of  the  Divine  Approval  203

The  Transitory  and  tbe  Permanent...  203

Holy  Betioence    ...  ...  ...  204

The  Coming  of  Elias  ...  ...  204

Canses  of  Failare  in  Spiritual  Power  205
Self-discipline    tbe   Secret  of  Moral

Power  ...  ...  ...  206


INDEX.


Ui


tHHI  rAOl

Hints  oonoeming  the  Ooming  Besnr-

reotion             ...            ...            ...  206

The  Aroidanoeof  NeedlesaOffenoa...  207


CHAPTER  XVIII.

The  Little  Ones  ...            ...            ...  217

The  Method  of  Dealing  with  OSenoes  221

The  Law  of  ForgiTenesa    ...            ...  222

The  Kingdom  of  the  Ohildlike         ...  224

The  Offending  Member      ...            ...  224

The    Lost    Sheep    and    the    Qood

Shepherd          ...             ...            ...  225

The  Offending  Brother      ...            ...  226

The  Power  of  United  Prayer           ...  226

The  Dnty  of  Unlimited  ForgiTenesa  227

The  Hard  Debtor              ...            ...  228

NeceBsiiy  of  becoming   like   Little

Children           ...            ...            „.  228

The  Unmeroifol  Servant  ...             ...  229

Heavenly  Greatness           ...             ...  230

OooaBions  of  Stumbling    ...             ...  231

Warning  for  the  Oontemptuoni        ...  232

Christian  Judgment           ...             ...  234

The  Limita  of  Mercy         ...            ...  235

Christ's  Type  of  the  Traly  Great  ...  236
Tme  Dignity  gained  by   hnmbling

the  Self            237

rhe  Severity  of  Spiritaal  Discipline  237

Despising  the  Little  Ones  ...             ...  238

rhe  Joy  of  recovering  Lost  Things  238

Christian  Ways  with  Trespassers    ...  239

Power  gained  by  Agreement  in  Prayer  239
The  Conditions  of  Christ's  Sensible

Presence          ...            ...            ...  240

The  Christian  Limit  of  Forgiveness...  240
Moral  Fitness   for  receiving  Divine

Forgireneaa     ...            ...            i..  241


OFAPTBR  XIX.

The  Sanctity  of  Marriage ...

».    253

The  Little  Children

...     254

The  Young  Ealer

...     256

Divorce

...     260

Christ  blessing  Little  Children

...     26]

The  Great  Refusal

...     261

The  Rich  Man's  Difficulty

...     262

The  Impossible  made  Possible

...     263

The  Great  Reward

...     264

The  Rich  Young  Man

...     264

The  Ethics  of  Marriage     ,..

...     266

THESIE  ,„,

The  Children  of  the  Kingdom          ...  267

The  Perfection  of  Goodnesa             ...  268

Poasessions  and  Life          ...             ,„  270

Natural  Laws  and  Human  Infirmitiea  271

Varieties  in  Receptiveness  ...  271
The  Folk  who  are  interested  in  the

Children           ...             ,„             ,..  273

The  Ruler's  Mistakes        ...            ...  272

Right  Attitude  towards  Parents  ...  278
The   Hindering   Power   of    Worldly

Possessiona       ...             ...             ...  273

Salvation  Posaible  because  it  is  God's

Work               ...            ...            ...  274

"The  Regeneration"         ...             ...  274

The  Christian  Foasesaion  mad  Chria-

tian  Heritage  ...            ...            ...  276

Reversion  of  Freaent  Bstimatea      .„  276

CHAPTER  XX.

Parable   of   the    Labourers   in  the

Vineyard          ...             ...    286, 294,  298

Predictions  of  the  Faasion               ...  289

Salome  and  her  Sons         ...             ...  291

The  Two  BUnd  Men          ...            293,  297

A  Great  Reversal               ...             ...  294

A  Mother's  Ambition        .«             ...  295

True  Greatneas    ...             ...             ...  296

Christ  the  Servant  and  the  Ransom  296

Salome's  Petition  for  Zebedee'a  Sons  299

Ignorant  Prayers                ...             ...  801

The  Astonishment  of  Preoedenoe     ...  802

Trophetio  Anticipations     ...             ...  303

Distinction  in  the  Kingdom             ..,  804

Community  and  Unity      ...             ...  806

Fair  Labour-agreements    ...             ...  307

The  Eleventh  Hour  a  Type  of  Old

Age    ...             ...             ...             ..  307

The  Social  Difficulty  of  the  Workless  308
Generosity  may   go  beyond   Agree-
ment ...             ...             .M             M.  308

Anticipations  of  Betrayal ...             ...  300

Motherly  Ambitions           ...             ...  309

Inconsiderate  Petition       ...             ...  310

Imperfect  Self-estimates  ...             ...  310

The  Moral  Greatness  of  Service       ...  311

Importxmity  revealing  Character    ...  311

CHAPTER  XXI.

The  Entry  into  Jerusalem                827,  341

The  Temple         ...             ...             ...  329

The  Return  to  the  Temple               ...  831


WDEX.


Th«  Controreny  in  the  Tempi*      ,..  832

The  Abb  of  Bethphage       ...            ,.,  836

The  Triumphant  Bide       ,.,            ...  836

Ohrist  cleansing  the  Temple             ,„  836

The  Fruitless  Fig  Tree      ...             ...  837

The  BonndleBB  Possibilities  of  Prajer  338

Qaestion  met  by  Qnestion                ...  338

The  Two  Sons     ...             ...             ...  389

The  Parable  of  the  Vineyard           ...  840
Parable  of  the  Wioked  Hnibandmen

842,866

The  Marriage  of  the  King's  Boa      ...  848

The  Triumph  of  Christ      ...            ...  844

The  Lord  of  ths  Temple    ...            ...  846

The  Omuipotenoe  of  Faith                ...  846

The  Anthority  of  Jesns      ...             ...  848

Goodness  and  Severity       ...             ...  849

Beady  Besponse  to  Dirine  Claims  ,.,  861

Signs  of  Meekness  and  Signs  of  Joy  861
The    Fitting  and  the    Unfitting  in

God's  Honse    ...            ...            ...  162

The  Ministry  of  the  Children          ...  862
The  Tree-type  of  the  Hypocrite      ...  863
Believing,  the  Condition  of  Accept-
able Prayer      ...             ...             ...  868

Christ  become  a  Qnestioner             ...  864

Speech  tested  by  Deed      ...             ,.,  864

The  History  of  the  Comer-ston*     .„  866

OHAPTEB  XXU.

The  Parable  of  the  Marriage  Feast  868,  376

The  Qaestion  of  Tribute    ...             ...  871

The  Sadducees    ...            ..,            ...  872

The  PhariseeB      ...             ...             ...  874

Tribute  to  Geesar               .»            »<  877

The  Qod  of  the  Living      ...            ...  877

The  Two  CommaDdmenti                 ...  878

The  Divine  Christ             ...            ...  879

Ezcnses                ...            ...            ...  880

Question  of  the  Sadducees  i  Whose

shall  she  be  P 881

The  Invitations  of  the  Qospel           ...  882

The  Ethics  of  the  Tribute                „.  883

The  BsBurreotion  of  the  Dead          ...  885

The  Greater  Commandments           ...  886

Wisdom's  Question             ...             ...  888

Man's  Ill-grounded  WiUalnesi         ...  889

The  Enticement  of  Material  Interests  389

The  Free  Invitation  of  the  Qospel  ...  890

Wilfulness  spoiling  our  Blessings    ...  890

Purposed  Entanglements  ...             ...  391


TBim  rAes

Christ  keeping  to  His  Provino*  ...  891
Denial  of  Besurreotion  as  a  Sign  of

Mental  Mood 89S

The   Pure    HnmanneM   ot    Uarital

Relations           ...             ...  ...  893

The  So-called  Dead  are  Alive  ...  S98

Our  Thoughts  of  Christ's  Sonship  ...  894

OHAPTEB  XXin.

The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  ...  404

Condemnation  of  their  Hypocrisy  ...  40S

Prophecy  of  their  Futnn  ...  ...  409

Needless  Bnrdens               ,.•  ...  410

Christian  Equality             ...  ...  411

The  Woe  of  the  HypooritM  412,  426

The  Onat  and  the  Camel  ...  ...  412

Building  the  Tombs  of  the  Prophets  418

The  Lament  over  Jerusalem  ...  414

Pharisees  and  Sadducees  ...  ...  416

Ethics  of  Anthority            ...  ...  416

The  Credit  of  the  Church  ...  417

Swearing              ...            ...  ...  419

Monstrons  Trifiing             ...  ...  4S0

Fatal  Blindness    ...             ...  ...  420

Judgment  and  Mercy         ...  ...  421

The  Sin  of  Inconsistency  ...  ...  423

The  Fascination  of  Human  Praise  ...  424

The  Eqnality  of  Believers  ...  424

Greatness    finding    ExpreasioB  in

Service              ...             ...  ...  4S6

The  Peril  of  making  Froselytea  ...  426

The  Scruples  of  the  Formalist  ...  426

Appearance  and  Reality   ...  ...  427

Holy  Denunciations           ...  ...  427

Lost  Opportunities  become  Judgments  428

OHAPTEB  XXIV.

The  Great  Prophecy  :  General  Pre-
dictions of  Coming  Sorrows  ,,.  446
Predictions  of  the  Nearer  End  i  The

Destruction  of  Jerusalem  ,„  448

The  End  of  the  World       ,.,  „.  460

False  Christs       ...             m  m.  463

Final  Perseverance           ,.,  ...  454

Lightning            ...             ...  ...  456

The  Unknown  Day  and  Hoar  ...  456

One  taken,  and  Another  left  ...  456

The  Two  Servants  ...  467, 464

The  Coming  of  Christ        m.  ...  463

Signs  of  the  Advent          ...  ...  463


INDEX.


TBUII

Salatarf  Waminga  .,

The  Signs  of  the  Heavens
The  Event  and  the  Time  ..
"The  End  of  the  World"


rAox

460
461
463
466


The  Christian  Attitude  in  Times  of

Oivil  Commotion             ...             .,,  466

The  Mission  of  Beligions  FeTseontion  467

The  Difflonlty  of  Keeping  on           ...  468

The  Gospel-witness           ...            ...  468

The  Misohiefa  wronght  by  Antichrists  469

Bky-signs            ...             ...             ...  469

A  Key  to  onr  Lord's  Meaning         ...  470

The  Taken  and  the  Left  ...            ...  470

Abiding  Beadinesi             ,„            ...  471

OHAPTBE  XXy.
The  Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins

486,  494,  408,  602
The  Parable  of  the  Talents

489,  496,  600,  604
The  Last  Judgment  ...  492,  501

Good  and  Faithful  Servants            ...  495

The  Divine  Law  of  Increase            ...  496

The  Judgment  of  the  Nations         ...  497

The  Eternal  Fotnre           ...            ...  498

The  Great  Assize               ...            ...  506

Signs  of  Wisdom  and  of  Folly  in  the

Christian  Life  ...            ...            ...  607

The  Provision  for  Christian  Bmer-

genoies             ...            ...            ...  608

The  Warning  of  the  Shut  Door        ...  608

Christ's  Belation  to  onr  Talent-tmsts  609

The  Moral  Value  of  onrBesponsibilities  610
Complaining  of  Others  when  we  Our.

selves  are  in  the  Wrong               ...  610

The  Law  of  Bewarda         ...            ...  611

The  Son  of  Man  exercising  Judgment  612
Christ's   Acoeptanoa    of    Vicarious

Servio*             ...            ...            ...  612

CHAPTEE  XXTL

The  Shadow  of  the  Cross  ...            •..  636

The  Supper  at  Bethany     ...            ...  536

The  Last  Supper  ...    639,  551,  562

The  Mount  of  Olives         ...            ...  541

The  Apprehension  of  onr  Lord        ...  646

The  Palace  of  Oaiaphas     ...            ».  647

"Ointment  poured  forth"                ...  649

The  Betrayal  of  Christ      ...            ...  550

"  The  Blood  of  the  New  Covenant "  651


THBAIB  PA6V

Tbe  Man  of  Sorrows          ...            ...  552

The  Onrae  of  the  Sword    ...             ...  553

Christ  and  Oaiaphas           ...            554,  558

St.  Peter  denying  his  Lord              ...  654

Jndas    ...            ...            ...            ...  555

The  Crime  of  Jndaa           ...           656,  574

The  Arrest           ...             ...             ..,  557

Peter's  Denial  of  Jesus      ...             ...  659

God's  Flans  and  Man's  Plots            ...  560

Tronblers  of  the  Good       ...            ...  561

Strength  and  Weakness    ...             ...  564

The  Agony  in  the  Garden  ...            ...  665

The  Submission  of  Jesus  ...            ...  667

The  Demoralized  Council ...             ...  669

Sin  in  Sequence  ...             ...             ...  671

The  Final  Devices  of  onr  Lord's  Foes  578

The  Law  of  Waste             ...            ...  678

Asking  the  Lord  what  wa  shonld  ask

Ourselves         ...            ...           ...  674

Blood  for  Bemission          ...             ...  676

Self-knowledge  and  Divine  Knowledge  676

Truths  learnt  in  Gethsemane          ...  576

Gethsemane  a  Bepresentative  Conflict  677

The  Becognition  of  Good  Intentions  677

The  Place  for  the  Sword  ...           ...  578

Peter's  Time  of  Strain      ...            ...  578

Quick  Penitence  revealing  Oharaoter  679

CHAPTBB  XXVU.

The  End  of  Judas             ...            ...  601

Christ  before  Pilate  ...  608,  620

Preparations  for  the  Crucifixion      ...  606
The  Crucifixion  ...             ...           607, 617

Witness  to  the  Lord's  Divinity        ...  612

The  Lord's  Grave              ...            ...  613

Jndas's  Confession            ...            ...  616

Barabbas              ...             ...            ...  616

The  Crown  of  Thorns        ...            ...  616

Christ  refusing  an  Opiate                 ...  617

Forsaken  by  God                ...             ...  618

The  Burial  of  Jesus            .»             ...  619

The  Besurrection                ...             ...  621

The  Price  of  Blood            ...             ...  622

The  Actors  in  a  Momentous  Tragedy  624>

The  B«proaoh  of  the  Cross              ...  626

Prodigy  rebuking  Levity  ...             ...  628

The  Treatment  of  the  Body  of  Christ  630

The  XJselessness  of  Bemorse            ...  632

Tbe  Silence  of  Innocence  ...             ...  633

Pilate's  Character-reading               ...  6iJ3

Guilt  that  will  not  wash  off              ...  6S4


INDEX.


rASi

The  Honourable  Hinigtr;  of  Simon...  634

Ohrist  aa  King  of  the  Jews  ...  63S
He  who  Bares  others  oaimot   MTe

himself            ...            ...            ...  635

The  Mjsterjr  of  the  Forsaking  ...  686
The  Natural  Impression  of  the  Omoi-

firfon...             ...             ...            ...  687

Jofwph's  Opportnnitgr        ^           ^  688

Wivtoanly  Derotion            .„            m  638


OHAPTBE  XXVTU.

T '^  Sesnrreotion  ...  .„    646

7h«WatohuidtheOUe(PriMt«   ...    660


The  Great  Ueeting  in  Galilee          m<  662

The  Vacant  Tomb              ...            ...  654

Donbts  as  to  the  Besarrection        ...  665
The  Great  Commission      ...            666,  660

Lessons  of  the  Besnrreotion            ...  657

The  Commotion   ...            ...            ...  659

Angel-ministries ...            ...            m«  663

Christ's   Besarrection    the  A.oknow>

ledgment  of  Man's  Sonl-riotory  ...  668

Snrprise — Worship            ...           ...  663

The  Helplessness  of  a  Foolish  Xzonie  664

Power  in  the  Bisen  Christ's  Hands  ...  664

The  Threefold  Name          ...             ...  66f

Th«  Yiuon  of  the  AbidiBfc  Ohrist    ...  06C
